The Online Library of Liberty
A Project Of Liberty Fund, Inc.

Emer de Vattel, The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of
the Law of Nature, Applied to the Conduct and Affairs
of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on
the Origin and Nature of Natural Law and on Luxury
(LF ed.) [1797]

The Online Library Of Liberty
This E-Book (PDF format) is published by Liberty Fund, Inc., a private,
non-profit, educational foundation established in 1960 to encourage study of the ideal
of a society of free and responsible individuals. 2010 was the 50th anniversary year of
the founding of Liberty Fund.

It is part of the Online Library of Liberty web site http://oll.libertyfund.org, which
was established in 2004 in order to further the educational goals of Liberty Fund, Inc.
To find out more about the author or title, to use the site's powerful search engine, to
see other titles in other formats (HTML, facsimile PDF), or to make use of the
hundreds of essays, educational aids, and study guides, please visit the OLL web site.
This title is also part of the Portable Library of Liberty DVD which contains over
1,000 books and quotes about liberty and power, and is available free of charge upon
request.

The cuneiform inscription that appears in the logo and serves as a design element in
all Liberty Fund books and web sites is the earliest-known written appearance of the
word “freedom” (amagi), or “liberty.” It is taken from a clay document written about
2300 B.C. in the Sumerian city-state of Lagash, in present day Iraq.

To find out more about Liberty Fund, Inc., or the Online Library of Liberty Project,
please contact the Director at oll@libertyfund.org.



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

LIBERTY FUND, INC.
8335 Allison Pointe Trail, Suite 300
Indianapolis, Indiana 46250-1684

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 2 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Edition Used:

The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the Conduct and
Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature
of Natural Law and on Luxury, edited and with an Introduction by Béla Kapossy and
Richard Whitmore (Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 2008).

Author: Emer de Vattel
Editor: Béla Kapossy
Editor: Richard Whatmore

About This Title:

A republication of the 1797 translation of Vattel’s work, along with new English
translations of 3 early essays.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 3 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

About Liberty Fund:

Liberty Fund, Inc. is a private, educational foundation established to encourage the
study of the ideal of a society of free and responsible individuals.

Copyright Information:

The copyright to this edition, in both print and electronic forms, is held by Liberty
Fund, Inc.

Fair Use Statement:

This material is put online to further the educational goals of Liberty Fund, Inc.
Unless otherwise stated in the Copyright Information section above, this material may
be used freely for educational and academic purposes. It may not be used in any way
for profit.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 4 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Table Of Contents
Introduction
A Note On the Texts
English Editions of the Law of Nations
Three Essays By Vattel
Acknowledgments
The Law of Nations
Advertisement
Preface
Preliminaries Idea and General Principles of the Law of Nations.
Book I: Of Nations Considered In Themselves
Chapter I: Of Nations Or Sovereign States.
Chapter II: General Principles of the Duties of a Nation Towards Itself.
Chapter III: Of the Constitution of a State, and the Duties and Rights of the

Nation In This Respect.
Chapter IV: Of the Sovereign, His Obligations, and His Rights.
Chapter V: Of States Elective, Successive Or Hereditary, and of Those Called

Patrimonial.
Chapter VI: Principal Objects of a Good Government; and First to Provide For

the Necessities of the Nation.
Chapter VII: Of the Cultivation of the Soil.
Chapter VIII: Of Commerce.
Chapter IX: Of the Care of the Public Ways of Communication, and the Right

of Toll.
Chapter X: Of Money and Exchange.
Chapter XI: Second Object of a Good Government,—to Procure the True

Happiness of the Nation.
Chapter XII: Of Piety and Religion.
Chapter XIII: Of Justice and Polity.
Chapter XIV: The Third Object of a Good Government,—to Fortify Itself

Against External Attacks.
Chapter XV: Of the Glory of a Nation.
Chapter XVI: Of the Protection Sought By a Nation, and Its Voluntary

Submission to a Foreign Power.
Chapter XVII: How a Nation May Separate Itself From the State of Which It Is

a Member, Or Renounce Its Allegiance to Its Sovereign When It Is Not
Protected.

Chapter XVIII: Of the Establishment of a Nation In a Country.
Chapter XIX: Of Our Native Country, and Several Things That Relate to It.
Chapter XX: Of Public, Common, and Private Property.
Chapter XXI: Of the Alienation of the Public Property, Or the Domain, and

That of a Part of the State.
Chapter XXII: Of Rivers, Streams, and Lakes.
Chapter XXIII: Of the Sea.
Book II: Of a Nation Considered In Its Relations to Others

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 5 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Chapter I: Of the Common Duties of a Nation Towards Others, Or of the
Offices of Humanity Between Nations.

Chapter II: Of the Mutual Commerce Between Nations.
Chapter III: Of the Dignity and Equality of Nations,—of Titles,—and Other

Marks of Honour.
Chapter IV: Of the Right to Security, and the Effects of the Sovereignty and

Independence of Nations.
Chapter V: Of the Observance of Justice Between Nations.
Chapter VI: Of the Concern a Nation May Have In the Actions of Her Citizens.
Chapter VII: Effects of the Domain, Between Nations.
Chapter VIII: Rules With Respect to Foreigners.
Chapter IX: Of the Rights Retained By All Nations After the Introduction of

Domain and Property.
Chapter X: How a Nation Is to Use Her Right of Domain, In Order to

Discharge Her Duties Towards Other Nations, With Respect to the Innocent
Use of Things.

Chapter XI: Of Usucaption and Prescription Among Nations.
Chapter XII: Of Treaties of Alliance, and Other Public Treaties.
Chapter XIII: Of the Dissolution and Renewal of Treaties.
Chapter XIV: Of Other Public Conventions,—of Those That Are Made By

Subordinate Powers,—particularly of the Agreement Called In Latin
Sponsio,—and of Conventions of Sovereigns With Private Persons.

Chapter XV: Of the Faith of Treaties.
Chapter XVI: Of Securities Given For the Observance of Treaties.
Chapter XVII: Of the Interpretation of Treaties.
Chapter XVIII: Of the Mode of Terminating Disputes Between Nations.
Book III: Of War
Chapter I: Of War,—its Different Kinds,— and the Right of Making War.
Chapter II: Of the Instruments of War,—the Raising of Troops, &c.—their

Commanders, Or the Subordinate Powers In War.
Chapter III: Of the Just Causes of War.
Chapter IV: Of the Declaration of War,— and of War In Due Form.
Chapter V: Of the Enemy, and of Things Belonging to the Enemy.
Chapter VI: Of the Enemy’s Allies—of Warlike Associations— of Auxiliaries

and Subsidies.
Chapter VII: Of Neutrality—and the Passage of Troops Through a Neutral

Country.
Chapter VIII: Of the Rights of Nations In War,—and First, of What We Have a

Right to Do, and What We Are Allowed to Do, to the Enemy’s Person In a
Just War.

Chapter IX: Of the Right of War, With Regard to Things Belonging to the
Enemy.

Chapter X: Of Faith Between Enemies,—of Stratagems, Artifices In War,
Spies, and Some Other Practices.

Chapter XI: Of the Sovereign Who Wages an Unjust War.
Chapter XII: Of the Voluntary Law of Nations, As It Regards the Effects of

Regular Warfare, Independently of the Justice of the Cause.
Chapter XIII: Of Acquisitions By War, and Particularly of Conquests.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 6 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Chapter XIV: Of the Right of Postliminium.
Chapter XV: Of the Right of Private Persons In War.
Chapter XVI: Of Various Conventions Made During the Course of the War.
Chapter XVII: Of Safe-conducts and Passports,—with Questions On the

Ransom of Prisoners of War.
Chapter XVIII: Of Civil War.
Book IV: Of the Restoration of Peace; and of Embassies
Chapter I: Of Peace, and the Obligation to Cultivate It.
Chapter II: Treaties of Peace.
Chapter III: Of the Execution of the Treaty of Peace.
Chapter IV: Of the Observance and Breach of the Treaty of Peace.
Chapter V: Of the Right of Embassy, Or the Right of Sending and Receiving

Public Ministers.
Chapter VI: Of the Several Orders of Public Ministers,—of the Representative

Character,—and of the Honours Due to Ministers.
Chapter VII: Of the Rights, Privileges, and Immunities of Embassadors and

Other Public Ministers.
Chapter VIII: Of the Judge of Embassadors In Civil Cases.
Chapter IX: Of the Embassador’s House and Domestics.
Additional Essays
Essay On the Foundation of Natural Law and On the First Principle of the

Obligation Men Find Themselves Under to Observe Laws 1
Dissertation On This Question: “can Natural Law Bring Society to Perfection

Without the Assistance of Political Laws?”
Dialogue Between the Prince of ****and His Confidant, On Certain Essential

Elements of Public Administration
Biographical Sketches of Authors Referred to By Vattel

natural law and enlightenment classics

Knud Haakonssen

General Editor

lfVattel_figure_001

Emer de Vattel

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 7 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

INTRODUCTION

Life Of Vattel
Emer1 de Vattel’s Le droit des gens. Ou Principes de la loi naturelle, appliqués à la
conduite & aux affaires des nations & des souverains (The Law of Nations, or
Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the Conduct and Affairs of Nations and
Sovereigns) (1758) was the most important book on the law of nations in the
eighteenth century. It was in great measure thanks to this work that the practical and
theoretical influence of natural jurisprudence was extended down through the
Revolutionary and Napoleonic eras. Indeed, it was Vattel who was cited as a major
source of contemporary wisdom on questions of international law in the American
Revolution and even by opponents of revolution, such as Cardinal Consalvi, at the
Congress of Vienna.

Emer de Vattel was born at Couvet, in Neuchâtel, a principality ruled by the kings of
Prussia, on April 25, 1714, as the youngest son of David Vattel and Marie de
Montmollin.2 His father, ennobled in 1727 by the king of Prussia, Friedrich Wilhelm
I, was a Protestant clergyman and head of the local congregation of ministers; his
mother was the daughter of the principality’s ambassador to the Prussian court. From
1728 to 1730 Vattel was enrolled as a student of the humanities at the University of
Basel, where he seems to have attended courses on Samuel Pufendorf given by the
Huguenot minister Pierre Roques. In 1733 he went to Geneva to pursue theological
and metaphysical studies; one of his teachers was Jean-Jacques Burlamaqui, and it
was under Burlamaqui’s tutelage that Vattel first studied in detail the principles of
natural law and the law of nations. Little is known of the following years, but in 1740
and 1741 Vattel wrote a series of essays, several of which appeared in Switzerland’s
leading literary journal, the Neuchâtelbased Journal Helvétique.3 The same year also
saw his lengthy defense of the philosophy of Leibniz against the accusation of
atheism made by the Lausanne professor of philosophy and mathematics Jean-Pierre
de Crousaz.4 Vattel’s Défense, which he dedicated to Friedrich II (“the Great”),
earned him an invitation from the French ambassador in Berlin to come to the court of
the prince whose subject he was by birth. However, he failed to obtain a diplomatic
position and, pressed by financial difficulties, in 1743 he moved to Dresden, where he
was promised employment by Count Brühl, first minister of Elector Friedrich August
II of Saxony (who as August III was also the elective king of Poland). Vattel spent the
next three years in Neuchâtel, writing essays and studying the works of the German
philosopher Christian Wolff, while waiting for orders from Dresden. These essays,
which included his Dissertation sur cette question: Si la loi naturelle peut porter la
société à sa perfection, sans le secours des loix politiques (Dissertation on This
Question: Can Natural Law Bring Society to Perfection Without the Assistance of
Political Laws?) as well as the Essai sur le fondement du droit naturel, et sur le
premier principe de l’obligation où se trouvent tous les hommes, d’en observer les
loix (Essay on the Foundation of Natural Law and on the First Principle of the
Obligation Men Find Themselves Under to Observe Laws), were published in 1746.5

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 8 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

In 1747, finally, after dedicating the second edition of the Pièces diverses to Brühl,6
he was granted a modest annual pension of 500 écus and sent as a permanent minister
to Berne. The purpose of his mission remains unclear; some of his compatriots
speculated that it was to negotiate the acquisition of Neuchâtel by the elector of
Saxony,7 but it is more likely that he was to facilitate renegotiation of a loan of
700,000 Reichsthaler that Saxony had received from the city the year before. In fact,
Vattel’s stay in Berne lasted no longer than a few weeks.

For much of the next ten years Vattel remained in Neuchâtel. From here he sent a
stream of letters to Brühl complaining of his ill health and dire financial
circumstances. Nevertheless, this turned out to be the most productive period of his
life. In 1757 he published a further collection of essays that included dialogues
between Diogenes and Marcus Aurelius and between Henry IV of France and his
adviser Sully.8 Also during this period he wrote his masterpiece, Droit des gens,
which appeared in Neuchâtel at the end of 1757, though the title page says London
1758.9 The work quickly established Vattel as a major authority on natural
jurisprudence.10 It also changed his personal situation. In 1759 the elector of Saxony
finally recalled Vattel to Dresden, appointed him to the Privy Council, and made him
chief adviser to the government of Saxony on foreign affairs. During his stay at
Dresden, Vattel published two further works, Mélanges de littérature, de morale, et
de politique (1760, reprinted in 1765 as Amusemens de littérature, de morale, et de
politique) and Questions de droit naturel et observations sur le traité du droit de
nature par le Baron de Wolf (1764), a detailed critique of Wolff’s Ius gentium
methodo scientifica pertractatum that Vattel had completed already in 1753. In 1764
he married Marie de Chêne, the daughter of a Huguenot noble family, with whom he
had a son. Due to ill health, Vattel was unable to cope with his office and retired to his
native Neuchâtel, where he died in December 1767 at the age of fifty-three.

Influence Of Swiss Heritage
Although a subject of the king of Prussia by birth, and a servant of the elector of
Saxony by profession, Vattel was first and foremost Swiss. However, that description
was more complicated in the eighteenth century than it is today. What foreign
observers often referred to as the Swiss republic was in fact a loose federation of
independent and highly diverse entities, some aristocratic, some democratic, some
monarchical, all of them small, some no bigger than a town. The federation was held
together by fear of foreign aggression, a complex web of treaties, jointly ruled
territories, and military and trade agreements to contain conflict between individual
cantons. Although Swiss thinkers frequently invoked a universal society of nations,
they remained highly suspicious of projects for perpetual peace in Europe, whether a
benevolent hegemony or a European federation. Instead, they saw their best chances
of survival in the more fragile order provided by a balance of power between large
commercial nations constantly in need of Swiss mercenaries for their armies and
Swiss investments for their public coffers. Swiss attachment to state autonomy was so
great that, during the 1750s and 1760s, a small but highly vocal minority flirted with
Rousseau’s ideas of strict isolationism as the only way to defend Swiss liberty from
the aggressiveness of modern commercial politics. Like Vattel, the majority of
eighteenth-century Swiss thinkers, however, saw clear military and cultural benefits in

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 9 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

commercial progress and ridiculed Rousseau and his followers’ infatuation with the
alleged virtuousness of ancient Sparta.11 They hoped to adapt the humanist heritage
of Swiss politics to the realities of a modern economy by showing how new forms of
Christian patriotism, assisted by wide-reaching legislative reforms, were able to arrest
and dissolve the dangerously “unsocial” tendency of commercial states.12

Vattel’S Theory Of Natural Law As Applied To The Law Of
Nations
Against the background of this Swiss debate, we can understand not only Vattel’s
vision of a workable European order but also the importance he attributed to political
economy for establishing and maintaining a regime of international justice. In a
famous passage, Vattel claimed that commerce had transformed Europe from a
“confused heap of detached pieces” into a kind of large republic, where all members
were united “for the maintenance of order and liberty” (bk. III, §47). An “eternal and
immutable law of nature” obliged a state not only to respect and to treat other states as
equals but also to provide mutual aid “so far as that other stands in real need of its
assistance, and the former can grant it without neglecting the duties it owes to itself”
(bk. II, §3). Here Vattel claimed to be following Christian Wolff who, in his Ius
gentium methodo scientifica pertractatum, derived the duty to mutual aid from
analogy between the state of nature and the realm of international relations: the law of
nations was simply the law of nature of individuals in the state of nature applied to
states (Prelim. §3–9). The primary duties of states were, first, to preserve and perfect
themselves, and, second, to assist each other in fulfilling those duties each state owed
to itself. States should “cultivate human society,” primarily through trade, as long as
the development of commerce did not conflict with their primary duties to
themselves. Vattel argued that states that acted upon the principles of natural law
alone would ultimately come to form a universal republic: “A real friendship will be
seen to reign among them; and this happy state consists in a mutual affection” (bk. II,
§12).

Although Vattel claimed that this “delightful dream” was derived directly from
human nature, in The Law of Nations he acknowledged that “most nations aim only to
strengthen and enrich themselves at the expense of others” (bk. II, §16). Accordingly,
prudence prevented existing states from making mutual aid the guiding principle of
foreign politics. Instead, states ought to content themselves with a morally less
appealing, but nevertheless workable, order based on the balance of power. Vattel
explained this acknowledgment of the realities of modern European politics on two
grounds. The first was the theoretical incoherence of previous natural law theories
with regard to the duties of perfectly independent states. Here he turned against
Wolff’s idea of a civitas maxima, as we will see.13 Vattel claimed that Wolff had
rightly distinguished between two forms of the law of nations: first, an immutable or
necessary law of nations, signifying the law of nature applied to individual states;
second, a voluntary law of nations, which defined the necessary limitations of natural
law within the realm of international relations and which, he argued, had to be
tolerated in order to avoid greater harm.14 Although states, like individuals, were
bound to assist others, this duty was limited by the perfect right of a state to self-

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 10 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

preservation. The implication this had for trade was clear enough: while a state was
obliged to trade with all other states and sell its products at a “fair price,”
considerations of self-preservation allowed it to limit its trade, establish trading
companies, or even refuse commerce with another state altogether. Wolff had also
rightly recognized that since the law of nations applied to all states in the same way,
those states affected by trade sanctions could merely point out breaches of the
necessary law of nations. Refusal to trade, however, did not provide any legal ground
for the commencement of military hostilities. The situation was different when a state
was not just incapable of self-preservation but lacked any resources to exchange for
vital goods. Here, the perfect right of preservation of a potential donor nation was
bound to clash with the equally perfect right of preservation of a state on the brink of
starvation. It is in this context that one needs to read Vattel’s often-cited justification
of the appropriation of uncultivated land by European settlers in America.15

Given the increasingly economic dimension of European politics, there was a constant
danger that peaceful trade would be subjected to the logic of warfare. Vattel’s main
task in The Law of Nations was to define as clearly as possible the limits individual
states were allowed to impose on freedom of trade. Wolff hoped to derive such
understanding from the image of a civitas maxima, a universal republic instituted by
nature, whose civil law was the expression of the right reason of civilized nations. In
the preface, Vattel rejected Wolff’s civitas maxima as fictitious and incompatible with
the idea of state sovereignty (preface, 14). While civil society could be said to be
natural in that it originated in human need, no such thing could be said of the relation
between sovereign states: “I acknowledge no other natural society between nations
than that which nature has established between mankind in general” (ibid.). In
contrast to individuals, nations enjoyed greater autonomy and because of this had no
pressing reason to subject themselves to a higher authority. Furthermore, their
absolute liberty was necessary “properly to discharge the duties [the state] owes to
herself and to her citizens” (preface, 15).

Vattel’s defense of a natural law of nations together with his insistence on state
sovereignty earned him a reputation for incoherence, the view of Kant, or, as many
international law theorists writing after the First World War maintained, for being an
unconditional supporter of reason of state who “disguised his evil intentions through
words of sublime charity.”16 Although in The Law of Nations Vattel dealt with this
issue only in passing, he discussed it at length in several of his other writings, notably
his Essay on the Foundation of Natural Law and on the First Principle of the
Obligation Men Find Themselves Under to Observe Laws. Here he sought to explain
how humans could be under an obligation to natural law even in the absence of a
punitive superior. Vattel’s main move, primarily aimed at Jean Barbeyrac, was to
derive obligation not from any external source, but from what he claimed was man’s
most basic motive, namely self-love and a desire for the happiness of a perfect soul.17
Ultimately it was from man’s obligation to himself to attain the highest degree of
happiness, which in turn required commerce with other rational beings, that the duty
of mutual aid and friendship could be derived.18 This also applied to the obedience
citizens owed to the state: “The love and affection a man feels for the state of which
he is a member, is a necessary consequence of the wise and rational love he owes to
himself, since his own happiness is connected with that of his country” (bk. I, §120).

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 11 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

In The Law of Nations Vattel used the same argument with regard to states. As in the
case of individuals, a nation’s duty of self-preservation and of self-perfection could be
derived only from its basic self-interest and its desire to attain the highest level of
national happiness. Moreover, like individuals, nations could attain national happiness
only by developing more enlightened forms of self-interest, forms that took into
account the well-being of other nations.19 Vattel claimed that the highest degree of
national happiness consisted in “true glory” (bk. I, §§186–88). It was acquired
through the positive reputation a state enjoyed among well-intentioned nations, and
through the respect it received from those seeking to violate the laws of nations. A
truly glorious nation, Vattel hoped, would set an example others would wish to
emulate. In so doing, it would gradually shift the pathological rivalry between states
in the direction of a system based on virtuous competition.20

As a further measure for reducing the tensions between self-preservation and mutual
aid, Vattel called upon European rulers and their ministers to implement a wide range
of legislative reforms that would allow modern nations to break out of the vicious
cycle of public borrowing and taxation and to create a healthier balance between
income and expenditure (bk. I, §183). Instead of relying on the distributive effect of
luxury and conspicuous consumption, rulers should initiate a new culture of virtuous
moderation and encourage agriculture so as to procure “abundance in every thing”
(bk. I, §73).21 Although he accepted certain protectionist measures with regard to
foreign trade, Vattel insisted that states should intervene as little as possible in the
domestic economy and grant individual citizens the maximum amount of natural
liberty: “Liberty is the soul of abilities and industry” (bk. I, §74). He also expressly
recommended the role of learned societies for the dissemination of technological
know-how (bk. I, §76). Vattel believed that of all modern nations Britain had come
closest to implementing a system worthy of emulation, and in The Law of Nations he
repeatedly singled it out as an example for the rest of Europe, not only with regard to
its economy but also with respect to its “admirable constitution.” In contrast with the
constitutions of patrimonial states, Britain allowed its citizens to recognize themselves
as part of both the nation and the universal society of men (bk. I, §24).22

Contemporaries would have recognized Vattel’s stance on perhaps the central issue of
European politics at the time: whether Britain or France would prove the stronger in
the international rivalry for supremacy. In supporting Britain’s advocacy of an
ongoing European balance of power, rather than French hegemony on mainland
Europe that was associated with the peace projects of the Abbé de Saint-Pierre and
Victor Riqueti de Mirabeau, Vattel was taking a stand on the domestic stability of
mixed government as much as he was on the consequences of such a polity for
international affairs. In advocating mixed government in commercial monarchies he
was going against the grain of the majority of writers, such as Montesquieu and
Rousseau, for whom Britain’s mixed government, with its parties, corruption, and
factions, represented an institutionalization of civil war domestically that would have
dire consequences if transposed into the dominant form of state internationally. Praise
of Britain also allowed Vattel to emphasize the greater modernity of Protestant states
by contrast with the backwardness of the religious, moral, and economic practices that
he associated with Catholicism. In an openly polemical fashion, Vattel often linked
such backwardness with reason of state, or amoral policy, in the international sphere

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 12 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

and was always ready to provide examples of the violation of natural law from the
history of the papacy. Catholic writers were, however, willing to use Vattel for his
broader arguments about the independence of small states. One key example is
Cardinal Consalvi at the Congress of Vienna, who employed Vattel’s arguments to
justify the sovereignty of the Vatican over the papal states.

Vattel was convinced that if Britain played a more active role in the relations between
European states, French aspirations to universal monarchy would be countered. This
was expected in turn to safeguard the sovereignty of the smaller states, and especially
the Swiss republics, the legitimacy of whose existence was increasingly questioned as
public credit allowed the larger monarchies to employ mercenary armies too strong
for the old republics, however great their republican valor and virtue. Vattel’s case for
the survival of small states in the modern world is one of his main themes, especially
in The Law of Nations. Vattel’s association of the law of nations with the defense of
small states against more powerful neighbors was illustrated in February 1758, after
the Prussian army had destroyed castles belonging to the duke of Saxony. Vattel
announced to Brühl that his recently published work proved the legitimacy of
Saxony’s complaints and also showed that “all powers are obliged to unite and punish
the one who wishes to introduce such wicked customs.”23 Prussia should be held
accountable, he explained in a letter addressed to the avoyer24 and Small Council of
Berne, for violating the established rules of war that permitted armed conflict only as
a last resort after all diplomatic options had been exhausted. Given that Saxony had
not only disarmed but even granted passage to Prussian troops, Friedrich’s systematic
plundering of Saxony’s riches and forced enlistment of the “entire flower of
youth”—a practice that Vattel described as being without precedent among Christian
princes—threatened the very possibility of peaceful coexistence among European
nations.25

Conclusion
Vattel’s ideas of modern patriotism and encouragement of the economy are not
among the most original in The Law of Nations. Nevertheless, they are important
because they show the weakness of any attempt to capture Vattel’s position within the
analytical framework of retrospective histories of international law or international
relations.26 Besides clarifying more thoroughly than previous thinkers the proper
relationship between the natural law of individuals and of states, Vattel used his
unusually broad intellectual interests to comment on the cultural, political, and
economic conditions required for a viable system of international justice. Vattel saw
his magnum opus as a contribution to a great European debate on the science of
legislation, a debate that analyzed the possibilities available to modern nations to
secure liberty and cultural advancement against constant interruption by war. The
importance of The Law of Nations therefore resides both in its systematic derivation
of international law from natural law and in its compelling synthesis of the modern
discourse of natural jurisprudence with the even newer language of political economy.
These features help to explain the continuing appeal of this text well into the
nineteenth century among politicians, international lawyers, and political theorists of
every complexion.27

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 13 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

A NOTE ON THE TEXTS

English Editions Of The Law Of Nations
Vattel’s Law of Nations was translated anonymously into English several times in the
eighteenth century. The first edition of 1760 was based on the French original Droit
des gens of 1758. A Dublin translation of 1787 is remarkably fluent and elegant, but it
does not include the substantive notes of the original nor, more importantly, the notes
added to the posthumous French edition of 1773 and intended by Vattel for a second
edition he did not live to complete. Several English editions, including the 1916
Classics of International Law edition, are similarly flawed and based on the edition of
1760. However, two English editions from the end of the eighteenth century include
Vattel’s later thoughts. One, from 1793, contains a pagination error. This has been
corrected in the revised version, London 1797, and the latter forms the basis for the
present edition. The 1797 edition has the benefit of a detailed table of contents and
margin titles for subsections.

There is no modern edition of The Law of Nations, but facsimiles of the popular
nineteenth-century editions by the London barrister Joseph Chitty have appeared in
recent times. These annotated editions (first in 1834) and their reissue with further
notes by Edward Ingraham (first in 1852) were based on the 1797 London edition.
Chitty helpfully identified the notes that distinguished the 1797 edition from the
earlier English translation. He sought, however, to add much more to the text, as he
explained in a preface written in Chancery Lane in November 1833:

Many years have elapsed since the original work was published, long before the
invaluable decisions of Sir William Scott, Sir C. Robinson, and Sir John Nichol, and
other eminent Judges in the Courts of Admiralty, and Prize and other Courts; and the
last edition upon which any care was bestowed, was published in ad 1797; since
which time, and especially during the last general war, many most important rules
respecting the Law of Nations were established. The object of the present Editor has,
therefore, been to collect and condense, in numerous notes, the modern rules and
decisions, and to fortify the positions in the text by references to other authors of
eminence, and by which he hopes that this edition will be found of more practical
utility, without interfering with the text, or materially increasing its size.

In consequence, Chitty’s text is overloaded with legal citations based on the case law
of the sea that emerged in the Napoleonic era. Vattel’s work had become a textbook
for law students in both Britain and North America.

Some of Chitty’s notes remain useful and have on occasion been incorporated into the
editorial apparatus for this edition. The present edition includes new footnotes,
elucidating dates, events, works, and persons referred to by Vattel. Posthumous
additions to the French edition of 1773, which were then translated in the edition of
1797, are identified as such in the new notes. Translations of Vattel’s Latin citations
have come from the best modern editions, particularly from the Loeb Classical

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 14 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Library. For each translation, reference to the edition used can be found in the
bibliography of authors cited. In cases where no translation could be found, or where
the context of Vattel’s work required an amended translation, the editors undertook
the translation, and this is signaled in the text by “trans. Eds.” All of the preceding
new material has been added to the 1797 text as numbered notes or as double square-
bracketed inserts within Vattel’s original notes.

Chitty lamented in 1833 that “he proposed to form an Index, so as to render the work
more readily accessible; but, in that desire, he has been overruled by the publishers.”
The present edition adds bibliographical and biographical details of authors cited in
the text, following up Vattel’s own sometimes obscure references. The bibliography
of authors cited includes and explains the short titles employed by Vattel in his
footnotes.

Page breaks in the 1797 edition have been indicated in the body of the text by the use
of angle brackets. For example, page 112 begins after <112>.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 15 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

Three Essays By Vattel
The first two essays included here, Essay on the Foundation of Natural Law1 and Can
Natural Law Bring Society to Perfection Without the Assistance of Political Laws?2
date from the early and formative phase of Vattel’s career and anticipate many of the
themes of The Law of Nations. Both essays were originally published in the collection
Le loisir phi losoph ique ou pièces diverses de philosophie, de morale et d’amusement
(Geneva, 1747). The second dissertation was a response to the Academy of Dijon’s
prize competition of 1742.

The two translations, both for the first time in English, are based on the texts as
appended to a nineteenth-century edition of the Le droit des gens: Nouvelle édition,
précédé d’un essai et d’une dissertation (de l’auteur), accompagnée des notes de
Pinheiro-Ferreira et du Baron de Chambrier d’Oleires, augmente du discours sur
l’étude du droit de la nature et des gens par Sir J. Mackintosh (traduction nouvelle),
complèté par l’exposition des doctrines des publicistes contemporains mise au
courant des progrès du droit public moderne et suivie d’une table analytique des
matières, par M. P. Pradier-Fodéré (3 vols.; Paris: Saint-Denis, 1863).

The third essay, Dialogue Between the Prince of **** and His Confidant,3 was first
published in Amusemens de littérature, de morale, et de politique par M. de Vattel
(The Hague: Pierre Gosse Junior & Daniel Pinet libraires de S.A.S, 1765, 21–48). It is
translated here in English for the first time.

The text of this essay is important because it shows Vattel to have been participating
fully in the debates about economic and administrative reform that took place all over
Europe at the time. The Dialogue also shows that Vattel’s theory of international law
(and especially his assessment of Europe’s chances of having a workable system of
international justice) can be fully understood only when seen in the light of his ideas
about domestic reform.

In all three essays the original notes have been preserved as numbered notes. New
material added by the volume editors is enclosed in double square brackets.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 16 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The editors would like to thank Nikolas Funke, Ken Goodwin, Tim Hochstrasser,
Amanda McKeever, Norman Vance, and Stefania Tutino for extensive scholarly
labors which have immeasurably improved this edition. Ian Gazeley, Julian Hoppit,
Istvan Hont, Michael Sonenscher, Gabriella Silvestrini, and Brian Young deserve
thanks for help on specific points of fact. Thanks are also due to Laura Goetz, Diana
Francoeur, and the editorial team at Liberty Fund, who saw the manuscript through
press with outstanding professionalism. Support for the research under pinning this
edition was provided by the School of Humanities Research Fund at the University of
Sussex, the British Academy, the Arts and Humanities Research Council, the
Leverhulme Trust, the Institut d’Etudes Politiques et Internationales de l’université de
Lausanne, and the Swiss National Science Foundation. As is always the case, a debt
of gratitude is owed to our wives and families, and also to our colleagues in
intellectual history at Sussex, Fribourg, and Lausanne. Our greatest debt, however, is
to Knud Haakonssen who, master editor that he is, guided us with patience and good
humor through the minefield of modern editorial practice.

Béla Kapossy

Richard Whatmore

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 17 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

THE LAW OF NATIONS
THE

LAW OF NATIONS,

or,

PRINCIPLES

OF THE

LAW OF NATURE,

Applied to the Conduct and Affairs

OF NATIONS AND SOVEREIGNS.

from the french of monsieur de vattel.

Nihil est enim illi principi Deo qui omnem hunc mundum regit, quod quidem in terris
fiat, acceptius, quam concilia coetusque hominum jure sociati, quae civitates,
appellantur.1

Cicero, Som. Scip.2

a new edition,

Revised, corrected, and enriched with many valuable Notes never before translated
into English.

london:

PRINTED FOR G.G. AND J. ROBINSON, PATERNOSTER-ROW.

1797.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 18 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

ADVERTISEMENT
In undertaking this new edition of Monsieur De Vattel’s treatise, it was not my
intention to give what might strictly be called a new translation. To add the author’s
valuable notes from the posthumous edition printed at Neuchatel in 1773,—to correct
some errors I had observed in the former version,—and occasionally to amend the
language where doubtful or obscure,—were the utmost limits of my original plan. As
I proceeded, however, my alterations became more numerous: but whether they will
be acknowledged as amendments, it must rest with the reader to determine. Even if
his decision should be more favourable than I have any reason to expect, I lay no
claim to praise for my humble efforts, but shall esteem myself very fortunate if I
escape the severity of censure for presenting the work to the public in a state still so
far short of perfection. Conscious of its defects, I declare with great sincerity—

.... Veniam Pro Laude Peto,—Laudatus Abunde,
Non Fastiditus Si Tibi, Lector, Ero.3
london,
May 1, 1797.

the editor

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 19 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

PREFACE
The Law of Nations, though so noble and important a subject, has not hitherto been
treated of with all the care it deserves. The greater part of mankind have therefore
only a vague, a very incomplete, and often even a false notion of it. The generality of
writers, and even celebrated authors, almost exclusively confine the name of the Law
of Nations to certain maxims and customs which have been adopted by different
nations, and which the mutual consent of the parties has alone rendered obligatory on
them. This is confining within very narrow bounds a law so extensive in its own
nature, and in which the whole human race are so intimately concerned; it is at the
same time a degradation of that law, in consequence of a misconception of its real
origin.

There certainly exists a natural law of nations, since the obligations of the law of
nature are no less binding on states, on men united in political society, than on
individuals. But, to acquire an exact knowledge of that law, it is not sufficient to know
what the law of nature prescribes to the individuals of the human race. The
application of a rule to various subjects can no otherwise be made than in a manner
agreeable to the nature of each subject. Hence it follows that the natural law of nations
is a particular science, consisting in a just and rational application of the law of nature
to the affairs and conduct of nations or sovereigns. All those treatises, therefore, in
which the law of nations is blended and confounded with the ordinary law of nature,
are incapable of conveying a distinct idea or a substantial knowledge of the sacred law
of nations.

The Romans often confounded the law of nations with the law of nature, giving the
name of “the law of nations” (Jus Gentium) to the law of nature, as being generally
acknowledged and adopted by all civilised nations.* The definitions given by the
emperor Justinian, of the law of nature, the law of nations, and the civil law, are well
known. “The law of nature” says he, “is that which nature teaches to all animals”:†
thus he defines the natural law in its most extensive sense, not that natural law which
is peculiar to man, and which is derived as well from his rational as from his animal
nature. “The civil law,” that emperor adds, “is that which each nation has established
for herself, and which peculiarly belongs to each state or civil society. And that law,
which natural reason has established among all mankind, and which is equally
observed by all people, is called the law of nations, as being a law which all nations
follow.”‡ In the succeeding paragraph the emperor seems to approach nearer to the
sense we at present give to that term. “The law of nations,” says he, “is common to
the whole human race. The exigencies and necessities of mankind have induced all
nations to lay down and adopt certain rules of right. For wars have arisen, and
produced captivity and servitude, which are contrary to the law of nature; since, by
the law of nature, all men were originally born free.”§ But, from what he adds— that
almost all kinds of contracts, those of buying and selling, of hire, partnership, trust,
and an infinite number of others, owe their origin to that law of nations,—it plainly
appears to have been Justinian’s idea, that, according to the situations and
circumstances in which men were placed, right reason has dictated to them certain

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 20 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

maxims of equity, so founded on the nature of things, that they have been universally
acknowledged and adopted. Still this is nothing more than the law of nature which is
equally applicable to all mankind.

The Romans, however, acknowledged a law whose obligations are reciprocally
binding on nations: and to that law they referred the right of embassies. They had also
their fecial law, which was nothing more than the law of nations in its particular
relation to public treaties, and especially to war. The feciales were the interpreters, the
guardians, and, in a manner, the priests of the public faith.*

The moderns are generally agreed in restricting the appellation of “the law of nations”
to that system of right and justice which ought to prevail between nations or sovereign
states. They differ only in the ideas they entertain of the origin whence that system
arose, and of the foundations upon which it rests. The celebrated Grotius understands
it to be a system established by the common consent of nations; and he thus
distinguishes it from the law of nature: “When several persons, at different times and
in various places, maintain the same thing as certain, such coincidence of sentiment
must be attributed to some general cause. Now, in the questions before us, that cause
must necessarily be one or the other of these two—either a just consequence drawn
from natural principles, or a universal consent. The former discovers to us the law of
nature, and the latter, the law of nations.”†

That great man, as appears from many passages in his excellent work, had a glimpse
of the truth: but as he had the task of extracting from the rude ore, as it were, and
reducing into regular shape and form, a new and important subject which had been
much neglected before his time, it is not surprising, that,—having his mind burthened
with an immense variety of objects, and with a numberless train of quotations which
formed a part of his plan,—he could not always acquire those distinct ideas so
necessary in the sciences. Persuaded that nations or sovereign powers are subject to
the authority of the law of nature, the observance of which he so frequently
recommends to them,—that learned man, in fact, acknowledged a natural law of
nations, which he somewhere calls the internal law of nations: and perhaps it will
appear that the only difference between him and us lies in the terms. But we have
already observed, that, in order to form this natural law of nations, it is not sufficient
simply to apply to nations what the law of nature decides with respect to individuals.
And besides, Grotius, by his very distinction, and by exclusively appropriating the
name of “the law of nations” to those maxims which have been established by the
common consent of mankind, seems to intimate, that sovereigns, in their transactions
with each other, cannot insist on the observance of any but those last-mentioned
maxims,—reserving the internal law for the direction of their own consciences.
If—setting out with the idea that political societies or nations live, with respect to
each other, in a reciprocal independence, in the state of nature, and that, as political
bodies, they are subject to the natural law—Grotius had moreover considered that the
law must be applied to these new subjects in a manner suitable to their nature,—that
judicious author would easily have discovered that the natural law of nations is a
particular science; that it produces between nations even an external obligation
wholly independent of their will; and that the common consent of mankind is only the
foundation and source of a particular kind of law called the Arbitrary Law of Nations.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 21 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Hobbes, in whose work we discover the hand of a master, notwithstanding his
paradoxes and detestable maxims,—Hobbes was, I believe, the first who gave a
distinct though imperfect idea of the law of nations. He divides the law of nature into
that of man, and that of states: and the latter is, according to him, what we usually call
the law of nations. “The maxims,” he adds, “of each of these laws are precisely the
same: but as states once established assume personal properties, that which is termed
the natural law when we speak of the duties of individuals, is called the law of nations
when applied to whole nations or states.”* This author has well observed, that the law
of nations is the law of nature applied to states or nations. But we shall see in the
course of this work, that he was mistaken in the idea that the law of nature does not
suffer any necessary change in that application,—an idea from which he concluded
that the maxims of the law of nature and those of the law of nations are precisely the
same.

Puffendorf declares that he unreservedly subscribes to this opinion espoused by
Hobbes.* He has not therefore separately treated of the law of nations, but has every-
where blended it with the law of nature properly so called.

Barbeyrac, who performed the office of translator and commentator to Grotius and
Puffendorf, has approached much nearer to the true idea of the law of nations. Though
the work is in every body’s hands, I shall here, for the reader’s convenience,
transcribe one of that learned translator’s notes on Grotius’s Law of War and Peace.†
“I acknowledge,” says he, “that there are laws common to all nations,—things which
all nations ought to practise towards each other: and if people choose to call these the
law of nations, they may do so with great propriety. But setting aside the
consideration that the consent of mankind is not the basis of the obligation by which
we are bound to observe those laws, and that it cannot even possibly take place in this
instance,—the principles and the rules of such a law are in fact the same as those of
the law of nature, properly so called; the only difference consisting in the mode of
their application, which may be somewhat varied, on account of the difference that
sometimes happens in the manner in which nations settle their affairs with each
other.”

It did not escape the notice of the author we have just quoted, that the rules and
decisions of the law of nature cannot be purely and simply applied to sovereign states,
and that they must necessarily undergo some modifications in order to accommodate
them to the nature of the new subjects to which they are applied. But it does not
appear that he discovered the full extent of this idea, since he seems not to approve of
the mode of treating the law of nations separately from the law of nature as relating to
individuals. He only commends Budaeus’s method, saying, “it was right in that author
to point out,* after each article of the law of nature, the application which may be
made of it to nations in their mutual relations to each other,—so far at least as his plan
permitted or required that he should do this.”† Here Barbeyrac made one step at least
in the right track: but it required more profound reflection and more extensive views
in order to conceive the idea of a system of natural law of nations, which should claim
the obedience of states and sovereigns,— to perceive the utility of such a work, and
especially to be the first to execute it.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 22 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

This glory was reserved for the baron de Wolf. That great philosopher saw that the
law of nature could not, with such modifications as the nature of the subjects required,
and with sufficient precision, clearness, and solidity, be applied to incorporated
nations or states, without the assistance of those general principles and leading ideas
by which the application is to be directed;—that it is by those principles alone we are
enabled evidently to demonstrate that the decisions of the law of nature respecting
individuals must, pursuant to the intentions of that very law, be changed and modified
in their application to states and political societies,—and thus to form a natural and
necessary law of nations:* whence he concluded, that it was proper to form a distinct
system of the law of nations,—a task which he has happily executed. But it is just that
we should hear what Wolf himself says in his Preface.1

“Nations,”† says he, “do not, in their mutual relations to each other, acknowledge any
other law than that which nature herself has established. Perhaps, therefore, it may
appear superfluous to give a treatise on the law of nations, as distinct from the law of
nature. But those who entertain this idea have not sufficiently studied the subject.
Nations, it is true, can only be considered as so many individual persons living
together in the state of nature; and, for that reason, we must apply to them all the
duties and rights which nature prescribes and attributes to men in general, as being
naturally born free, and bound to each other by no ties but those of nature alone. The
law which arises from this application, and the obligations resulting from it, proceed
from that immutable law founded on the nature of man; and thus the law of nations
certainly belongs to the law of nature: it is therefore, on account of its origin, called
the natural, and, by reason of its obligatory force, the necessary law of nations. That
law is common to all nations; and if any one of them does not respect it in her actions,
she violates the common rights of all the others.

“But nations or sovereign states being moral persons, and the subjects of the
obligations and rights resulting, in virtue of the law of nature, from the act of
association which has formed the political body,—the nature and essence of these
moral persons necessarily differ, in many respects, from the nature and essence of the
physical individuals, or men, of whom they are composed. When, therefore, we would
apply to nations the duties which the law of nature prescribes to individual man, and
the rights it confers on him in order to enable him to fulfil his duties,—since those
rights and those duties can be no other than what are consistent with the nature of
their subjects, they must, in their application, necessarily undergo a change suitable to
the new subjects to which they are applied. Thus we see that the law of nations does
not in every particular remain the same as the law of nature, regulating the actions of
individuals. Why may it not therefore be separately treated of, as a law peculiar to
nations?”

Being myself convinced of the utility of such a work, I impatiently waited for
Monsieur Wolf’s production, and, as soon as it appeared, formed the design of
facilitating, for the advantage of a greater number of readers, the knowledge of the
luminous ideas which it contains. The treatise of the philosopher of Hall[[e on the law
of nations is dependent on all those of the same author on philosophy and the law of
nature. In order to read and understand it, it is necessary to have previously studied
sixteen or seventeen quarto volumes which precede it. Besides, it is written in the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 23 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

manner and even in the formal method of geometrical works. These circumstances
present obstacles which render it nearly useless to those very persons in whom the
knowledge and taste of the true principles of the law of nations are most important
and most desirable. At first I thought that I should have had nothing farther to do, than
to detach this treatise from the entire system by rendering it independent of every
thing Monsieur Wolf had said before, and to give it a new form, more agreeable, and
better calculated to ensure it a reception in the polite world. With that view, I made
some attempts; but I soon found, that if I indulged the expectation of procuring
readers among that class of persons for whom I intended to write, and of rendering my
efforts beneficial to man-kind, it was necessary that I should form a very different
work from that which lay before me, and undertake to furnish an original production.
The method followed by Monsieur Wolf has had the effect of rendering his work dry,
and in many respects incomplete. The different subjects are scattered through it in a
manner that is extremely fatiguing to the attention: and as the author had, in his “Law
of Nature,” treated of universal public law, he frequently contents himself with a bare
reference to his former production, when, in handling the law of nations, he speaks of
the duties of a nation towards herself.

]]

From Monsieur Wolf’s treatise, therefore, I have only borrowed whatever appeared
most worthy of attention, especially the definitions and general principles; but I have
been careful in selecting what I drew from that source, and have accommodated to my
own plan the materials with which he furnished me. Those who have read Monsieur
Wolf’s treatises on the law of nature and the law of nations, will see what advantage I
have made of them. Had I every-where pointed out what I have borrowed, my pages
would be crowded with quotations equally useless and disagreeable to the reader. It is
better to acknowledge here, once for all, the obligations I am under to that great
master. Although my work be very different from his (as will appear to those who are
willing to take the trouble of making the comparison), I confess that I should never
have had the courage to launch into so extensive a field, if the celebrated philosopher
of Hall[[e had not preceded my steps, and held forth a torch to guide me on my way.

]]

Sometimes, however, I have ventured to deviate from the path which he had pointed
out, and have adopted sentiments opposite to his. I will here quote a few instances.
Monsieur Wolf, influenced perhaps by the example of numerous other writers, has
devoted several sections* to the express purpose of treating of the nature of
patrimonial kingdoms, without rejecting or rectifying that idea so degrading to human
kind. I do not even admit of such a denomination, which I think equally shocking,
improper, and dangerous, both in its effects, and in the impressions it may give to
sovereigns: and in this, I flatter myself I shall obtain the suffrage of every man who
possesses the smallest spark of reason and sentiment,—in short, of every true citizen.

Monsieur Wolf determines (Jus Gent. §878) that it is naturally lawful to make use of
poisoned weapons in war. I am shocked at such a decision, and sorry to find it in the
work of so great a man. Happily for the human race, it is not difficult to prove the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 24 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

contrary, even from Monsieur Wolf’s own principles. What I have said on this subject
may be seen in Book III. §156.

In the very outset of my work, it will be found that I differ entirely from Monsieur
Wolf in the manner of establishing the foundations of that species of law of nations
which we call voluntary. Monsieur Wolf deduces it from the idea of a great republic
(civitatis maximae) instituted by nature herself, and of which all the nations of the
world are members. According to him, the voluntary law of nations is, as it were, the
civil law of that great republic. This idea does not satisfy me; nor do I think the fiction
of such a republic either admissible in itself, or capable of affording sufficiently solid
grounds on which to build the rules of the universal law of nations which shall
necessarily claim the obedient acquiescence of sovereign states. I acknowledge no
other natural society between nations than that which nature has established between
mankind in general. It is essential to every civil society (civitati) that each member
have resigned a part of his right to the body of the society, and that there exist in it an
authority capable of commanding all the members, of giving them laws, and of
compelling those who should refuse to obey. Nothing of this kind can be conceived or
supposed to subsist between nations. Each sovereign state claims and actually
possesses an absolute independence on all the others. They are all, according to
Monsieur Wolf himself, to be considered as so many individuals who live together in
the state of nature, and who acknowledge no other laws but those of nature, or of her
Great Author. Now, although nature has indeed established a general society between
mankind, by creating them subject to such wants as render the assistance of their
fellow-creatures indispensably necessary to enable them to live in a manner suitable
to men,—yet she has not imposed on them any particular obligation to unite in civil
society, properly so called: and if they all obeyed the injunctions of that good parent,
their subjection to the restraints of civil society would be unnecessary. It is true, that,
as there does not exist in mankind a disposition voluntarily to observe towards each
other the rules of the law of nature, they have had recourse to a political association,
as the only adequate remedy against the depravity of the majority,—the only means of
securing the condition of the good, and repressing the wicked: and the law of nature
itself approves of this establishment. But it is easy to perceive that the civic
association is very far from being equally necessary between nations, as it was
between individuals. We cannot therefore say that nature equally recommends it,
much less that she has prescribed it. Individuals are so constituted, and are capable of
doing so little by themselves, that they can scarcely subsist without the aid and the
laws of civil society. But as soon as a considerable number of them have united under
the same government, they become able to supply most of their wants; and the
assistance of other political societies is not so necessary to them as that of individuals
is to an individual. These societies have still, it is true, powerful motives for carrying
on a communication and commerce with each other; and it is even their duty to do it;
since no man can, without good reasons, refuse assistance to another man. But the law
of nature may suffice to regulate this commerce, and this correspondence. States
conduct themselves in a different manner from individuals. It is not usually the
caprice or blind impetuosity of a single person that forms the resolutions and
determines the measures of the public: they are carried on with more deliberation and
circumspection: and, on difficult or important occasions, arrangements are made and
regulations established by means of treaties. To this we may add, that independence is

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 25 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

even necessary to each state, in order to enable her properly to discharge the duties
she owes to herself and to her citizens, and to govern herself in the manner best suited
to her circumstances. It is therefore sufficient (as I have already said) that nations
should conform to what is required of them by the natural and general society
established between all mankind.

But, says Monsieur Wolf, a rigid adherence to the law of nature cannot always prevail
in that commerce and society of nations; it must undergo various modifications,
which can only be deduced from this idea of a kind of great republic of nations,
whose laws, dictated by sound reason and founded on necessity, shall regulate the
alterations to be made in the natural and necessary law of nations, as the civil laws of
a particular state determine what modifications shall take place in the natural law of
individuals. I do not perceive the necessity of this consequence; and I flatter myself
that I shall, in the course of this work, be able to prove, that all the modifications, all
the restrictions,—in a word, all the alterations which the rigour of the natural law
must be made to undergo in the affairs of nations, and from which the voluntary law
of nations is formed,—to prove, I say, that all these alterations are deducible from the
natural liberty of nations, from the attention due to their common safety, from the
nature of their mutual correspondence, their reciprocal duties, and the distinctions of
their various rights, internal and external, perfect and imperfect,—by a mode of
reasoning nearly similar to that which Mon-sieur Wolf has pursued, with respect to
individuals, in his treatise on the law of nature.

In that treatise it is made to appear that the rules, which, in consequence of the natural
liberty of mankind, must be admitted in questions of external right do not cancel the
obligation which the internal right imposes on the conscience of each individual. It is
easy to apply this doctrine to nations, and—by carefully drawing the line of
distinction between the internal and the external right—between the necessary and the
voluntary law of nations—to teach them not to indulge themselves in the commission
of every act which they may do with impunity, unless it be approved by the
immutable laws of justice, and the voice of conscience.

Since nations, in their transactions with each other, are equally bound to admit those
exceptions to, and those modifications of, the rigour of the necessary law, whether
they be deduced from the idea of a great republic of which all nations are supposed to
be the members, or derived from the sources whence I propose to draw them,—there
can be no reason why the system which thence results, should not be called the
Voluntary Law of nations, in contradistinction to the necessary, internal, and
consciential law. Names are of very little consequence: but it is of considerable
importance carefully to distinguish these two kinds of law, in order that we may never
confound what is just and good in itself, with what is only tolerated through necessity.

The necessary and the voluntary law of nations are therefore both established by
nature, but each in a different manner; the former as a sacred law which nations and
sovereigns are bound to respect and follow in all their actions; the latter, as a rule
which the general welfare and safety oblige them to admit in their transactions with
each other. The necessary law immediately proceeds from nature; and that common
mother of mankind recommends the obser-vance of the voluntary law of nations, in

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 26 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

consideration of the state in which nations stand with respect to each other, and for the
advantage of their affairs. This double law, founded on certain and invariable
principles, is susceptible of demonstration, and will constitute the principal subject of
this work.

There is another kind of law of nations, which authors call arbitrary, because it
proceeds from the will or consent of nations. States, as well as individuals, may
acquire rights and contract obligations, by express engagements, by compacts and
treaties: hence results a conventional law of nations, peculiar to the contracting
powers. Nations may also bind themselves by their tacit consent: upon this ground
rest all those regulations which custom has introduced between different states, and
which constitute the usage of nations, or the law of nations founded on custom. It is
evident that this law cannot impose any obligation except on those particular nations
who have, by long use, given their sanction to its maxims: it is a peculiar law, and
limited in its operation, as the conventional law: both the one and the other derive all
their obligatory force from that maxim of the natural law which makes it the duty of
nations to fulfil their engagements, whether express or tacit. The same maxim ought
to regulate the conduct of states with regard to the treaties they conclude, and the
customs they adopt. I must content myself with simply laying down the general rules
and principles which the law of nature furnishes for the direction of sovereigns in this
respect. A particular detail of the various treaties and customs of different states
belongs to history, and not to a systematic treatise on the law of nations.

Such a treatise ought, as we have already observed, principally to consist in a
judicious and rational application of the principles of the law of nature to the affairs
and conduct of nations and sovereigns. The study of the law of nations supposes
therefore a pre-vious knowledge of the ordinary law of nature: and in fact I proceed
on the supposition that my readers are already, to a certain degree at least, possessed
of that knowledge. Nevertheless, as it is not agreeable to readers in general to be
obliged to recur to other authorities for proofs of what an author advances, I have
taken care to establish, in a few words, the most important of those principles of the
law of nature which I intended to apply to nations. But I have not always thought it
necessary to trace them to their primary foundations for the purpose of demonstration,
but have sometimes contented myself with supporting them by common truths which
are acknowledged by every candid reader, without carrying the analysis any farther. It
is sufficient for me to persuade, and for this purpose to advance nothing as a principle,
that will not readily be admitted by every sensible man.

The law of nations is the law of sovereigns. It is principally for them and for their
ministers that it ought to be written. All mankind are indeed interested in it; and, in a
free country, the study of its maxims is a proper employment for every citizen: but it
would be of little consequence to impart the knowledge of it only to private
individuals, who are not called to the councils of nations, and who have no influence
in directing the public measures. If the conductors of states, if all those who are
employed in public affairs, condescended to apply seriously to the study of a science
which ought to be their law, and, as it were, the compass by which to steer their
course, what happy effects might we not expect from a good treatise on the law of
nations! We every day feel the advantages of a good body of laws in civil

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 27 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

society:—the law of nations is, in point of importance, as much superior to the civil
law, as the proceedings of nations and sovereigns are more momentous in their
consequences than those of private persons.

But fatal experience too plainly proves, how little regard those who are at the head of
affairs pay to the dictates of justice, in conjunctures where they hope to find their
advantage. Satisfied with bestowing their attention on a system of politics which is
often false since often unjust, the generality of them think they have done enough
when they have thoroughly studied that. Nevertheless we may truly apply to states a
maxim which has long been acknowledged as true with respect to individuals,—that
the best and safest policy is that which is founded on virtue. Cicero, as great a master
in the art of government as in eloquence and philosophy, does not content himself
with rejecting the vulgar maxim, that “a state cannot be happily governed without
committing injustice”; he even proceeds so far as to lay down the very reverse of the
proposition as an invariable truth, and maintains, that, “without a strict attention to the
most rigid justice, public affairs cannot be advantageously administered.”*

Providence occasionally bestows on the world kings and ministers whose minds are
impressed with this great truth. Let us not renounce the pleasing hope that the number
of those wise conductors of nations will one day be multiplied; and in the interim let
us, each in his own sphere, exert our best efforts to accelerate the happy period.

It is principally with a view of rendering my work palatable to those by whom it is of
the most importance that it should be read and relished, that I have sometimes joined
examples to the maxims I advance: and in that idea I have been confirmed by the
approbation of one of those ministers who are the enlightened friends of the human
race, and who alone ought to be admitted into the councils of kings.2 But I have been
sparing in the use of such embellishments. Without ever aiming at a vain parade of
erudition, I only sought to afford an occasional relaxation to the reader’s mind, or to
render the doctrine more impressive by an example, and sometimes to shew that the
practice of nations is conformable to the principles laid down: and whenever I found a
convenient opportunity, I have, above all things, endeavoured to inspire a love of
virtue, by shewing, from some striking passage of history, how amiable it is, how
worthy of our homage in some truly great men, and even productive of solid
advantage. I have quoted the chief part of my examples from modern history, as well
because these are more interesting, as to avoid a repetition of those which have been
already accumulated by Grotius, Puffendorf, and their commentators.

As to the rest, I have, both in these examples and in my reasonings, studiously
endeavoured to avoid giving offence; it being my intention religiously to observe the
respect due to nations and sovereign powers: but I have made it a still more sacred
rule to respect the truth, and the interests of the human race. If, among the base
flatterers of despotic power, my principles meet with opponents, I shall have on my
side the virtuous man, the friend of the laws, the man of probity, and the true citizen.

I should prefer the alternative of total silence, were I not at liberty in my writings to
obey the dictates of my conscience. But my pen lies under no restraint, and I am
incapable of prostituting it to flattery. I was born in a country of which liberty is the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 28 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

soul, the treasure, and the fundamental law; and my birth qualifies me to be the friend
of all nations. These favourable circumstances have encouraged me in the attempt to
render myself useful to mankind by this work. I felt conscious of my deficiency in
knowledge and abilities: I saw that I was undertaking an arduous task: but I shall rest
satisfied if that class of readers whose opinions are entitled to respect, discover in my
labours the traces of the honest man and the good citizen.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 29 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

PRELIMINARIES

Idea And General Principles Of The Law Of Nations.
Nations or states are bodies politic, societies of men united §1. What is meant by
together for the purpose of promoting their mutual safety and a nation or state.
advantage by the joint efforts of their combined strength.

Such a society has her affairs and her interests; she deliberates §2. It is a moral
and takes resolutions in common; thus becoming a moral person, person.
who possesses an understanding and a will peculiar to herself,
and is susceptible of obligations and rights.

To establish on a solid foundation the obligations and rights of §3. Definition of the
nations, is the design of this work. The law of nations is the law of nations.
science which teaches the rights subsisting between nations or
states, and the obligations correspondent to those rights.

In this treatise it will appear, in what manner states, as such, ought to regulate all their
actions. We shall examine the obligations of a people, as well towards themselves as
towards other nations; and by that means we shall discover the rights which result
from those obligations. For, the right being nothing more than the power of doing
what is morally possible, that is to say, what is proper and consistent with duty,—it is
evident that right is derived from duty, or passive obligation,—the obligation we lie
under to act in such or such manner. It is therefore necessary that a nation should
acquire a knowledge of the obligations incumbent on her, in order that she may not
only avoid all violation of her duty, but also be able distinctly to ascertain her rights,
or what she may lawfully require from other nations.

Nations being composed of men naturally free and independent, §4. In what light
and who, before the establishment of civil societies, lived nations or states are to
together in the state of nature,—nations or sovereign states are to be considered.
be considered as so many free persons living together in the state
of nature.

It is a settled point with writers on the natural law, that all men inherit from nature a
perfect liberty and independence, of which they cannot be deprived without their own
consent. In a state, the individual citizens do not enjoy them fully and absolutely,
because they have made a partial surrender of them to the sovereign. But the body of
the nation, the state, remains absolutely free and independent with respect to all other
men, all other nations, as long as it has not voluntarily submitted to them.

As men are subject to the laws of nature,—and as their union in §5. To what laws
civil society cannot have exempted them from the obligation to nations are subject.
observe those laws, since by that union they do not cease to be

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 30 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

men,—the entire nation, whose common will is but the result of the united wills of the
citizens, remains subject to the laws of nature, and is bound to respect them in all her
proceedings. And since right arises from obligation, as we have just observed (§3), the
nation possesses also the same rights which nature has conferred upon men in order to
enable them to perform their duties.

We must therefore apply to nations the rules of the law of nature, §6. In what the law of
in order to discover what their obligations are, and what their nations originally
rights: consequently the law of nations is originally no other than consists.
the law of nature applied to nations. But as the application of a
rule cannot be just and reasonable unless it be made in a manner suitable to the
subject, we are not to imagine that the law of nations is precisely and in every case the
same as the law of nature, with the difference only of the subjects to which it is
applied, so as to allow of our substituting nations for individuals. A state or civil
society is a subject very different from an individual of the human race: from which
circumstance, pursuant to the law of nature itself, there result, in many cases, very
different obligations and rights; since the same general rule, applied to two subjects,
cannot produce exactly the same decisions, when the subjects are different; and a
particular rule which is perfectly just with respect to one subject, is not applicable to
another subject of a quite different nature. There are many cases, therefore, in which
the law of nature does not decide between state and state in the same manner as it
would between man and man. We must therefore know how to accommodate the
application of it to different subjects; and it is the art of thus applying it with a
precision founded on right reason, that renders the law of nations a distinct science.*

We call that the necessary law of nations which consists in the §7. Definition of the
application of the law of nature to nations. It is necessary, necessary law of
because nations are absolutely bound to observe it. This law nations.
contains the precepts prescribed by the law of nature to states, on
whom that law is not less obligatory than on individuals, since states are composed of
men, their resolutions are taken by men, and the law of nature is binding on all men,
under whatever relation they act. This is the law which Grotius, and those who follow
him, call the internal law of nations, on account of its being obligatory on nations in
point of conscience. Several writers term it the natural law of nations.

Since therefore the necessary law of nations consists in the §8. It is immutable.
application of the law of nature to states,—which law is
immutable, as being founded on the nature of things, and particularly on the nature of
man,—it follows, that the necessary law of nations is immutable.

Whence, as this law is immutable, and the obligations that arise §9. Nations can make
from it necessary and indispensable, nations can neither make no change in it, nor
any changes in it by their conventions, dispense with it in their dispense with the
own conduct, nor reciprocally release each other from the obligations arising
observance of it. from it.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 31 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

This is the principle by which we may distinguish lawful conventions or treaties from
those that are not lawful, and innocent and rational customs from those that are unjust
or censurable.

There are things, just in themselves, and allowed by the necessary law of nations, on
which states may mutually agree with each other, and which they may consecrate and
enforce by their manners and customs. There are others, of an indifferent nature,
respecting which, it rests at the option of nations to make in their treaties whatever
agreements they please, or to introduce whatever custom or practice they think proper.
But every treaty, every custom, which contravenes the injunctions or prohibitions of
the necessary law of nations, is unlawful. It will appear, however, in the sequel, that it
is only by the internal law, by the law of conscience, such conventions or treaties are
always condemned as unlawful,—and that, for reasons which shall be given in their
proper place, they are nevertheless often valid by the external law. Nations being free
and independent,—though the conduct of one of them be illegal and condemnable by
the laws of conscience, the others are bound to acquiesce in it, when it does not
infringe upon their perfect rights. The liberty of that nation would not remain entire, if
the others were to arrogate to themselves the right of inspecting and regulating her
actions;—an assumption on their part, that would be contrary to the law of nature,
which declares every nation free and independent of all the others.

Man is so formed by nature, that he cannot supply all his own §10. Society
wants, but necessarily stands in need of the intercourse and established by nature
assistance of his fellow-creatures, whether for his immediate between all mankind;
preservation, or for the sake of perfecting his nature, and
enjoying such a life as is suitable to a rational being. This is sufficiently proved by
experience. We have instances of persons, who, having grown up to manhood among
the bears of the forest, enjoyed not the use of speech or of reason, but were, like the
brute beasts, possessed only of sensitive faculties. We see moreover that nature has
refused to bestow on men the same strength and natural weapons of defence with
which she has furnished other animals,—having, in lieu of those advantages, endowed
mankind with the faculties of speech and reason, or at least a capability of acquiring
them by an intercourse with their fellow-creatures. Speech enables them to
communicate with each other, to give each other mutual assistance, to perfect their
reason and knowledge; and having thus become intelligent, they find a thousand
methods of preserving themselves, and supplying their wants. Each individual,
moreover, is intimately conscious that he can neither live happily nor improve his
nature without the intercourse and assistance of others. Since, therefore, na-ture has
thus formed mankind, it is a convincing proof of her intention that they should
communicate with and mutually aid and assist each other.

Hence is deduced the establishment of natural society among men. The general law of
that society is, that each individual should do for the others every thing which their
necessities require, and which he can perform without neglecting the duty that he
owes to himself: a law which all men must observe in order to live in a manner
consonant to their nature, and conformable to the views of their common creator,—a
law which our own safety, our happiness, our dearest interests, ought to render sacred
to every one of us. Such is the general obligation that binds us to the observance of

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 32 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

our duties: let us fulfil them with care, if we would wisely endeavour to promote our
own advantage.

It is easy to conceive what exalted felicity the world would enjoy, were all men
willing to observe the rule that we have just laid down. On the contrary, if each man
wholly and immediately directs all his thoughts to his own interest, if he does nothing
for the sake of other men, the whole human race together will be immersed in the
deepest wretchedness. Let us therefore endeavour to promote the general happiness of
mankind: all mankind, in return, will endeavour to promote ours; and thus we shall
establish our felicity on the most solid foundations.

The universal society of the human race being an institution of §11. and between
nature herself, that is to say, a necessary consequence of the nations.
nature of man,—all men, in whatever stations they are placed,
are bound to cultivate it, and to discharge its duties. They cannot liberate themselves
from the obligation by any convention, by any private association. When, therefore,
they unite in civil society for the purpose of forming a separate state or nation, they
may indeed enter into particular engagements towards those with whom they
associate themselves; but they remain still bound to the performance of their duties
towards the rest of mankind. All the difference consists in this, that, having agreed to
act in common, and having resigned their rights and submitted their will to the body
of the society, in every thing that concerns their common welfare,—it thenceforward
belongs to that body, that state, and its rulers, to fulfil the duties of humanity towards
strangers, in every thing that no longer depends on the liberty of individuals; and it is
the state more particularly that is to perform those duties towards other states. We
have already seen (§5) that men united in society remain subject to the obligations
imposed upon them by human nature. That society, considered as a moral person,
since possessed of an understanding, volition, and strength peculiar to itself, is
therefore obliged to live on the same terms with other societies or states, as individual
man was obliged, before those establishments, to live with other men, that is to say,
according to the laws of the natural society established among the human race, with
the difference only of such exceptions as may arise from the different nature of the
subjects.

Since the object of the natural society established between all §12. The object of
mankind is that they should lend each other mutual assistance in this society of nations.
order to attain perfection themselves and to render their
condition as perfect as possible,—and since nations, considered as so many free
persons living together in a state of nature, are bound to cultivate human society with
each other,—the object of the great society established by nature between all nations
is also the interchange of mutual assistance for their own improvement and that of
their condition.

The first general law that we discover in the very object of the §13. General
society of nations, is that each individual nation is bound to obligation imposed by
contribute every thing in her power to the happiness and it.
perfection of all the others.*

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 33 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

But the duties that we owe to ourselves being unquestionably §14. Explanation of
paramount to those we owe to others,—a nation owes herself in this observation.
the first instance, and in preference to all other nations, to do
every thing she can to promote her own happiness and perfection. (I say every thing
she can, not only in a physical but in a moral sense,—that is, every thing that she can
do lawfully, and consistently with justice and honour.) When therefore she cannot
contribute to the welfare of another nation without doing an es-sential injury to
herself, her obligation ceases on that particular occasion, and she is considered as
lying under disability to perform the office in question.

Nations being free and independent of each other, in the same §15. The second
manner as men are naturally free and independent, the second general law is the
general law of their society is, that each nation should be left in liberty and
the peaceable enjoyment of that liberty which she inherits from independence of
nature. The natural society of nations cannot subsist, unless the nations.

natural rights of each be duly respected. No nation is willing to
renounce her liberty: she will rather break off all commerce with those states that
should attempt to infringe upon it.

As a consequence of that liberty and independence, it exclusively §16. Effect of that
belongs to each nation to form her own judgment of what her liberty.
conscience prescribes to her,—of what she can or cannot do,—of
what it is proper or improper for her to do: and of course it rests solely with her to
examine and determine whether she can perform any office for another nation without
neglecting the duty which she owes to herself. In all cases, therefore, in which a
nation has the right of judging what her duty requires, no other nation can compel her
to act in such or such particular manner: for any attempt at such compulsion would be
an infringement on the liberty of nations. We have no right to use constraint against a
free person except in those cases where such person is bound to perform some
particular thing for us, and for some particular reason which does not depend on his
judgment,—in those cases, in short, where we have a perfect right against him.

In order perfectly to understand this, it is necessary to observe, §17. Distinctions
that the obligation, and the right which corresponds to or is between internal and
derived from it, are distinguished into external and internal. The external, perfect and
obligation is internal, as it binds the conscience, and is deduced imperfect obligations
from the rules of our duty: it is external, as it is considered and rights.

relatively to other men, and produces some right between them.
The internal obligation is always the same in its nature, though it varies in degree: but
the external obligation is divided into perfect and imperfect; and the right that results
from it is also perfect or imperfect. The perfect right is that which is accompanied by
the right of compelling those who refuse to fulfil the correspondent obligation; the
imperfect right is unaccompanied by that right of compulsion. The perfect obligation
is that which gives to the opposite party the right of compulsion; the imperfect gives
him only a right to ask.

It is now easy to conceive why the right is always imperfect, when the correspondent
obligation depends on the judgment of the party in whose breast it exists: for if, in

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 34 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

such a case, we had a right to compel him, he would no longer enjoy the freedom of
determination respecting the conduct he is to pursue in order to obey the dictates of
his own conscience. Our obligation is always imperfect with respect to other people,
while we possess the liberty of judging how we are to act: and we retain that liberty
on all occasions where we ought to be free.

Since men are naturally equal, and a perfect equality prevails in §18. Equality of
their rights and obligations, as equally proceeding from nations.
nature,—nations composed of men, and considered as so many
free persons living together in the state of nature, are naturally equal, and inherit from
nature the same obligations and rights. Power or weakness does not in this respect
produce any difference. A dwarf is as much a man as a giant; a small republic is no
less a sovereign state than the most powerful kingdom.

By a necessary consequence of that equality, whatever is lawful §19. Effect of that
for one nation, is equally lawful for any other; and whatever is equality.
unjustifiable in the one, is equally so in the other.

A nation then is mistress of her own actions so long as they do §20. Each nation is
not affect the proper and perfect rights of any other nation,—so mistress of her own
long as she is only internally bound, and does not lie under any actions when they do
external and perfect obligation. If she makes an ill use of her not affect the perfect
liberty, she is guilty of a breach of duty; but other nations are rights of others.

bound to acquiesce in her conduct, since they have no right to
dictate to her.

Since nations are free, independent, and equal,—and since each §21. Foundation of
possesses the right of judging, according to the dictates of her the voluntary law of
conscience, what conduct she is to pursue in order to fulfil her nations.
duties,—the effect of the whole is, to produce, at least externally
and in the eyes of mankind, a perfect equality of rights between nations, in the
administration of their affairs and the pursuit of their pretensions, without regard to
the intrinsic justice of their conduct, of which others have no right to form a definitive
judgment; so that whatever may be done by any one nation, may be done by any
other; and they ought, in human society, to be considered as possessing equal rights.

Each nation in fact maintains that she has justice on her side in every dispute that
happens to arise: and it does not belong to either of the parties interested, or to other
nations, to pronounce a judgment on the contested question. The party who is in the
wrong is guilty of a crime against her own conscience: but as there exists a possibility
that she may perhaps have justice on her side, we cannot accuse her of violating the
laws of society.

It is therefore necessary, on many occasions, that nations should suffer certain things
to be done, though in their own nature unjust and condemnable; because they cannot
oppose them by open force, without violating the liberty of some particular state, and
destroying the foundations of their natural society. And since they are bound to
cultivate that society, it is of course presumed that all nations have consented to the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 35 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

principle we have just established. The rules that are deduced from it, constitute what
Monsieur Wolf calls “the voluntary law of nations”; and there is no reason why we
should not use the same term, although we thought it necessary to deviate from that
great man in our manner of establishing the foundation of that law.

The laws of natural society are of such importance to the safety §22. Right of nations
of all states, that, if the custom once prevailed of trampling them against the infractors
under foot, no nation could flatter herself with the hope of of the law of nations.
preserving her national existence, and enjoying domestic
tranquillity, however attentive to pursue every measure dictated by the most
consummate prudence, justice, and moderation.* Now all men and all states have a
perfect right to those things that are necessary for their preservation, since that right
corresponds to an indispensable obligation. All nations have therefore a right to resort
to forcible means for the purpose of repressing any one particular nation who openly
violates the laws of the society which nature has established between them, or who
directly attacks the welfare and safety of that society.

But care must be taken not to extend that right to the prejudice of §23. Measure of that
the liberty of nations. They are all free and independent, but right.
bound to observe the laws of that society which nature has
established between them; and so far bound, that, when any one of them violates those
laws, the others have a right to repress her. The conduct of each nation, therefore, is
no farther subject to the controul of the others, than as the interests of natural society
are concerned. The general and common right of nations over the conduct of any
sovereign state is only commensurate to the object of that society which exists
between them.

The several engagements into which nations may enter, produce §24. Conventional
a new kind of law of nations, called conventional, or of treaties. law of nations, or law
As it is evident that a treaty binds none but the contracting of treaties.
parties, the conventional law of nations is not a universal but a
particular law. All that can be done on this subject in a treatise on the law of nations,
is to lay down those general rules which nations are bound to observe with respect to
their treaties. A minute detail of the various agreements made between particular
nations, and of the rights and obligations thence resulting, is matter of fact, and
belongs to the province of history.

Certain maxims and customs consecrated by long use, and §25. Customary law
observed by nations in their mutual intercourse with each other of nations.
as a kind of law, form the customary law of nations, or the
custom of nations. This law is founded on a tacit consent, or, if you please, on a tacit
convention of the nations that observe it towards each other. Whence it appears that it
is not obligatory except on those nations who have adopted it, and that it is not
universal, any more than the conventional law. The same remark, therefore, is equally
applicable to this customary law, viz. that a minute detail of its particulars does not
belong to a systematic treatise on the law of nations, but that we must content
ourselves with giving a general theory of it,—that is to say, the rules which are to be
observed in it, as well with a view to its effects, as to its substance: and, with respect

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 36 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

to the latter, those rules will serve to distinguish lawful and innocent customs from
those that are unjust and unlawful.

When a custom or usage is generally established, either between §26. General rule
all the civilised nations in the world, or only between those of a respecting that law.
certain continent, as of Europe, for example, or between those
who have a more frequent intercourse with each other,—if that custom is in its own
nature in-different, and much more, if it be useful and reasonable, it becomes
obligatory on all the nations in question, who are considered as having given their
consent to it, and are bound to observe it towards each other, as long as they have not
expressly declared their resolution of not observing it in future. But if that custom
contains any thing unjust or unlawful, it is not obligatory: on the contrary, every
nation is bound to relinquish it, since nothing can oblige or authorise her to violate the
law of nature.

These three kinds of law of nations, the voluntary, the §27. Positive law of
conventional, and the customary, together constitute the positive nations.
law of nations. For they all proceed from the will of
nations,—the voluntary from their presumed consent, the conventional from an
express consent, and the customary from tacit consent: and as there can be no other
mode of deducing any law from the will of nations, there are only these three kinds of
positive law of nations.

We shall be careful to distinguish them from the natural or necessary law of nations,
without, however, treating of them separately. But after having, under each individual
head of our subject, established what the necessary law prescribes, we shall
immediately add how and why the decisions of that law must be modified by the
voluntary law; or (which amounts to the same thing in other terms) we shall explain
how, in consequence of the liberty of nations, and pursuant to the rules of their natural
society, the external law, which they are to observe towards each other, differs in
certain instances from the maxims of the internal law, which nevertheless remain
always obligatory in point of conscience. As to the rights introduced by treaties or by
custom, there is no room to apprehend that any one will confound them with the
natural law of nations. They form that species of law of nations which authors have
distinguished by the name of arbitrary.

To furnish the reader beforehand with a general direction §28. General maxim
respecting the distinction between the necessary and the respecting the use of
voluntary law, let us here observe, that, as the necessary law is the necessary and the
always obligatory on the conscience, a nation ought never to lose voluntary law.
sight of it in deliberating on the line of conduct she is to pursue
in order to fulfil her duty: but when there is question of examining what she may
demand of other states, she must consult the voluntary law, whose maxims are
devoted to the safety and advantage of the universal society of mankind.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 37 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

BOOK I

Of Nations Considered In Themselves

CHAPTER I

Of Nations Or Sovereign States.
A nation or a state is, as has been said at the beginning of this §1. Of the state, and
work, a body politic, or a society of men united together for the of sovereignty.
purpose of promoting their mutual safety and advantage by their
combined strength.

From the very design that induces a number of men to form a society which has its
common interests, and which is to act in concert, it is necessary that there should be
established a public authority, to order and direct what is to be done by each in
relation to the end of the association. This political authority is the sovereignty; and
he or they who are invested with it are the sovereign.

It is evident, that, by the very act of the civil or political §2. The authority of
association, each citizen subjects himself to the authority of the the body politic over
entire body, in every thing that relates to the common welfare. the members.
The authority of all over each member, therefore, essentially
belongs to the body politic, or state; but the exercise of that authority may be placed
in different hands, according as the society may have ordained.

If the body of the nation keeps in its own hands the empire or the §3. Of the several
right to command, it is a popular government, a democracy; if it kinds of government.
entrusts it to a certain number of citizens, to a senate, it
establishes an aristocratic republic; finally, if it confides the government to a single
person, the state becomes a monarchy.

These three kinds of government may be variously combined and modified. We shall
not here enter into the particulars; this subject belonging to the public universal law:*
for the object of the present work, it is sufficient to establish the general principles
necessary for the decision of those disputes that may arise between nations.

Every nation that governs itself, under what form soever, without §4. What are
dependence on any foreign power, is a sovereign state. Its rights sovereign states.
are naturally the same as those of any other state. Such are the
moral persons who live together in a natural society, subject to the law of nations. To
give a nation a right to make an immediate figure in this grand society, it is sufficient
that it be really sovereign and independent, that is, that it govern itself by its own
authority and laws.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 38 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

We ought therefore to account as sovereign states those which §5. Of states bound
have united themselves to another more powerful, by an unequal by unequal alliance.
alliance, in which, as Aristotle says, to the more powerful is
given more honour, and to the weaker, more assistance.3

The conditions of those unequal alliances may be infinitely varied. But whatever they
are, provided the inferior ally reserve to itself the sovereignty, or the right of
governing its own body, it ought to be considered as an independent state, that keeps
up an intercourse with others under the authority of the law of nations.

Consequently a weak state, which, in order to provide for its §6. Or by treaties of
safety, places itself under the protection of a more powerful one, protection.
and engages, in return, to perform several offices equivalent to
that protection, without however divesting itself of the right of government and
sovereignty,—that state, I say, does not, on this account, cease to rank among the
sovereigns who acknowledge no other law than that of nations.

There occurs no greater difficulty with respect to tributary states; §7. Of tributary states.
for though the payment of tribute to a foreign power does in
some degree diminish the dignity of those states, from its being a confession of their
weakness,—yet it suffers their sovereignty to subsist entire. The custom of paying
tribute was formerly very common,—the weaker by that means purchasing of their
more powerful neighbour an exemption from oppression, or at that price securing his
protection, without ceasing to be sovereigns.

The Germanic nations introduced another custom,—that of §8. Of feudatory
requiring homage from a state either vanquished, or too weak to states.
make resistance. Sometimes even, a prince has given
sovereignties in fee, and sovereigns have voluntarily rendered themselves feudatories
to others.

When the homage leaves independency and sovereign authority in the administration
of the state, and only means certain duties to the lord of the fee, or even a mere
honorary acknowledgment, it does not prevent the state or the feudatory prince being
strictly sovereign. The king of Naples pays homage for his kingdom to the pope, and
is nevertheless reckoned among the principal sovereigns of Europe.

Two sovereign states may also be subject to the same prince, §9. Of two states
without any dependence on each other, and each may retain all subject to the same
its rights as a free and sovereign state. The king of Prussia is prince.
sovereign prince of Neufchatel in Switzerland, without that
principality being in any manner united to his other dominions; so that the people of
Neufchatel, in virtue of their franchises, may serve a foreign power at war with the
king of Prussia, provided that the war be not on account of that principality.4

Finally, several sovereign and independent states may unite §10. Of states forming
themselves together by a perpetual confederacy, without ceasing a federal republic.
to be, each individually, a perfect state. They will together

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 39 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

constitute a federal republic: their joint deliberations will not impair the sovereignty
of each member, though they may, in certain respects, put some restraint on the
exercise of it, in virtue of voluntary engagements. A person does not cease to be free
and independent, when he is obliged to fulfil engagements which he has voluntarily
contracted.

Such were formerly the cities of Greece; such are at present5 the Seven United
Provinces of the Netherlands, and such the members of the Helvetic body.

But a people that has passed under the dominion of another is no §11. Of a state that
longer a state, and can no longer avail itself directly of the law of has passed under the
nations. Such were the nations and kingdoms which the Romans dominion of another.
rendered subject to their empire; the generality even of those
whom they honoured with the name of friends and allies no longer formed real states.
Within themselves, they were go-verned by their own laws and magistrates; but
without, they were in every thing obliged to follow the orders of Rome; they dared not
of themselves either to make war or contract alliances; and could not treat with
nations.

The law of nations is the law of sovereigns: free and independent §12. The objects of
states are moral persons, whose rights and obligations we are to this treatise.
establish in this treatise.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 40 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER II

General Principles Of The Duties Of A Nation Towards Itself.
If the rights of a nation spring from its obligations, it is §13. A nation ought
principally from those that relate to itself. It will further appear to act agreeably to its
that its duties towards others depend very much on its duties nature.
towards itself, as the former are to be regulated and measured by
the latter. As we are then to treat of the obligations and rights of nations,—an
attention to order requires that we should begin by establishing what each nation owes
to itself.

The general and fundamental rule of our duties towards ourselves is, that every moral
being ought to live in a manner conformable to his nature, naturae convenienter
vivere. A nation is a being determined by its essential attributes, that has its own
nature, and can act in conformity to it. There are then actions of a nation as such,
wherein it is concerned in its national character, and which are either suitable or
opposite to what constitutes it a nation; so that it is not a matter of indifference
whether it performs some of those actions, and omits others. In this respect, the Law
of Nature prescribes it certain duties. We shall see, in this first book, what conduct a
nation ought to observe, in order that it may not be wanting to itself. But we shall first
sketch out a general idea of this subject.

He who no longer exists can have no duties to perform: and a §14. Of the
moral being is charged with obligations to himself, only with a preservation and
view to his perfection and happiness: for to preserve and to perfection of a nation.
perfect his own nature, is the sum of all his duties to himself.

The preservation of a nation consists in the duration of the political association by
which it is formed. If a period is put to this association, the nation or state no longer
subsists, though the individuals that composed it, still exist.

The perfection of a nation is found in what renders it capable of obtaining the end of
civil society; and a nation is in a perfect state, when nothing necessary is wanting to
arrive at that end. We know that the perfection of a thing consists, generally, in the
perfect agreement of all its constituent parts to tend to the same end. A nation being a
multitude of men united together in civil society,—if in that multitude all conspire to
attain the end proposed in forming a civil society, the nation is perfect; and it is more
or less so, according as it approaches more or less to that perfect agreement. In the
same manner its external state will be more or less perfect, according as it concurs
with the interior perfection of the nation.

The end or object of civil society is to procure for the citizens §15. What is the end
whatever they stand in need of, for the necessities, the of civil society.
conveniences, the accommodation of life, and, in general,

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 41 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

whatever constitutes happiness,—with the peaceful possession of property, a method
of obtaining justice with security, and, finally a mutual defence against all external
violence.

It is now easy to form a just idea of the perfection of a state or nation:—every thing in
it must conspire to promote the ends we have pointed out.

In the act of association, by virtue of which a multitude of men §16. A nation is under
form together a state or nation, each individual has entered into an obligation to
engagements with all, to promote the general welfare; and all preserve itself.
have entered into engagements with each individual, to facilitate
for him the means of supplying his necessities, and to protect and defend him. It is
manifest that these reciprocal engagements can no otherwise be fulfilled than by
maintaining the political association. The entire nation is then obliged to maintain that
association; and as their preservation depends on its continuance, it thence follows
that every nation is obliged to perform the duty of self-preservation.

This obligation, so natural to each individual of God’s creation, is not derived to
nations immediately from nature, but from the agreement by which civil society is
formed: it is therefore not absolute, but conditional,—that is to say, it supposes a
human act, to wit, the social compact. And as compacts may be dissolved by common
consent of the parties,—if the individuals that compose a nation should unanimously
agree to break the link that binds them, it would be lawful for them to do so, and thus
to destroy the state or nation; but they would doubtless incur a degree of guilt, if they
took this step without just and weighty reasons; for civil societies are approved by the
Law of Nature, which recommends them to mankind, as the true means of supplying
all their wants, and of effectually advancing towards their own perfection. Moreover
civil society is so useful, nay so necessary to all citizens, that it may well be
considered as morally impossible for them to consent unanimously to break it without
necessity. But what citizens may or ought to do,—what the majority of them may
resolve in certain cases of necessity, or of pressing exigency,—are questions that will
be treated of elsewhere: they cannot be solidly determined without some principles
which we have not yet established. For the present, it is sufficient to have proved,
that, in general, as long as the political society subsists, the whole nation is obliged to
endeavour to maintain it.

If a nation is obliged to preserve itself, it is no less obliged §17. And to preserve
carefully to preserve all its members. The nation owes this to its members.
itself, since the loss even of one of its members weakens it, and
is injurious to its preservation. It owes this also to the members in particular, in
consequence of the very act of association; for those who compose a nation are united
for their defence and common advantage; and none can justly be deprived of this
union, and of the advantages he expects to derive from it, while he on his side fulfils
the conditions.

The body of a nation cannot then abandon a province, a town, or even a single
individual who is a part of it, unless compelled to it by necessity, or indispensably
obliged to it by the strongest reasons founded on the public safety.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 42 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Since then a nation is obliged to preserve itself, it has a right to §18. A nation has a
every thing necessary for its preservation. For the Law of Nature right to every thing
gives us a right to every thing, without which we cannot fulfil necessary for its
our obligation; otherwise it would oblige us to do impossibilities, preservation.
or rather would contradict itself in prescribing us a duty, and at
the same time debarring us of the only means of fulfilling it. It will doubtless be here
understood, that those means ought not to be unjust in themselves, or such as are
absolutely forbidden by the Law of Nature. As it is impossible that it should ever
permit the use of such means,—if on a particular occasion no other present
themselves for fulfilling a general obligation, the obligation must, in that particular
instance, be looked on as impossible, and consequently void.

By an evident consequence from what has been said, a nation §19. It ought to avoid
ought carefully to avoid, as much as possible, whatever might every thing that might
cause its destruction, or that of the state, which is the same thing. occasion its

destruction.
A nation or state has a right to every thing that can help to ward
off imminent danger, and keep at a distance whatever is capable §20. Of its right to

every thing that may
of causing its ruin; and that from the very same reasons that promote this end.
establish its right to the things necessary to its preservation.

The second general duty of a nation towards itself is to labour at §21. A nation ought
its own perfection and that of its state. It is this double perfection to perfect itself and
that renders a nation capable of attaining the end of civil society: the state.
it would be absurd to unite in society, and yet not endeavour to
promote the end of that union.

Here the entire body of a nation, and each individual citizen, are bound by a double
obligation, the one immediately proceeding from nature, and the other resulting from
their reciprocal engagements. Nature lays an obligation upon each man to labour after
his own perfection; and in so doing, he labours after that of civil society, which could
not fail to be very flourishing, were it composed of none but good citizens. But the
individual finding in a well regulated society the most powerful succours to enable
him to fulfil the task which Nature imposes upon him in relation to himself, for
becoming better, and consequently more happy,—he is doubtless obliged to
contribute all in his power to render that society more perfect.

All the citizens who form a political society, reciprocally en-gage to advance the
common welfare, and as far as possible to promote the advantage of each member.
Since then the perfection of the society is what enables it to secure equally the
happiness of the body and that of the members, the grand object of the engagements
and duties of a citizen is to aim at this perfection. This is more particularly the duty of
the body collective in all their common deliberations, and in every thing they do as a
body.

A nation therefore ought to prevent, and carefully to avoid, §22. And to avoid
whatever may hinder its perfection and that of the state, or retard every thing contrary
the progress either of the one or the other. to its perfection.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 43 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

We may then conclude, as we have done above in regard to the §23. The rights it
preservation of a state (§18), that a nation has a right to every derives from these
thing without which it cannot attain the perfection of the obligations.
members and of the state, or prevent and repel whatever is
contrary to this double perfection.

On this subject, the English furnish us an example highly worthy §24. Examples.
of attention. That illustrious nation distinguishes itself in a
glorious manner by its application to every thing that can render the state more
flourishing. An admirable constitution there places every citizen in a situation that
enables him to contribute to this great end, and every-where diffuses that spirit of
genuine patriotism which zealously exerts itself for the public welfare. We there see
private citizens form considerable enterprises, in order to promote the glory and
welfare of the nation. And while a bad prince would find his hands tied up, a wise and
moderate king finds the most powerful aids to give success to his glorious designs.
The nobles and the representatives of the people form a link of confidence between
the monarch and the nation, and, concurring with him in every thing that tends to
promote the public welfare, partly ease him of the burden of government, give
stability to his power, and procure him an obedience the more perfect, as it is
voluntary. Every good citizen sees that the strength of the state is really the advantage
of all, and not that of a single person.6 Happy constitution! which they did not
suddenly obtain: it has cost rivers of blood; but they have not purchased it too dear.
May luxury, that pest so fatal to the manly and patriotic virtues, that minister of
corruption so dangerous to liberty, never overthrow a monument that does so much
honour to human nature—a monument capable of teaching kings how glorious it is to
rule over a free people!7

There is another nation illustrious by its bravery and its victories.8 Its numerous and
valiant nobility, its extensive and fertile dominions, might render it respectable
throughout all Europe, and in a short time it might be in a most flourishing situation.
But its constitution opposes this; and such is its attachment to that constitution, that
there is no room to expect a proper remedy will ever be applied. In vain might a
magnanimous king, raised by his virtues above the pursuits of ambition and injustice,
form the most salutary designs for promoting the happiness of his people;—in vain
might those designs be approved by the more sensible part, by the majority of the
nation;—a single deputy, obstinate or corrupted by a foreign power, might put a stop
to all, and disconcert the wisest and most necessary measures. From an excessive
jealousy of its liberty, that nation has taken such precautions as must necessarily place
it out of the power of the king to make any attempts on the liberties of the public. But
is it not evident that those precautions exceed the end proposed,— that they tie the
hands of the most just and wise prince, and deprive him of the means of securing the
public freedom against the enterprises of foreign powers, and of rendering the nation
rich and happy? Is it not evident that the nation has deprived itself of the power of
acting, and that its councils are exposed to the caprice or treachery of a single
member?

We shall conclude this chapter, with observing, that a nation §25. A nation ought
ought to know itself. Without this knowledge, it cannot make any to know itself.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 44 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

successful endeavours after its own perfection. It ought to have a just idea of its state,
to enable it to take the most proper measures; it ought to know the progress it has
already made, and what further advances it has still to make,—what advantages it
possesses, and what defects it labours under, in order to preserve the former, and
correct the latter. Without this knowledge, a nation will act at random, and often take
the most improper measures. It will think it acts with great wisdom in imitating the
conduct of nations that are reputed wise and skilful,—not perceiving that such or such
regulation, such or such practice, though salutary to one state, is often pernicious to
another. Every thing ought to be conducted according to its nature. Nations cannot be
well governed without such regulations as are suitable to their respective characters;
and in order to this, their characters ought to be known.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 45 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER III

Of The Constitution Of A State, And The Duties And Rights
Of The Nation In This Respect.
We were unable to avoid, in the first chapter, anticipating something of the subject of
this.

We have seen already that every political society must §26. Of public
necessarily establish a public authority, to regulate their common authority.
affairs,—to prescribe to each individual the conduct he ought to
observe with a view to the public welfare,—and to possess the means of procuring
obedience. This authority essentially belongs to the body of the society; but it may be
exercised in a variety of ways; and every society has a right to choose that mode
which suits it best.

The fundamental regulation that determines the manner in which §27. What is the
the public authority is to be executed, is what forms the constitution of a state.
constitution of the state. In this is seen the form in which the
nation acts in quality of a body-politic,—how and by whom the people are to be
governed,— and what are the rights and duties of the governors. This constitution is
in fact nothing more than the establishment of the order in which a nation proposes to
labour in common for obtaining those advantages with a view to which the political
society was established.

The perfection of a state, and its aptitude to attain the ends of §28. The nation ought
society, must then depend on its constitution: consequently the to chuse the best
most important concern of a nation that forms a political society, constitution.
and its first and most essential duty towards itself, is to chuse the
best constitution possible, and that most suitable to its circumstances. When it makes
this choice, it lays the foundation of its own preservation, safety, perfection, and
happiness:—it cannot take too much care in placing these on a solid basis.

The laws are regulations established by public authority, to be §29. Of political,
observed in society. All these ought to relate to the welfare of the fundamental, and civil
state and of the citizens. The laws made directly with a view to laws.
the public welfare are political laws; and in this class, those that
concern the body itself and the being of the society, the form of government, the
manner in which the public authority is to be exerted,—those, in a word, which
together form the constitution of the state, are the fundamental laws.

The civil laws are those that regulate the rights and conduct of the citizens among
themselves.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 46 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Every nation that would not be wanting to itself, ought to apply its utmost care in
establishing these laws, and principally its fundamental laws,—in establishing them, I
say, with wisdom, in a manner suitable to the genius of the people, and to all the
circumstances in which they may be placed: they ought to determine them and make
them known with plainness and precision, to the end that they may possess stability,
that they may not be eluded, and, that they may create, if possible, no
dissension—that, on the one hand, he or they to whom the exercise of the sovereign
power is committed, and the citizens, on the other, may equally know their duty, and
their rights. It is not here necessary to consider in detail, what that constitution and
those laws ought to be:—this discussion belongs to public law and politics. Besides,
the laws and constitutions of different states must necessarily vary according to the
disposition of the people, and other circumstances. In the Law of Nations we must
adhere to generals. We here consider the duty of a nation towards itself, principally to
determine the conduct that it ought to observe in that great society which nature has
established among all nations. These duties give it rights, that serve as a rule to
establish what it may require from other nations, and reciprocally what others may
require from it.

The constitution and laws of a state are the basis of the public §30. Of the support of
tranquillity, the firmest support of political authority, and a the constitution and
security for the liberty of the citizens. But this constitution is a obedience to the laws.
vain phantom, and the best laws are useless, if they be not
religiously observed: the nation ought then to watch very attentively, in order to
render them equally respected by those who govern, and by the people destined to
obey. To attack the constitution of the state, and to violate its laws, is a capital crime
against society; and if those guilty of it are invested with authority, they add to this
crime a perfidious abuse of the power with which they are intrusted. The nation ought
constantly to repress them with its utmost vigour and vigilance, as the importance of
the case requires. It is very uncommon to see the laws and constitution of a state
openly and boldly opposed: it is against silent and gradual attacks that a nation ought
to be particularly on its guard. Sudden revolutions strike the imaginations of men:
they are detailed in history; their secret springs are developed. But we overlook the
changes that insensibly happen by a long train of steps that are but slightly marked. It
would be rendering nations an important service, to shew from history, how many
states have thus entirely changed their nature, and lost their original constitution. This
would awaken the attention of man-kind:—impressed thenceforward with this
excellent maxim (no less essential in politics than in morals), principiis obsta,9
—they would no longer shut their eyes against innovations, which, though
inconsiderable in themselves, may serve as steps to mount to higher and more
pernicious enterprises.

The consequences of a good or bad constitution being of such §31. The rights of a
importance, and the nation being strictly obliged to procure, as nation with respect to
far as possible, the best and most convenient one, it has a right to its constitution and
every thing necessary to enable it to fulfil this obligation (§18). It government.
is then manifest that a nation has an indisputable right to form,
maintain, and perfect its constitution,—to regulate at pleasure every thing relating to

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 47 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

the government,—and that no person can have a just right to hinder it. Government is
established only for the sake of the nation, with a view to its safety and happiness.

If any nation is dissatisfied with the public administration, it may §32. It may reform
apply the necessary remedies, and reform the government. But the government.
observe that I say “the nation”; for I am very far from meaning to
authorise a few malcontents or incendiaries to give disturbance to their governors by
exciting murmurs and seditions. None but the body of a nation have a right to check
those at the helm when they abuse their power. When the nation is silent and obeys,
the people are considered as approving the conduct of their superiors, or at least
finding it supportable; and it is not the business of a small number of citizens to put
the state in danger, under the pretence of reforming it.

In virtue of the same principles, it is certain that if the nation is §33. And may change
uneasy under its constitution, it has a right to change it. the constitution.

There can be no difficulty in the case, if the whole nation be unanimously inclined to
make this change. But it is asked, what is to be done if the people are divided? In the
ordinary manage-ment of the state, the opinion of the majority must pass without
dispute for that of the whole nation; otherwise it would be almost impossible for the
society ever to take any resolution. It appears then by parity of reasoning, that a nation
may change the constitution of the state by a majority of votes; and whenever there is
nothing in this change that can be considered as contrary to the act of civil
association, or to the intention of those united under it, the whole are bound to
conform to the resolution of the majority. But if the question be, to quit a form of
government, to which alone it appeared that the people were willing to submit on their
entering into the bonds of society,—if the greater part of a free people, after the
example of the Jews in the time of Samuel, are weary of liberty, and resolved to
submit to the authority of a monarch,—those citizens who are more jealous of that
privilege, so invaluable to those who have tasted it,—though obliged to suffer the
majority to do as they please,—are under no obligation at all to submit to the new
government: they may quit a society which seems to have dissolved itself in order to
unite again under another form: they have a right to retire elsewhere, to sell their
lands, and take with them all their effects.

Here again a very important question presents itself. It essentially §34. Of the legislative
belongs to the society to make laws both in relation to the power, and whether it
manner in which it desires to be governed, and to the conduct of can change the
the citizens:—this is called the legislative power. The nation may constitution.
intrust the exercise of it to the prince, or to an assembly; or to
that assembly and the prince jointly; who have then a right to make new laws and to
repeal old ones. It is asked whether their power extends to the fundamental
laws,—whether they may change the constitution of the state? The principles we have
laid down lead us to decide with certainty, that the authority of these legislators does
not extend so far, and that they ought to consider the fundamental laws as sacred, if
the nation has not, in very express terms, given them power to change them. For the
constitution of the state ought to possess stability: and since that was first established
by the nation, which afterwards intrusted certain persons with the legislative power,

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 48 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

the fundamental laws are excepted from their commission. It is visible that the society
only intended to make provision for having the state constantly furnished with laws
suited to particular conjunctures, and, for that purpose, gave the legislature the power
of abrogating the ancient civil and political laws that were not fundamental, and of
making new ones: but nothing leads us to think that it meant to submit the constitution
itself to their will. In short, it is from the constitution that those legislators derive their
power: how then can they change it, without destroying the foundation of their own
authority? By the fundamental laws of England, the two houses of parliament, in
concert with the king, exercise the legislative power: but if the two houses should
resolve to suppress themselves, and to invest the king with full and absolute authority,
certainly the nation would not suffer it. And who would dare to assert that they would
not have a right to oppose it? But if the parliament entered into a debate on making so
considerable a change, and the whole nation was voluntarily silent upon it, this would
be considered as an approbation of the act of its representatives.

But in treating here of the change of the constitution, we treat §35. The nation ought
only of the right: the question of expediency belongs to politics. not to attempt it
We shall therefore only observe in general, that, great changes in without great caution.
a state being delicate and dangerous operations, and frequent
changes being in their own nature prejudicial, a people ought to be very circumspect
in this point, and never be inclined to make innovations without the most pressing
reasons, or an absolute necessity. The fickleness of the Athenians was ever inimical to
the happiness of the republic, and at length proved fatal to that liberty of which they
were so jealous, without knowing how to enjoy it.

We may conclude from what has been said (§31), that if any §36. It is the judge of
disputes arise in a state respecting the fundamental laws, the all disputes relating to
public administration, or the rights of the different powers of the government.
which it is composed, it belongs to the nation alone to judge and
determine them conformably to its political constitution.

In short, all these affairs being solely a national concern, no §37. No foreign
foreign power has a right to interfere in them, nor ought to power has a right to
intermeddle with them otherwise than by its good offices, unless interfere.
requested to do it, or induced by particular reasons. If any intrude
into the domestic concerns of another nation, and attempt to put a constraint on its
deliberations, they do it an injury.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 49 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER IV

Of The Sovereign, His Obligations, And His Rights.
The reader cannot expect to find here a long deduction of the §38. Of the sovereign.
rights of sovereignty, and the functions of a prince. These are to
be found in treatises on the public law. In this chapter we only propose to shew, in
consequence of the grand principles of the law of nations, what a sovereign is, and to
give a general idea of his obligations and his rights.

We have said that the sovereignty is that public authority which commands in civil
society, and orders and directs what each citizen is to perform, to obtain the end of its
institution. This authority originally and essentially belonged to the body of the
society, to which each member submitted, and ceded his natural right of conducting
himself in every thing as he pleased according to the dictates of his own
understanding, and of doing himself justice. But the body of the society does not
always retain in its own hands this sovereign authority: it frequently intrusts it to a
senate, or to a single person. That senate, or that person, is then the sovereign.

It is evident that men form a political society, and submit to laws, §39. It is solely
solely for their own advantage and safety. The sovereign established for the
authority is then established only for the common good of all the safety and advantage
citizens; and it would be absurd to think that it could change its of society.
nature on passing into the hands of a senate or a monarch.
Flattery therefore cannot, without rendering itself equally ridiculous and odious, deny
that the sovereign is only established for the safety and advantage of society.

A good prince, a wise conductor of society, ought to have his mind impressed with
this great truth, that the sovereign power is solely intrusted to him for the safety of the
state, and the happiness of all the people,—that he is not permitted to consider himself
as the principal object in the administration of affairs, to seek his own satisfaction, or
his private advantage,—but that he ought to direct all his views, all his steps, to the
greatest advantage of the state and people who have submitted to him.* What a noble
sight it is to see a king of England rendering his parliament an account of his principal
operations,—assuring that body, the representatives of the nation, that he has no other
end in view than the glory of the state, and the happiness of his people,—and
affectionately thanking all who concur with him in such salutary views! Certainly a
monarch who makes use of this language, and by his conduct proves the sincerity of
his professions, is, in the opinion of the wise, the only great man. But in most
kingdoms, a criminal flattery has long since caused these maxims to be forgotten. A
crowd of servile courtiers easily persuade a proud monarch that the nation was made
for him, and not he for the nation. He soon considers the kingdom as a patrimony that
is his own property, and his people as a herd of cattle from which he is to derive his
wealth, and which he may dispose of to answer his own views, and gratify his
passions. Hence those fatal wars undertaken by ambition, restlessness, hatred and

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 50 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

pride;—hence those oppressive taxes, whose produce is dissipated by ruinous luxury,
or squandered upon mistresses and favourites;—hence, in fine, are important posts
given by favour, while public merit is neglected, and every thing that does not
immediately interest the prince, is abandoned to ministers and subalterns. Who can, in
this unhappy government, discover an authority established for the public
welfare?—A great prince will be on his guard even against his virtues. Let us not say,
with some writers, that private virtues are not the virtues of kings,—a maxim of
superficial politicians, or of those who are very inaccurate in their expressions.
Goodness, friendship, gratitude, are still virtues on the throne; and would to God they
were always to be found there! but a wise king does not yield an undiscerning
obedience to their impulse. He cherishes them, he cultivates them in his private life:
but in state-affairs he listens only to justice and sound policy. And why? because he
knows that the government was intrusted to him only for the happiness of society, and
that therefore he ought not to consult his own pleasure in the use he makes of his
power. He tempers his goodness with wisdom. He gives to friendship his domestic
and private favours; he distributes posts and employments according to merit,—public
rewards to services done to the state. In a word, he uses the public power only with a
view to the public welfare. All this is comprehended in that fine saying of Lewis
XII.10 “A king of France does not revenge the injuries of a duke of Orleans.”

A political society is a moral person (prelim. §2) inasmuch as it §40. Of his
has an understanding and a will of which it makes use for the representative
conduct of its affairs, and is capable of obligations and rights. character.
When therefore a people confer the sovereignty on any one
person, they invest him with their understanding and will, and make over to him their
obligations and rights, so far as relates to the administration of the state, and to the
exercise of the public authority. The sovereign, or conductor of the state, thus
becoming the depositary of the obligations and rights relative to government, in him is
found the moral person, who, without absolutely ceasing to exist in the nation, acts
thenceforwards only in him and by him. Such is the origin of the representative
character attributed to the sovereign. He represents the nation in all the affairs in
which he may happen to be engaged as a sovereign. It does not debase the dignity of
the greatest monarch to attribute to him this representative character; on the contrary,
nothing sheds a greater lustre on it, since the monarch thus unites in his own person
all the majesty that belongs to the entire body of the nation.

The sovereign, thus clothed with the public authority, with every §41. He is intrusted
thing that constitutes the moral personality of the nation, of with the obligations
course becomes bound by the obligations of that nation, and of the nation, and
invested with its rights. invested with its

rights.
All that has been said in chap. II. of the general duties of a nation §42. His duty with
towards itself, particularly regards the sovereign. He is the respect to the
depositary of the empire, and of the power of commanding preservation and
whatever conduces to the public welfare; he ought, therefore, as perfection of the
a tender and wise father, and as a faithful administrator, to watch nation.
for the nation, and take care to preserve it, and render it more

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 51 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

perfect,—to better its state, and to secure it, as far as possible, against every thing that
threatens its safety or its happiness.

Hence all the rights which a nation derives from its obligation to §43. His rights in this
preserve and perfect itself, and to improve its state, (see §§18, respect.
20, and 23, of this book)—all these rights, I say, reside in the
sovereign, who is therefore indifferently called the conductor of the society, superior,
prince, &c.

We have observed above, that every nation ought to know itself. §44. He ought to
This obligation devolves on the sovereign, since it is he who is to know the nation.
watch over the preservation and perfection of the nation. The
duty which the law of nature here imposes on the conductors of nations is of extreme
importance, and of considerable extent. They ought exactly to know the whole
country subject to their authority,—its qualities, defects, advantages, and situation
with regard to the neighbouring states; and they ought to acquire a perfect knowledge
of the manners and general inclinations of their people, their virtues, vices, talents,
&c. All these branches of knowledge are necessary to enable them to govern properly.

The prince derives his authority from the nation; he possesses §45. The extent of his
just so much of it as they have thought proper to intrust him power.
with.* If the nation has plainly and simply invested him with the
sovereignty without limitation or division, he is supposed to be invested with all the
prerogatives, without which the sovereign command or authority Prerogatives of
could not be exerted in the manner most conducive to the public majesty.
welfare. These are called regal prerogatives, or the prerogatives
of majesty.

But when the sovereign power is limited and regulated by the §46. The prince ought
fundamental laws of the state, those laws shew the prince the to respect and support
extent and bounds of his power, and the manner in which he is to the fundamental laws.
exert it. The prince is therefore strictly obliged not only to
respect, but also to support them. The constitution and the fundamental laws are the
plan on which the nation has resolved to labour for the attainment of happiness: the
execution is intrusted to the prince. Let him religiously follow this plan,—let him
consider the fundamental laws as inviolable and sacred rules,—and remember that the
moment he deviates from them, his commands become unjust, and are but a criminal
abuse of the power with which he is intrusted. He is, by virtue of that power, the
guardian and defender of the laws:—and while it is his duty to restrain each daring
violator of them, ought he himself to trample them under foot?*

If the prince be invested with the legislative power, he may, §47. He may change
according to his wisdom, and when the public advantage requires the laws not
it, abolish those laws that are not fundamental, and make new fundamental.
ones. See what we have said on this subject in the preceding
chapter, §34.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 52 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

But while these laws exist, the sovereign ought religiously to §48. He ought to
maintain and observe them. They are the foundation of the public maintain and observe
tranquillity, and the firmest support of the sovereign authority. the existing laws.
Every thing is uncertain, violent, and subject to revolutions, in
those unhappy states where arbitrary power has placed her throne. It is therefore the
true interest of the prince, as well as his duty, to maintain and respect the laws. He
ought to submit to them himself. We find this truth established in a piece published by
order of Lewis XIV.11 one of the most absolute princes that ever reigned in Europe.
“Let it not be said that the sovereign is not subject to the laws of his state, since the
contrary proposition is one of the truths of the law of nations, which flattery has
sometimes attacked, and which good princes have always defended, as a tutelar
divinity of their states.”*

But it is necessary to explain this submission of the prince to the §49. In what sense he
laws. First he ought, as we have just seen, to follow their is subject to the laws.
regulations in all the acts of his administration. In the second
place, he is himself subject, in his private affairs, to all the laws that relate to property.
I say, “in his private affairs”; for when he acts as a sovereign prince, and in the name
of the state, he is subject only to the fundamental laws, and the law of nations. In the
third place, the prince is subject to certain regulations of general polity, considered by
the state as inviolable, unless he be excepted in express terms by the law, or tacitly by
a necessary consequence of his dignity. I here speak of the laws that relate to the
situation of individuals, and particularly of those that regulate the validity of
marriages. These laws are established to ascertain the state of families: now the royal
family is that of all others the most important to be certainly known. But, fourthly, we
shall observe in general, with respect to this question, that, if the prince is invested
with a full, absolute, and unlimited sovereignty, he is above the laws, which derive
from him all their force; and he may dispense with his own observance of them,
whenever natural justice and equity will permit him. Fifthly, as to the laws relative to
morals and good order, the prince ought doubtless to respect them, and to support
them by his example. But, sixthly, he is certainly above all civil penal laws. The
majesty of a sovereign will not admit of his being punished like a private person; and
his functions are too exalted to allow of his being molested under pretence of a fault
that does not directly concern the government of the state.

It is not sufficient that the prince be above the penal laws: even §50. His person is
the interest of nations requires that we should go something sacred and inviolable.
farther. The sovereign is the soul of the society; if he be not held
in veneration by the people, and in perfect security, the public peace, and the
happiness and safety of the state, are in continual danger. The safety of the nation then
necessarily requires that the person of the prince be sacred and inviolable. The Roman
people bestowed this privilege on their tribunes, in order that they might meet with no
obstruction in defending them, and that no apprehension might disturb them in the
discharge of their office. The cares, the employments of a sovereign, are of much
greater importance than those of the tribunes were, and not less dangerous, if he be
not provided with a powerful defence. It is impossible even for the most just and wise
monarch, not to make mal-contents; and ought the state to continue exposed to the
danger of losing so valuable a prince by the hand of an assassin? The monstrous and

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 53 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

absurd doctrine, that a private person is permitted to kill a bad prince, deprived the
French, in the beginning of the last century, of a hero who was truly the father of his
people.* Whatever a prince may be, it is an enormous crime against a nation to
deprive them of a sovereign whom they think proper to obey.†

But this high attribute of sovereignty is no reason why the nation §51. But the nation
should not curb an insupportable tyrant, pronounce sentence on may curb a tyrant, and
him (still respecting in his person the majesty of his rank), and withdraw itself from
withdraw itself from his obedience. To this indisputable right a his obedience.
powerful republic owes its birth. The tyranny exercised by Philip
II. in the Netherlands excited those provinces to rise: seven of them, closely
confederated, bravely maintained their liberties, under the conduct of the heroes of the
house of Orange; and Spain, after several vain and ruinous efforts, acknowledged
them sovereign and independent states. If the authority of the prince is limited and
regulated by the fundamental laws, the prince, on exceeding the bounds prescribed
him, commands without any right, and even without a just title: the nation is not
obliged to obey him, but may resist his unjust attempts. As soon as a prince attacks
the constitution of the state, he breaks the contract which bound the people to him: the
people become free by the act of the sovereign, and can no longer view him but as an
usurper who would load them with oppression. This truth is acknowledged by every
sensible writer, whose pen is not enslaved by fear, or sold for hire. But some
celebrated authors maintain, that if the prince is invested with the supreme command
in a full and absolute manner, nobody has a right to resist him, much less to curb him,
and that nought remains for the nation but to suffer and obey with patience. This is
founded upon the supposition that such a sovereign is not accountable to any person
for the manner in which he governs, and that if the nation might controul his actions
and resist him, where it thinks them unjust, his authority would no longer be absolute;
which would be contrary to this hypothesis. They say that an absolute sovereign
completely possesses all the political authority of the society, which nobody can
oppose,—that, if he abuses it, he does ill indeed, and wounds his conscience,—but
that his commands are not the less obligatory, as being founded on a lawful right to
command,— that the nation, by giving him absolute authority, has reserved no share
of it to itself, and has submitted to his discretion, &c. We might be content with
answering, that in this light there is not any sovereign who is completely and fully
absolute. But in order to remove all these vain subtleties, let us remember the essential
end of civil society. Is it not to labour in concert for the common happiness of all?
Was it not with this view that every citizen divested himself of his rights, and resigned
his liberty? Could the society make such use of its authority, as irrevocably to
surrender itself and all its members to the discretion of a cruel tyrant? No, certainly,
since it would no longer possess any right itself, if it were disposed to oppress a part
of the citizens. When therefore it confers the supreme and absolute government,
without an express reserve, it is necessarily with the tacit reserve that the sovereign
shall use it for the safety of the people, and not for their ruin. If he becomes the
scourge of the state, he degrades himself; he is no better than a public enemy, against
whom the nation may and ought to defend itself; and if he has carried his tyranny to
the utmost height, why should even the life of so cruel and perfidious an enemy be
spared? Who shall presume to blame the conduct of the Roman senate, that declared
Nero an enemy to his country?

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 54 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

But it is of the utmost importance to observe, that this judgment can only be passed by
the nation, or by a body which represents it, and that the nation itself can not make
any attempt on the person of the sovereign, except in cases of extreme necessity, and
when the prince, by violating the laws, and threatening the safety of his people, puts
himself in a state of war against them. It is the person of the sovereign, not that of an
unnatural tyrant and a public enemy, that the interest of the nation declares sacred and
inviolable. We seldom see such monsters as Nero. In the more common cases, when a
prince violates the fundamental laws,— when he attacks the liberties and privileges of
his subjects,—or (if he be absolute) when his government, without being carried to
extreme violence, manifestly tends to the ruin of the nation,—it may resist him, pass
sentence on him, and withdraw from his obedience: but though this may be done, still
his person should be spared, and that for the welfare of the state.* It is above a
century since the English took up arms against their king, and obliged him to descend
from the throne. A set of able enterprising men, spurred on by ambition, took
advantage of the terrible ferment, caused by fanaticism and party spirit; and Great
Britain suffered her sovereign to die unworthily on a scaffold. The nation coming to
itself discovered its former blindness. If, to this day, it still annually makes a solemn
atonement, it is not only, from the opinion that the unfortunate Charles I. did not
deserve so cruel a fate, but, doubtless, from a conviction that the very safety of the
state requires the person of the sovereign to be held sacred and inviolable, and that the
whole nation ought to render this maxim venerable, by paying respect to it when the
care of its own preservation will permit.

One word more on the distinction that is endeavoured to be made here in favour of an
absolute sovereign. Whoever has well weighed the force of the indisputable principles
we have established, will be convinced, that, when it is necessary to resist a prince
who has become a tyrant, the right of the people is still the same, whether that prince
was made absolute by the laws, or was not; because that right is derived from what is
the object of all political society,—the safety of the nation, which is the supreme
law.* But if the distinction of which we are treating, is of no moment with respect to
the right, it can be of none in practice, with respect to expediency. As it is very
difficult to oppose an absolute prince, and it cannot be done without raising great
disturbances in the state, and the most violent and dangerous commotions, it ought to
be attempted only in cases of extremity, when the public misery is raised to such a
height, that the people may say with Tacitus, miseram pacem vel bello bene mutari,12
—that it is better to expose themselves to a civil war, than to endure them. But if the
prince’s authority be limited,—if it in some respects depends on a senate or a
parliament that represents the nation,—there are means of resisting and curbing him,
without exposing the state to violent shocks. When mild and innocent remedies can be
applied to the evil, there can be no reason for waiting until it becomes extreme.

But however limited a prince’s authority may be, he is §52. Arbitration
commonly very jealous of it; it seldom happens that he patiently between the king and
suffers resistance, and peaceably submits to the judgment of his his subjects.
people. Can he want support, while he is the distributer of
favours? We see too many base and ambitious souls, for whom the state of a rich and
decorated slave has more charms than that of a modest and virtuous citizen. It is
therefore always difficult for a nation to resist a prince and pronounce sentence on his

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 55 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

conduct, without exposing the state to dangerous troubles, and to shocks capable of
overturning it. This has sometimes occasioned a compromise between the prince and
the subjects, to submit to the decision of a friendly power all the disputes that might
arise between them. Thus the kings of Denmark, by solemn treaties, formerly referred
to those of Sweden the differences that might arise between them and their senate: and
this the kings of Sweden have also done with regard to those of Denmark. The princes
and states of West Friesland, and the burgesses of Embden, have in the same manner
constituted the republic of the United Provinces the judge of their differences. The
princes and the city of Neufchatel established, in 1406, the canton of Berne perpetual
judge and arbitrator of their disputes. Thus also, according to the spirit of the Helvetic
confederacy, the entire body takes cognisance of the disturbances that arise in any of
the confederated states, though each of them is truly sovereign and independent.

As soon as a nation acknowledges a prince for its lawful §53. The obedience
sovereign, all the citizens owe him a faithful obedience. He can which subjects owe to
neither govern the state, nor perform what the nation expects a sovereign.
from him, if he be not punctually obeyed. Subjects then have no
right, in doubtful cases, to examine the wisdom or justice of their sovereign’s
commands; this examination belongs to the prince: his subjects ought to suppose (if
there be a possibility of supposing it) that all his orders are just and salutary: he alone
is accountable for the evil that may result from them.

Nevertheless this ought not to be entirely a blind obedience. No §54. In what cases
engagement can oblige or even authorise a man to violate the law they may resist him.
of nature. All authors who have any regard to conscience or
decency, agree that no one ought to obey such commands as are evidently contrary to
that sacred law. Those governors of places who bravely refused to execute the
barbarous orders of Charles IX.13 on the memorable day of St. Bartholomew,14 have
been universally praised; and the court did not dare to punish them, at least openly.
“Sire,” said the brave Orte, governor of Bayonne, in his letter, “I have communicated
your majesty’s command to your faithful inhabitants and warriors in the garrison: and
I have found there only good citizens and brave soldiers; but not a single executioner:
wherefore both they and I most humbly entreat your majesty to be pleased to employ
our hands and our lives in things that are possible, however hazardous they may be;
and we will exert ourselves to the last drop of our blood in the execution of them.”*
The count de Tende, Charny, and others, replied to those who brought them the orders
of the court, “that they had too great a respect for the king, to believe that such
barbarous orders came from him.”

It is more difficult to determine in what cases a subject may not only refuse to obey,
but even resist a sovereign, and oppose his violence by force. When a sovereign does
injury to any one, he acts without any real authority; but we ought not thence to
conclude hastily that the subject may resist him. The nature of sovereignty, and the
welfare of the state, will not permit citizens to oppose a prince whenever his
commands appear to them unjust or prejudicial. This would be falling back into the
state of nature, and rendering government impossible. A subject ought patiently to
suffer from the prince, doubtful wrongs, and wrongs that are supportable,—the
former, because whoever has submitted to the decision of a judge, is no longer

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 56 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

capable of deciding his own pretensions; and as to those that are supportable, they
ought to be sacrificed to the peace and safety of the state, on account of the great
advantages obtained by living in society. It is presumed, as matter of course, that
every citizen has tacitly engaged to observe this moderation; because, without it,
society could not exist. But when the injuries are manifest and atrocious,— when a
prince, without any apparent reason, attempts to deprive us of life, or of those things,
the loss of which would render life irksome,— who can dispute our right to resist
him? Self-preservation is not only a natural right, but an obligation imposed by
nature, and no man can entirely and absolutely renounce it. And though he might give
it up, can he be considered as having done it by his political engagements, since he
entered into society only to establish his own safety upon a more solid basis? The
welfare of society does not require such a sacrifice; and, as Barbeyrac well observes
in his notes on Grotius, “If the public interest requires, that those who obey should
suffer some inconvenience, it is no less for the public interest that those who
command, should be afraid of driving their patience to the utmost extremity.”* The
prince who violates all laws,—who no longer observes any measures,—and who
would in his transports of fury take away the life of an innocent person,— divests
himself of his character, and is no longer to be considered in any other light than that
of an unjust and outrageous enemy, against whom his people are allowed to defend
themselves. The person of the sovereign is sacred and inviolable: but he who, after
having lost all the sentiments of a sovereign, divests himself even of the appearances
and exterior conduct of a monarch, degrades himself: he no longer retains the sacred
character of a sovereign, and cannot retain the prerogatives attached to that exalted
rank. However, if this prince is not a monster,—if he is furious only against us in
particular, and from the effects of a sudden transport or a violent passion, and is
supportable to the rest of the nation,—the respect we ought to pay to the tranquillity
of the state is such, and the respect due to sovereign majesty so powerful, that we are
strictly obliged to seek every other means of preservation, rather than to put his
person in danger. Every one knows the example set by David: he fled,—he kept
himself concealed, to secure himself from Saul’s fury,— and more than once spared
the life of his persecutor.15 When the reason of Charles VI.16 of France was suddenly
disordered by a fatal accident, he in his fury killed several of those who surrounded
him: none of them thought of securing his own life at the expense of that of the king;
they only endeavoured to disarm and secure him. They did their duty like men of
honour and faithful subjects, in exposing their lives, to save that of this unfortunate
monarch: such a sacrifice is due to the state and to sovereign majesty: furious from
the derangement of his faculties, Charles was not guilty; he might recover his health,
and again become a good king.

What has been said is sufficient for the intention of this work: the §55. Of ministers.
reader may see these questions treated more at large in many
books that are well known. We shall conclude this subject with an important
observation. A sovereign is undoubtedly allowed to employ ministers to ease him in
the painful offices of government; but he ought never to surrender his authority to
them. When a nation chuses a conductor, it is not with a view that he should deliver
up his charge into other hands. Ministers ought only to be instruments in the hands of
the prince; he ought constantly to direct them, and continually endeavour to know
whether they act according to his intentions. If the imbecillity of age, or any infirmity,

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 57 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

render him incapable of governing, a regent ought to be nominated, according to the
laws of the state: but when once the sovereign is capable of holding the reins, let him
insist on being served, but never suffer himself to be superseded. The last kings of
France of the first race surrendered the government and authority to the mayors of the
palace: thus becoming mere phantoms, they justly lost the title and honours of a
dignity of which they had abandoned the functions. The nation has every thing to gain
in crowning an all-powerful minister; for he will improve that soil as his own
inheritance, which he plundered whilst he only reaped precarious advantages from it.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 58 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER V

Of States Elective, Successive Or Hereditary, And Of Those
Called Patrimonial.
We have seen in the preceding chapter, that it originally belongs §56. Of elective
to a nation to confer the supreme authority, and to chuse the states.
person by whom it is to be governed. If it confers the sovereignty
on him for his own person only, reserving to itself the right of chusing a successor
after the sovereign’s death, the state is elective. As soon as the prince is elected
according to the laws, he enters into the possession of all the prerogatives which those
laws annex to his dignity.

It has been debated, whether elective kings and princes are real §57. Whether elective
sovereigns. But he who lays any stress on this circumstance must kings are real
have only a very confused idea of sovereignty. The manner in sovereigns.
which a prince obtains his dignity has nothing to do with
determining its nature. We must consider, first, whether the nation itself forms an
independent society (see chap. I.), and secondly, what is the extent of the power it has
intrusted to the prince. Whenever the chief of an independent state really represents
his nation, he ought to be considered as a true sovereign (§40), even though his
authority should be limited in several respects.

When a nation would avoid the troubles which seldom fail to §58. Of successive
accompany the election of a sovereign, it makes its choice for a and hereditary states.
long succession of years, by establishing the
right of succession, or by rendering the crown hereditary in a The origin of the right
family, according to the order and rules that appear most of succession.
agreeable to that nation. The name of an Hereditary State or
Kingdom is given to that where the successor is appointed by the same law that
regulates the successions of individuals. The Successive Kingdom is that where a
person succeeds according to a particular fundamental law of the state. Thus the lineal
succession, and of males alone, is established in France.

The right of succession is not always the primitive establishment §59. Other origins of
of a nation; it may have been introduced by the concession of this right.
another sovereign, and even by usurpation. But when it is
supported by long possession, the people are considered as consenting to it; and this
tacit consent renders it lawful, though the source be vicious. It rests then on the
foundation we have already pointed out,—a foundation that alone is lawful and
incapable of being shaken, and to which we must ever revert.

The same right, according to Grotius and the generality of §60. Other sources
writers, may be derived from other sources, as conquest, or the which still amount to
right of a proprietor, who, being master of a country, should the same thing.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 59 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

invite inhabitants to settle there, and give them lands, on condition of their
acknowledging him and his heirs for their sovereigns. But as it is absurd to suppose
that a society of men can place themselves in subjection otherwise than with a view to
their own safety and welfare, and still more that they can bind their posterity on any
other footing, it ultimately amounts to the same thing; and it must still be said that the
succession is established by the express will or the tacit consent of the nation, for the
welfare and safety of the state.

It thus remains an undeniable truth, that in all cases the §61. A nation may
succession is established or received only with a view to the change the order of
public welfare and the general safety. If it happened then that the the succession.
order established in this respect became destructive to the state,
the nation would certainly have a right to change it by a new law. Salus populi
suprema lex,—the safety of the people is the supreme law; and this law is agreeable to
the strictest justice,—the people having united in society only with a view to their
safety and greater advantage.*

This pretended proprietory right attributed to princes is a chimera produced by an
abuse which its supporters would fain make of the laws respecting private
inheritances. The state neither is nor can be a patrimony, since the end of patrimony is
the advantage of the possessor, whereas the prince is established only for the
advantage of the state.* The consequence is evident: if the nation plainly perceives
that the heir of her prince would be a pernicious sovereign, she has a right to exclude
him.

The authors whom we oppose, grant this right to a despotic prince, while they refuse
it to nations. This is because they consider such a prince as a real proprietor of the
empire, and will not acknowledge that the care of their own safety, and the right to
govern themselves, still essentially belong to the society, although they have intrusted
them, even without any express reserve, to a monarch and his heirs. In their opinion,
the kingdom is the inheritance of the prince, in the same manner as his field and his
flocks,—a maxim injurious to human nature, and which they would not have dared to
advance in an enlightened age, if it had not the support of an authority which too often
proves stronger than reason and justice.

A nation may, for the same reason, oblige one branch who §62. Of renunciations.
removes to another country, to renounce all claim to the crown,
as a daughter who marries a foreign prince. These renunciations, required or approved
by the state, are perfectly valid, since they are equivalent to a law that such persons
and their posterity should be excluded from the throne. Thus the laws of England have
for ever rejected every Roman Catholic. “Thus a law of Russia, made at the beginning
of the reign of Elizabeth, most wisely excludes from the possession of the crown
every heir possessed of another monarchy; and thus the law of Portugal disqualifies
every foreigner who lays claim to the crown by right of blood.”*

Some celebrated authors, in other respects very learned and judicious, have then
deviated from the true principles in treating of renunciations. They have largely
expatiated on the rights of children born or to be born, of the transmission of those

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 60 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

rights, &c. But they ought to have considered the succession, less as a property of the
reigning family, than as a law of the state. From this clear and incontestable principle
we easily deduce the whole doctrine of renunciations. Those required or approved by
the state are valid and sacred: they are fundamental laws:—those not authorised by
the state can only be obligatory on the prince who made them. They cannot injure his
posterity; and he himself may recede from them in case the state stands in need of him
and gives him an invitation: for he owes his services to a people who had committed
their safety to his care. For the same reason, the prince cannot lawfully resign at an
unseasonable juncture, to the detriment of the state, and abandon in imminent danger
a nation that had put itself under his care.†

In ordinary cases, when the state may follow the established rule §63. The order of
without being exposed to very great and manifest danger, it is succession ought
certain that every descendent ought to succeed when the order of commonly to be kept.
succession calls him to the throne, however great may appear his
incapacity to rule by himself. This is a consequence of the spirit of the law that
established the succession: for the people had recourse to it, only to prevent the
troubles which would otherwise be almost inevitable at every change. Now little
advances would have been made towards obtaining this end, if, at the death of a
prince, the people were allowed to examine the capacity of his heir, before they
acknowledged him for their sovereign. “What a door would this open for usurpers or
malcontents!—It was to avoid these inconveniences that the order of succession was
established; and nothing more wise could have been done; since by this means no
more is required than his being the king’s son, and his being actually alive,—which
can admit of no dispute: but on the other hand there is no rule fixed to judge of the
capacity or incapacity to reign.”* Though the succession was not established for the
particular advantage of the sovereign and his family, but for that of the state, the heir
apparent has nevertheless a right, to which justice requires that regard should be paid.
His right is subordinate to that of the nation, and to the safety of the state; but it ought
to take place when the public welfare does not oppose it.

These reasons have the greater weight, since the law or the state §64. Of regents.
may remedy the incapacity of the prince by nominating a regent,
as is practised in cases of minority. This regent is, during the whole time of his
administration, invested with the royal authority; but he exercises it in the king’s
name.

The principles we have just established respecting the successive §65. Indivisibility of
or hereditary right, manifestly shew that a prince has no right to sovereignties.
divide his state among his children. Every sovereignty, properly
so called, is, in its own nature, one, and indivisible, since those who have united in
society cannot be separated in spite of themselves. Those partitions, so contrary to the
nature of sovereignty and the preservation of states, have been much in use: but an
end has been put to them, wherever the people, and princes themselves, have had a
clear view of their greatest interest, and the foundation of their safety.

But when a prince has united several different nations under his authority, his empire
is then properly an assemblage of several societies subject to the same head; and there

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 61 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

exists no natural objection to his dividing them among his children: he may distribute
them, if there be neither law nor compact to the contrary, and if each of those nations
consents to receive the sovereign he appoints for it. For this reason France was
divisible under the two first races.* But being entirely consolidated under the third, it
has since been considered as a single kingdom,—it has become indivisible,—and a
fundamental law has declared it so. That law, wisely providing for the preservation
and splendour of the kingdom, irrevocably unites to the crown all the acquisitions of
its kings.

The same principles will also furnish us with the solution of a §66. Who are to
celebrated question. When the right of succession becomes decide disputes
uncertain in a successive or hereditary state, and two or three respecting the
competitors lay claim to the crown,—it is asked, Who shall be succession to a
the judge of their pretensions? Some learned men, resting on the sovereignty.

opinion that sovereigns are subject to no other judge but God,
have maintained that the competitors for the crown, while their right remains
uncertain, ought either to come to an amicable compromise,—enter into articles
among themselves,—chuse arbitrators,—have recourse even to the drawing of
lots,—or, finally, determine the dispute by arms; and that the subjects cannot in any
manner decide the question. One might be astonished that celebrated authors should
have maintained such a doctrine. But since, even in speculative philosophy, there is
nothing so absurd as not to have been advanced by one or other of the philosophers,†
what can be expected from the human mind, when seduced by interest or fear? What!
in a question that concerns none so much as the nation,—that relates to a power
established only with a view to the happiness of the people,—in a quarrel that is to
decide for ever their dearest interests, and their very safety,— are they to stand by as
unconcerned spectators? Are they to allow strangers, or the blind decision of arms, to
appoint them a master, as a flock of sheep are to wait till it be determined whether
they are to be delivered up to the butcher, or restored to the care of their shepherd?

But, say they, the nation has divested itself of all jurisdiction, by giving itself up to a
sovereign; it has submitted to the reigning family; it has given to those who are
descended from that family a right which nobody can take from them; it has
established them its superiors, and can no longer judge them. Very well! But does it
not belong to that same nation to acknowledge the person to whom its duty binds it,
and prevent its being delivered up to another? And since it has established the law of
succession, who is more capable or has a better right to identify the individual whom
the fundamental law had in view, and has pointed out as the successor? We may
affirm, then, without hesitation, that the decision of this grand controversy belongs to
the nation, and to the nation alone. Even if the competitors have agreed among
themselves, or have chosen arbitrators, the nation is not obliged to submit to their
regulations, unless it has consented to the transaction or compromise,— princes not
acknowledged, and whose right is uncertain, not being in any manner able to dispose
of its obedience. The nation acknowledges no superior judge in an affair that relates to
its most sacred duties, and most precious rights.

Grotius and Puffendorff differ in reality but little from our opinion; but would not
have the decision of the people or state called a juridical sentence (judicium

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 62 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

jurisdictionis). Well! be it so: we shall not dispute about words. However, there is
something more in the case than a mere examination of the competitors’ rights, in
order to submit to him who has the best. All the disputes that arise in society are to be
judged and decided by the public authority. As soon as the right of succession is
found uncertain, the sovereign authority returns for a time to the body of the state,
which is to exercise it, either by itself, or by its representatives, till the true sovereign
be known. “The contest on this right suspending the functions in the person of the
sovereign, the authority naturally returns to the subjects, not for them to retain it, but
to prove on which of the competitors it lawfully devolves, and then to commit it to his
hands. It would not be difficult to support, by an infinite number of examples, a truth
so evident by the light of reason: it is sufficient to remember that the states of France,
after the death of Charles the Fair,17 terminated the famous dispute between Philip de
Valois and the king of England (Edward III.),18 and that those states, though subject
to him in whose favour they granted the decision, were nevertheless the judges of the
dispute.”*

Guicciardini, book XII.19 also shews that it was the states of Arragon that decided the
succession to that kingdom, in favour of Ferdinand,20 grandfather of Ferdinand21 the
husband of Isabella queen of Castile,22 in preference to the other relations of Martin
king of Arragon,23 who asserted that the kingdom belonged to them.†

In the kingdom of Jerusalem also, it was the states that decided the disputes of those
who made pretensions to it; as is proved by several examples in the foreign political
history.‡

The states of the principality of Neufchatel have often, in the form of a juridical
sentence, pronounced on the succession to the sovereignty. In the year 1707, they
decided between a great number of competitors, and their decision in favour of the
king of Prussia was acknowledged by all Europe in the treaty of Utrecht.

The better to secure the succession in a certain and invariable §67. That the right to
order, it is at present an established rule in all Christian states the succession ought
(Portugal excepted) that no descendent of the sovereign can not to depend on the
succeed to the crown, unless he be the issue of a marriage that is judgment of a foreign
conformable to the laws of the country. As the nation has power.

established the succession, to the nation alone belongs the power
of acknowledging those who are capable of succeeding; and consequently, on its
judgment and laws alone must depend the validity of the marriage of its sovereigns,
and the legitimacy of their birth.

If education had not the power of familiarising the human mind to the greatest
absurdities, is there any man of sense who would not be struck with astonishment to
see so many nations suffer the legitimacy and right of their princes to depend on a
foreign power? The court of Rome has invented an infinite number of obstructions
and cases of invalidity in marriages, and at the same time arrogates to itself the right
of judging of their validity, and of removing the obstructions; so that a prince of its
communion cannot in certain cases be so much his own master, as to contract a
marriage necessary to the safety of the state. Jane, the only daughter of Henry IV.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 63 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

king of Castile,24 found this true by cruel experience. Some rebels published abroad
that she owed her birth to Bertrand de la Cueva, the king’s favourite; and
notwithstanding the declarations and last will of that prince, who explicitly and
invariably acknowledged Jane for his daughter, and nominated her his heiress, they
called to the crown Isabella, Henry’s sister, and wife to Ferdinand heir of Arragon.
The grandees of Jane’s party had provided her a powerful resource, by negotiating a
marriage between her and Alphonsus king of Portugal:25 but as that prince was Jane’s
uncle, it was necessary to obtain a dispensation from the pope; and Pius II.26 who
was in the interest of Ferdinand and Isabella, refused to grant the dispensation, though
such alliances were then very common. These difficulties cooled the ardour of the
Portuguese monarch, and abated the zeal of the faithful Castilians. Every thing
succeeded with Isabella, and the unfortunate Jane took the veil, in order to secure, by
this heroic sacrifice, the peace of Castile.*

If the prince proceeds and marries notwithstanding the pope’s refusal, he exposes his
dominions to the most fatal troubles. What would have become of England, if the
reformation had not been happily established, when the pope presumed to declare
Queen Elizabeth illegitimate, and incapable of wearing the crown?

A great emperor, Lewis of Bavaria,27 boldly asserted the rights of his crown in this
respect. In the diplomatic code of the law of nations by Leibnitz, we find* two acts, in
which that prince condemns, as an invasion of the imperial authority, the doctrine that
attributes to any other power but his own, the right of granting dispensations, and of
judging of the validity of marriages, in the places under his jurisdiction: but he was
neither well supported in his life-time, nor imitated by his successors.

Finally, there are states whose sovereign may chuse his §68. Of states called
successor, and even transfer the crown to another during his life: patrimonial.
these are commonly called patrimonial kingdoms or states: but
let us reject so unjust and so improper an epithet, which can only serve to inspire
some sovereigns with ideas very opposite to those they ought to entertain. We have
shewn (§61) that a state cannot be a patrimony. But it may happen that a nation, either
through unbounded confidence in its prince, or for some other reason, has intrusted
him with the care of appointing his successor, and even consented to receive, if he
thinks proper, another sovereign from his hands. Thus we see that Peter I.28 em-peror
of Russia, nominated his wife29 to succeed him, though he had children.

But when a prince chuses his successor, or when he cedes the §69. Every true
crown to another,—properly speaking, he only nominates, by sovereignty is
virtue of the power with which he is, either expressly or by tacit unalienable.
consent, intrusted— he only nominates, I say, the person who is
to govern the state after him. This neither is nor can be an alienation, properly so
called. Every true sovereignty is, in its own nature, unalienable. We shall be easily
convinced of this, if we pay attention to the origin and end of political society, and of
the supreme authority. A nation becomes incorporated into a society, to labour for the
common welfare as it shall think proper, and to live according to its own laws. With
this view it establishes a public authority. If it intrusts that authority to a prince, even
with the power of transferring it to other hands, this can never take place without the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 64 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

express and unanimous consent of the citizens, with the right of really alienating or
subjecting the state to another body politic: for the individuals who have formed this
society, entered into it in order to live in an independent state, and not under a foreign
yoke. Let not any other source of this right be alleged in objection to our argument, as
conquest, for instance; for we have already shewn (§60) that these different sources
ultimately revert to the true principles on which all just governments are founded.
While the victor does not treat his conquest according to those principles, the state of
war still in some measure subsists: but the moment he places it in a civil state, his
rights are proportioned by the principles of that state.

I know that many authors, and particularly Grotius,* give long enumerations of the
alienations of sovereignties. But the examples often prove only the abuse of power,
not the right. And besides, the people consented to the alienation, either willingly or
by force. What could the inhabitants of Pergamus, Bithynia, and Cyrene do, when
their kings gave them, by their last wills, to the Roman people? Nothing remained for
them, but to submit with a good grace to so powerful a legatee. To furnish an example
capable of serving as an authority, they should have produced an instance of a people
resisting a similar bequest of their sovereign, and whose resistance had been generally
condemned as unjust and rebellious. Had Peter I. who nominated his wife to succeed
him, attempted to subject his empire to the grand signor, or to some other
neighbouring power, can we imagine that the Russians would have suffered it, or that
their resistance would have passed for a revolt? We do not find in Europe any great
state that is reputed alienable. If some petty principalities have been considered as
such, it is because they were not true sovereignties. They were fiefs of the em-pire,
enjoying a greater or lesser degree of liberty: their masters made a traffic of the rights
they possessed over those territories: but they could not withdraw them from a
dependence on the empire.

Let us conclude then, that, as the nation alone has a right to subject itself to a foreign
power, the right of really alienating the state can never belong to the sovereign, unless
it be expressly given him by the entire body of the people.† Neither are we to presume
that he possesses a right to nominate his successor or surrender the sceptre to other
hands,—a right which must be founded on an express consent, on a law of the state,
or on long custom, justified by the tacit consent of the people.

If the power of nominating his successor is intrusted to the §70. Duty of a prince
sovereign, he ought to have no other view in his choice, but the who is empowered to
advantage and safety of the state. He himself was established nominate his
only for this end (§39); the liberty of transferring his power to successor.
another could then be granted to him only with the same view. It
would be absurd to consider it as a prerogative useful to the prince, and which he may
turn to his own private advantage. Peter the Great proposed only the welfare of the
empire when he left the crown to his wife. He knew that heroine to be the most
capable person to follow his views, and perfect the great things he had begun, and
therefore preferred her to his son, who was still too young. If we often found on the
throne such elevated minds as Peter’s, a nation could not adopt a wiser plan in order
to ensure to itself a good government, than to intrust the prince, by a fundamental law,
with the power of appointing his successor. This would be a much more certain

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 65 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

method than the order of birth. The Roman emperors who had no male children
appointed a successor by adoption. To this custom Rome was indebted for a series of
sovereigns unequalled in history,—Nerva, Trajan, Adrian, Antoninus, Marcus
Aurelius,—what princes! Does the right of birth often place such on the throne?

We may go still farther, and boldly assert, that, as the safety of §71. He must have at
the whole nation is deeply interested in so important a least a tacit
transaction, the consent and ratification of the people or state is ratification.
necessary to give it full and entire effect,—at least their tacit
consent and ratification. If an emperor of Russia thought proper to nominate for his
successor a person notoriously unworthy of the crown, it is not at all probable that
vast empire would blindly submit to so pernicious an appointment. And who shall
presume to blame a nation for refusing to run headlong to ruin out of respect to the
last orders of its prince? As soon as the people submit to the sovereign appointed to
rule over them, they tacitly ratify the choice made by the last prince; and the new
monarch enters into all the rights of his predecessor.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 66 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER VI

Principal Objects Of A Good Government; And First To
Provide For The Necessities Of The Nation.
After these observations on the constitution of the state, let us §72. The object of
now proceed to the principal objects of a good government. We society points out the
have seen above (§§41 and 42) that the prince, on his being duties of the
invested with the sovereign authority, is charged with the duties sovereign.
of the nation in relation to government. In treating of the
principal objects of a wise administration, we at once shew the duties of a nation
towards itself, and those of the sovereign towards his people.

A wise conductor of the state will find in the objects of civil society the general rule
and indication of his duties. The society is established with the view of procuring, to
those who are its members, the necessaries, conveniences, and even pleasures of life,
and, in general, every thing necessary to their happiness,—of enabling each individual
peaceably to enjoy his own property, and to obtain justice with safety and
certainty,—and, finally, of defending themselves in a body against all external
violence (§15).
The nation, or its conductor, should first apply to the business of He ought to procure
providing for all the wants of the people, and producing a happy plenty.
plenty of all the necessaries of life, with its conveniences, and
innocent and laudable enjoyments. As an easy life without luxury contributes to the
happiness of men, it likewise enables them to labour with greater safety and success
after their own perfection, which is their grand and principal duty, and one of the ends
they ought to have in view when they unite in society.

To succeed in procuring this abundance of every thing, it is §73.To take care that
necessary to take care that there be a sufficient number of able there be a sufficient
workmen in every useful or necessary profession. An attentive number of workmen.
application on the part of government, wise regulations, and
assistance properly granted, will produce this effect, without using constraint, which
is always fatal to industry.

Those workmen that are useful ought to be retained in the state; §74. To prevent the
to succeed in retaining them, the public authority has certainly a emigration of those
right to use constraint, if necessary. Every citizen owes his that are useful.
personal services to his country; and a mechanic, in particular,
who has been reared, educated, and instructed in its bosom, cannot lawfully leave it,
and carry to a foreign land that industry which he acquired at home, unless his country
has no occasion for him, or he cannot there obtain the just fruit of his labour and
abilities. Employment must then be procured for him; and if, while able to obtain a
decent livelihood in his own country, he would without reason abandon it, the state
has a right to detain him. But a very moderate use ought to be made of this right, and

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 67 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

only in important or necessary cases. Liberty is the soul of abilities and industry:
frequently a mechanic or an artist, after having long travelled abroad, is attracted
home to his native soil by a natural affection, and returns more expert and better
qualified to render his country useful services. If certain extraordinary cases be
excepted, it is best in this affair to practise the mild methods of protection,
encouragement, &c. and to leave the rest to that natural love felt by all men for the
places of their birth.

As to those emissaries who come into a country to entice away §75. Emissaries who
useful subjects, the sovereign has a right to punish them severely, entice them away.
and has just cause of complaint against the power by whom they
are employed.

In another place, we shall treat more particularly of the general question, whether a
citizen be permitted to quit the society of which he is a member. The particular
reasons concerning useful workmen are sufficient here.

The state ought to encourage labour, to animate industry, to §76. Labour and
excite abilities, to propose honours, rewards, privileges, and so to industry must be
order matters that every one may live by his industry. In this encouraged.
particular, England deserves to be held up as an example. The
parliament incessantly attends to these important affairs, in which neither care nor
expense is spared. And do we not even see a society of excellent citizens formed with
this view, and devoting considerable sums to this use? Premiums are also distributed
in Ireland to the mechanics who most distinguish themselves in their profession. Can
such a state fail of being powerful and happy?

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 68 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER VII

Of The Cultivation Of The Soil.
Of all the arts, tillage, or agriculture, is doubtless the most useful §77. The utility of
and necessary, as being the source whence the nation derives its tillage.
subsistence. The cultivation of the soil causes it to produce an
infinite increase; it forms the surest resource, and the most solid fund of riches and
commerce, for a nation that enjoys a happy climate.

This object then deserves the utmost attention of the government. §78. Regulations
The sovereign ought to neglect no means of rendering the land necessary in this
under his jurisdiction as well cultivated as possible. He ought not respect—
to allow either communities or private persons to acquire large
tracts of land, and leave them uncultivated.
Those rights of common, which deprive the proprietor of the free For the distribution of
liberty of disposing of his land,—which will not allow him to land.
inclose and cultivate it in the most advantageous manner,—
those rights, I say, are inimical to the welfare of the state, and ought to be suppressed,
or reduced to just bounds. Notwithstanding the introduction of private property among
the citizens, the nation has still a right to take the most effectual measures to cause the
aggregate soil of the country to produce the greatest and most advantageous revenue
possible.

The government ought carefully to avoid every thing capable of §79. For the
discouraging the husbandman, or of diverting him from the protection of
labours of agriculture. Those taxes,—those excessive and ill- husbandmen.
proportioned impositions, the burthen of which falls almost
entirely on the cultivators,— and the oppressions they suffer from the officers who
levy them,— deprive the unhappy peasant of the means of cultivating the earth, and
depopulate the country. Spain is the most fertile and the worst cultivated country in
Europe. The church there possesses too much land; and the contractors for the royal
magazines, being authorised to purchase at a low price all the corn they find in the
possession of a peasant, above what is necessary for the subsistence of himself and his
family, so greatly discourage the husbandman, that he sows no more corn than is
barely necessary for the support of his own household. Hence the frequent scarcity in
a country capable of feeding its neighbours.

Another abuse injurious to agriculture is the contempt cast upon §80. Husbandry ought
the husbandman. The tradesmen in cities,—even the most servile to be placed in an
mechanics,—the idle citizens,—consider him that cultivates the honourable light.
earth with a disdainful eye: they humble and discourage him:
they dare to despise a profession that feeds the human race,—the natural employment
of man. A little insignificant haberdasher, a tailor, places far beneath him the beloved
employment of the first consuls and dictators of Rome! China has wisely prevented

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 69 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

this abuse: agriculture is there held in honour; and to preserve this happy mode of
thinking, the emperor himself, followed by his whole court, annually, on a solemn
day, sets his hand to the plough, and sows a small piece of land. Hence China is the
best cultivated country in the world: it feeds an immense multitude of inhabitants who
at first sight appear to the traveller too numerous for the space they occupy.

The cultivation of the soil deserves the attention of the §81. The cultivation
government, not only on account of the invaluable advantages of the soil, a natural
that flow from it, but from its being an obligation imposed by obligation.
nature on mankind. The whole earth is destined to feed its
inhabitants; but this it would be incapable of doing, if it were uncultivated. Every
nation is then obliged by the law of nature to cultivate the land that has fallen to its
share; and it has no right to enlarge its boundaries, or have recourse to the assistance
of other nations, but in proportion as the land in its possession is incapable of
furnishing it with necessaries. Those nations (such as the ancient Germans, and some
modern Tartars), who inhabit fertile countries, but disdain to cultivate their lands, and
chuse rather to live by plunder, are wanting to themselves, are injurious to all their
neighbours, and deserve to be extirpated as savage and pernicious beasts. There are
others, who, to avoid labour, chuse to live only by hunting, and their flocks. This
might, doubtless, be allowed in the first ages of the world, when the earth, without
cultivation, produced more than was sufficient to feed its small number of inhabitants.
But at present, when the human race is so greatly multiplied, it could not subsist if all
nations were disposed to live in that manner. Those who still pursue this idle mode of
life, usurp more extensive territories than, with a reasonable share of labour, they
would have occasion for, and have therefore no reason to complain, if other nations,
more industrious, and too closely confined, come to take possession of a part of those
lands. Thus, though the conquest of the civilised empires of Peru and Mexico was a
notorious usurpation, the establishment of many colonies on the continent of North
America might, on their confining themselves within just bounds, be extremely
lawful. The people of those extensive tracts rather ranged through than inhabited
them.

The establishment of public granaries is an excellent regulation §82. Of public
for preventing scarcity. But great care should be taken to prevent granaries.
their being managed with a mercantile spirit, and with views of
profit. This would be establishing a monopoly, which would not be the less unlawful,
for its being carried on by the magistrate. These granaries should be filled in times of
the greatest plenty, and take off the corn that would lie on the husbandman’s hands, or
be carried in too great quantities to foreign countries: they should be opened when
corn is dear, and keep it at a reasonable price. If in a time of plenty they prevent that
necessary commodity from easily falling to a very low price, this inconvenience is
more than compensated by the relief they afford in times of dearth: or rather, it is no
inconvenience at all: for, when corn is sold extremely cheap, the manufacturer, in
order to obtain a preference, is tempted to undersell his neighbours, by offering his
goods at a price which he is afterwards obliged to raise (and this produces great
disorders in commerce, by putting it out of its course); or he accustoms himself to an
easy life, which he cannot support in harder times. It would be of advantage to
manufactures and to commerce to have the subsistence of workmen regularly kept at a

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 70 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

moderate and nearly equal price. In short, public granaries keep in the state quantities
of corn that would be sent abroad at too cheap a rate, and must be purchased again,
and brought back at a very great expense after a bad harvest; which is a real loss to the
nation. These establishments, however, do not hinder the corn trade. If the country,
one year with another, produces more than is sufficient for the support of her
inhabitants, the superfluity will still be sent abroad; but it will be sent at a higher and
fairer price.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 71 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER VIII

Of Commerce.
It is commerce that enables individuals and whole nations to §83. Of home and
procure those commodities which they stand in need of, but foreign trade.
cannot find at home. Commerce is divided into home and foreign
trade. The former is that carried on in the state between the several inhabitants; the
latter is carried on with foreign nations.

The home trade of a nation is of great use; it furnishes all the §84. Utility of the
citizens with the means of procuring whatever they want, as home trade.
either necessary, useful, or agreeable: it causes a circulation of
money, excites industry, animates labour, and, by affording subsistence to a great
number of people, contributes to increase the population and power of the state.

The same reasons shew the use of foreign trade, which is §85. Utility of foreign
moreover attended with these two advantages:—1. By trading trade.
with foreigners, a nation procures such things as neither nature
nor art can furnish in the country it occupies. And secondly, if its foreign trade be
properly directed, it increases the riches of the nation, and may become the source of
wealth and plenty. Of this the example of the Carthaginians among the ancients, and
that of the English and Dutch among the moderns, afford remarkable proofs.
Carthage, by her riches, counter-balanced the fortune, courage, and greatness of
Rome. Holland has amassed immense sums in her marshes; a company of her
merchants possesses whole kingdoms in the East, and the governor of Batavia
exercises command over the monarchs of India. To what a degree of power and glory
is England arrived! Formerly her warlike princes and inhabitants made glorious
conquests which they afterwards lost by those reverses of fortune so frequent in war:
at present, it is chiefly commerce that places in her hand the balance of Europe.

Nations are obliged to cultivate the home trade,—first, because it §86. Obligation to
is clearly demonstrated from the law of nature, that mankind cultivate the home
ought mutually to assist each other, and, as far as in their power, trade.
contribute to the perfection and happiness of their fellow-
creatures: whence arises, after the introduction of private property, the obligation to
resign to others, at a fair price, those things which they have occasion for, and which
we do not destine for our own use. Secondly, society being established with the view
that each may procure whatever things are necessary to his own perfection and
happiness,—and a home trade being the means of obtaining them,—the obligations to
carry on and improve this trade are derived from the very compact on which the
society was formed. Finally, being advantageous to the nation, it is a duty the people
owe to themselves, to make this commerce flourish.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 72 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

For the same reason, drawn from the welfare of the state, and §87. Obligation to
also to procure for the citizens every thing they want, a nation is carry on foreign trade.
obliged to promote and carry on a foreign trade. Of all the
modern states, England is most distinguished in this respect. The parliament have
their eyes constantly fixed on this important object; they effectually protect the
navigation of the merchants, and, by considerable bounties, favour the exportation of
superfluous commodities and merchandises. In a very sensible production,* may be
seen the valuable advantages that kingdom has derived from such judicious
regulations.

Let us now see what are the laws of nature and the rights of §88. Foundation of
nations in respect to the commerce they carry on with each other. the laws of
Men are obliged mutually to assist each other as much as commerce.
possible, and to contribute to the perfection and happiness of
their fellow-creatures (Prelim. §10); whence it follows, as we have said above (§86),
that, after the introduction of private property, it became a duty to sell to each other at
a fair price what the possessor himself has no occasion for, and what is necessary to
others; because, since that introduction of private property, no one can by any other
means procure the different things that may be necessary or useful to him, and
calculated to render life pleasant and agreeable.
Now, since right springs from obligation (Prelim. §3), the Right of buying.
obligation which we have just established gives every man the
right of procuring the things he wants, by purchasing them at a reasonable price from
those who have themselves no occasion for them.

We have also seen (Prelim. §5) that men could not free themselves from the authority
of the laws of nature by uniting in civil society, and that the whole nation remains
equally subject to those laws in its national capacity; so that the natural and necessary
law of nations is no other than the law of nature properly applied to nations or
sovereign states (Prelim. §6): from all which it follows, that a nation has a right to
procure, at an equitable price, whatever articles it wants, by purchasing them of other
nations who have no occasion for them. This is the foundation of the right of
commerce between different nations, and, in particular, of the right of buying.

We cannot apply the same reasoning to the right of selling such §89. Right of selling.
things as we want to part with. Every man and every nation
being perfectly at liberty to buy a thing that is to be sold, or not to buy it, and to buy it
of one rather than of another,—the law of nature gives to no person whatsoever any
kind of right to sell what belongs to him to another who does not wish to buy it;
neither has any nation the right of selling her commodities or merchandise to a people
who are unwilling to have them.

Every state has consequently a right to prohibit the entrance of §90. Prohibition of
foreign merchandises; and the nations that are affected by such foreign merchandises.
prohibition have no right to complain of it, as if they had been
refused an office of humanity. Their complaints would be ridiculous, since their only
ground of complaint would be, that a profit is refused to them by that nation, who
does not chuse they should make it at her expense. It is, however, true, that if a nation

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 73 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

was very certain that the prohibition of her merchandises was not founded on any
reason drawn from the welfare of the state that prohibited them, she would have cause
to consider this conduct as a mark of ill-will shewn in this instance, and to complain
of it on that footing. But it would be very difficult for the excluded nation to judge
with certainty that the state had no solid or apparent reason for making such a
prohibition.

By the manner in which we have shewn a nation’s right to buy of §91. Nature of the
another what it wants, it is easy to see that this right is not one of right of buying.
those called perfect, and that are accompanied with a right to use
constraint. Let us now distinctly explain the nature of a right which may give room for
disputes of a very serious nature. You have a right to buy of others such things as you
want, and of which they themselves have no need; you make application to me: I am
not obliged to sell them to you, if I myself have any occasion for them. In virtue of the
natural liberty which belongs to all men, it is I who am to judge whether I have
occasion for them myself, or can conveniently sell them to you; and you have no right
to determine whether I judge well or ill, because you have no authority over me. If I,
improperly, and without any good reason, refuse to sell you at a fair price what you
want, I offend against my duty: you may complain of this; but you must submit to it;
and you cannot attempt to force me, without violating my natural right, and doing me
an injury. The right of buying the things we want is then only an imperfect right, like
that of a poor man to receive alms of the rich man; if the latter refuses to bestow it, the
poor man may justly complain; but he has no right to take it by force.

If it be asked, what a nation has a right to do in case of extreme necessity,—this
question will be answered in its proper place in the following book, Chap. IX.

Since then a nation cannot have a natural right to sell her §92. Every nation is
merchandises to another that is unwilling to purchase to chuse how far it
them,—since she has only an imperfect right to buy what she will engage in
wants of others,—since it belongs only to these last to judge commerce.
whether it be proper for them to sell or not— and, finally, since
commerce consists in mutually buying and selling all sorts of commodities,—it is
evident that it depends on the will of any nation to carry on commerce with another,
or to let it alone. If she be willing to allow this to one, it depends on the nation to
permit it under such conditions as she shall think proper. For in permitting another
nation to trade with her, she grants that other a right; and every one is at liberty to
affix what conditions he pleases to a right which he grants of his own accord.

Men and sovereign states may, by their promises, enter into a §93. How a nation
perfect obligation with respect to each other, in things where acquires a perfect
nature has imposed only an imperfect obligation. A nation, not right to a foreign
having naturally a perfect right to carry on a commerce with trade.
another, may procure it by an agreement or treaty. This right is
then acquired only by treaties, and relates to that branch of the law of nations termed
conventional (Prelim. §24). The treaty that gives the right of commerce, is the
measure and rule of that right.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 74 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

A simple permission to carry on commerce with a nation gives §94. Of the simple
no perfect right to that commerce. For if I merely and simply permission of
permit you to do any thing, I do not give you any right to do it commerce.
afterwards in spite of me:—you may make use of my
condescension as long as it lasts; but nothing prevents me from changing my will. As
then every nation has a right to chuse whether she will or will not trade with another,
and on what conditions she is willing to do it (§92),—if one nation has for a time
permitted another to come and trade in the country, she is at liberty, whenever she
thinks proper, to prohibit that commerce,—to restrain it,—to subject it to certain
regulations; and the people who before carried it on cannot complain of injustice.

Let us only observe, that nations, as well as individuals, are obliged to trade together
for the common benefit of the human race, because mankind stand in need of each
other’s assistance (Prelim. §§10, 11, and Book I. §88): still however, each nation
remains at liberty to consider, in particular cases, whether it be convenient for her to
encourage, or permit commerce; and as our duty to ourselves is paramount to our duty
to others,—if one nation finds herself in such circumstances, that she thinks foreign
commerce dangerous to the state, she may renounce and prohibit it. This the Chinese
have done for a long time together. But, again, it is only for very serious and
important reasons that her duty to herself should dictate such a reserve; otherwise, she
could not refuse to comply with the general duties of humanity.

We have seen what are the rights that nations derive from nature §95. Whether the laws
with regard to commerce, and how they may acquire others by relating to commerce
treaties:—let us now examine whether they can found any on are subject to
long custom. To determine this question in a solid manner, it is prescription.
necessary first to observe, that there are rights which consist in a
simple power: they are called in Latin, jura merae facultatis, rights of mere ability.
They are such in their own nature, that he who possesses them may use them or not,
as he thinks proper,—being absolutely free from all restraint in this respect; so that
the actions that relate to the exercise of these rights, are acts of mere free will, that
may be done or not done according to pleasure. It is manifest that rights of this kind
cannot be lost by prescription on account of their not being used, since prescription is
only founded on consent legitimately presumed; and that, if I possess a right which is
of such a nature that I may or may not use it as I think proper, without any person
having a right to prescribe to me on the subject, it cannot be presumed, from my
having long forborne to use it, that I therefore intend to abandon it. This right is then
imprescriptible, unless I have been forbidden or hindered from making use of it, and
have obeyed with sufficient marks of consent. Let us suppose, for instance, that I am
entirely at liberty to grind my corn at any mill I please, and that during a very
considerable time, a century if you please, I have made use of the same mill:—as I
have done in this respect what I thought proper, it is not to be presumed, from this
long-continued use of the same mill, that I meant to deprive myself of the right of
grinding at any other; and consequently, my right cannot be lost by prescription. But
now suppose, that, on my resolving to make use of another mill, the owner of the
former opposes it, and announces to me a prohibition;—if I obey his prohibition
without necessity, and without opposition, though I have it in my power to defend
myself, and know my right, this right is lost, because my conduct affords grounds for

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 75 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

a legitimate presumption that I chose to abandon it.—Let us apply these
principles.—Since it depends on the will of each nation to carry on commerce with
another, or not to carry it on, and to regulate the manner in which it chuses to carry it
on (§92), the right of commerce is evidently a right of mere ability (jus merae
facultatis), a simple power,—and consequently is imprescriptible. Thus, although two
nations have traded together, without interruption, during a century, this long usage
does not give any right to either of them; nor is the one obliged on this account to
suffer the other to come and sell its merchandises, or to buy others:—they both
preserve the double right of prohibiting the entrance of foreign merchandise, and of
selling their own wherever people are willing to buy them. Although the English have
from time immemorial been accustomed to get wine from Portugal, they are not on
that account obliged to continue the trade, and have not lost the liberty of purchasing
their wines elsewhere. Although they have, in the same manner, been long
accustomed to sell their cloth in that kingdom, they have, nevertheless, a right to
transfer that trade to any other country: and the Portuguese, on their part, are not
obliged by this long custom, either to sell their wines to the English, or to purchase
their cloths. If a nation desires any right of commerce which shall no longer depend
on the will of another, she must acquire it by treaty.30

What has been just said may be applied to the rights of §96. Imprescriptibility
commerce acquired by treaties. If a nation has by this method of rights founded on
procured the liberty of selling certain merchandises to another, treaty.
she does not lose her right, though a great number of years are
suffered to elapse without its being used; because this right is a simple power, jus
merae facultatis, which she is at liberty to use or not, whenever she pleases.

Certain circumstances, however, may render a different decision necessary, because
they imply a change in the nature of the right in question. For instance, if it appears
evident, that the nation granting this right granted it only with the view of procuring a
species of merchandise of which she stands in need,—and if the nation which
obtained the right of selling, neglects to furnish those merchandises, and another
offers to bring them regularly, on condition of having an exclusive privilege,—it
appears certain that the privilege may be granted to the latter. Thus the nation that had
the right of selling, would lose it, because she had not fulfilled the tacit condition.

Commerce is a common benefit to a nation; and all her members §97. Of monopolies,
have an equal right to it. Monopoly therefore, in general, is and trading
contrary to the rights of the citizens. However, this rule has its companies, with
exceptions, suggested even by the interest of the nation; and a exclusive privileges.
wise government may, in certain cases, justly establish
monopolies. There are commercial enterprises that cannot be carried on without an
energy that requires considerable funds, which surpass the ability of individuals.
There are others that would soon become ruinous, were they not conducted with great
prudence, with one regular spirit, and according to well-supported maxims and rules.
These branches of trade cannot be indiscriminately carried on by individuals:
companies are therefore formed, under the authority of government; and these
companies cannot subsist without an exclusive privilege. It is therefore advantageous
to the nation to grant them: hence have arisen, in different countries, those powerful

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 76 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

companies that carry on commerce with the East. When the subjects of the United
Provinces established themselves in the Indies on the ruin of their enemies the
Portuguese, individual merchants would not have dared to think of such an arduous
enterprise; and the state itself, wholly taken up with the defence of its liberty against
the Spaniards, had not the means of attempting it.

It is also certain beyond all doubt, that, whenever any individual offers, on condition
of obtaining an exclusive privilege, to establish a particular branch of commerce or
manufacture which the nation has not the means of carrying on, the sovereign may
grant him such privilege.

But whenever any branch of commerce may be left open to the whole nation, without
producing any inconvenience or being less advantageous to the state, a restriction of
that commerce to a few privileged individuals is a violation of the rights of all the
other citizens. And even when such a commerce requires considerable expenses to
maintain forts, men of war, &c. this being a national affair, the state may defray those
expenses, and, as an encouragement to industry, leave the profits of the trade to the
merchants. This is sometimes done in England.

The conductor of a nation ought to take particular care to §98. Balance of trade,
encourage the commerce that is advantageous to his people, and and attention of
to suppress or lay restraints upon that which is to their government in this
disadvantage. Gold and silver having become the common respect.
standard of the value of all the articles of commerce, the trade
that brings into the state a greater quantity of these metals than it carries out, is an
advantageous trade; and, on the contrary, that is a ruinous one, which causes more
gold and silver to be sent abroad, than it brings home. This is what is called the
balance of trade. The ability of those who have the direction of it, consists in making
that balance turn in favour of the nation.

Of all the measures that a wise government may take with this §99. Import duties.
view, we shall only touch here on import duties. When the
conductors of a state, without absolutely forcing trade, are nevertheless desirous of
diverting it into other channels, they lay such duties on the merchandises they would
discourage, as will prevent their consumption. Thus French wines are charged with
very high duties in England, while the duties on those of Portugal are very
moderate,—because England sells few of her productions to France, while she sells
large quantities to Portugal. There is nothing in this conduct that is not very wise and
extremely just; and France has no reason to complain of it,—every nation having an
undoubted right to make what conditions she thinks proper, with respect to receiving
foreign merchandises, and being even at liberty to refuse taking them at all.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 77 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER IX

Of The Care Of The Public Ways Of Communication, And
The Right Of Toll.
The utility of high-ways, bridges, canals, and, in a word, of all §100. Utility of high-
safe and commodious ways of communication, cannot be ways, canals, &c.
doubted. They facilitate the trade between one place and another,
and render the conveyance of merchandise less expensive, as well as more certain and
easy. The merchants are enabled to sell at a better price, and to obtain the preference;
an attraction is held out to foreigners, whose merchandises are carried through the
country, and diffuse wealth in all the places through which they pass. France and
Holland feel the happy consequences of this from daily experience.

One of the principal things that ought to employ the attention of §101. Duty of
the government with respect to the welfare of the public in government in this
general, and of trade in particular, must then relate to the high- respect.
ways, canals, &c. in which nothing ought to be neglected to
render them safe and commodious. France is one of those states where this duty to the
public is discharged with the greatest attention and magnificence. Numerous patroles
every where watch over the safety of travellers: magnificent roads, bridges, and
canals, facilitate the communication between one province and another:—Lewis XIV.
joined the two seas by a work worthy of the Romans.

The whole nation ought, doubtless, to contribute to such useful §102. Its rights in this
undertakings. When therefore the laying out and repairing of respect.
high-ways, bridges, and canals, would be too great a burthen on
the ordinary revenues of the state, the government may oblige the people to labour at
them, or to contribute to the expense. The peasants, in some of the provinces of
France, have been heard to murmur at the labours imposed upon them for the
construction of roads: but experience had no sooner made them sensible of their true
interest, than they blessed the authors of the undertaking.

The construction and preservation of all these works being §103. Foundation of
attended with great expense, the nation may very justly oblige all the right of toll.
those to contribute to them, who receive advantage from their
use: this is the legitimate origin of the right of toll. It is just, that a traveller, and
especially a merchant, who receives advantage from a bridge, a canal, or a road, in his
own passage, and in the more commodious conveyance of his merchandise, should
help to defray the expense of these useful establishments, by a moderate contribution:
and if the state thinks proper to exempt the citizens from paying it, she is under no
obligation to gratify strangers in this particular.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 78 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

But a law so just in its origin frequently degenerates into great §104. Abuse of this
abuses. There are countries where no care is taken of the high- right.
ways, and where nevertheless considerable tolls are exacted. A
lord of a manor, who happens to possess a stripe of land terminating on a river, there
establishes a toll, though he is not at a farthing’s expense in keeping up the navigation
of the river, and rendering it convenient. This is a manifest extortion, and an
infringment of the natural rights of mankind. For the division of lands, and their
becoming private property, could never deprive any man of the right of passage, when
not the least injury is done to the person through whose territory he passes. Every man
inherits this right from nature, and cannot justly be forced to purchase it.

But the arbitrary or customary law of nations at present tolerates this abuse, while it
is not carried to such an excess as to destroy commerce. People do not, however,
submit without difficulty, except in the case of those tolls which are established by
ancient usage: and the imposition of new ones is often a source of disputes. The Swiss
formerly made war on the dukes of Milan, on account of some oppressions of this
nature. This right of tolls is also further abused, when the passenger is obliged to
contribute too much, and what bears no proportion to the expense of preserving these
public passages.

At present, to avoid all difficulty and oppression, nations settle these points by
treaties.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 79 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER X

Of Money And Exchange.
In the first ages after the introduction of private property, people §105. Establishment
exchanged their superfluous commodities and effects for those of money.
they wanted. Afterwards gold and silver became the common
standard of the value of all things: and to prevent the people from being cheated, the
mode was introduced of stamping pieces of gold and silver in the name of the state,
with the figure of the prince, or some other impression, as the seal and pledge of their
value. This institution is of great use and infinite convenience: it is easy to see how
much it facilitates commerce.—Nations or sovereigns cannot therefore bestow too
much attention on an affair of such importance.

The impression on the coin becoming the seal of its standard and §106. Duty of the
weight, a moment’s reflection will convince us that the coinage nation or prince with
of money ought not to be left indiscriminately free to every respect to the coin.
individual: for by that means, frauds would become too
common;—the coin would soon lose the public confidence; and this would destroy a
most useful institution. Hence money is coined by the authority and in the name of the
state or prince, who are its surety: they ought therefore to have a quantity of it coined
sufficient to answer the necessities of the country, and to take care that it be good, that
is to say, that its intrinsic value bear a just proportion to its extrinsic or numerary
value.

It is true, that, in a pressing necessity, the state would have a right to order the citizens
to receive the coin at a price superior to its real value: but as foreigners will not
receive it at that price, the nation gains nothing by this proceeding: it is only a
temporary palliative for the evil, without effecting a radical cure. This excess of value,
added in an arbitrary manner to the coin, is a real debt which the sovereign contracts
with individuals: and in strict justice, this crisis of affairs being over, that money
ought to be called in at the expense of the state, and paid for in other specie, according
to the natural standard; otherwise this kind of burthen, laid on in the hour of necessity,
would fall solely on those who received this arbitrary money in payment: which
would be unjust. Besides, experience has shewn that such a resource is destructive to
trade, by destroying the confidence both of foreigners and citizens,—raising in
proportion the price of every thing,—and inducing every one to lock up or send
abroad the good old specie; whereby a temporary stop is put to the circulation of
money. So that it is the duty of every nation and of every sovereign to abstain, as
much as possible, from so dangerous an experiment, and rather to have recourse to
extraordinary taxes and contributions to support the pressing exigencies of the state.*

Since the state is surety for the goodness of the money and its §107. Their rights in
currency, the public authority alone has the right of coining it. this respect.
Those who counterfeit it, violate the rights of the sovereign,

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 80 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

whether they make it of the same standard and value or not. These are called false-
coiners, and their crime is justly considered as one of the most heinous nature. For if
they coin base money, they rob both the public and the prince; and if they coin good,
they usurp the prerogative of the sovereign. They will never be inclined to coin good
money, unless there be a profit on the coinage: and in this case they rob the state of a
profit which exclusively belongs to it. In both cases, they do an injury to the
sovereign; for the public faith being surety for the money, the sovereign alone has a
right to have it coined. For this reason the right of coining is placed among the
prerogatives of majesty, and Bodinus relates,* that Sigismund Augustus, king of
Poland,31 having granted this privilege to the duke of Prussia, in the year 1543, the
states of the country passed a decree in which it was asserted that the king could not
grant that privilege, it being inseparable from the crown. The same author observes,
that, although many lords and bishops of France had formerly the privilege of coining
money, it was still considered as coined by the king’s authority: and the kings of
France at last withdrew all those privileges, on account of their being often abused.

From the principles just laid down, it is easy to conclude, that if §108. How one nation
one nation counterfeits the money of another, or if she allows may injure another in
and protects false-coiners who presume to do it, she does that the article of coin.
nation an injury. But commonly criminals of this class find no
protection any-where,—all princes being equally interested in exterminating them.

There is another custom more modern, and of no less use to §109. Of exchange,
commerce than the establishment of coin,—namely exchange, or and the laws of
the traffic of bankers, by means of which a merchant remits commerce.
immense sums from one end of the world to the other, at a very
trifling expense, and, if he pleases, without risk. For the same reason that sovereigns
are obliged to protect commerce, they are obliged to support this custom, by good
laws, in which every merchant, whether citizen or foreigner, may find security. In
general, it is equally the interest and the duty of every nation to have wise and
equitable commercial laws established in the country.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 81 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER XI

Second Object Of A Good Government,—To Procure The
True Happiness Of The Nation.
Let us continue to lay open the principal objects of a good §110. A nation ought
government. What we have said in the five preceding chapters to labour after its own
relates to the care of providing for the necessities of the people, happiness.
and procuring plenty in the state: this is a point of necessity; but
it is not sufficient for the happiness of a nation. Experience shews that a people may
be unhappy in the midst of all earthly enjoyments, and in the possession of the
greatest riches. Whatever may enable mankind to enjoy a true and solid felicity, is a
second object that deserves the most serious attention of the government. Happiness is
the point where centre all those duties which individuals and nations owe to
themselves; and this is the great end of the law of nature. The desire of happiness is
the powerful spring that puts man in motion: felicity is the end they all have in view,
and it ought to be the grand object of the public will (Prelim. §5). It is then the duty of
those who form this public will, or of those who represent it—the rulers of the
nation—to labour for the happiness of the people, to watch continually over it, and to
promote it to the utmost of their power.

To succeed in this, it is necessary to instruct the people to seek §111. Instruction.
felicity where it is to be found,—that is, in their own
perfection,—and to teach them the means of obtaining it. The sovereign cannot then
take too much pains in instructing and enlightening his people, and in forming them to
useful knowledge and wise discipline. Let us leave a hatred of the sciences to the
despotic tyrants of the east: they are afraid of having their people instructed, because
they chuse to rule over slaves. But though they are obeyed with the most abject
submission, they frequently experience the effects of disobedience and revolt. A just
and wise prince feels no apprehensions from the light of knowledge: he knows that it
is ever advantageous to a good government. If men of learning know that liberty is the
natural inheritance of mankind, on the other hand they are more fully sensible than
their neighbours, how necessary it is, for their own advantage, that this liberty should
be subject to a lawful authority:—incapable of being slaves, they are faithful subjects.

The first impressions made on the mind are of the utmost §112. Education of
importance for the remainder of life. In the tender years of youth.
infancy and youth, the human mind and heart easily receive the
seeds of good or evil. Hence the education of youth is one of the most important
affairs that deserve the attention of the government. It ought not to be entirely left to
fathers. The most certain way of forming good citizens is to found good
establishments for public education, to provide them with able masters,—direct them
with prudence,—and pursue such mild and suitable measures, that the citizens will not
neglect to take advantage of them. How admirable was the education of the Romans,
in the flourishing ages of their republic, and how admirably was it calculated to form

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 82 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

great men! The young men put themselves under the patronage of some illustrious
person; they frequented his house, accompanied him wherever he went, and equally
improved by his instructions and example: their very sports and amusements were
exercises proper to form soldiers. The same practice prevailed at Sparta; and this was
one of the wisest institutions of the incomparable Lycurgus. That legislator and
philosopher entered into the most minute details respecting the education of youth,*
being persuaded that on that depended the prosperity and glory of his republic.

Who can doubt that the sovereign,—the whole nation,—ought to §113. Arts and
encourage the arts and sciences? To say nothing of the many sciences.
useful inventions that strike the eye of every
beholder,—literature and the polite arts enlighten the mind, and soften the manners:
and if study does not always inspire the love of virtue, it is because it sometimes, and
even too often, unhappily meets with an incorrigibly vicious heart. The nation and its
conductors ought then to protect men of learning and great artists, and to call forth
talents by honours and rewards. Let the friends of barbarism declaim against the
sciences and polite arts;—let us, without deigning to answer their vain reasonings,
content ourselves with appealing to experience. Let us compare England, France,
Holland, and several towns of Switzerland and Germany, to the many regions that lie
buried in ignorance, and see where we can find the greater number of honest men and
good citizens. It would be a gross error to oppose against us the example of Sparta,
and that of ancient Rome. They, it is true, neglected curious speculations, and those
branches of knowledge and art that were purely subservient to pleasure and
amusement: but the solid and practical sciences,—morality, jurisprudence, politics,
and war, were cultivated by them, especially by the Romans, with a degree of
attention superior to what we bestow on them.

In the present age, the utility of literature and the polite arts is pretty generally
acknowledged, as is likewise the necessity of encouraging them. The immortal Peter
I. thought that without their assistance he could not entirely civilise Russia, and render
it flourishing. In England, learning and abilities lead to honour and riches. Newton
was honoured, protected, and rewarded while living, and after his death his tomb was
placed among those of kings. France also, in this respect, deserves particular praise: to
the munificence of her kings she is indebted for several establishments that are no less
useful than glorious. The Royal Academy of Sciences diffuses on every side the light
of knowledge, and the desire of instruction. Louis XV. furnished the means of sending
to search, under the equator and the polar circle, for the proof of an important truth;
and we at present know what was before only believed on the strength of Newton’s
calculations. Happy will that kingdom be, if the too general taste of the age does not
make the people neglect solid knowledge, to give themselves up to that which is
merely amusing, and if those who fear the light do not succeed in extinguishing the
blaze of science!

I speak of the freedom of philosophical discussion, which is the §114. Freedom of
soul of the republic of letters. What can genius produce when philosophical
trammelled by fear? Can the greatest man that ever lived discussion.
contribute much towards enlightening the minds of his fellow-
citizens, if he finds himself constantly exposed to the cavils of captious and ignorant

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 83 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

bigots,—if he is obliged to be continually on his guard, to avoid being accused by
innuendo-mongers of indirectly attacking the received opinions? I know that liberty
has its proper bounds,—that a wise government ought to have an eye to the press, and
not to allow the publication of scandalous productions, which attack morality,
government, or the established religion. But yet great care should be taken not to
extinguish a light that may afford the state the most valuable advantages. Few men
know how to keep a just medium; and the office of literary censor ought to be
intrusted to none but those who are at once both prudent and enlightened. Why should
they search in a book for what the author does not appear to have intended to put into
it? and when a writer’s thoughts and discourses are wholly employed on philosophy,
ought a malicious adversary to be listened to, who would set him at variance with
religion? So far from disturbing a philosopher on account of his opinions, the
magistrate ought to chastise those who publicly charge him with impiety, when in his
writings he shews respect to the religion of the state. The Romans seem to have been
formed to give examples to the universe: that wise people carefully supported the
worship and religious ceremonies established by law, and left the field open to the
speculations of philosophers. Cicero—a senator, a consul, an augur—ridicules
superstition, attacks it, and demolishes it in his philosophical writings; and, in so
doing, he thought he was only promoting his own happiness and that of his fellow-
citizens: but he observes that “to destroy superstition is not destroying religion; for
(says he) it becomes a wise man to respect the institutions and religious ceremonies of
his ancestors: and it is sufficient to contemplate the beauty of the world, and the
admirable order of the celestial bodies, in order to be convinced of the existence of an
eternal and all-perfect being, who is entitled to the veneration of the human race.”*
And in his Dialogues on the Nature of the Gods, he introduces Cotta the academic,
who was high-priest, attacking with great freedom the opinions of the stoics, and
declaring that he should always be ready to defend the established religion from
which he saw the republic had derived great advantages; that neither the learned nor
the ignorant should make him abandon it: he then says to his adversary, “These are
my thoughts, both as pontiff and as Cotta. But do you, as a philosopher, bring me over
to your opinion by the strength of your arguments: for a philosopher ought to prove to
me the truth of the religion he would have me embrace, whereas I ought in this
respect to believe our forefathers, even without proof.”*

Let us add experience to these examples and authorities. Never did a philosopher
occasion disturbances in the state, or in religion, by his opinions: they would make no
noise among the people, nor ever offend the weak, if malice or intemperate zeal did
not take pains to discover a pretended venom lurking in them. It is by him who
endeavours to place the opinions of a great man in opposition to the doctrines and
worship established by law, that the state is disturbed, and religion brought into
danger.

To instruct the nation, is not sufficient:—in order to conduct it to §115. Love of virtue,
happiness, it is still more necessary to inspire the people with the and abhorrence of
love of virtue, and the abhorrence of vice. Those who are deeply vice to be excited.
versed in the study of morality are convinced that virtue is the
true and only path that leads to happiness; so that its maxims are but the art of living
happily; and he must be very ignorant of politics, who does not perceive how much

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 84 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

more capable a virtuous nation will be, than any other, of forming a state that shall be
at once happy, tranquil, flourishing, solid, respected by its neighbours, and formidable
to its enemies. The interest of the prince must then concur with his duty and the
dictates of his conscience, in engaging him to watch attentively over an affair of such
importance. Let him employ all his authority in order to encourage virtue, and
suppress vice: let the public establishments be all directed to this end: let his own
conduct, his example, and the distribution of favours, posts, and dignities, all have the
same tendency. Let him extend his attention even to the private life of the citizens,
and banish from the state whatever is only calculated to corrupt the manners of the
people. It belongs to politics to teach him in detail the different means of attaining this
desirable end,—to shew him those he should prefer, and those he ought to avoid, on
account of the dangers that might attend the execution, and the abuses that might be
made of them. We shall here only observe, in general, that vice may be suppressed by
chastisements, but that mild and gentle methods alone can elevate men to the dignity
of virtue: it may be inspired, but it cannot be commanded.

It is an incontestable truth, that the virtues of the citizens §116. The nation may
constitute the most happy dispositions that can be desired by a hence discover the
just and wise government. Here then is an infallible criterion, by intention of its rulers.
which the nation may judge of the intentions of those who
govern it. If they endeavour to render the great and the common people virtuous, their
views are pure and upright; and you may rest assured that they solely aim at the great
end of government, the happiness and glory of the nation. But if they corrupt the
morals of the people, spread a taste for luxury, effeminacy, a rage for licentious
pleasures,—if they stimulate the higher orders to a ruinous pomp and
extravagance,—beware, citizens! beware of those corruptors! they only aim at
purchasing slaves in order to exercise over them an arbitrary sway.

If a prince has the smallest share of moderation, he will never have recourse to these
odious methods. Satisfied with his superior station and the power given him by the
laws, he proposes to reign with glory and safety; he loves his people, and desires to
render them happy. But his ministers are in general impatient of resistance, and
cannot brook the slightest oppo-sition:—if he surrenders to them his authority, they
are more haughty and intractable than their master: they feel not for his people the
same love that he feels: “let the nation be corrupted (say they) provided it do but
obey.” They dread the courage and firmness inspired by virtue, and know that the
distributor of favours rules as he pleases over men whose hearts are accessible to
avarice. Thus a wretch who exercises the most infamous of all professions, perverts
the inclinations of a young victim of her odious traffic; she prompts her to luxury and
epicurism, she inspires her with voluptuousness and vanity, in order the more
certainly to betray her to a rich seducer. This base and unworthy creature is
sometimes chastised by the magistrate; but the minister, who is infinitely more guilty,
wallows in wealth, and is invested with honour and authority. Posterity, however, will
do him justice, and detest the corruptor of a respectable nation.

If governors endeavoured to fulfill the obligations which the law §117. The state, or the
of nature lays upon them with respect to themselves, and in their public person, ought
character of conductors of the state, they would be incapable of to perfect its

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 85 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

ever giving into the odious abuse just mentioned. Hitherto we understanding and
have considered the obligation a nation is under to acquire will.
knowledge and virtue, or to perfect its understanding and
will;—that obligation, I say, we have considered in relation to the individuals that
compose a nation: it also belongs in a proper and singular manner to the conductors of
the state. A nation, while she acts in common, or in a body, is a moral person (Prelim.
§2) that has an understanding and will of her own, and is not less obliged than any
individual to obey the laws of nature (Book I. §5), and to improve her faculties (Book
I. §21). That moral person resides in those who are invested with the public authority,
and represent the entire nation. Whether this be the common council of the nation, an
aristocratic body, or a monarch, this conductor and representative of the nation, this
sovereign, of whatever kind, is therefore indispensably obliged to procure all the
knowledge and information necessary to govern well, and to acquire the practice and
habit of all the virtues suitable to a sovereign.

And as this obligation is imposed with a view to the public welfare, he ought to direct
all his knowledge, and all his virtues, to the safety of the state, the end of civil society.

He ought even to direct, as much as possible, all the abilities, the §118. And to direct
knowledge, and the virtues of the citizens to this great end; so the knowledge and
that they may not only be useful to the individuals who possess virtues of the citizens
them, but also to the state. This is one of the great secrets in the to the welfare of the
art of reigning. The state will be powerful and happy, if the good society.

qualities of the subject, passing beyond the narrow sphere of
private virtues, become civic virtues. This happy disposition raised the Roman
republic to the highest pitch of power and glory.

The grand secret of giving to the virtues of individuals a turn so §119. Love for their
advantageous to the state, is to inspire the citizens with an ardent country.
love for their country. It will then naturally follow, that each will
endeavour to serve the state, and to apply all his powers and abilities to the advantage
and glory of the nation. This love of their country is natural to all men. The good and
wise author of nature has taken care to bind them, by a kind of instinct, to the places
where they received their first breath, and they love their own nation, as a thing with
which they are intimately connected. But it often happens that some causes unhappily
weaken or destroy this natural impression. The injustice or the severity of the
government too easily effaces it from the hearts of the subjects: can self-love attach an
individual to the affairs of a country where every thing is done with a view to a single
person?—far from it:—we see, on the contrary, that free nations are passionately
interested in the glory and the happiness of their country. Let us call to mind the
citizens of Rome in the happy days of the republic, and consider, in modern times, the
English and the Swiss.

The love and affection a man feels for the state of which he is a §120. In individuals.
member, is a necessary consequence of the wise and rational
love he owes to himself, since his own happiness is connected with that of his
country. This sensation ought also to flow from the engagements he has entered into
with society. He has promised to procure its safety and advantage as far as in his

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 86 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

power: and how can he serve it with zeal, fidelity, or courage, if he has not a real love
for it?

The nation in a body ought doubtless to love itself, and desire its §121. In the nation or
own happiness as a nation. The sensation is too natural to admit state itself, and in the
of any failure in this obligation: but this duty relates more sovereign.
particularly to the conductor, the sovereign, who represents the
nation, and acts in its name. He ought to love it as what is most dear to him, to prefer
it to every thing, for it is the only lawful object of his care, and of his actions, in every
thing he does by virtue of the public authority. The monster who does not love his
people is no better than an odious usurper, and deserves, no doubt, to be hurled from
the throne. There is no kingdom where the statue of Codrus32 ought not to be placed
before the palace of the sovereign. That magnanimous king of Athens sacrificed his
life for his people.* That great prince, and Louis XII.33 are illustrious models of the
tender love a sovereign owes to his subjects.

The term, country, seems to be pretty generally known: but as it §122. Definition of
is taken in different senses, it may not be unuseful to give it here the term country.
an exact definition. It commonly signifies the state of which one
is a member: in this sense we have used it in the preceding sections; and it to be thus
understood in the law of nations.

In a more confined sense, and more agreeably to its etymology, this term signifies the
state, or even more particularly the town or place, where our parents had their fixed
residence at the moment of our birth. In this sense, it is justly said, that our country
cannot be changed, and always remains the same, to whatsoever place we may
afterwards remove. A man ought to preserve gratitude and affection for the state to
which he is indebted for his education, and of which his parents were members when
they gave him birth. But as various lawful reasons may oblige him to chuse another
country,—that is, to become a member of another society; so, when we speak in
general of the duty to our country, the term is to be understood as meaning the state of
which a man is an actual member; since it is the latter, in preference to every other
state, that he is bound to serve with his utmost efforts.

If every man is obliged to entertain a sincere love for his country, §123. How shameful
and to promote its welfare as far as in his power, it is a shameful and criminal to injure
and detestable crime to injure that very country. He who our country.
becomes guilty of it, violates his most sacred engagements, and
sinks into base ingratitude: he dishonours himself by the blackest perfidy, since he
abuses the confidence of his fellow-citizens, and treats as enemies those who had a
right to expect his assistance and services. We see traitors to their country only among
those men who are solely sensible to base interest, who only seek their own
immediate advantage, and whose hearts are incapable of every sentiment of affection
for others. They are therefore justly detested by mankind in general, as the most
infamous of all villains.

On the contrary, those generous citizens are loaded with honour §124. The glory of
and praise, who, not content with barely avoiding a failure in good citizens.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 87 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

duty to their country, make noble efforts in her favour, and are capable of making her
the greatest sacrifices.
The names of Brutus,34 Curtius,35 and the two Decii,36 will live Examples.
as long as that of Rome. The Swiss will never forget Arnold de
Winkelried,37 that hero, whose exploit would have deserved to be transmitted to
posterity by the pen of a Livy. He truly devoted his life for his country’s sake: but he
devoted it as a general, as an undaunted warrior, not as a superstitious visionary. That
nobleman, who was of the country of Underwald, seeing at the battle of Sempach38
that his countrymen could not break through the Austrians, because the latter, armed
cap-a-pie, had dismounted, and, forming a close battalion, presented a front covered
with steel, and bristling with pikes and lances,—formed the generous design of
sacrificing himself for his country. “My friends,” said he to the Swiss, who began to
be dispirited, “I will this day give my life to procure you the victory: I only
recommend to you my family: follow me, and act in consequence of what you see me
do.” At these words he ranged them in that form which the Romans called cuneus,
and placing himself in the point of the triangle, marched to the centre of the enemy;
when, embracing between his arms as many of the enemy’s pikes as he could
compass, he threw himself to the ground, thus opening for his followers a passage to
penetrate into the midst of this thick battalion. The Austrians, once broken, were
conquered, as the weight of their armour then became fatal to them, and the Swiss
obtained a complete victory.*

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 88 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER XII

Of Piety And Religion.
Piety and religion have an essential influence on the happiness of §125. Of piety.
a nation, and, from their importance, deserve a particular chapter.
Nothing is so proper as piety to strengthen virtue, and give it its due extent. By the
word piety, I mean a disposition of soul that leads us to direct all our actions towards
the Deity, and to endeavour to please him in every thing we do. To the practice of this
virtue all mankind are indispensably obliged: it is the purest source of their felicity;
and those who unite in civil society, are under still greater obligations to practise it. A
nation ought then to be pious. The superiors intrusted with the public affairs should
constantly endeavour to deserve the approbation of their divine master; and whatever
they do in the name of the state, ought to be regulated by this grand view. The care of
forming pious dispositions in all the people should be constantly one of the principal
objects of their vigilance, and from this the state will derive very great advantages. A
serious attention to merit in all our actions the approbation of an infinitely wise Being,
cannot fail of producing excellent citizens. Enlightened piety in the people is the
firmest support of a lawful authority; and, in the sovereign’s heart, it is the pledge of
the people’s safety, and excites their confidence. Ye lords of the earth, who
acknowledge no superior here below, what security can we have for the purity of your
intentions, if we do not conceive you to be deeply impressed with respect for the
common Father and Lord of men, and animated with a desire to please him?

We have already insinuated that piety ought to be attended with §126. It ought to be
knowledge. In vain would we propose to please God, if we know attended with
not the means of doing it. But what a deluge of evils arises when knowledge.
men heated by so powerful a motive are prompted to take
methods that are equally false and pernicious! A blind piety only produces
superstitious bigots, fanatics and persecutors, a thousand times more dangerous and
destructive to society than libertines are. There have appeared barbarous tyrants who
have talked of nothing but the glory of God, while they crushed the people, and
trampled under foot the most sacred laws of nature. It was from a refinement of piety,
that the anabaptists of the sixteenth century refused all obedience to the powers of the
earth. James Clement and Ravaillac,* those execrable parricides, thought themselves
animated by the most sublime devotion.

Religion consists in the doctrines concerning the Deity and the §127. Of religion
things of another life, and in the worship appointed to the honour internal and external.
of the supreme Being. So far as it is seated in the heart, it is an
affair of conscience, in which every one ought to be directed by his own
understanding: but so far as it is external, and publicly established, it is an affair of
state.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 89 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Every man is obliged to endeavour to obtain just ideas of God, to §128. Rights of
know his laws, his views with respect to his creatures, and the individuals.
end for which they were created. Man, doubtless, owes the most
pure love, the most profound respect to his Creator; and to keep alive these
dispositions, and act in consequence of them, he should honour God in all his actions,
and shew, by the most suitable means, the sentiments that fill his mind.
This short explanation is sufficient to prove that man is Liberty of conscience.
essentially and necessarily free to make use of his own choice in
matters of religion. His belief is not to be commanded; and what kind of worship must
that be, which is produced by force! Worship consists in certain actions performed
with an immediate view to the honour of God; there can then be no worship proper for
any man, which he does not believe suitable to that end. The obligation of sincerely
endeavouring to know God, of serving him, and adoring him from the bottom of the
heart, being imposed on man by his very nature,—it is impossible that, by his
engagements with society, he should have exonerated himself from that duty, or
deprived himself of the liberty which is absolutely necessary for the performance of it.
It must then be concluded, that liberty of conscience is a natural and inviolable right.
It is a disgrace to human nature, that a truth of this kind should stand in need of proof.

But we should take care not to extend this liberty beyond its just §129. Public
bounds. In religious affairs a citizen has only a right to be free establishment of
from compulsion, but can by no means claim that of openly religion.
doing what he pleases, without regard to the consequences it may
produce on society. The establishment of re-ligion by law, and its public exercise, are
matters of state, and are necessarily under the jurisdiction of the Duties and rights of
political authority. If all men are bound to serve God, the entire the nation.
nation, in her national capacity, is doubtless obliged to serve and
honour him (Prelim. §5). And as this important duty is to be discharged by the nation
in whatever manner she judges best,—to the nation it belongs to determine what
religion she will follow, and what public worship she thinks proper to establish.

If there be as yet no religion established by public authority, the §130. When there is
nation ought to use the utmost care, in order to know and as yet no established
establish the best. That which shall have the approbation of the religion.
majority shall be received, and publicly established by law; by
which means it will become the religion of the state. But if a considerable part of the
nation is obstinately bent upon following another, it is asked—What does the law of
nations require in such a case? Let us first remember that liberty of conscience is a
natural right, and that there must be no constraint in this respect. There remain then
but two methods to take,—either to permit this party of the citizens to exercise the
religion they chuse to profess,— or to separate them from the society,—leaving them
their property, and their share of the country that belonged to the nation in
common,— and thus to form two new states instead of one. The latter method appears
by no means proper:—it would weaken the nation, and thus would be inconsistent
with that regard which she owes to her own preservation. It is therefore of more
advantage to adopt the former method, and thus to establish two religions in the state.
But if these religions are too incompatible,—if there be reason to fear that they will
produce divisions among the citizens, and disorder in public affairs,—there is a third

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 90 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

method, a wise medium between the two former, of which the Swiss have furnished
examples. The cantons of Glaris and Appenzel were, in the sixteenth century, each
divided into two parts: the one preserved the Romish religion, and the other embraced
the reformation: each part has a distinct government of its own for domestic affairs;
but on foreign affairs they unite, and form but one and the same republic, one and the
same canton.

Finally, if the number of citizens who would profess a different religion from that
established by the nation be inconsiderable,—and if for good and just reasons it be
thought improper to allow the exercise of several religions in the state,—those
citizens have a right to sell their lands, to retire with their families, and take all their
property with them. For their engagements to society, and their submission to the
public authority, can never oblige them to violate their consciences. If the society will
not allow me to do that to which I think myself bound by an indispensable obligation,
it is obliged to allow me permission to depart.

When the choice of a religion is already made, and there is one §131. When there is
established by law, the nation ought to protect and support that an established
religion, and preserve it as an establishment of the greatest religion.
importance,— without, however, blindly rejecting the changes
that may be proposed to render it more pure and useful: for we ought, in all things, to
aim at perfection (§21). But as all innovations, in this case, are full of danger, and can
seldom be produced without disturbances, they ought not to be attempted upon slight
grounds, without necessity, or very important reasons. It solely belongs to the society,
the state, the entire nation, to determine the necessity or propriety of those changes;
and no private individual has a right to attempt them by his own authority, nor
consequently to preach to the people a new doctrine. Let him offer his sentiments to
the conductors of the nation, and submit to the orders he receives from them.

But if a new religion spreads, and becomes fixed in the minds of the people, as it
commonly happens, independently of the public authority, and without any
deliberation in common,—it will be then necessary to adopt the mode of reasoning we
followed in the preceding section on the case of chusing a religion,—to pay attention
to the number of those who follow the new opinions,—to remember that no earthly
power has authority over the consciences of men,—and to unite the maxims of sound
policy with those of justice and equity.

We have thus given a brief compendium of the duties and rights §132. Duties and
of a nation with regard to religion. Let us now come to those of rights of the sovereign
the sovereign. These cannot be exactly the same as those of the with regard to
nation which the sovereign represents. The nature of the subject religion.
opposes it; for in religion nobody can give up his liberty. To give
a clear and distinct view of those rights and duties of the prince, and to establish them
on a solid basis, it is necessary here to refer to the distinction we have made in the two
preceding sections:—if there is question of establishing a religion in a state that has
not yet received one, the sovereign may doubtless favour that which to him appears
the true or the best religion,—may have it announced to the people, and, by mild and
suitable means, endeavour to establish it:—he is even bound to do this, because he is

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 91 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

obliged to attend to every thing that concerns the happiness of the nation. But in this
he has no right to use authority and constraint. Since there was no religion established
in the society when he received his authority, the people gave him no power in this
respect; the support of the laws relating to religion is no part of his office, and does
not belong to the authority with which they intrusted him. Numa was the founder of
the religion of the ancient Romans: but he persuaded the people to receive it. If he had
been able to command in that instance, he would not have had recourse to the
revelations of the nymph Egeria.39 Though the sovereign cannot exert any authority
in order to establish a religion where there is none, he is authorised and even obliged
to employ all his power to hinder the introduction of one which he judges pernicious
to morality and dangerous to the state. For he ought to preserve his people from every
thing that may be injurious to them; and so far is a new doctrine from being an
exception to this rule, that it is one of its most important objects. We shall see, in the
following sections, what are the duties and rights of the prince in regard to the religion
publicly established.

The prince, or the conductor, to whom the nation has intrusted §133. Where there is
the care of the government, and the exercise of the sovereign an established
power, is obliged to watch over the preservation of the received religion.
religion, the worship established by law,—and has a right to
restrain those who attempt to destroy or disturb it. But to acquit himself of this duty in
a manner equally just and wise, he ought never to lose sight of the character in which
he is called to act, and the reason of his being invested with it. Religion is of extreme
importance to the peace and welfare of society; and the prince is obliged to have an
eye to every thing in which the state is interested. This is all that calls him to interfere
in religion, or to protect and defend it. It is therefore upon this footing only that he can
interfere: consequently he ought to exert his authority against those alone whose
conduct in religious matters is prejudicial or dangerous to the state; but he must not
extend it to pretended crimes against God, the punishment of which exclusively
belongs to the Sovereign Judge, the Searcher of hearts. Let us remember that religion
is no farther an affair of state, than as it is exterior and publicly established: that of the
heart can only depend on the conscience. The prince has no right to punish any
persons but those that disturb society; and it would be very unjust in him to inflict
pains and penalties on any person whatsoever for his private opinions, when that
person neither takes pains to divulge them, nor to obtain followers. It is a principle of
fanaticism, a source of evils, and of the most notorious injustice, to imagine that frail
mortals ought to take up the cause of God, maintain his glory by acts of violence, and
avenge him on his enemies. Let us only give to sovereigns, said a great statesman and
an excellent citizen* —let us give them, for the common advantage, the power of
punishing whatever is injurious to charity in society. It appertains not to human
justice to become the avenger of what concerns the cause of God.† Cicero, who was
as able and as great in state affairs as in philosophy and eloquence, thought like the
duke of Sully. In the laws he proposes relating to religion, he says, on the subject of
piety and interior religion, “if any one transgresses, God will revenge it”: but he
declares the crime capital that should be committed against the religious ceremonies
established for public affairs, and in which the whole state is concerned.‡ The wise
Romans were very far from persecuting a man for his creed; they only required that
people should not disturb the public order.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 92 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

The creeds or opinions of individuals, their sentiments with §134. Objects of his
respect to the Deity,—in a word, interior religion—should, like care, and the means
piety, be the object of the prince’s attention: he should neglect no he ought to employ.
means of enabling his subjects to discover the truth, and of
inspiring them with good sentiments; but he should employ for this purpose only mild
and paternal methods.* Here he cannot command (§128). It is in external religion and
its public exercise that his authority may be employed. His task is to preserve it, and
to prevent the disorders and troubles it may occasion. To preserve religion, he ought
to maintain it in the purity of its institution, to take care that it be faithfully observed
in all its public acts and ceremonies, and punish those who dare to attack it openly.
But he can require nothing by force except silence, and ought never to oblige any
person to bear a part in external ceremonies:—by constraint, he would only produce
disturbances or hypocrisy.

A diversity of opinions and worship has often produced disorders and fatal
dissensions in a state: and for this reason, many will allow but one and the same
religion. A prudent and equitable sovereign will, in particular conjunctures, see
whether it be proper to tolerate or forbid the exercise of several different kinds of
worship.

But, in general, we may boldly affirm that the most certain and §135. Of toleration.
equitable means of preventing the disorders that may be
occasioned by difference of religion, is an universal toleration of all religions which
contain no tenets that are dangerous either to morality or to the state. Let interested
priests declaim!—they would not trample under foot the laws of humanity, and those
of God himself, to make their doctrine triumph, if it were not the foundation on which
are erected their opulence, luxury, and power. Do but crush the spirit of
persecution,—punish severely whoever shall dare to disturb others on account of their
creed,—and you will see all sects living in peace in their common country, and
ambitious of producing good citizens. Holland and the states of the king of Prussia
furnish a proof of this: Calvinists, Lutherans, Catholics, Pietists, Socinians, Jews, all
live there in peace, because they are equally protected by the sovereign; and none are
punished, but the disturbers of the tranquillity of others.

If, in spite of the prince’s care to preserve the established §136. What the prince
religion, the entire nation, or the greater part of it, should be ought to do when the
disgusted with it, and desire to have it changed, the sovereign nation is resolved to
cannot do violence to his people, nor constrain them in an affair change its religion.
of this nature. The public religion was established for the safety
and advantage of the nation: and, besides its proving inefficacious when it ceases to
influence the heart, the sovereign has here no other authority than that which results
from the trust reposed in him by the people,—and they have only committed to him
that of protecting whatever religion they think proper to profess.

But at the same time it is very just that the prince should have the §137. Difference of
liberty of continuing in the profession of his own religion, religion does not
without losing his crown. Provided that he protect the religion of deprive a prince of his
the state, this is all that can be required of him. In general, a crown.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 93 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

difference of religion can never make any prince forfeit his claims to the sovereignty,
unless a fundamental law ordain it otherwise. The pagan Romans did not cease to
obey Constantine,40 when he embraced Christianity; nor did the Christians revolt
from Julian,41 after he had quitted it.*

We have established liberty of conscience for individuals (§128). §138. Duties and
However, we have also shewn that the sovereign has a right, and rights of the sovereign
is even under an obligation, to protect and support the religion of reconciled with those
the state, and not suffer any person to attempt to corrupt or of the subjects.
destroy it,—that he may even, according to circumstances,
permit only one kind of public worship throughout the whole country. Let us
reconcile those different duties and rights, between which it may be thought that there
is some contradiction:—let us, if possible, omit no material argument on so important
and delicate a subject.

If the sovereign will allow the public exercise of only one and the same religion, let
him oblige no body to do any thing contrary to his conscience; let no subject be forced
to bear a part in a worship which he disapproves, or to profess a religion which he
believes to be false; but let the subject on his part rest content with avoiding the guilt
of a shameful hypocrisy; let him, according to the light of his own knowledge, serve
God in private, and in his own house,—persuaded that providence does not call upon
him for public worship, since it has placed him in such circumstances, that he cannot
perform it without creating disturbances in the state. God would have us obey our
sovereign, and avoid every thing that may be pernicious to society. These are
immutable precepts of the law of nature: the precept that enjoins public worship is
conditional, and dependent on the effects which that worship may produce. Interior
worship is necessary in its own nature; and we ought to confine ourselves to it, in all
cases in which it is most convenient. Public worship is appointed for the edification of
men in glorifying God: but it counteracts that end, and ceases to be laudable, on those
occasions when it only produces disturbances, and gives offence. If any one believes
it absolutely necessary, let him quit the country where he is not allowed to perform it
according to the dictates of his own conscience,—let him go and join those who
profess the same religion with himself.

The prodigious influence of religion on the peace and welfare of §139. The sovereign
society incontrovertibly proves that the conductor of the state ought to have the
ought to have the inspection of what relates to it, and an inspection of the
authority over the ministers who teach it. The end of society and affairs of religion, and
of civil government necessarily requires that he who exercises authority over those

who teach it.
the supreme power should be invested with all the rights without
which he could not exercise it in a manner the most advantageous to the state. These
are the prerogatives of majesty (§45), of which no sovereign can divest himself,
without the express consent of the nation. The inspection of the affairs of religion, and
the authority over its ministers, constitute therefore one of the most important of those
prerogatives, since, without this power, the sovereign would never be able to prevent
the disturbances that religion might occasion in the state, nor to employ that powerful
engine in promoting the welfare and safety of the society. It would be certainly very
strange that a multitude of men who united themselves in society for their common

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 94 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

advantage, that each might in tranquillity labour to supply his necessities, promote his
own perfection and happiness, and live as becomes a rational being,—it would be
very strange, I say, that such a society should not have a right to follow their own
judgment in an affair of the utmost importance,—to determine what they think most
suitable with regard to religion,—and to take care that nothing dangerous or hurtful be
mixed with it. Who shall dare to dispute that an independent nation has, in this respect
as in all others, a right to proceed according to the light of conscience? and when once
she has made choice of a particular religion and worship, may she not confer on her
conductor all the power she possesses of regulating and directing that religion and
worship, and enforcing their observance?

Let us not be told that the management of sacred things belongs not to a profane hand.
Such discourses, when brought to the bar of reason, are found to be only vain
declamations. There is nothing on earth more august and sacred than a sovereign; and
why should God, who calls him by his providence to watch over the safety and
happiness of a whole nation, deprive him of the direction of the most powerful spring
that actuates mankind? The law of nature secures to him this right, with all others that
are essential to good government; and nothing is to be found in Scripture that changes
this disposition. Among the Jews, neither the king nor any other person could make
any innovation in the law of Moses; but the sovereign attended to its preservation, and
could check the high-priest when he deviated from his duty. Where is it asserted in the
New Testament, that a Christian prince has nothing to do with religious affairs?
Submission and obedience to the superior powers are there clearly and expressly
enjoined. It were in vain to object to us the example of the apostles, who preached the
gospel in opposition to the will of sovereigns:—whoever would deviate from the
ordinary rules, must have a divine mission, and establish his authority by miracles.

No person can dispute that the sovereign has a right to take care that nothing contrary
to the welfare and safety of the state be introduced into religion; and consequently he
must have a right to examine its doctrines, and to point out what is to be taught, and
what is to be suppressed in silence.

The sovereign ought likewise to watch attentively, in order to §140. He ought to
prevent the established religion from being employed to sinister prevent the abuse of
purposes, either by making use of its discipline to gratify hatred, the received religion.
avarice, or other passions, or presenting its doctrines in a light
that may prove prejudicial to the state. Of wild reveries, seraphic devotions, and
sublime speculations, what would be the consequences to society, if it entirely
consisted of individuals whose intellects were weak, and whose hearts were easily
governed?—the consequences would be a renunciation of the world, a general neglect
of business and of honest labour. This society of pretended saints would become an
easy and certain prey to the first ambitious neighbour; or if suffered to live in peace, it
would not survive the first generation; both sexes, consecrating their chastity to God,
would refuse to co-operate in the designs of their creator, and to comply with the
requisitions of nature and of the state. Unluckily for the missionaries, it evidently
appears, even from Father Charlevoix’ History of New France, that their labours were
the principal cause of the ruin of the Hurons. That author expressly says, that a great
number of those converts would think of nothing but the faith,—that they forgot their

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 95 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

activity and valour,—that divisions arose between them and the rest of the nation, &c.
That nation was therefore soon destroyed by the Iroquois, whom they had before been
accustomed to conquer.*

To the prince’s inspection of the affairs and concerns of religion §141. The sovereign’s
we have joined an authority over its ministers: without the latter authority over the
power, the former would be nugatory and ineffectual:—they are ministers of religion.
both derived from the same principle. It is absurd, and contrary
to the first foundations of society, that any citizens should claim an independence of
the sovereign authority, in offices of such importance to the repose, the happiness, and
safety of the state. This is establishing two independent powers in the same
society,—an unfailing source of division, disturbance, and ruin. There is but one
supreme power in the state; the functions of the subordinate powers vary according to
their different objects:—ecclesiastics, magistrates, and commanders of the troops, are
all officers of the republic, each in his own department; and all are equally
accountable to the sovereign.

A prince cannot indeed justly oblige an ecclesiastic to preach a §142. Nature of this
doctrine, or to perform a religious rite, which the latter does not authority.
think agreeable to the will of God. But if the minister cannot, in
this respect, conform to the will of his sovereign, he ought to resign his station, and
consider himself as a man who is not called to fill it,—two things being necessary for
the discharge of the duty annexed to it, viz. to teach and behave with sincerity,
according to the dictates of his own conscience, and to conform to the prince’s
intentions, and the laws of the state. Who can forbear being filled with indignation, at
seeing a bishop audaciously resist the orders of the sovereign, and the decrees of the
supreme tribunals, solemnly declaring that he thinks himself accountable to God
alone, for the power with which he is intrusted?

On the other hand, if the clergy are rendered contemptible, it will §143. Rule to be
be out of their power to produce the fruits for which their observed with respect
ministry was appointed. The rule that should be followed with to ecclesiastics.
respect to them may be comprised in a few words:—let them
enjoy a large portion of esteem; but let them have no authority, and still less any claim
to independence. In the first place, let the clergy, as well as every other order of men,
be, in their functions, as in every thing else, subject to the public power, and
accountable to the sovereign for their conduct. Secondly, let the prince take care to
render the ministers of religion respectable in the eyes of the people; let him trust
them with the degree of authority necessary to enable them to discharge their duty
with success; let him, in case of need, support them with the power he possesses.
Every man in office ought to be vested with an authority commensurate to his
functions; otherwise he will be unable to discharge them in a proper manner. I see no
reason why the clergy should be excepted from this general rule; only the prince
should be more particularly watchful that they do not abuse their authority; the affair
being altogether the most delicate, and the most fruitful in dangers. If he renders the
character of churchmen respectable, he should take care that this respect be not
carried to such a superstitious veneration, as shall arm the hand of an ambitious priest
with a powerful engine with which he may force weak minds into whatever direction

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 96 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

he pleases. When once the clergy become a separate body, they become formidable.
The Romans (we shall often have occasion to recur to them)— the wise Romans
elected from among the senators their pontifex-maximus,42 and the principal
ministers of the altar; they knew no distinction between clergy and laity; nor had they
a set of gownsmen to constitute a separate class from the rest of the citizens.

If the sovereign be deprived of this power in matters of religion, §144. Recapitulation
and this authority over the clergy, how shall he preserve the of the reasons which
religion pure from the admixture of any thing contrary to the establish the
welfare of the state? How can he cause it to be constantly taught sovereign’s rights in
and practised in the manner most conducive to the pub-lic matters of religion.

welfare? And especially, how can he prevent the disorders it may
occasion, either by its doctrines, or the manner in which its discipline is exerted?
These cares and duties can only belong to the sovereign, and nothing can dispense
with his discharging them.

Hence we see that the prerogatives of the crown, in ecclesiastical Authorities and
affairs, have been constantly and faithfully defended by the examples.
parliaments of France. The wise and learned magistrates of
whom those illustrious bodies are composed, are sensible of the maxims which sound
reason dictates on this subject. They know how important it is not to suffer an affair
of so delicate a nature, so extensive in its connections and influence, and so
momentous in its consequences, to be placed beyond the reach of the public
authority.—What! Shall ecclesiastics presume to propose to the people, as an article
of faith, some obscure and useless dogma, which constitutes no essential part of the
received religion?—shall they exclude from the church, and defame those who do not
shew a blind obedience?—shall they refuse them the sacraments, and even the rites of
burial?—and shall not the prince have power to protect his subjects, and preserve the
kingdom from a dangerous schism?

The kings of England have asserted the prerogatives of their crown: they have caused
themselves to be acknowledged heads of the church; and this regulation is equally
approved by reason and sound policy, and is also conformable to ancient custom. The
first christian emperors exercised all the functions of heads of the church; they made
laws on subjects relating to it,* —summoned councils, and presided in them,—
appointed and deposed bishops, &c. In Switzerland there are wise republics, whose
sovereigns, knowing the full extent of the supreme authority, have rendered the
ministers of religion subject to it, without offering violence to their consciences. They
have prepared a formulary of the doctrines that are to be preached, and published laws
of ecclesiastical discipline, such as they would have it exercised in the countries under
their jurisdiction,—in order that those who will not conform to these establishments
may not devote themselves to the service of the church. They keep all the ministers of
religion in a lawful dependence, and suffer no exertion of church discipline but under
their own authority. It is not probable that religion will ever occasion disturbances in
these republics.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 97 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

If Constantine and his successors had caused themselves to be §145. Pernicious
formally acknowledged heads of the church,—and if Christian consequences of the
kings and princes had, in this instance, known how to maintain contrary opinion.
the rights of sovereignty,—would the world ever have witnessed
those horrid disorders produced by the pride and ambition of some popes and
ecclesiastics, emboldened by the weakness of princes, and supported by the
superstition of the people,—rivers of blood shed in the quarrels of monks, about
speculative questions that were often unintelligible, and almost always as useless to
the salvation of souls, as in themselves indifferent to the welfare of society,—citizens
and even brothers armed against each other,—subjects excited to revolt, and kings
hurled from their thrones? Tantum religio potuit suadere malorum!43 The history of
the emperors Henry IV.44 Frederic I.45 Frederic II.46 and Louis of Bavaria, are well
known. Was it not the independence of the ecclesiastics,— was it not that system in
which the affairs of religion are submitted to a foreign power,—that plunged France
into the horrors of the league, and had nearly deprived her of the best and greatest of
her kings? Had it not been for that strange and dangerous system, would a foreigner,
pope Sixtus V. have undertaken to violate the fundamental law of the kingdom, and
declared the lawful heir incapable of wearing the crown? Would the world have seen,
at other times and in other places,* the succession to the crown rendered uncertain by
a bare informality—the want of a dispensation, whose validity was disputed, and
which a foreign prelate claimed the sole right of granting? Would that same foreigner
have arrogated to himself the power of pronouncing on the legitimacy of the issue of a
king? Would kings have been assassinated in consequence of a detestable doctrine?†
Would a part of France have been afraid to acknowledge the best of their kings,‡ until
he had received absolution from Rome? And would many other princes have been
unable to give a solid peace to their people, because no decision could be formed
within their own dominions on articles or conditions in which religion was
interested?§

All we have advanced on this subject, so evidently flows from §146. The abuses
the notions of independence and sovereignty, that it will never be particularised. 1. The
disputed by any honest man who endeavours to reason justly. If a power of the popes.
state cannot finally determine every thing relating to religion, the
nation is not free, and the prince is but half a sovereign. There is no medium in this
case; either each state must, within its own territories, possess supreme power in this
respect, as well as in all others, or we must adopt the system of Boniface VIII.47 and
consider all Roman catholic countries as forming only one state, of which the pope
shall be the supreme head, and the kings subordinate administrators of temporal
affairs, each in his province,— nearly as the sultans were formerly under the authority
of the caliphs. We know that the above-mentioned pope had the presumption to write
to Philip the Fair, king of France, Scire te volumus, quod in spiritualibus &
tempo-ralibus nobis subes* —“We would have thee know that thou art subject to us
as well in temporals as in spirituals.” And we may see in the canon law† his famous
bull Unam sanctam,48 in which he attributes to the church two swords, or a double
power, spiritual and temporal,—condemns those who think otherwise, as men, who,
after the example of the Manicheans, establish two principles,—and finally declares,
that it is an article of faith, necessary to salvation, to believe that every human
creature is subject to the Roman pontiff.‡

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 98 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

We shall consider the enormous power of the popes as the first abuse that sprung from
this system, which divests sovereigns of their authority in matters of religion. This
power in a foreign court directly militates against the independence of nations and the
sovereignty of princes. It is capable of overturning a state; and wherever it is
acknowledged, the sovereign finds it impossible to exercise his authority in such a
manner as is most for the advantage of the nation. We have already, in the last
section, given several remarkable instances of this; and history presents others without
number. The senate of Sweden having condemned Trollius,49 archbishop of Upsal,
for the crime of rebellion, to be degraded from his see, and to end his days in a
monastery, pope Leo X.50 had the audacity to excommunicate the administrator
Steno, and the whole senate, and sentenced them to rebuild at their own expense a
fortress belonging to the archbishop, which they had caused to be demolished, and
pay a fine of a hundred thousand ducats to the deposed prelate.* The barbarous
Christiern,51 king of Denmark, took advantage of this decree to lay waste the
territories of Sweden, and to spill the blood of the most illustrious of her nobility. Paul
V.52 thundered out an interdict against Venice, on account of some very wise laws
made with respect to the government of the city, but which displeased that pontiff,
who thus threw the republic into an embarrassment, from which all the wisdom and
firmness of the senate found it difficult to extricate it. Pius V.53 in his bull In Coena
Domini, of the year 1567, declares, that all princes who shall introduce into their
dominions any new taxes, of what nature soever they be, or shall increase the ancient
ones, without having first obtained the approbation of the holy see, are ipso facto
excommunicated. Is not this a direct attack on the independence of nations, and a
subversion of the authority of sovereigns?

In those unhappy times, those dark ages that preceded the revival of literature and the
reformation, the popes attempted to regulate the actions of princes, under the pretence
of conscience,—to judge of the validity of their treaties,—to break their alliances, and
declare them null and void. But those attempts met with a vigorous resistance, even in
a country which is generally thought to have then possessed valour alone, with a very
small portion of knowledge. The pope’s nuncio, in order to detach the Swiss from the
interests of France, published a monitory against all those cantons that favoured
Charles VIII. declaring them excommunicated,54 if within the space of fifteen days
they did not abandon the cause of that prince, and enter into the confederacy which
was formed against him: but the Swiss opposed this act by protesting against it as an
iniquitous abuse, and caused their protest to be publicly posted up in all the places
under their jurisdiction,—thus shewing their contempt for a proceeding that was
equally absurd and derogatory to the rights of sovereigns.* We shall mention several
other similar attempts, when we come to treat of the faith of treaties.

This power in the popes has given birth to another abuse, that §147. 2. Important
deserves the utmost attention from a wise government. We see employments
several countries in which ecclesiastical dignities, and all the conferred by a foreign
higher benefices, are distributed by a foreign power,—by the power.
pope,—who bestows them on his creatures, and very often on
men who are not subjects of the state. This practice is at once a violation of the
nation’s rights, and of the principles of common policy. A nation ought not to suffer
foreigners to dictate laws to her, to interfere in her concerns, or deprive her of her

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 99 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

natural advantages: and yet how does it happen that so many states still tamely suffer
a foreigner to dispose of posts and employments of the highest importance to their
peace and happiness? The princes who consented to the introduction of so enormous
an abuse, were equally wanting to themselves and their people. In our times the court
of Spain has been obliged to expend immense sums in order to recover without danger
the peaceable possession of a right which essentially belonged to the nation, or its
head.

Even in those states whose sovereigns have preserved so §148. 3. Powerful
important a prerogative of the crown, the abuse in a great subjects dependent on
measure subsists. The sovereign nominates indeed to bishoprics a foreign court.
and great benefices; but his authority is not sufficient to enable
the persons nominated to enter on the exercise of their functions; they must also have
bulls from Rome.* By this and a thousand other links of attachment, the whole body
of the clergy, in those countries, still depend on the court of Rome; from it they expect
dignities,—from it, that purple, which, according to the proud pretensions of those
who are invested with it, renders them equal to sovereigns: from the resentment of
that court, they have every thing to fear; and of course we see them almost invariably
disposed to gratify it on every occasion. On the other hand, the court of Rome
supports those clergy with all her might,—assists them by her politics and
credit,—protects them against their enemies, and against those who would set bounds
to their power,—nay, often against the just indignation of their sovereign,—and by
this means attaches them to her still more strongly. Is it not doing an injury to the
rights of society, and shocking the first elements of government, thus to suffer a great
number of subjects, and even subjects in high posts, to be dependent on a foreign
prince, and entirely devoted to him? Would a prudent sovereign receive men who
preached such doctrines? There needed no more to cause all the missionaries to be
driven from China.

It was for the purpose of more firmly securing the attachment of §149. 4. The celibacy
churchmen, that the celibacy of the clergy was invented. A of the priests.
priest, a prelate, already bound to the see of Rome by his
functions and his hopes, is further detached from his country, by the celibacy he is
obliged to observe. He is not connected with civil society by a family: his grand
interests are all centred in the church; and provided he has the pope’s favour, he has
no further concern: in what country soever he was born, Rome is his refuge, the centre
of his adopted country. Every body knows that the religious orders are a sort of papal
militia, spread over the face of the earth, to support and advance the interests of their
monarch. This is doubtless a strange abuse,—a subversion of the first laws of society.
But this is not all: if the prelates were married, they might enrich the state with a
number of good citizens; rich benefices affording them the means of giving their
legitimate children a suitable education. But what a multitude of men are there in
convents, consecrated to idleness under the cloak of devotion! Convents.
Equally useless to society in peace and war, they neither serve it
by their labour in necessary professions, nor by their courage in arms: yet they enjoy
immense revenues; and the people are obliged, by the sweat of their brow, to furnish
support for these swarms of sluggards. What should we think of a husbandman who
pro-tected useless hornets to devour the honey of his bees?* It is not the fault of the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 100 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

fanatic preachers of over-strained sanctity, if all their devotees do not imitate the
celibacy of the monks. How happened it that princes could suffer them publicly to
extol, as the most sublime virtue, a practice equally repugnant to nature, and
pernicious to society? Among the Romans, laws were made to diminish the number of
those who lived in celibacy, and to favour marriage:† but superstition soon attacked
such just and wise regulations; and the christian emperors, persuaded by churchmen,
thought themselves obliged to abrogate them.‡ Several of the fathers of the church
have censured those laws against celibacy,—doubtless, says a great man,§with a
laudable zeal for the things of another life, but with very little knowledge of the affairs
of this. That great man lived in the church of Rome:—he did not dare to assert in
direct terms, that voluntary celibacy is to be condemned even with respect to
conscience and the things of another life:—but it is certainly a conduct well becoming
genuine piety, to conform ourselves to nature, to fulfil the views of the Creator, and to
labour for the welfare of society. If a person is capable of rearing a family, let him
marry, let him be attentive to give his children a good education:—in so doing, he will
discharge his duty, and be undoubtedly in the road to salvation.

The enormous and dangerous pretensions of the clergy are also §150. 5. Enormous
another consequence of this system which places every thing pretensions of the
relating to religion beyond the reach of the civil power. In the clergy.
first place, the ecclesiastics, under pretence of the holiness of
their functions, have raised themselves
above all the other citizens, even the principal magistrates: and, Pre-eminence.
contrary to the express injunctions of their master, who said to
his apostles seek not the first places at feasts, they have almost every where arrogated
to themselves the first rank. Their head, in the Roman church, obliges sovereigns to
kiss his feet; emperors have held the bridle of his horse; and if bishops or even simple
priests do not at present raise themselves above their prince, it is because the times
will not permit it: they have not always been so modest; and one of their writers has
had the assurance to assert, that a priest is as much above a king, as a man is above a
beast.* How many authors, better known and more esteemed than the one just quoted,
have taken a pleasure in praising and extolling that silly speech attributed to the
emperor Theodosius the First—Ambrose has taught me the great distance there is
between the empire and the priesthood!

We have already observed that ecclesiastics ought to be honoured: but modesty, and
even humility, should characterise them: and does it become them to forget it in their
own conduct, while they preach it to others? I would not mention a vain ceremonial,
were it not attended with very material consequences, from the pride with which it
inspires many priests, and the impressions it may make on the minds of the people. It
is essentially necessary to good order, that subjects should behold none in society so
respectable as their sovereign, and, next to him, those on whom he has devolved a part
of his authority.

Ecclesiastics have not stopped in so fair a path. Not contented §151. 6.
with rendering themselves independent with respect to their Independence.
functions,—by the aid of the court of

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 101 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Rome, they have even attempted to withdraw themselves Immunities.
entirely, and in every respect, from all subjection to the political
authority. There have been times when an ecclesiastic could not be brought before a
secular tribunal for any crime whatsoever.* The canon law declares expressly, It is
indecent for laymen to judge a churchman.† The popes Paul III. Pius V. and Urban
VIII.55 excommunicated all lay judges who should presume to undertake the trial of
ecclesiastics. Even the bishops of France have not been afraid to say on several
occasions, that they did not depend on any temporal prince; and, in 1656, the general
assembly of the French clergy had the assurance to use the following
expressions—“The decree of council having been read, was disapproved by the
assembly, because it leaves the king judge over the bishops, and seems to subject their
immunities to his judges.* There are decrees of the popes that excommunicate
whoever imprisons a bishop. According to the principles of the church of Rome, a
prince has not the power of punishing an ecclesiastic with death, though a rebel, or a
malefactor;— he must first apply to the ecclesiastical power; and the latter will, if it
thinks proper, deliver up the culprit to the secular arm, after having degraded him.†
History affords us a thousand examples of bishops who remained unpunished, or were
but slightly chastised, for crimes for which nobles of the highest rank forfeited their
lives. John de Braganza, king of Portugal, justly inflicted the penalty of death on those
noblemen who had conspired his destruction; but he did not dare to put to death the
archbishop of Braga, the author of that detestable plot.*56

For an entire body of men, numerous and powerful, to stand beyond the reach of the
public authority, and be dependent on a foreign court, is an entire subversion of order
in the republic, and a manifest diminution of the sovereignty. This is a mortal stab
given to society, whose very essence it is that every citizen should be subject to the
public authority. Indeed the immunity which the clergy arrogate to themselves in this
respect, is so inimical to the natural and necessary rights of a nation, that the king
himself has not the power of granting it. But churchmen will tell us they derive this
immunity from God himself: but till they have furnished some proof of their
pretensions, let us adhere to this certain principle, that God desires the safety of states,
and not that which will only be productive of disorder and destruction to them.

The same immunity is claimed for the possessions of the church. §152. 7. Immunity of
The state might, no doubt, exempt those possessions from every church possessions.
species of tax at a time when they were scarcely sufficient for the
support of the ecclesiastics: but, for that favour, these men ought to be indebted to the
public authority alone, which has always a right to revoke it, whenever the welfare of
the state makes it necessary. It being one of the fundamental and essential laws of
every society, that, in case of necessity, the wealth of all the members ought to
contribute proportionally to the common necessities,—the prince himself cannot, of
his own authority, grant a total exemption to a very numerous and rich body, without
being guilty of extreme injustice to the rest of his subjects, on whom, in consequence
of that exemption, the whole weight of the burthen will fall.

The possessions of the church are so far from being entitled to an exemption on
account of their being consecrated to God, that, on the contrary, it is for that very
reason they ought to be taken the first for the use and safety of the state. For nothing

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 102 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

is more agreeable to the common Father of mankind than to save a state from ruin.
God himself having no need of any thing, the consecration of wealth to him is but a
dedication of it to such uses as shall be agreeable to him. Besides, a great part of the
revenues of the church, by the confession of the clergy themselves, is destined for the
poor. When the state is in necessity, it is doubtless the first and principal pauper, and
the most worthy of assistance. We may extend this principle even to the most
common cases, and safely assert that to supply a part of the current expenses of the
state from the revenues of the church, and thus take so much from the weight of the
people’s burthen, is really giving a part of those revenues to the poor, according to
their original destination. But it is really contrary to religion and the intentions of the
founders, to waste in pomp, luxury, and epicurism, those revenues that ought to be
consecrated to the relief of the poor.*

Not satisfied however with rendering themselves independent, §153. 8.
the ecclesiastics undertook to bring mankind under their Excommunication of
dominion; and indeed they had reason to despise the stupid men in office.
mortals who suffered them to proceed in their plan.
Excommunication was a formidable weapon among ignorant and superstitious men,
who neither knew how to keep it within its proper bounds, nor to distinguish between
the use and the abuse of it. Hence arose disorders, which have prevailed even in some
protestant countries. Churchmen have presumed, by their own authority alone, to
excommunicate men in high employments, magistrates whose functions were daily
useful to society,—and have boldly asserted that those officers of the state, being
struck with the thunders of the church, could no longer discharge the duty of their
posts. What a perversion of order and reason! What! shall not a nation be allowed to
intrust its affairs, its happiness, its repose and safety, to the hands of those whom it
deems the most skilful and the most worthy of that trust? Shall the power of a
churchman, whenever he pleases, deprive the state of its wisest conductors, of its
firmest supports, and rob the prince of his most faithful servants? So absurd a
pretension has been condemned by princes, and even by prelates, respectable for their
character and judgment. We read in the 171st letter of Ives de Chartres,57 to the
archbishop of Sens, that the royal capi-tularies (conformably to the thirteenth canon of
the twelfth council of Toledo, held in the year 681) enjoined the priests to admit to
their conversation all those whom the king’s majesty had received into favour, or
entertained at his table, though they had been excommunicated by them, or by
others,—in order that the church might not appear to reject or condemn those whom
the king was pleased to employ in his service.*

The excommunications pronounced against the sovereigns §154. 9. And of
themselves, and accompanied with the absolution of their sovereigns
subjects from their oaths of allegiance, put the finishing stroke to themselves.
this enormous abuse; and it is almost incredible that nations
should have suffered such odious procedures. We have slightly touched on this
subject in §§145 and 146. The thirteenth century gives striking instances of it. Otho
IV. for endeavouring to oblige several provinces of Italy to submit to the laws of the
empire, was excommunicated and deprived of the empire by Innocent III.58 and his
subjects absolved from their oath of allegiance. Finally, this unfortunate emperor,
being abandoned by the princes, was obliged to resign the crown to Frederic II. John,

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 103 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

king of England, endeavouring to maintain the rights of his kingdom in the election of
an archbishop of Canterbury,59 found himself exposed to the audacious enterprises of
the same pope. Innocent excommunicated the king,—laid the whole kingdom under
an interdict,—had the presumption to declare John unworthy of the throne, and to
absolve his subjects from their oath of fidelity: he stirred up the clergy against
him,—excited his subjects to rebel,—solicited the king of France to take up arms to
dethrone him,— publishing at the same time a crusade against him, as he would have
done against the Saracens. The king of England at first appeared determined to defend
himself with vigour: but soon losing courage, he suffered himself to be brought to
such an excess of infamy, as to resign his kingdoms into the hands of the pope’s
legate, to receive them back from him, and hold them as a fief of the church, on
condition of paying tribute.*

The popes were not the only persons guilty of such enormities: there have also been
councils who bore a part in them. That of Lyons, summoned by Innocent IV.60 in the
year 1245, had the audacity to cite the emperor Frederic II. to appear before them in
order to exculpate himself from the charges brought against him,—threatening him
with the thunders of the church if he failed to do it. That great prince did not give
himself much trouble about so irregular a proceeding. He said, “that the pope aimed at
rendering himself both a judge and a sovereign; but that, from all antiquity, the
emperors themselves had called councils, where the popes and prelates rendered to
them, as to their sovereigns, the respect and obedience that was their due.”† The
emperor, however, thinking it necessary to yield a little to the superstition of the
times, condescended to send ambassadors to the council, to defend his cause: but this
did not prevent the pope from excommunicating him, and declaring him deprived of
the crown. Frederic, like a man of a superior genius, laughed at the empty thunders of
the Vatican, and proved himself able to preserve the crown in spite of the election of
Henry, Landgrave of Thuringia,61 whom the ecclesiastical electors, and many
bishops, had presumed to declare king of the Romans,—but who obtained little more
by that election, than the ridiculous title of king of the priests.

I should never have done, were I to accumulate examples: but those I have already
quoted are but too many for the honour of humanity. It is an humiliating sight to
behold the excess of folly to which superstition had reduced the nations of Europe in
those unhappy times.‡

By means of the same spiritual arms, the clergy drew every thing §155. 10. The clergy
to themselves, usurped the authority of the tribunals, and drawing every thing
disturbed the course of justice. They claimed a right to take to themselves, and
cognisance of all causes, on account of sin, of which (says disturbing the order of
Innocent III.)*every man of sense must know that the cognisance justice.

belongs to our ministry. In the year 1329, the prelates of France
had the assurance to tell king Philip de Valois, that, to prevent causes of any kind
from being brought before the ecclesiastical courts, was depriving the church of all its
rights, omnia ecclesiarum jura tollere.†62 And accordingly it was their aim to have to
themselves the decision of all disputes. They boldly opposed the civil authority, and
made themselves feared by proceeding in the way of excommunication. It even
happened sometimes, that, as dioceses were not always confined to the extent of the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 104 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

political territory, a bishop would summon foreigners before his tribunal, for causes
purely civil, and take upon him to decide them, in manifest violation of the rights of
nations. To such a height had the disorder arisen three or four centuries ago, that our
wise ancestors thought themselves obliged to take serious measures to put a stop to it;
and stipulated in their treaties, that none of the confederates should be summoned
before spiritual courts, for money debts, since every one ought to be contented with
the ordinary modes of justice that were observed in the country.* We find in history
that the Swiss on many occasions repressed the encroachments of the bishops and
their judges.

Over every affair of life they extended their authority, under pretence that conscience
was concerned. They obliged new-married husbands to purchase permission to lie
with their wives, the first three nights after marriage.†

This burlesque invention leads us to remark another abuse, §156. 11. Money
manifestly contrary to the rules of a wise policy, and to the duty drawn to Rome.
a nation owes to herself,—I mean the immense sums, which
bulls, dispensations, &c. annually drew to Rome, from all the countries in communion
with her. How much might be said on the scandalous trade of indulgences! but it at
last became ruinous to the court of Rome, which, by endeavouring to gain too much,
suffered irreparable losses.

Finally, that independent authority intrusted to ecclesiastics, who §157. 12. Laws and
were often incapable of understanding the true maxims of customs contrary to
government, or too careless to take the trouble of studying them, the welfare of states.
and whose minds were wholly occupied by a visionary
fanaticism, by empty speculations, and notions of a chimerical and overstrained
purity,—that authority, I say, produced, under the pretence of sanctity, laws and
customs that were pernicious to the state. Some of these we have noticed: but a very
remarkable instance is mentioned by Grotius. “In the ancient Greek church,” says he,
“was long observed a canon, by which those who had killed an enemy in any war
whatsoever, were excommunicated for three years.”‡ A fine reward decreed for the
heroes who defended their country, instead of the crowns and triumphs with which
pagan Rome had been accustomed to honour them! Pagan Rome became mistress of
the world:—she adorned her bravest warriors with crowns. The empire, having
embraced christianity, soon became a prey to barbarians:—her subjects, by defending
her, incurred the penalty of a degrading excommunication. By devoting themselves to
an idle life, they thought themselves pursuing the path to heaven, and actually found
themselves in the high road to riches and greatness.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 105 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER XIII

Of Justice And Polity.
Next to the care of religion, one of the principal duties of a §158. A nation ought
nation relates to justice. They ought to employ their utmost to make justice reign.
attention in causing it to prevail in the state, and to take proper
measures for having it dispensed to every one in the most certain, the most speedy,
and the least burthensome manner. This obligation flows from the object proposed by
uniting in civil society, and from the social compact itself. We have seen (§15) that
men have bound themselves by the engagements of society, and consented to divest
themselves, in its favour, of a part of their natural liberty, only with a view of
peaceably enjoying what belongs to them, and obtaining justice with certainty. The
nation would therefore neglect her duty to herself, and deceive the individuals, if she
did not seriously endeavour to make the strictest justice prevail. This attention she
owes to her own happiness, repose, and prosperity. Confusion, disorder, and
despondency, will soon arise in a state, when the citizens are not sure of easily and
speedily obtaining justice in all their disputes: without this, the civil virtues will
become extinguished, and the society weakened.

There are two methods of making justice flourish,—good laws, §159. To establish
and the attention of the superiors to see them executed. In good laws.
treating of the constitution of a state (Chap. III.) we have already
shewn, that a nation ought to establish just and wise laws, and have also pointed out
the reasons, why we cannot here enter into the particulars of those laws. If men were
always equally just, equitable, and enlightened, the laws of nature would doubtless be
sufficient for society. But ignorance, the illusions of self-love, and the violence of the
passions, too often render these sacred laws ineffectual. And we see, in consequence,
that all well-governed nations have perceived the necessity of enacting positive laws.
There is a necessity for general and formal regulations, that each may clearly know
his own rights without being misled by self-deception: sometimes even it is necessary
to deviate from natural equity, in order to prevent abuses and frauds, and to
accommodate ourselves to circumstances; and since the sensation of duty has
frequently so little influence on the heart of man, a penal sanction becomes necessary,
to give the laws their full efficacy. Thus is the law of nature converted into civil law.*
It would be dangerous to commit the interests of the citizens to the mere discretion of
those who are to dispense justice. The legislator should assist the understanding of the
judges, force their prejudices and inclinations, and subdue their will, by simple, fixed,
and certain rules. These again are the civil laws.

The best laws are useless, if they be not observed. The nation §160. To enforce
ought then to take pains to support them, and to cause them to be them.
respected and punctually executed: with this view she cannot
adopt measures too just, too extensive, or too effectual; for hence, in a great degree,
depend her happiness, glory, and tranquillity.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 106 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

We have already observed (§41) that the sovereign, who §161. Functions and
represents a nation and is invested with its authority, is also duties of the prince in
charged with its duties. An attention to make justice flourish in this respect.
the state must then be one of the principal functions of the
prince; and nothing can be more worthy of the sovereign majesty. The emperor
Justinian thus begins his book of the Institutes: Imperatoriam majestatem non solum
armis decoratam, sed etiam legibus oportet esse armatam, ut utrumque tempus, &
bellorum & pacis, recte possit gubernari.63 The degree of power intrusted by the
nation to the head of the state, is then the rule of his duties and his functions in the
administration of justice. As the nation may either reserve the legislative power to
itself, or intrust it to a select body,—it has also a right, if it thinks proper, to establish
a supreme tribunal to judge of all disputes, independently of the prince. But the
conductor of the state must naturally have a considerable share in legislation, and it
may even be entirely intrusted to him. In this last case, it is he who must establish
salutary laws, dictated by wisdom and equity: but in all cases, he should be the
guardian of the law; he should watch over those who are invested with authority, and
confine each individual within the bounds of duty.

The executive power naturally belongs to the sovereign,—to §162. How he is to
every conductor of a people: he is supposed to be invested with dispense justice.
it, in its fullest extent, when the fundamental laws do not restrict
it. When the laws are established, it is the prince’s province to have them put in
execution. To support them with vigour, and to make a just application of them to all
cases that present themselves, is what we call rendering justice. And this is the duty of
the sovereign, who is naturally the judge of his people. We have seen the chiefs of
some small states perform these functions themselves: but this custom becomes
inconvenient, and even impossible, in a great kingdom.

The best and safest method of distributing justice is by §163. He ought to
establishing judges, distinguished by their integrity and appoint enlightened
knowledge, to take cognisance of all the disputes that may arise and upright judges.
between the citizens. It is impossible for the prince to take upon
himself this painful task: he cannot spare sufficient time either for the thorough
investigation of all causes, or even for the acquisition of the knowledge necessary to
decide them. As the sovereign cannot personally discharge all the functions of
government, he should, with a just discernment, reserve to himself such as he can
successfully perform, and are of most importance,—intrusting the others to officers
and magistrates who shall execute them under his authority. There is no
inconvenience in trusting the decision of a law-suit to a body of prudent, honest, and
enlightened men:—on the contrary it is the best mode the prince can possibly adopt;
and he fully acquits himself of the duty he owes to his people in this particular, when
he gives them judges adorned with all the qualities suitable to ministers of justice: he
has then nothing more to do but to watch over their conduct, in order that they may
not neglect their duty.

The establishment of courts of justice is particularly necessary §164. The ordinary
for the decision of all fiscal causes,—that is to say, all the courts should
disputes that may arise between the subjects on the one hand, determine causes

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 107 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

and, on the other, the persons who exert the profitable relating to the
prerogatives of the prince. It would be very unbecoming, and revenue.
highly improper for a prince, to take upon him to give judgment
in his own cause:—he cannot be too much on his guard against the illusions of
interest and self-love; and even though he were capable of resisting their influence,
still he ought not to expose his character to the rash judgments of the multitude. These
important reasons ought even to prevent his submitting the decision of causes in
which he is concerned, to the ministers and counsellors particularly attached to his
person. In all well-regulated states, in countries that are really states, and not the
dominions of a despot, the ordinary tribunals decide all causes in which the sovereign
is a party, with as much freedom as those between private persons.

The end of all trials at law is justly to determine the disputes that §165. There ought to
arise between the citizens. If, therefore, suits are prosecuted be established
before an inferior judge, who examines all the circumstances and supreme courts of
proofs relating to them, it is very proper, that, for the greater justice, wherein
safety, the party condemned should be allowed to appeal to a causes should be

finally determined.
superior tribunal, where the sentence of the former judge may be
examined, and reversed, if it appear to be ill-founded. But it is necessary that this
supreme tribunal should have the authority of pronouncing a definitive sentence
without appeal: otherwise the whole proceeding will be vain, and the dispute can
never be determined.

The custom of having recourse to the prince himself, by laying a complaint at the foot
of the throne, when the cause has been finally determined by a supreme court, appears
to be subject to very great inconveniences. It is more easy to deceive the prince by
specious reasons, than a number of magistrates well skilled in the knowledge of the
laws; and experience too plainly shews, what powerful resources are derived from
favour and intrigue in the courts of kings. If this practice be authorised by the laws of
the state, the prince ought always to fear that these complaints are only formed with a
view of protracting a suit, and procrastinating a just condemnation. A just and wise
sovereign will not admit them without great caution; and if he reverses the sentence
that is complained of, he ought not to try the cause himself, but submit it to the
examination of another tribunal, as is the practice in France. The ruinous length of
these proceedings authorises us to say, that it is more convenient and advantageous to
the state, to establish a sovereign tribunal, whose definitive decrees should not be
subject to a reversal even by the prince himself. It is sufficient for the security of
justice, that the sovereign keep a watchful eye over the judges and magistrates, in the
same manner as he is bound to watch all the other officers in the state,— and that he
have power to call to an account and to punish such as are guilty of prevarication.

When once this sovereign tribunal is established, the prince §166. The prince
cannot meddle with its decrees; and, in general, he is absolutely ought to preserve the
obliged to preserve and maintain the forms of justice. Every forms of justice.
attempt to violate them is an assumption of arbitrary power, to
which it cannot be presumed that any nation could ever have intended to subject itself.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 108 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

When those forms are defective, it is the business of the legislator to reform them.
This being done or procured in a manner agreeable to the fundamental laws, will be
one of the most salutary benefits the sovereign can bestow upon his people. To
preserve the citizens from the danger of ruining themselves in defending their
rights,—to repress and destroy that monster, chicanery,—will be an action more
glorious in the eyes of the wise man, than all the exploits of a conqueror.

Justice is administered in the name of the sovereign; the prince §167. The prince
relies on the judgment of the courts, and, with good reason, looks ought to support the
upon their decisions as sound law and justice. His part in this authority of the
branch of the government is then to maintain the authority of the judges.
judges, and to cause their sentences to be executed; without
which, they would be vain and delusive; for justice would not be rendered to the
citizens.

There is another kind of justice named attributive or distributive, §168. Of distributive
which in general consists in treating every one according to his justice.
deserts. This virtue ought to regulate the distribution of public
employments, honours, and rewards in a state. It is, in the first place, a duty the nation
owes
to herself, to encourage good citizens, to excite every one to The distribution of
virtue by honours and rewards, and to intrust with employments employments and
such persons only as are capable of properly discharging them. rewards.
In the next place, it is a duty the nation owes to individuals, to
shew herself duly attentive to reward and honour merit. Although a sovereign has the
power of distributing his favours and employments to whomsoever he pleases, and
nobody has a perfect right to any post or dignity,—yet a man who by intense
application has qualified himself to become useful to his country, and he who has
rendered some signal service to the state, may justly complain if the prince overlooks
them, in order to advance useless men without merit. This is treating them with an
ingratitude that is wholly unjustifiable, and adapted only to extinguish emulation.
There is hardly any fault that in a course of time can become more prejudicial to a
state: it introduces into it a general relaxation; and its public affairs, being managed
by incompetent hands, cannot fail to be attended with ill-success. A powerful state
may support itself for some time by its own weight; but at length it falls into decay;
and this is perhaps one of the principal causes of those revolutions observable in great
empires. The sovereign is attentive to the choice of those he employs, while he feels
himself obliged to watch over his own safety, and to be on his guard: but when once
he thinks himself elevated to such a pitch of greatness and power as leaves him
nothing to fear, he follows his own caprice, and all public offices are distributed by
favour.

The punishment of transgressors commonly belongs to §169. Punishment of
distributive justice, of which it is really a branch; since good transgressors.
order requires that malefactors should be made to suffer the
punishments they have deserved. But if we would clearly establish this on its true
foundations, we must recur to first principles.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 109 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

The right of punishing, which in a state of nature belongs to each Foundation of the
individual, is founded on the right of personal safety. Every man right of punishing.
has a right to preserve himself from injury, and by force to
provide for his own security, against those who unjustly attack him. For this purpose,
he may, when injured, inflict a punishment on the aggressor, as well with the view of
putting it out of his power to injure him for the future, or of reforming him, as of
restraining, by his example, all those who might be tempted to imitate him. Now,
when men unite in society,—as the society is thenceforward charged with the duty of
providing for the safety of its members, the individuals all resign to it their private
right of punishing. To the whole body, therefore, it belongs to avenge private injuries,
while it protects the citizens at large. And as it is a moral person, capable also of
being injured, it has a right to provide for its own safety, by punishing those who
trespass against it;—that is to say, it has a right to punish public delinquents. Hence
arises the right of the sword, which belongs to a nation, or to its conductor. When the
society use it against another nation, they make war; when they exert it in punishing
an individual, they exercise vindictive justice. Two things are to be considered in this
part of government,—the laws, and their execution.

It would be dangerous to leave the punishment of transgressors §170. Criminal laws.
entirely to the discretion of those who are invested with
authority. The passions might interfere in a business which ought to be regulated only
by justice and wisdom. The punishment, pre-ordained for an evil action, lays a more
effectual restraint on the wicked, than a vague fear, in which they may deceive
themselves. In short, the people, who are commonly moved at the sight of a suffering
wretch, are better convinced of the justice of his punishment, when it is inflicted by
the laws themselves. Every well-governed state ought then to have its laws for the
punishment of criminals. It belongs to the legislative power, whatever that be, to
establish them with justice and wisdom. But this is not a proper place for giving a
general theory of them: we shall therefore only say, that each nation ought, in this as
in every other instance, to chuse such laws as may best suit her peculiar
circumstances.

We shall only make one observation, which is connected with §171. Degree of
the subject in hand, and relates to the degree of punishment. punishment.
From the foundation even of the right of punishing, and from the
lawful end of inflicting penalties, arises the necessity of keeping them within just
bounds. Since they are designed to procure the safety of the state and of the citizens,
they ought never to be extended beyond what that safety requires. To say that any
punishment is just since the transgressor knew beforehand the penalty he was about to
incur, is using a barbarous language, repugnant to humanity, and to the law of nature,
which forbids our doing any ill to others, unless they lay us under the necessity of
inflicting it in our own defence and for our own security. Whenever then a particular
crime is not much to be feared in society, as when the opportunities of committing it
are very rare, or when the subjects are not inclined to it, too rigorous punishments
ought not to be used to suppress it. Attention ought also to be paid to the nature of the
crime; and the punishment should be proportioned to the degree of injury done to the
public tranquillity and the safety of society, and the wickedness it supposes in the
criminal.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 110 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

These maxims are not only dictated by justice and equity, but also as forcibly
recommended by prudence and the art of government. Experience shews us, that the
imagination becomes familiarised to objects which are frequently presented to it. If,
therefore, terrible punishments are multiplied, the people will become daily less
affected by them, and at length contract, like the Japanese, a savage and ferocious
character:— these bloody spectacles will then no longer produce the effect designed;
for they will cease to terrify the wicked. It is with these examples as with honours:—a
prince who multiplies titles and distinctions to excess, soon depreciates them, and
makes an injudicious use of one of the most powerful and convenient springs of
government. When we recollect the practice of the ancient Romans with respect to
criminals,—when we reflect on their scrupulous attention to spare the blood of the
citizens,— we cannot fail to be struck at seeing with how little ceremony it is now- a-
days shed in the generality of states. Was then the Roman republic but ill governed?
Does better order and greater security reign among us?— It is not so much the cruelty
of the punishments, as a strict punctuality in enforcing the penal code, that keeps
mankind within the bounds of duty: and if simple robbery is punished with death,
what further punishment is reserved to check the hand of the murderer?

The execution of the laws belongs to the conductor of the state: §172. Execution of
he is intrusted with the care of it, and is indispensably obliged to the laws.
discharge it with wisdom. The prince then is to see that the
criminal laws be put in execution; but he is not to attempt in his own person to try the
guilty. Besides the reasons we have already alleged in treating of civil causes, and
which are of still greater weight in regard to those of a criminal nature,—to appear in
the character of a judge pronouncing sentence on a wretched criminal, would ill
become the majesty of the sovereign, who ought in every thing to appear as the father
of his people. It is a very wise maxim commonly received in France, that the prince
ought to reserve to himself all matters of favour, and leave it to the magistrates to
execute the rigour of justice. But then justice ought to be exercised in his name, and
under his authority. A good prince will keep a watchful eye over the conduct of the
magistrates; he will oblige them to observe scrupulously the established forms, and
will himself take care never to break through them. Every sovereign who neglects or
violates the forms of justice in the prosecution of criminals, makes large strides
towards tyranny: and the liberty of the citizens is at an end, when once they cease to
be certain that they cannot be condemned, except in pursuance of the laws, according
to the established forms, and by their ordinary judges. The custom of committing the
trial of the accused party to commissioners chosen at the pleasure of the court, was the
tyrannical invention of some ministers who abused the authority of their master. By
this irregular and odious procedure, a famous minister always succeeded in destroying
his enemies. A good prince will never give his consent to such a proceeding, if he has
sufficient discernment to foresee the dreadful abuse his ministers may make of it. If
the prince ought not to pass sentence himself,—for the same reason, he ought not to
aggravate the sentence passed by the judges.

The very nature of government requires that the executor of the §173. Right of
laws should have the power of dispensing with them, when this pardoning.
may be done without injury to any person, and in certain
particular cases where the welfare of the state requires an exception. Hence the right

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 111 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

of granting pardons is one of the attributes of sovereignty. But, in his whole conduct,
in his severity as well as in his mercy, the sovereign ought to have no other object in
view than the greater advantage of society. A wise prince knows how to reconcile
justice with clemency,—the care of the public safety, with that pity which is due to
the unfortunate.

The internal police consists in the attention of the prince and §174. Internal police.
magistrates to preserve every thing in order. Wise regulations
ought to prescribe whatever will best contribute to the public safety, utility and
convenience; and those who are invested with authority cannot be too attentive to
enforce them. By a wise police, the sovereign accustoms the people to order and
obedience, and preserves peace, tranquillity, and concord among the citizens. The
magistrates of Holland are said to possess extraordinary talents in this respect:—a
better police prevails in their cities, and even their establishments in the Indies, than in
any other places in the known world.

Laws and the authority of the magistrates having been §175. Duel, or single
substituted in the room of private war, the conductor of a nation combat.
ought not to suffer individuals to attempt to do themselves
justice, when they can have recourse to the magistrates. Duelling—that species of
combat, in which the parties engage on account of a private quarrel—is a manifest
disorder, repugnant to the ends of civil society. This phrenzy was unknown to the
ancient Greeks and Romans, who raised to such a height the glory of their arms: we
received it from barbarous nations who knew no other law but the sword. Louis XIV.
deserves the greatest praise for his endeavours to abolish this savage custom.

But why was not that prince made sensible that the most severe §176. Means of
punishments were incapable of curing the rage for duelling? putting a stop to this
They did not reach the source of the evil; and since a ridiculous disorder.
prejudice had persuaded all the nobility and gentlemen of the
army, that a man who wears a sword is bound in honour to avenge, with his own
hand, the least injury he has received; this is the principle on which it is proper to
proceed. We must destroy this prejudice, or restrain it by a motive of the same nature.
While a nobleman, by obeying the law, shall be regarded by his equals as a coward
and as a man dishonoured,—while an officer in the same case shall be forced to quit
the service,—can you hinder his fighting by threatening him with death? On the
contrary, he will place a part of his bravery in doubly exposing his life, in order to
wash away the affront. And certainly, while the prejudice subsists, while a nobleman
or an officer cannot act in opposition to it, without embittering the rest of his life, I do
not know whether we can justly punish him who is forced to submit to its tyranny, or
whether he be very guilty with respect to morality. That worldly honour, be it as false
and chimerical as you please, is to him a substantial and necessary possession, since
without it, he can neither live with his equals, nor exercise a profession that is often
his only resource. When therefore any insolent fellow would unjustly ravish from him
that chimera so esteemed and so necessary, why may he not defend it as he would his
life and property against a robber? As the state does not permit an individual to pursue
with arms in his hand the usurper of his property, because he may obtain justice from
the magistrate,—so, if the sovereign will not allow him to draw his sword against the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 112 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

man from whom he has received an insult, he ought necessarily to take such measures
that the patience and obedience of the citizen who has been insulted, shall not prove
prejudicial to him. Society cannot deprive man of his natural right of making war
against an aggressor, without furnishing him with some other means of securing
himself from the evil his enemy would do him. On all those occasions where the
public authority cannot lend us its assistance, we resume our original and natural right
of self-defence. Thus a traveller may, without hesitation, kill the robber who attacks
him on the highway; because it would, at that moment, be in vain for him to implore
the protection of the laws and of the magistrate. Thus a chaste virgin would be praised
for taking away the life of a brutal ravisher who attempted to force her to his desires.

Till men have got rid of this Gothic idea, that honour obliges them, even in contempt
of the laws, to avenge their personal injuries with their own hands, the most effectual
method of putting a stop to the effects of this prejudice would perhaps be to make a
total distinction between the offended and the aggressor,—to pardon the former
without difficulty, when it appears that his honour has been really attacked,—and to
exercise justice without mercy on the party who has committed the outrage. And as to
those who draw the sword for trifles and punctilios, for little piques or railleries in
which honour is not concerned, I would have them severely punished. By this means a
restraint would be put on those peevish and insolent folks, who often reduce even the
most moderate men to a necessity of chastising them. Every one would be on his
guard, to avoid being considered as the aggressor; and with a view to gain the
advantage of engaging in duel (if unavoidable) without incurring the penalties of the
law, both parties would curb their passions; by which means the quarrel would fall of
itself, and be attended with no consequences. It frequently happens that a bully is at
bottom a coward; he gives himself haughty airs, and offers insult, in hopes that the
rigour of the law will oblige people to put up with his insolence. And what is the
consequence?—A man of spirit will run every risk, rather than submit to be
insulted:—the aggressor dares not recede: and a combat ensues, which would not
have taken place, if the latter could have once imagined that there was nothing to
prevent the other from chastising him for his presumption,—the offended person
being acquitted by the same law that condemns the aggressor.

To this first law, whose efficacy would, I doubt not, be soon proved by experience, it
would be proper to add the following regulations:—1. Since it is an established
custom that the nobility and military men should appear armed even in time of peace,
care should be taken to enforce a rigid observance of the laws which allow the
privilege of wearing swords to these two orders of men only. 2. It would be proper to
establish a particular court, to determine, in a summary manner, all affairs of honour
between persons of these two orders. The marshals’ court in France is in possession of
this power; and it might be invested with it in a more formal manner and to a greater
extent. The governors of provinces and strong places, with their general officers,—the
colonels and captains of each regiment,—might, in this particular, act as deputies to
the marshals. These courts, each in its own department, should alone confer the right
of wearing a sword. Every nobleman at sixteen or eighteen years of age, and every
soldier at his entrance into the regiment, should be obliged to appear before the court
to receive the sword. 3. On its being there delivered to him, he should be informed,
that it is intrusted to him only for the defence of his country; and care might be taken

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 113 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

to inspire him with true ideas of honour. 4. It appears to me of great importance, to
establish, for different cases, punishments of a different nature. Whoever should so far
forget himself, as, either by word or deed, to insult a man who wears a sword, might
be degraded from the rank of nobility, deprived of the privilege of carrying arms, and
subjected to corporal punishment,—even the punishment of death, according to the
grossness of the insult: and, as I before observed, no favour should be shewn to the
offender in case a duel was the consequence, while at the same time the other party
should stand fully acquitted. Those who fight on slight occasions, I would not have
condemned to death, unless in such cases where the author of the quarrel,—he, I
mean, who carried it so far as to draw his sword, or to give the challenge,—has killed
his adversary. People hope to escape punishment, when it is too severe; and, besides,
a capital punishment, in such cases, is not considered as infamous. But let them be
ignominiously degraded from the rank of nobility and the use of arms, and for ever
deprived of the right of wearing a sword, without the least hope of pardon: this would
be the most proper method to restrain men of spirit, provided that due care was taken
to make a distinction between different offenders, according to the degree of the
offence. As to persons below the rank of nobility, and who do not belong to the army,
their quarrels should be left to the cognisance of the ordinary courts, which, in case of
bloodshed, should punish the offenders according to the common laws against
violence and murder. It should be the same with respect to any quarrel that might arise
between a commoner and a man entitled to carry arms: it is the business of the
ordinary magistrate to preserve order and peace between those two classes of men,
who cannot have any points of honour to settle, the one with the other. To protect the
people against the violence of those who wear the sword, and to punish the former
severely, if they should dare to insult the latter, should further be, as it is at present,
the business of the magistrate.

I am sanguine enough to believe that these regulations, and this method of
proceeding, if strictly adhered to, would extirpate that monster, duelling, which the
most severe laws have been unable to restrain. They go to the source of the evil by
preventing quarrels, and oppose a lively sensation of true and real honour to that false
and punctilious honour which occasions the spilling of so much blood. It would be
worthy a great monarch to make a trial of it: its success would immortalise his name;
and by the bare attempt he would merit the love and gratitude of his people.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 114 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER XIV

The Third Object Of A Good Government,—To Fortify Itself
Against External Attacks.
We have treated at large of what relates to the felicity of a §177. A nation ought
nation: the subject is equally copious and complicated. Let us to fortify itself against
now proceed to a third division of the duties which a nation owes external attacks.
to itself,—a third object of good government. One of the ends of
political society is to defend itself with its combined strength against all external
insult or violence (§15). If the society is not in a condition to repulse an aggressor, it
is very imperfect,—it is unequal to the principal object of its destination, and cannot
long subsist. The nation ought to put itself in such a state as to be able to repel and
humble an unjust enemy: this is an important duty, which the care of its own
perfection, and even of its preservation, imposes both on the state and its conductor.

It is its strength alone that can enable a nation to repulse all §178. National
aggressors, to secure its rights, and render itself every where strength.
respectable. It is called upon by every possible motive, to neglect
no circumstance that can tend to place it in this happy situation. The strength of a state
consists in three things,—the number of the citizens, their military virtues, and their
riches. Under this last article we may comprehend fortresses, artillery, arms, horses,
ammunition, and, in general, all that immense apparatus at present necessary in war,
since they can all be procured with money.

To increase the number of the citizens as far as it is possible or §179. Increase of
convenient, is then one of the first objects that claim the attentive population.
care of the state or its conductor: and this will be successfully
effected by complying with the obligation to procure the country a plenty of the
necessaries of life,—by enabling the people to support their families with the fruits of
their labour,—by giving proper directions that the poorer classes, and especially the
husbandmen, be not harassed and oppressed by the levying of taxes,—by governing
with mildness, and in a manner, which, instead of disgusting and dispersing the
present subjects of the state, shall rather attract new ones,—and, finally, by
encouraging marriage, after the example of the Romans. That nation, so attentive to
every thing capable of increasing and supporting their power, made wise laws against
celibacy (as we have already observed in §149), and granted privileges and
exemptions to married men, particularly to those who had numerous families: laws
that were equally wise and just, since a citizen who rears subjects for the state, has a
right to expect more favour from it than the man who chuses to live for himself
alone.*

Every thing tending to depopulate a country is a defect in a state not overstocked with
inhabitants. We have already spoken of convents and the celibacy of priests. It is
strange that establishments, so directly repugnant to the duties of a man and a citizen,

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 115 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

as well as to the advantage and safety of society, should have found such favour, and
that princes, instead of opposing them as it was their duty to do, should have protected
and enriched them. A system of policy, that dextrously took advantage of superstition
to extend its own power, led princes and subjects astray, caused them to mistake their
real duties, and blinded sovereigns even with respect to their own interest. Experience
seems at length to have opened the eyes of nations and their conductors; the pope
himself (let us mention it to the honour of Benedict XIV.) endeavours gradually to
reform so palpable an abuse; by his orders, none in his dominions are any longer
permitted to take the vow of celibacy before they are twenty-five years of age. That
wise pontiff gives the sovereigns of his communion a salutary example; he invites
them to attend at length to the safety of their states,—to narrow at least, if they cannot
entirely close up, the avenues of that sink that drains their dominions. Take a view of
Germany; and there, in countries which are in all other respects upon an equal footing,
you will see the protestant states twice as populous as the catholic ones. Compare the
desert state of Spain with that of England teeming with inhabitants:—survey many
fine provinces, even in France, destitute of hands to till the soil;—and then tell me,
whether the many thousands of both sexes, who are now locked up in convents, would
not serve God and their country infinitely better, by peopling those fertile plains with
useful cultivators? It is true, indeed, that the catholic cantons of Switzerland are
nevertheless very populous: but this is owing to a profound peace, and the nature of
the government, which abundantly repair the losses occasioned by convents. Liberty
is able to remedy the greatest evils; it is the soul of a state, and was with great justice
called by the Romans alma Libertas.

A cowardly and undisciplined multitude are incapable of §180. Valour.
repulsing a warlike enemy: the strength of the state consists less
in the number than the military virtues of its citizens. Valour, that heroic virtue which
makes us undauntedly encounter danger in defence of our country, is the firmest
support of the state: it renders it formidable to its enemies, and often even saves it the
trouble of defending itself. A state whose reputation in this respect is once well
established, will be seldom attacked, if it does not provoke other states by its
enterprises. For above two centuries the Swiss have enjoyed a profound peace, while
the din of arms resounded all around them, and the rest of Europe was desolated by
the ravages of war. Nature gives the foundation of valour; but various causes may
animate it, weaken it, and even destroy it. A nation ought then to seek after and
cultivate a virtue so useful; and a prudent sovereign will take all possible measures to
inspire his subjects with it:—his wisdom will point out to him the means. It is this
generous flame that animates the French nobility: fired with a love of glory and of
their country, they fly to battle, and cheerfully spill their blood in the field of honour.
To what an extent would they not carry their conquests, if that kingdom were
surrounded by nations less warlike! The Briton, generous and intrepid, resembles a
lion in combat; and in general, the nations of Europe surpass in bravery all the other
people upon earth.

But valour alone is not always successful in war: constant §181. Other military
success can only be obtained by an assemblage of all the military virtues.
virtues. History shews us the importance of ability in the
commanders, of military discipline, frugality, bodily strength, dexterity, and being

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 116 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

inured to fatigue and labour. These are so many distinct branches which a nation
ought carefully to cultivate. It was the assemblage of all these that raised so high the
glory of the Romans, and rendered them the masters of the world. It were a mistake to
suppose that valour alone produced those illustrious exploits of the ancient
Swiss,—the victories of Morgarten, Sempach, Laupen, Morat, and many others.64
The Swiss not only fought with intrepidity: they studied the art of war,—they inured
themselves to its toils, they accustomed themselves to the practice of all its
manoeuvres,—and their very love of liberty made them submit to a discipline which
could alone secure to them that treasure, and save their country. Their troops were no
less celebrated for their discipline than their bravery. Mezeray, after having given an
account of the behaviour of the Swiss at the battle of Dreux,65 adds these remarkable
words: “in the opinion of all the officers of both sides who were present, the Swiss, in
that battle, under every trial, against infantry and cavalry, against French and against
Germans, gained the palm for military discipline, and acquired the reputation of being
the best infantry in the world.”*

Finally, the wealth of a nation constitutes a considerable part of §182. Riches.
its power, especially in modern times, when war requires such
immense expenses. It is not simply in the revenues of the sovereign, or the public
treasure, that the riches of a nation consist: its opulence is also rated from the wealth
of individuals. We commonly call a nation rich, when it contains a great number of
citizens in easy and affluent circumstances. The wealth of private persons really
increases the strength of the nation; since they are capable of contributing large sums
towards supplying the necessities of the state, and that, in a case of extremity, the
sovereign may even employ all the riches of his subjects in the defence, and for the
safety of the state, in virtue of the supreme command with which he is invested, as we
shall hereafter shew. The nation then ought to endeavour to acquire those public and
private riches, that are of such use to it: and this is a new reason for encouraging a
commerce with other nations, which is the source from whence they flow,—and a
new motive for the sovereign to keep a watchful eye over the different branches of
foreign trade carried on by his subjects, in order that he may preserve and protect the
profitable branches, and cut off those that occasion the exportation of gold and silver.

It is requisite that the state should possess an income §183. Public
proportionate to its necessary expenditures. That income may be revenues, and taxes.
supplied by various means,—by lands reserved for that purpose,
by contributions, taxes of different kinds, &c.—but of this subject we shall treat in
another place.

We have here summed up the principal ingredients that §184. The nation
constitute that strength which a nation ought to augment and ought not to increase
improve.—Can it be necessary to add the observation, that this its power by illegal
desirable object is not to be pursued by any other methods than means.
such as are just and innocent? A laudable end is not sufficient to
sanctify the means; for these ought to be in their own nature lawful. The law of nature
cannot contradict itself: if it forbids an action as unjust or dishonest in its own nature,
it can never permit it for any purpose whatever. And therefore in those cases where
that object, in itself so valuable and so praiseworthy, cannot be attained without

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 117 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

employing unlawful means, it ought to be considered as unattainable, and
consequently be relinquished. Thus we shall shew, in treating of the just causes of
war, that a nation is not allowed to attack another with a view to aggrandise itself by
subduing and giving law to the latter. This is just the same as if a private person
should attempt to enrich himself by seizing his neighbour’s property.

The power of a nation is relative, and ought to be measured by §185. Power is but
that of its neighbours, or of all the nations from whom it has any relative.
thing to fear. The state is sufficiently powerful, when it is
capable of causing itself to be respected, and of repelling whoever would attack it. It
may be placed in this happy situation, either by keeping up its own strength equal or
even superior to that of its neighbours,—or by preventing their rising to a
predominant and formidable power. But we cannot shew here, in what cases, and by
what means, a state may justly set bounds to the power of another: it is necessary first
to explain the duties of a nation towards others, in order to combine them afterwards
with its duties towards itself. For the present we shall only observe that a nation,
while it obeys the dictates of prudence and wise policy in this instance, ought never to
lose sight of the maxims of justice.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 118 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER XV

Of The Glory Of A Nation.
The glory of a nation is intimately connected with its power, and §186. Advantages of
indeed forms a considerable part of it. It is this brilliant glory.
advantage that procures it the esteem of other nations, and
renders it respectable to its neighbours. A nation whose reputation is well
established,—especially one whose glory is illustrious,—is courted by all sovereigns:
they desire its friendship, and are afraid of offending it. Its friends, and those who
wish to become so, favour its enterprises, and those who envy its prosperity are afraid
to shew their ill-will.

It is then of great advantage to a nation to establish its reputation §187. Duty of the
and glory: hence this becomes one of the most important of the nation.
duties it owes to itself. True glory consists in the favourable
opinion of men of wisdom and discernment:
it is acquired by the virtues or good qualities of the head and the How true glory is
heart, and by great actions which are the fruits of those virtues. A acquired.
nation may have a two-fold claim to it—first, by what it does in
its national character, by the conduct of those who have the administration of its
affairs, and are invested with its authority and government,—and, secondly, by the
merit of the individuals of whom the nation is composed.

A prince, a sovereign of whatever kind, being bound to exert §188. Duty of the
every effort for the good of the nation, is doubtless obliged to prince.
extend its glory, as far as lies in his power. We have seen that his
duty is to labour after the perfection of the state, and of the people who are subject to
him: by that means he will make them merit a good reputation and glory. He ought
always to have this object in view in every thing he undertakes, and in the use he
makes of his power. Let him, in all his actions, display justice, moderation, and
greatness of soul: and he will thus acquire for himself and his people a name
respected by the universe, and not less useful than glorious. The glory of Henry IV.66
saved France: in the deplorable state in which he found affairs, his virtues gave
animation to the loyal part of his subjects, and encouraged foreign nations to lend him
their assistance, and to enter into an alliance with him against the ambitious
Spaniards. In his circumstances, a weak prince of little estimation would have been
abandoned by all the world; people would have been afraid of being involved in his
ruin.

Besides the virtues which constitute the glory of princes as well as of private persons,
there is a dignity and decorum that particularly belong to the supreme rank, and which
a sovereign ought to observe with the greatest care. He cannot neglect them without
degrading himself, and casting a stain upon the state. Every thing that emanates from
the throne ought to bear the character of purity, nobleness, and greatness. What an

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 119 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

idea do we conceive of a people, when we see their sovereign display in his public
acts a meanness of sentiment, by which a private person would think himself
disgraced! All the majesty of the nation resides in the person of the prince:—what
then must become of it if he prostitutes it, or suffers it to be prostituted by those who
speak and act in his name? The minister who puts into his master’s mouth a language
unworthy of him, deserves to be turned out of office with every mark of ignominy.

The reputation of individuals is, by a common and natural mode §189. Duty of the
of speaking and thinking, made to reflect on the whole nation. In citizens.
general we attribute a virtue or a vice to a people, when that vice
or that virtue is frequently observed among them. We say that a nation is warlike,
when it produces a great number of brave warriors,—that it is learned, when there are
many learned men among the citizens,—and that it excels in the arts, when it
produces many able artists: on the other hand, we call it cowardly, lazy or stupid,
when men of those characters are more numerous there than elsewhere. The citizens,
being obliged to labour with all their might to promote the welfare and advantage of
their country, not only owe to themselves the care of deserving a good reputation, but
they also owe it to the nation, whose glory is so liable to be influenced by theirs.
Bacon, Newton, Descartes, Leibnitz, and Bernouilli,67 have each done honour to his
native country, and essentially benefited it by the glory he acquired. Great ministers,
and great generals,—an Oxenstiern,68 a Turenne,69 a Marlborough,70 a Ruyter,71
—serve their country in a double capacity, both by their actions, and by their glory.
On the other hand, the fear of reflecting a disgrace on his country will furnish the
good citizen with a new motive for abstaining from every dishonourable action. And
the prince ought not to suffer his subjects to give themselves up to vices capable of
bringing infamy on the nation, or even of simply tarnishing the brightness of its
glory:—he has a right to suppress and to punish scandalous enormities, which do a
real injury to the state.

The example of the Swiss is very capable of shewing how §190. Example of the
advantageous glory may prove to a nation. The high reputation Swiss.
they have acquired for their valour, and which they still
gloriously support, has preserved them in peace for above two centuries, and rendered
all the powers of Europe desirous of their assistance. Louis XI. while dauphin, was
witness of the prodigies of valour they performed at the battle of St. Jaques,72 near
Basle, and he immediately formed the design of closely attaching to his interest so
intrepid a nation.* The twelve hundred gallant heroes, who on this occasion attacked
an army of between fifty and sixty thousand veteran troops, first defeated the
vanguard of the Armagnacs, which was eighteen thousand strong; afterwards rashly
engaging the main body of the army, they perished almost to a man, without being
able to complete their victory.* But besides their terrifying the enemy, and preserving
Switzerland from a ruinous invasion, they rendered her essential service by the glory
they acquired for her arms. A reputation for an inviolable fidelity is no less
advantageous to that nation; and they have at all times been jealous of preserving it.
The canton of Zug punished with death that unworthy soldier who betrayed the
confidence of the duke of Milan by discovering that prince to the French, when, to
escape them, he had disguised himself in the habit of the Swiss and placed himself in
their ranks as they were marching out of Novara.†

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 120 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Since the glory of a nation is a real and substantial advantage, §191. Attacking the
she has a right to defend it, as well as her other advantages. He glory of a nation is
who attacks her glory does her an injury; and she has a right to doing her an injury.
exact of him, even by force of arms, a just reparation. We cannot
then condemn those measures sometimes taken by sovereigns to support or avenge the
dignity of their crown. They are equally just and necessary. If, when they do not
proceed from too lofty pretensions, we attribute them to a vain pride, we only betray
the grossest ignorance of the art of reigning, and despise one of the firmest supports of
the greatness and safety of a state.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 121 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER XVI

Of The Protection Sought By A Nation, And Its Voluntary
Submission To A Foreign Power.
When a nation is not capable of preserving herself from insult §192. Protection.
and oppression, she may procure the protection of a more
powerful state. If she obtains this by only engaging to perform certain articles, as, to
pay a tribute in return for the safety obtained,—to furnish her protector with
troops,—and to embark in all his wars as a joint concern,—but still reserving to
herself the right of administering her own government at pleasure,—it is a simple
treaty of protection, that does not at all derogate from her sovereignty, and differs not
from the ordinary treaties of alliance otherwise than as it creates a difference in the
dignity of the contracting parties.

But this matter is sometimes carried still farther: and although a §193. Voluntary
nation is under an obligation to preserve with the utmost care the submission of one
liberty and independence it inherits from nature,—yet, when it nation to another.
has not sufficient strength of itself, and feels itself unable to
resist its enemies, it may lawfully subject itself to a more powerful nation on certain
conditions agreed to by both parties: and the compact or treaty of submission will
thenceforward be the measure and rule of the rights of each. For since the people who
enter into subjection resign a right which naturally belongs to them, and transfer it to
the other nation, they are perfectly at liberty to annex what conditions they please to
this transfer; and the other party, by accepting their submission on this footing,
engages to observe religiously all the clauses of the treaty.

This submission may be varied to infinity, according to the will §194. Several kinds of
of the contracting parties: it may either leave the inferior nation a submission.
part of the sovereignty, restraining it only in certain respects,—or
it may totally abolish it, so that the superior nation shall become the sovereign of the
other,—or, finally, the lesser nation may be incorporated with the greater, in order
thenceforward to form with it but one and the same state: and then the citizens of the
former will have the same privileges as those with whom they are united. The Roman
history furnishes examples of each of these three kinds of submission,—1. the allies
of the Roman people, such as the inhabitants of Latium were for a long time, who, in
several respects, depended on Rome, but, in all others, were governed according to
their own laws, and by their own magistrates;— 2. the countries reduced to Roman
provinces, as Capua, whose inhabitants submitted absolutely to the Romans;* —3. the
nations to which Rome granted the freedom of the city. In after times the emperors
granted that privilege to all the nations subject to the empire, and thus transformed all
their subjects into citizens.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 122 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

In the case of a real subjection to a foreign power, the citizens §195. Right of the
who do not approve this change are not obliged to submit to citizens when the
it:—they ought to be allowed to sell their effects and retire nation submits to a
elsewhere. For my having entered into a society does not oblige foreign power.
me to follow its fate, when it dissolves itself in order to submit to
a foreign dominion. I submitted to the society as it then was, to live in that society as
the member of a sovereign state, and not in another: I am bound to obey it, while it
remains a political society: but when it divests itself of that quality in order to re-ceive
its laws from another state, it breaks the bond of union between its members, and
releases them from their obligations.

When a nation has placed itself under the protection of another §196. These compacts
that is more powerful, or has even entered into subjection to it annulled by the
with a view to receiving its protection,—if the latter does not failure of protection.
effectually protect the other in case of need, it is manifest, that,
by failing in its engagements, it loses all the rights it had acquired by the convention,
and that the other, being disengaged from the obligation it had contracted, re-enters
into the possession of all its rights, and recovers its independence, or its liberty. It is to
be observed, that this takes place even in cases where the protector does not fail in his
engagements through a want of good faith, but merely through inability. For the
weaker nation having submitted only for the sake of obtaining protection,—if the
other proves unable to fulfil that essential condition, the compact is dissolved;—the
weaker resumes its right, and may, if it thinks proper, have recourse to a more
effectual protection.* Thus the dukes of Austria, who had acquired a right of
protection, and in some sort a sovereignty over the city of Lucerne, being unwilling or
unable to protect it effectually, that city concluded an alliance with the three first
cantons; and the dukes having carried their complaint to the emperor, the inhabitants
of Lucerne replied, “that they had used the natural right common to all men, by which
every one is permitted to endeavour to procure his own safety when he is abandoned
by those who are obliged to grant him assistance.”†

The law is the same with respect to both the contracting parties: §197. Or by the
if the party protected do not fulfil their engagements with infidelity of the party
fidelity, the protector is discharged from his; he may afterwards protected.
refuse his protection, and declare the treaty broken, in case the
situation of his affairs renders such a step advisable.

In virtue of the same principle which discharges one of the §198. And by the
contracting parties when the other fails in his engagements, if the encroachments of the
more powerful nation should assume a greater authority over the protector.
weaker one than the treaty of protection or submission allows,
the latter may consider the treaty as broken, and provide for its safety according to its
own discretion. If it were otherwise, the inferior nation would lose by a convention
which it had only formed with a view to its safety; and if it were still bound by its
engagements when its protector abuses them and openly violates his own, the treaty
would, to the weaker party, prove a downright deception. However, as some people
maintain, that, in this case, the inferior nation has only the right of resistance and of
imploring foreign aid,—and particularly as the weak cannot take too many

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 123 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

precautions against the powerful, who are skilful in colouring over their
enterprises,—the safest way is to insert in this kind of treaty a clause declaring it null
and void whenever the superior power shall arrogate to itself any rights not expressly
granted by the treaty.

But if the nation that is protected, or that has placed itself in §199. How the right
subjection on certain conditions, does not resist the of the nation
encroachments of that power from which it has sought protected is lost by its
support,—if it makes no opposition to them,—if it preserves a silence.
profound silence, when it might and ought to speak,—its patient
acquiescence becomes in length of time a tacit consent that legitimates the rights of
the usurper. There would be no stability in the affairs of men, and especially in those
of nations, if long possession, accompanied by the silence of the persons concerned,
did not produce a degree of right. But it must be observed, that silence, in order to
shew tacit consent, ought to be voluntary. If the inferior nation proves that violence
and fear prevented its giving testimonies of its opposition, nothing can be concluded
from its silence, which therefore gives no right to the usurper.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 124 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER XVII

How A Nation May Separate Itself From The State Of Which
It Is A Member, Or Renounce Its Allegiance To Its Sovereign
When It Is Not Protected.
We have said that an independent nation, which, without §200. Difference
becoming a member of another state, has voluntarily rendered between the present
itself dependent on or subject to it in order to obtain protection, case and those in the
is released from its engagements as soon as that protection fails, preceding chapter.
even though the failure happen through the inability of the
protector. But we are not to conclude that it is precisely the same case with every
nation that cannot obtain speedy and effectual protection from its natural sovereign or
the state of which it is a member. The two cases are very different. In the former, a
free nation becomes subject to another state,—not to partake of all the other’s
advantages, and form with it an absolute union of interests (for if the more powerful
state were willing to confer so great a favour, the weaker one would be incorporated,
not subjected),—but to obtain protection alone by the sacrifice of its liberty, without
expecting any other return. When therefore the sole and indispensable condition of its
subjection is (from what cause soever) not complied with, it is free from its
engagements; and its duty towards itself obliges it to take fresh methods to provide for
its own security. But the several members of one individual state, as they all equally
participate in the advantages it procures, are bound uniformly to sup-port it: they have
entered into mutual engagements to continue united with each other, and to have on
all occasions but one common cause. If those who are menaced or attacked might
separate themselves from the others in order to avoid a present danger, every state
would soon be dismembered and destroyed. It is then essentially necessary for the
safety of society, and even for the welfare of all its members, that each part should
with all its might resist a common enemy, rather than separate from the others; and
this is consequently one of the necessary conditions of the political association. The
natural subjects of a prince are bound to him without any other reserve than the
observation of the fundamental laws;—it is their duty to remain faithful to him, as it is
his, on the other hand, to take care to govern them well: both parties have but one
common interest; the people and the prince together constitute but one complete
whole, one and the same society. It is then an essential and necessary condition of the
political society, that the subjects remain united to their prince, as far as in their
power.

When, therefore, a city or a province is threatened or actually §201. Duty of the
attacked, it must not, for the sake of escaping the danger, members of a state, or
separate itself from the state of which it is a member, or abandon subjects of a prince,
its natural prince, even when the state or the prince is unable to who are in danger.
give it immediate and effectual assistance. Its duty, its political
engagements, oblige it to make the greatest efforts, in order to maintain itself in its

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 125 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

present state. If it is overcome by force,—necessity, that irresistible law, frees it from
its former engagements, and gives it a right to treat with the conqueror, in order to
obtain the best terms possible. If it must either submit to him or perish, who can doubt
but that it may and even ought to prefer the former alternative? Modern usage is
conformable to this decision:—a city submits to the enemy when it cannot expect
safety from a vigorous resistance; it takes an oath of fidelity to him; and its sovereign
lays the blame on fortune alone.

The state is obliged to defend and preserve all its members (§17); §202. Their right
and the prince owes the same assistance to his subjects. If, when they are
therefore, the state or the prince refuses or neglects to succour a abandoned.
body of people who are exposed to imminent danger, the latter,
being thus abandoned, become perfectly free to provide for their own safety and
preservation in whatever manner they find most convenient, without paying the least
regard to those who, by abandoning them, have been the first to fail in their duty. The
country of Zug, being attacked by the Swiss in 1352, sent for succour to the duke of
Austria its sovereign; but that prince, being engaged in discourse concerning his
hawks at the time when the deputies appeared before him, would scarcely condescend
to hear them. Thus abandoned, the people of Zug entered into the Helvetic
confederacy.* The city of Zurich had been in the same situation the year before.
Being attacked by a band of rebellious citizens who were supported by the
neighbouring nobility and the house of Austria, it made application to the head of the
empire: but Charles IV.73 who was then emperor, declared to its deputies that he
could not defend it;—upon which, Zurich secured its safety by an alliance with the
Swiss.† The same reason has authorised the Swiss in general to separate themselves
entirely from the empire, which never protected them in any emergency: they had not
owned its authority for a long time before their independence was acknowledged by
the emperor and the whole Germanic body, at the treaty of Westphalia.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 126 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER XVIII

Of The Establishment Of A Nation In A Country.
Hitherto we have considered the nation merely with respect to §203. Possession of a
itself, without any regard to the country it possesses. Let us now country by a nation.
see it established in a country, which becomes its own property
and habitation. The earth belongs to mankind in general; destined by the creator to be
their common habitation, and to supply them with food, they all possess a natural
right to inhabit it, and to derive from it whatever is necessary for their subsistence,
and suitable to their wants. But when the human race became extremely multiplied,
the earth was no longer capable of furnishing spontaneously, and without culture,
sufficient support for its inhabitants; neither could it have received proper cultivation
from wandering tribes of men continuing to possess it in common. It therefore became
necessary that those tribes should fix themselves somewhere, and appropriate to
themselves portions of land, in order that they might, without being disturbed in their
labour, or disappointed of the fruits of their industry, apply themselves to render those
lands fertile, and thence derive their subsistence. Such must have been the origin of
the rights of property and dominion: and it was a sufficient ground to justify their
establishment. Since their introduction, the right which was common to all mankind is
individually restricted to what each lawfully possesses. The country which a nation
inhabits, whether that nation has emigrated thither in a body, or that the different
families of which it consists were previously scattered over the country, and there
uniting, formed themselves into a political society,—that country, I say, is the
settlement of the nation, and it has a peculiar and exclusive right to it.

This right comprehends two things: 1. The domain, by virtue of §204. Its right over
which the nation alone may use this country for the supply of its the parts in its
necessities, may dispose of it as it thinks proper, and derive from possession.
it every advantage it is capable of yielding.—2. The empire, or
the right of sovereign command, by which the nation directs and regulates at its
pleasure every thing that passes in the country.

When a nation takes possession of a country to which no prior §205. Acquisition of
owner can lay claim, it is considered as acquiring the empire or the sovereignty in a
sovereignty of it, at the same time with the domain. For since the vacant country.
nation is free and independent, it can have no intention, in
settling in a country, to leave to others the right of command, or any of those rights
that constitute sovereignty. The whole space over which a nation extends its
government, becomes the seat of its jurisdiction, and is called its territory.

If a number of free families, scattered over an independent §206. Another
country, come to unite for the purpose of forming a nation or manner of acquiring
state, they all together acquire the sovereignty over the whole the empire in a free
country they inhabit; for they were previously in possession of country.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 127 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

the domain,—a proportional share of it belonging to each individual family: and since
they are willing to form together a political society, and establish a public authority
which every member of the society shall be bound to obey, it is evidently their
intention to attribute to that public authority the right of command over the whole
country.

All mankind have an equal right to things that have not yet fallen §207. How a nation
into the possession of any one; and those things belong to the appropriates to itself a
person who first takes possession of them. When therefore a desert country.
nation finds a country uninhabited and without an owner, it may
lawfully take possession of it: and after it has sufficiently made known its will in this
respect, it cannot be deprived of it by another nation. Thus navigators going on
voyages of discovery, furnished with a commission from their sovereign, and meeting
with islands or other lands in a desert state, have taken possession of them in the name
of their nation: and this title has been usually respected, provided it was soon after
followed by a real possession.

But it is questioned whether a nation can, by the bare act of §208. A question on
taking possession, appropriate to itself countries which it does this subject.
not really occupy, and thus engross a much greater extent of
territory than it is able to people or cultivate. It is not difficult to determine, that such
a pretension would be an absolute infringement of the natural rights of men, and
repugnant to the views of nature, which, having destined the whole earth to supply the
wants of mankind in general, gives no nation a right to appropriate to itself a country,
except for the purpose of making use of it, and not of hindering others from deriving
advantage from it. The law of nations will therefore not acknowledge the property and
sovereignty of a nation over any uninhabited countries, except those of which it has
really taken actual possession, in which it has formed settlements, or of which it
makes actual use. In effect, when navigators have met with desert countries in which
those of other nations had, in their transient visits, erected some monument to shew
their having taken possession of them, they have paid as little regard to that empty
ceremony, as to the regulation of the popes, who divided a great part of the world
between the crowns of Castile and Portugal.*

There is another celebrated question, to which the discovery of §209. Whether it be
the new world has principally given rise. It is asked whether a lawful to possess a
nation may lawfully take possession of some part of a vast part of a country
country, in which there are none but erratic nations whose scanty inhabited only by a
population is incapable of occupying the whole? We have few wandering tribes.

already observed (§81), in establishing the obligation to cultivate
the earth, that those nations cannot exclusively appropriate to themselves more land
than they have occasion for, or more than they are able to settle and cultivate. Their
unsettled habitation in those immense regions cannot be accounted a true and legal
possession; and the people of Europe, too closely pent up at home, finding land of
which the savages stood in no particular need, and of which they made no actual and
constant use, were lawfully entitled to take possession of it, and settle it with colonies.
The earth, as we have already observed, belongs to mankind in general, and was
designed to furnish them with subsistence: if each nation had from the beginning

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 128 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

resolved to appropriate to itself a vast country, that the people might live only by
hunting, fishing, and wild fruits, our globe would not be sufficient to maintain a tenth
part of its present inhabitants. We do not therefore deviate from the views of nature in
confining the Indians within narrower limits. However, we cannot help praising the
moderation of the English puritans who first settled in New England; who,
notwithstanding their being furnished with a charter from their sovereign, purchased
of the Indians the land of which they intended to take possession.* This laudable
example was followed by William Penn74 and the colony of quakers that he
conducted to Pennsylvania.

When a nation takes possession of a distant country, and settles a §210. Colonies.
colony there, that country, though separated from the principal
establishment, or mother-country, naturally becomes a part of the state, equally with
its ancient possessions. Whenever therefore the political laws, or treaties, make no
distinction between them, every thing said of the territory of a nation, must also
extend to its colonies.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 129 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER XIX

Of Our Native Country, And Several Things That Relate To It.
The whole of the countries possessed by a nation and subject to §211. What is our
its laws, forms, as we have already said, its territory, and is the country.
common country of all the individuals of the nation. We have
been obliged to anticipate the definition of the term, native country (§122), because
our subject led us to treat of the love of our country,—a virtue so excellent and so
necessary in a state. Supposing then this definition already known, it remains that we
should explain several things that have a relation to this subject, and answer the
questions that naturally arise from it.

The citizens are the members of the civil society: bound to this §212. Citizens and
society by certain duties, and subject to its authority, they equally natives.
participate in its advantages. The natives, or natural-born
citizens, are those born in the country, of parents who are citizens. As the society
cannot exist and perpetuate itself otherwise than by the children of the citizens, those
children naturally follow the condition of their fathers, and succeed to all their rights.
The society is supposed to desire this, in consequence of what it owes to its own
preservation; and it is presumed, as matter of course, that each citizen, on entering
into society, reserves to his children the right of becoming members of it. The country
of the fathers is therefore that of the children; and these become true citizens merely
by their tacit consent. We shall soon see, whether, on their coming to the years of
discretion, they may renounce their right, and what they owe to the society in which
they were born. I say, that, in order to be of the country, it is necessary that a person
be born of a father who is a citizen; for if he is born there of a foreigner, it will be
only the place of his birth, and not his country.

The inhabitants, as distinguished from citizens, are foreigners, §213. Inhabitants.
who are permitted to settle and stay in the country. Bound to the
society by their residence, they are subject to the laws of the state, while they reside in
it; and they are obliged to defend it, because it grants them protection, though they do
not participate in all the rights of citizens. They enjoy only the advantages which the
law or custom gives them. The perpetual inhabitants are those who have received the
right of perpetual residence. These are a kind of citizens of an inferior order, and are
united to the society, without participating in all its advantages. Their children follow
the condition of their fathers; and as the state has given to these the right of perpetual
residence, their right passes to their posterity.

A nation, or the sovereign who represents it, may grant to a §214. Naturalisation.
foreigner the quality of citizen, by admitting him into the body of
the political society. This is called naturalisation. There are some states in which the
sovereign cannot grant to a foreigner all the rights of citizens,—for example, that of
holding public offices,—and where, consequently, he has the power of granting only

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 130 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

an imperfect naturalisation. It is here a regulation of the fundamental law, which
limits the power of the prince. In other states, as in England and Poland, the prince
cannot naturalise a single person, without the concurrence of the nation represented
by its deputies. Finally, there are states, as, for instance, England, where the single
circumstance of being born in the country naturalises the children of a foreigner.

It is asked, whether the children born of citizens in a foreign §215. Children of
country are citizens? The laws have decided this question in citizens, born in a
several countries, and their regulations must be followed. By the foreign country.
law of nature alone, children follow the condition of their fathers,
and enter into all their rights (§212); the place of birth produces no change in this
particular, and cannot of itself furnish any reason for taking from a child what nature
has given him; I say “of itself,” for civil or political laws may, for particular reasons,
ordain otherwise. But I suppose that the father has not entirely quitted his country in
order to settle elsewhere. If he has fixed his abode in a foreign country, he is become
a member of another society, at least as a perpetual inhabitant; and his children will be
members of it also.

As to children born at sea, if they are born in those parts of it that §216. Children born
are possessed by their nation, they are born in the country: if it is at sea.
on the open sea, there is no reason to make a distinction between
them and those who are born in the country; for, naturally, it is our extraction, not the
place of our birth, that gives us rights: and if the children are born in a vessel
belonging to the nation, they may be reputed born in its territories; for it is natural to
consider the vessels of a nation as parts of its territory, especially when they sail upon
a free sea, since the state retains its jurisdiction over those vessels. And as, according
to the commonly received custom, this jurisdiction is preserved over the vessels, even
in parts of the sea subject to a foreign dominion, all the children born in the vessels of
a nation are considered as born in its territory. For the same reason, those born in a
foreign vessel are reputed born in a foreign country, unless their birth took place in a
port belonging to their own nation: for the port is more particularly a part of the
territory; and the mother, though at that moment on board a foreign vessel, is not on
that account out of the country. I suppose that she and her husband have not quitted
their native country to settle elsewhere.

For the same reasons also, children born out of the country in the §217. Children born
armies of the state, or in the house of its minister at a foreign in the armies of the
court, are reputed born in the country; for a citizen, who is absent state, or in the house
with his family on the service of the state, but still dependent on of its minister at a
it, and subject to its jurisdiction, cannot be considered as having foreign court.

quitted its territory.

Settlement is a fixed residence in any place with an intention of §218. Settlement.
always staying there. A man does not then establish his
settlement in any place, unless he makes sufficiently known his intention of fixing
there, either tacitly, or by an express declaration. However, this declaration is no
reason why, if he afterwards changes his mind, he may not transfer his settlement
elsewhere. In this sense, a person who stops at a place upon business, even though he

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 131 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

stay a long time, has only a simple habitation there, but has no settlement. Thus the
envoy of a foreign prince has not his settlement at the court where he resides.

The natural or original settlement is that which we acquire by birth, in the place
where our father has his; and we are considered as retaining it, till we have abandoned
it, in order to chuse another. The acquired settlement (adscititium) is that where we
settle by our own choice.

Vagrants are people who have no settlement. Consequently those §219. Vagrants.
born of vagrant parents have no country, since a man’s country is
the place where, at the time of his birth, his parents had their settlement (§122), or it is
the state of which his father was then a member;—which comes to the same point: for
to settle for ever in a nation, is to become a member of it, at least as a perpetual
inhabitant, if not with all the privileges of a citizen. We may, however, consider the
country of a vagrant to be that of his child, while that vagrant is considered as not
having absolutely renounced his natural or original settlement.

Many distinctions will be necessary in order to give a complete §220. Whether a
solution to the celebrated question, whether a man may quit his person may quit his
country or the society of which he is a member. 1. The children country.
are bound by natural ties to the society in which they were born:
they are under an obligation to shew themselves grateful for the protection it has
afforded to their fathers, and are in a great measure indebted to it for their birth and
education. They ought therefore to love it, as we have already shewn (§122),—to
express a just gratitude to it, and requite its services as far as possible by serving it in
turn. We have observed above (§212), that they have a right to enter into the society
of which their fathers were members. But every man is born free; and the son of a
citizen, when come to the years of discretion, may examine whether it be convenient
for him to join the society for which he was destined by his birth. If he does not find it
advantageous to remain in it, he is at liberty to quit it on making it a compensation for
what it has done in his favour,* and preserving, as far as his new engagements will
allow him, the sentiments of love and gratitude he owes it. A man’s obligations to his
natural country may, however, change, lessen, or entirely vanish, according as he
shall have quitted it lawfully, and with good reason, in order to choose another, or has
been banished from it deservedly or unjustly, in due form of law, or by violence.

2. As soon as the son of a citizen attains the age of manhood, and acts as a citizen, he
tacitly assumes that character; his obligations, like those of others who expressly and
formally enter into engagements with society, become stronger and more extensive:
but the case is very different with respect to him of whom we have been speaking.
When a society has not been formed for a determinate time, it is allowable to quit it,
when that separation can take place without detriment to the society. A citizen may
therefore quit the state of which he is a member, provided it be not in such a
conjuncture when he cannot abandon it without doing it a visible injury. But we must
here draw a distinction between what may in strict justice be done, and what is
honourable and conformable to every duty,—in a word, between the internal and the
external obligation. Every man has a right to quit his country, in order to settle in any
other, when by that step he does not endanger the welfare of his country. But a good

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 132 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

citizen will never determine on such a step without necessity, or without very strong
reasons. It is taking a dishonourable advantage of our liberty, to quit our associates
upon slight pretences, after having derived considerable advantages from them: and
this is the case of every citizen with respect to his country.

3. As to those who have the cowardice to abandon their country in a time of danger,
and seek to secure themselves instead of defending it,— they manifestly violate the
social compact, by which all the contracting parties engaged to defend themselves in
an united body, and in concert: they are infamous deserters whom the state has a right
to punish severely.*

In a time of peace and tranquillity, when the country has no §221. How a person
actual need of all her children, the very welfare of the state, and may absent himself
that of the citizens, requires that every individual be at liberty to for a time.
travel on business, provided that he be always ready to return,
whenever the public interest recalls him. It is not presumed that any man has bound
himself to the society of which he is a member, by an engagement never to leave the
country when the interest of his affairs requires it, and when he can absent himself
without injury to his country.

The political laws of nations vary greatly in this respect. In some §222. Variation of the
nations, it is at all times, except in case of actual war, allowed to political laws in this
every citizen to absent himself, and even to quit the country respect.
altogether, whenever he thinks proper, without alleging any
reason for it.
This liberty, contrary in its own nature to the welfare and safety These must be
of society, can no where be tolerated but in a country destitute of obeyed.
resources and incapable of supplying the wants of its inhabitants.
In such a country there can only be an imperfect society; for civil society ought to be
capable of enabling all its members to procure by their labour and industry all the
necessaries of life:—unless it effects this, it has no right to require them to devote
themselves entirely to it. In some other states, every citizen is left at liberty to travel
abroad on business, but not to quit his country altogether, without the express
permission of the sovereign. Finally, there are states where the rigour of the
government will not permit any one whatsoever to go out of the country, without
passports in form, which are even not granted without great difficulty. In all these
cases it is necessary to conform to the laws, when they are made by a lawful authority.
But in the last-mentioned case, the sovereign abuses his power, and reduces his
subjects to an insupportable slavery, if he refuses them permission to travel for their
own advantage, when he might grant it to them without inconvenience, and without
danger to the state. Nay it will presently appear, that, on certain occasions, he cannot,
under any pretext, detain persons who wish to quit the country with the intention of
abandoning it for ever.

There are cases in which a citizen has an absolute right to §223. Cases in which
renounce his country, and abandon it entirely,—a right, founded a citizen has a right to
on reasons derived from the very nature of the social quit his country.
compact.—1. If the citizen cannot procure subsistence in his own

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 133 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

country, it is undoubtedly lawful for him to seek it elsewhere. For political or civil
society being entered into only with a view of facilitating to each of its members the
means of supporting himself, and of living in happiness and safety, it would be absurd
to pretend that a member, whom it cannot furnish with such things as are most
necessary, has not a right to leave it.

2. If the body of the society, or he who represents it, absolutely fail to discharge their
obligations towards a citizen, the latter may withdraw himself. For if one of the
contracting parties does not observe his engagements, the other is no longer bound to
fulfil his; for the contract is reciprocal between the society and its members. It is on
the same principle also that the society may expel a member who violates its laws.

3. If the major part of the nation, or the sovereign who represents it, attempt to enact
laws relative to matters in which the social compact cannot oblige every citizen to
submission, those who are averse to these laws have a right to quit the society, and go
settle elsewhere. For instance, if the sovereign, or the greater part of the nation, will
allow but one religion in the state, those who believe and profess another religion
have a right to withdraw, and to take with them their families and effects. For they
cannot be supposed to have subjected themselves to the authority of men, in affairs of
conscience;* and if the society suffers and is weakened by their departure, the blame
must be imputed to the intolerant party: for it is they who fail in their observance of
the social compact,— it is they who violate it, and force the others to a separation. We
have elsewhere touched upon some other instances of this third case,—that of a
popular state wishing to have a sovereign (§33),—and that of an independent nation
taking the resolution to submit to a foreign power (§195).

Those who quit their country for any lawful reason, with a design §224. Emigrants.
to settle elsewhere, are called emigrants, and take their families
and property with them.

Their right to emigrate may arise from several sources. 1. In the §225. Sources of their
cases we have just mentioned (§223), it is a natural right, which right.
is certainly reserved to each individual in the very compact itself
by which civil society was formed.

2. The liberty of emigration may, in certain cases, be secured to the citizens by a
fundamental law of the state. The citizens of Neufchatel and Valangin in Switzerland
may quit the country and carry off their effects at their own pleasure, without even
paying any duties.

3. It may be voluntarily granted them by the sovereign.

4. Finally, this right may be derived from some treaty made with a foreign power, by
which a sovereign has promised to leave full liberty to those of his subjects, who, for
a certain reason, on account of religion for instance, desire to transplant themselves
into the territories of that power. There are such treaties between the German princes,
particularly for cases in which religion is concerned. In Switzerland likewise, a citizen
of Bern who wishes to emigrate to Fribourg and there profess the religion of the place,

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 134 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

and reciprocally a citizen of Fribourg who, for a similar reason, is desirous of
removing to Bern, has a right to quit his native country, and carry off with him all his
property.

It appears from several passages in history, particularly the history of Switzerland and
the neighbouring countries, that the law of nations, established there by custom some
ages back, did not permit a state to receive the subjects of another state into the
number of its citizens. This vicious custom had no other foundation than the slavery
to which the people were then reduced. A prince, a lord, ranked his subjects under the
head of his private property: he calculated their number, as he did that of his flocks;
and, to the disgrace of human nature, this strange abuse is not yet every where
eradicated.

If the sovereign attempts to molest those who have a right to §226. If the sovereign
emigrate, he does them an injury; and the injured individuals infringes their right,
may lawfully implore the protection of the power who is willing he injures them.
to receive them. Thus we have seen Frederic William,75 king of
Prussia, grant his protection to the emigrant protestants of Saltzburgh.

The name of supplicants is given to all fugitives who implore the §227. Supplicants.
protection of a sovereign against the nation or prince they have
quitted. We cannot solidly establish what the law of nations determines with respect
to them, until we have treated of the duties of one nation towards others.

Finally, exile is another manner of leaving our country. An exile §228. Exile and
is a man driven from the place of his settlement, or constrained banishment.
to quit it, but without a mark of infamy. Banishment is a similar
expulsion, with a mark of infamy annexed.* Both may be for a limited time, or for
ever. If an exile or banished man had his settlement in his own country, he is exiled or
banished from his country. It is however proper to observe that common usage applies
also the terms, exile and banishment, to the expulsion of a foreigner who is driven
from a country where he had no settlement, and to which he is, either for a limited
time or for ever, prohibited to return.

As a man may be deprived of any right whatsoever by way of punishment,—exile,
which deprives him of the right of dwelling in a certain place, may be inflicted as a
punishment: banishment is always one; for a mark of infamy cannot be set on any
one, but with the view of punishing him for a fault, either real or pretended.

When the society has excluded one of its members by a perpetual banishment, he is
only banished from the lands of that society, and it cannot hinder him from living
wherever else he pleases; for, after having driven him out, it can no longer claim any
authority over him. The contrary, however, may take place by particular conventions
between two or more states. Thus every member of the Helvetic confederacy may
banish its own subjects out of the territories of Switzerland in general; and in this case
the banished person will not be allowed to live in any of the cantons, or in the
territories of their allies.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 135 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Exile is divided into voluntary and involuntary. It is voluntary, when a man quits his
settlement, to escape some punish-ment, or to avoid some calamity,—and involuntary,
when it is the effect of a superior order.

Sometimes a particular place is appointed, where the exiled person is to remain during
his exile; or a certain space is particularised, which he is forbid to enter. These various
circumstances and modifications depend on him who has the power of sending into
exile.

A man, by being exiled or banished, does not forfeit the human §229. The exile and
character, nor consequently his right to dwell somewhere on banished man have a
earth. He derives this right from nature, or rather from its author, right to live
who has destined the earth for the habitation of mankind; and the somewhere.
introduction of property cannot have impaired the right which
every man has to the use of such things as are absolutely necessary,—a right which he
brings with him into the world at the moment of his birth.

But though this right is necessary and perfect in the general view §230. Nature of this
of it, we must not forget that it is but imperfect with respect to right.
each particular country. For, on the other hand, every nation has
a right to refuse admitting a foreigner into her territory, when he cannot enter it
without exposing the nation to evident danger, or doing her a manifest injury. What
she owes to herself, the care of her own safety, gives her this right; and in virtue of
her natural liberty, it belongs to the nation to judge, whether her circumstances will or
will not justify the admission of that foreigner (Prelim. §16). He cannot then settle by
a full right, and as he pleases, in the place he has chosen, but must ask permission of
the chief of the place; and if it is refused, it is his duty to submit.

However, as property could not be introduced to the prejudice of §231. Duty of nations
the right acquired by every human creature, of not being towards them.
absolutely deprived of such things as are necessary,—no nation
can, without good reasons, refuse even a perpetual residence to a man driven from his
country. But if particular and substantial reasons prevent her from affording him an
asylum, this man has no longer any right to demand it,—because, in such a case, the
country inhabited by the nation cannot, at the same time, serve for her own use, and
that of this foreigner. Now, supposing even that things are still in common, nobody
can arrogate to himself the use of a thing which actually serves to supply the wants of
another. Thus a nation, whose lands are scarcely sufficient to supply the wants of the
citizens, is not obliged to receive into its territories a company of fugitives or exiles.
Thus it ought even absolutely to reject them, if they are infected with a contagious
disease. Thus also it has a right to send them elsewhere, if it has just cause to fear that
they will corrupt the manners of the citizens, that they will create religious
disturbances, or occasion any other disorder, contrary to the public safety. In a word,
it has a right, and is even obliged, to follow, in this respect, the suggestions of
prudence. But this prudence should be free from unnecessary suspicion and
jealousy;—it should not be carried so far as to refuse a retreat to the unfortunate, for
slight reasons, and on groundless and frivolous fears. The means of tempering it will
be never to lose sight of that charity and commiseration which are due to the unhappy.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 136 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

We must not suppress those feelings even for those who have fallen into misfortune
through their own fault. For we ought to hate the crime, but love the man, since all
mankind ought to love each other.

If an exile or banished man has been driven from his country for §232. A nation cannot
any crime, it does not belong to the nation in which he has taken punish them for faults
refuge, to punish him for that fault committed in a foreign committed out of its
country. For nature does not give to men or to nations any right territories,
to inflict punishment, except for their own defence and safety
(§169); whence it follows, that we cannot punish any but those by whom we have
been injured.

But this very reason shews, that, although the justice of each §233. except such as
nation ought in general to be confined to the punishment of affect the common
crimes committed in its own territories, we ought to except from safety of mankind.
this rule those villains, who, by the nature and habitual frequency
of their crimes, violate all public security, and declare themselves the enemies of the
human race. Poisoners, assassins, and incendiaries by profession, may be
exterminated wherever they are seized; for they attack and injure all nations, by
trampling under foot the foundations of their common safety. Thus pirates are sent to
the gibbet by the first into whose hands they fall. If the sovereign of the country
where crimes of that nature have been committed, reclaims the perpetrators of them in
order to bring them to punishment, they ought to be surrendered to him, as being the
person who is principally interested in punishing them in an exemplary manner. And
as it is proper to have criminals regularly convicted by a trial in due form of law, this
is a second reason for delivering up malefactors of that class to the states where their
crimes have been committed.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 137 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER XX

Of Public, Common, And Private Property.
Let us now see what is the nature of the different things §234. What the
contained in the country possessed by a nation, and endeavour to Romans called res
establish the general principles of the law by which they are communes.
regulated. This subject is treated by civilians under the title de
rerum divisione. There are things which in their own nature cannot be possessed;
there are others, of which nobody claims the property, and which remain common, as
in their primitive state, when a nation takes possession of a country: the Roman
lawyers called these things res communes, things common: such were, with them, the
air, the running water, the sea, the fish, and wild beasts.

Every thing susceptible of property is considered as belonging to §235. Aggregate
the nation that possesses the country, and as forming the aggre- wealth of a nation,
gate mass of its wealth. But the nation does not possess all those and its divisions.
things in the same manner. Those not divided between particular
communities, or among the individuals of a nation, are called public property. Some
are reserved for the necessities of the state, and form the demesne of the crown, or of
the republic: others remain common to all the citizens, who take advantage of them,
each according to his necessities, or according to the laws which regulate their use;
and these are called common property.—There are others that belong to some body or
community, termed joint property, res universitatis; and these are, with respect to this
body in particular, what the public property is with respect to the whole nation. As the
nation may be considered as a great community, we may indifferently give the name
of common property to those things that belong to it in common, in such a manner
that all the citizens may make use of them, and to those that are possessed in the same
manner by a body or community: the same rules hold good with respect to
both.—Finally, the property possessed by individuals is termed private property, res
singulorum.

When a nation in a body takes possession of a country, every §236. Two ways of
thing that is not divided among its members remains common to acquiring public
the whole nation, and is called public property. There is a second property.
way whereby a nation, and, in general, every community, may
acquire possessions, viz. by the will of whosoever thinks proper to convey to it, under
any title whatsoever, the domain or property of what he possesses.

As soon as the nation commits the reins of government to the §237. The revenues of
hands of a prince, it is considered as committing to him, at the the public property
same time, the means of governing. Since therefore the income are naturally at the
of the public property, of the domain of the state, is destined for sovereign’s disposal.
the expenses of government, it is naturally at the prince’s
disposal, and ought always to be considered in this light, unless the nation has, in

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 138 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

express terms, excepted it in conferring the supreme authority, and has provided in
some other manner for its disposal, and for the necessary expenses of the state, and
the support of the prince’s person and household. Whenever therefore the prince is
purely and simply invested with the sovereign authority, it includes a full discretional
power to dispose of the public revenues. The duty of the sovereign indeed obliges him
to apply those revenues only to the necessities of the state; but he alone is to
determine the proper application of them, and is not accountable for them to any
person.

The nation may invest the superior with the sole use of its §238. The nation may
common possessions, and thus add them to the domain of the grant him the use and
state. It may even cede the property of them to him. But this property of its
cession of the use or property requires an express act of the common possessions,
proprietor, which is the nation. It is difficult to found it on a tacit
consent, because fear too often hinders the subjects from protesting against the unjust
encroachments of the sovereign.

The people may even allow the superior the domain of the things §239. or allow him
they possess in common, and reserve to themselves the use of the domain, and
them in the whole or in part. Thus the domain of a river, for reserve to itself the
instance, may be ceded to the prince, while the people reserve to use of them.
themselves the use of it for navigation, fishing, the watering of
cattle, &c. They may also allow the prince the sole right of fishing, &c. in that river.
In a word, the people may cede to the superior whatever right they please over the
common possessions of the nation; but all those particular rights do not naturally and
of themselves flow from the sovereignty.

If the income of the public property, or of the domain, is not §240. Taxes.
sufficient for the public wants, the state supplies the deficiency
by taxes. These ought to be regulated in such a manner, that all the citizens may pay
their quota in proportion to their abilities, and the advantages they reap from the
society. All the members of civil society being equally obliged to contribute,
according to their abilities, to its advantage and safety,—they cannot refuse to furnish
the subsidies necessary to its preservation, when they are demanded by lawful
authority.

Many nations have been unwilling to commit to the prince a trust §241. The nation may
of so delicate a nature, or to grant him a power that he may so reserve to itself the
easily abuse. In establishing a domain for the support of the right of imposing
sovereign and the ordinary expenses of the state, they have them.
reserved to themselves the right of providing, by themselves or
by their representatives, for extraordinary wants, in imposing taxes payable by all the
inhabitants. In England, the king lays the necessities of the state before the
parliament; that body, composed of the representatives of the nation, deliberates, and,
with the concurrence of the king, determines the sum to be raised, and the manner of
raising it. And of the use the king makes of the money thus raised, that same body
oblige him to render them an account.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 139 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

In other states where the sovereign possesses the full and §242. Of the
absolute authority, it is he alone that imposes taxes, regulates the sovereign who has
manner of raising them, and makes use of them as he thinks this power.
proper, without giving an account to any body. The French king
at present enjoys this authority, with the simple formality of causing his edicts to be
registered by the parliament; and that body has a right to make humble remonstrances,
if it sees any inconveniences attending the imposition ordered by the prince:—a wise
establishment for causing truth and the cries of the people to reach the ears of the
sovereign, and for setting some bounds to his extravagance, or to the avidity of the
ministers and persons concerned in the revenue.*

The prince who is invested with the power of taxing his people §243. Duties of the
ought by no means to consider the money thus raised as his own prince with respect to
property. He ought never to lose sight of the end for which this taxes.
power was granted him: the nation was willing to enable him to
provide, as it should seem best to his wisdom, for the necessities of the state. If he
diverts this money to other uses,—if he consumes it in idle luxury, to gratify his
pleasures, to satiate the avarice of his mistresses and favourites,—we hesitate not to
declare to those sovereigns who are still capable of listening to the voice of truth, that
such a one is not less guilty, nay, that he is a thousand times more so, than a private
person who makes use of his neighbours’ property to gratify his irregular passions.
Injustice, though screened from punishment, is not the less shameful.

Every thing in the political society ought to tend to the good of §244.Eminent domain
the community; and since even the persons of the citizens are annexed to the
subject to this rule, their property cannot be excepted. The state sovereignty.
could not subsist, or constantly administer the public affairs in
the most advantageous manner, if it had not a power to dispose occasionally of all
kinds of property subject to its authority. It is even to be presumed, that, when the
nation takes possession of a country, the property of certain things is given up to
individuals only with this reserve. The right which belongs to the society, or to the
sovereign, of disposing, in case of necessity and for the public safety, of all the wealth
contained in the state, is called the eminent domain. It is evident that this right is, in
certain cases, necessary to him who governs, and consequently is a part of the empire
or sovereign power, and ought to be placed in the number of the prerogatives of
majesty (§45). When therefore the people confer the empire on any one, they at the
same time invest him with the eminent domain, unless it be expressly reserved. Every
prince who is truly sovereign is invested with this right when the nation has not
excepted it,—however limited his authority may be in other respects.

If the sovereign disposes of the public property in virtue of his eminent domain, the
alienation is valid, as having been made with sufficient powers.

When, in a case of necessity, he disposes in like manner of the possessions of a
community or an individual, the alienation will, for the same reason, be valid. But
justice requires that this community or this individual be indemnified at the public
charge: and if the treasury is not able to bear the expense, all the citizens are obliged
to contribute to it; for the burthens of the state ought to be supported equally, or in a

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 140 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

just proportion. The same rules are applicable to this case as to the loss of
merchandise thrown overboard to save the vessel.

Besides the eminent domain, the sovereignty gives a right of §245. Government of
another nature over all public, common, and private public property.
property,—that is, the empire, or the right of command in all
places of the country belonging to the nation. The supreme power extends to every
thing that passes in the state, wherever it is transacted; and consequently the sovereign
commands in all public places, on rivers, on highways, in deserts, &c. Every thing
that happens there is subject to his authority.

In virtue of the same authority, the sovereign may make laws to §246. The superior
regulate the manner in which common property is to be may make laws with
used,—as well the property of the nation at large, as that of respect to the use of
distinct bodies or corporations. He cannot, indeed, take away things possessed in
their right from those who have a share in that property: but the common.

care he ought to take of the public repose, and of the common
advantage of the citizens, gives him doubtless a right to establish laws tending to this
end, and consequently to regulate the manner in which things possessed in common
are to be enjoyed. This affair might give room for abuses, and excite disturbances,
which it is important to the state to prevent, and against which the prince is obliged to
take just measures. Thus the sovereign may establish wise laws with respect to
hunting and fishing,—forbid them in the seasons of propagation,—prohibit the use of
certain nets, and of every destructive method, &c. But as it is only in the character of
the common father, governor, and guardian of his people, that the sovereign has a
right to make those laws, he ought never to lose sight of the ends which he is called
upon to accomplish by enacting them: and if, upon those subjects, he makes any
regulations with any other view than that of the public welfare, he abuses his power.

A corporation, as well as every other proprietor, has a right to §247. Alienation of
alienate and mortgage its property: but the present members the property of a
ought never to lose sight of the destination of that joint property, corporation.
nor dispose of it otherwise than for the advantage of the body, or
in cases of necessity. If they alienate it with any other view, they abuse their power,
and transgress against the duty they owe to their own corporation and their posterity;
and the prince, in quality of common father, has a right to oppose the measure.
Besides, the interest of the state requires that the property of corporations be not
squandered away;—which gives the prince, intrusted with the care of watching over
the public safety, a new right to prevent the alienation of such property. It is then very
proper to ordain in a state, that the alienation of the property of corporations should be
invalid, without the consent of the superior powers. And indeed the civil law, in this
respect, gives to corporations the rights of minors. But this is strictly no more than a
civil law; and the opinion of those who make the law of nature alone a sufficient
authority to take from a corporation the power of alienating their property without the
consent of the sovereign, appears to me to be void of foundation, and contrary to the
notion of property. A corporation, it is true, may have received property either from
their predecessors, or from any other persons, with a clause that disables them from
alienating it: but in this case they have only the perpetual use of it, not the entire and

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 141 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

free property. If any of their property was solely given for the preservation of the
body, it is evident that the corporation has not a right to alienate it, except in a case of
extreme necessity:—and whatever property they may have received from the
sovereign, is presumed to be of that nature.

All the members of a corporation have an equal right to the use §248. Use of common
of its common property. But, respecting the manner of enjoying property.
it, the body of the corporation may make such regulations as they
think proper, provided that those regulations be not inconsistent with that equality
which ought to be preserved in a communion of property. Thus a corporation may
determine the use of a common forest or pasture, either allowing it to all the members
according to their wants, or allotting to each an equal share; but they have not a right
to exclude any one of the number, or to make a distinction to his disadvantage by
assigning him a less share than that of the others.

All the members of a body having an equal right to its common §249. How each
property, each individual ought so to manage in taking advantage member is to enjoy it.
of it, as not in any wise to injure the common use. According to
this rule, an individual is not permitted to construct upon any river that is public
property, any work capable of rendering it less convenient for the use of every one
else, as erecting mills, making a trench to turn the water upon his own lands, &c. If he
attempts it, he arrogates to himself a private right, derogatory to the common right of
the public.

The right of anticipation (jus praeventionis) ought to be §250. Right of
faithfully observed in the use of common things which cannot be anticipation in the use
used by several persons at the same time. This name is given to of it.
the right which the first-comer acquires, to the use of things of
this nature. For instance, if I am actually drawing water from a common or public
well, another who comes after me cannot drive me away to draw out of it himself: and
he ought to wait till I have done. For I make use of my right in drawing that water,
and nobody can disturb me: a second, who has an equal right, cannot assert it to the
prejudice of mine; to stop me by his arrival, would be arrogating to himself a better
right than he allows me, and thereby violating the law of equality.

The same rule ought to be observed in regard to those common §251. The same right
things which are consumed in using them. They belong to the in another case.
person who first takes possession of them with the intention of
applying them to his own use; and a second, who comes after, has no right to take
them from him. I repair to a common forest, and begin to fell a tree: you come in
afterwards, and would wish to have the same tree: you cannot take it from me; for this
would be arrogating to yourself a right superior to mine, whereas our rights are equal.
The rule in this case is the same as that which the law of nature prescribes in the use
of the productions of the earth, before the introduction of property.

The expenses necessary for the preservation or reparation of the §252. Preservation
things that belong to the public, or to a community, ought to be and repairs of
equally borne by all who have a share in them, whether the common possessions.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 142 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

necessary sums be drawn from the common coffer, or that each individual contributes
his quota. The nation, the corporation, and, in general, every collective body, may
also establish extraordinary taxes, imposts, or annual contributions, to defray those
expenses,—provided there be no oppressive exaction in the case, and that the money
so levied be faithfully applied to the use for which it was raised. To this end also, as
we have before observed (§103), toll-duties are lawfully established. High-ways,
bridges, and causeways, are things of a public nature, from which all who pass over
them derive advantage: it is therefore just that all those passengers should contribute
to their support.

We shall see presently that the sovereign ought to provide for the §253. Duty and right
preservation of the public property. He is no less obliged, as the of the sovereign in
conductor of the whole nation, to watch over the preservation of this respect.
the property of a corporation. It is the interest of the state at large
that a corporation should not fall into indigence, by the ill conduct of its members for
the time being. And as every obligation generates the correspondent right which is
necessary to discharge it, the sovereign has here a right to oblige the corporation to
conform to their duty. If therefore he perceives, for instance, that they suffer their
necessary buildings to fall to ruin, or that they destroy their forests, he has a right to
prescribe what they ought to do, and to put his orders in force.

We have but a few words to say with respect to private property: §254. Private
every proprietor has a right to make what use he pleases of his property.
own substance, and to dispose of it as he pleases, when the rights
of a third person are not involved in the business. The sovereign, however, as the
father of his people, may and ought to set bounds to a prodigal, and to prevent his
running to ruin, especially if this prodigal be the father of a family. But he must take
care not to extend this right of inspection so far as to lay a restraint on his subjects in
the administration of their affairs;— which would be no less injurious to the true
welfare of the state than to the just liberty of the citizens. The particulars of this
subject belong to public law and politics.

It must also be observed, that individuals are not so perfectly free §255. The sovereign
in the economy or government of their affairs, as not to be may subject it to
subject to the laws and regulations of police made by the regulations of police.
sovereign. For instance, if vineyards are multiplied to too great
an extent in a country which is in want of corn, the sovereign may forbid the planting
of the vine in fields proper for tillage; for here the public welfare and the safety of the
state are concerned. When a reason of such importance requires it, the sovereign or
the magistrate may oblige an individual to sell all the provisions in his possession
above what are necessary for the subsistence of his family, and may fix the price he
shall receive for them. The public authority may and ought to hinder monopolies, and
suppress all practices tending to raise the price of provisions,—to which practices the
Romans applied the expressions annonam incendere, comprimere, vexare.76

Every man may naturally chuse the person to whom he would §256. Inheritances.
leave his property after his death, as long as his right is not
limited by some indispensable obligation,—as, for instance, that of providing for the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 143 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

subsistence of his children. The children also have naturally a right to inherit their
father’s property in equal portions. But this is no reason why particular laws may not
be established in a state, with regard to testaments and inheritances,—a respect being
however paid to the essential laws of nature. Thus, by a rule established in many
places with a view to support noble families, the eldest son is, of right, his father’s
principal heir. Lands, perpetually appropriated to the eldest male heir of a family,
belong to him by virtue of another right, which has its source in the will of the person,
who, being sole owner of those lands, has bequeathed them in that manner.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 144 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER XXI

Of The Alienation Of The Public Property, Or The Domain,
And That Of A Part Of The State.
The nation being the sole mistress of the property in her §257. The nation may
possession, may dispose of it as she thinks proper, and may alienate its public
lawfully alienate or mortgage it. This right is a necessary property.
consequence of the full and absolute domain: the exercise of it is
restrained by the law of nature, only with respect to proprietors who have not the use
of reason necessary for the management of their affairs; which is not the case with a
nation. Those who think otherwise cannot allege any solid reason for their opinion;
and it would follow from their principles, that no safe contract can be entered into
with any nation;—a conclusion, which attacks the foundation of all public treaties.

But it is very just to say that the nation ought carefully to §258. Duties of a
preserve her public property,—to make a proper use of it,—not nation in this respect.
to dispose of it without good reasons, nor to alienate or mortgage
it but for a manifest public advantage, or in case of a pressing necessity. This is an
evident consequence of the duties a nation owes to herself. The public property is
extremely useful and even necessary to the nation; and she cannot squander it
improperly, without injuring herself, and shamefully neglecting the duty of self-
preservation. I speak of the public property strictly so called, or the domain of the
state. Alienating its revenues is cutting the sinews of government. As to the property
common to all the citizens, the nation does an injury to those who derive advan-tage
from it, if she alienates it without necessity, or without cogent reasons. She has a right
to do this as proprietor of these possessions; but she ought not to dispose of them
except in a manner that is consistent with the duties which the body owes to its
members.

The same duties lie on the prince, the director of the nation: he §259. Duties of the
ought to watch over the preservation and prudent management of prince.
the public property,—to stop and prevent all waste of it,—and
not suffer it to be applied to improper uses.

The prince, or the superior of the society, whatever he is, being §260. He cannot
naturally no more than the administrator, and not the proprietor alienate the public
of the state, his authority, as sovereign or head of the nation, property.
does not of itself give him a right to alienate or mortgage the
public property. The general rule then is, that the superior cannot dispose of the public
property, as to its substance,—the right to do this being reserved to the proprietor
alone, since proprietorship is defined to be the right to dispose of a thing substantially.
If the superior exceeds his powers with respect to this property, the alienation he
makes of it will be invalid, and may at any time be revoked by his successor, or by the
nation. This is the law generally received in France; and it was upon this principle that

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 145 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

the duke of Sully* advised Henry IV. to resume the possession of all the domains of
the crown alienated by his predecessors.

The nation having the free disposal of all the property belonging §261. The nation may
to her (§257), may convey her right to the sovereign, and give him a right to it.
consequently confer upon him that of alienating and mortgaging
the public property. But this right not being necessary to the conductor of the state, to
enable him to render the people happy by his government,—it is not to be presumed,
that the nation have given it to him; and if they have not made an express law for that
purpose, we are to conclude that the prince is not invested with it, unless he has
received full, unlimited, and absolute authority.

The rules we have just established relate to alienations of public §262. Rules on this
property in favour of individuals. The question assumes a subject with respect to
different aspect when it relates to alienations made by one nation treaties between
to another:* it requires other principles to decide it in the nation and nation.
different cases that may present themselves. Let us endeavour to
give a general theory of them.

1. It is necessary that nations should be able to treat and contract validly with each
other, since they would otherwise find it impossible to bring their affairs to an issue,
or to obtain the blessings of peace with any degree of certainty. Whence it follows,
that when a nation has ceded any part of its property to another, the cession ought to
be deemed valid and irrevocable, as in fact it is, in virtue of the notion of property.
This principle cannot be shaken by any fundamental law, by which a nation might
pretend to deprive themselves of the power of alienating what belongs to them: for
this would be depriving themselves of all power to form contracts with other nations,
or attempting to deceive them. A nation with such a law ought never to treat
concerning its property: if it is obliged to it by necessity, or determined to do it for its
own advantage, the moment it broaches a treaty on the subject, it renounces its
fundamental law. It is seldom disputed that an entire nation may alienate what belongs
to itself: but it is asked, whether its conductor, its sovereign, has this power? The
question may be determined by the fundamental laws. But if the laws say nothing
directly on this subject, then we have recourse to our second principle, viz.

2. If the nation has conferred the full sovereignty on its conductor,— if it has intrusted
to him the care, and, without reserve, given him the right, of treating and contracting
with other states, it is considered as having invested him with all the powers necessary
to make a valid contract. The prince is then the organ of the nation; what he does is
considered as the act of the nation itself; and though he is not the owner of the public
property, his alienations of it are valid, as being duly authorised.

The question becomes more difficult, when it relates, not to the §263. Alienation of a
alienation of some parts of the public property, but to the part of the state.
dismembering of the nation or state itself,—the cession of a town
or a province that constitutes a part of it. This question however admits of a sound
decision on the same principles. A nation ought to preserve itself (§16),—it ought to
preserve all its members,—it cannot abandon them; and it is under an engagement to

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 146 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

support them in their rank as members of the nation (§17). It has not then a right to
traffic with their rank and liberty, on account of any advantages it may expect to
derive from such a negotiation. They have joined the society for the purpose of being
members of it:—they submit to the authority of the state, for the purpose of promoting
in concert their common welfare and safety, and not of being at its disposal, like a
farm or an herd of cattle. But the nation may lawfully abandon them in a case of
extreme necessity; and she has a right to cut them off from the body, if the public
safety requires it. When therefore, in such a case, the state gives up a town or a
province to a neighbour or to a powerful enemy, the cession ought to remain valid as
to the state, since she had a right to make it: nor can she any longer lay claim to the
town or province thus alienated, since she has relinquished every right she could have
over them.

But this province or town, thus abandoned and dismembered §264. Rights of the
from the state, is not obliged to receive the new master whom the dismembered party.
state attempts to set over it. Being separated from the society of
which it was a member, it resumes all its original rights; and if it be capable of
defending its liberty against the prince who would subject it to his authority, it may
lawfully resist him. Francis I.77 having engaged by the treaty of Madrid78 to cede the
duchy of Burgundy to the emperor Charles V.79 the states of that province declared,
“that, having never been subject but to the crown of France, they would die subject to
it; and that if the king abandoned them, they would take up arms, and endeavour to set
themselves at liberty, rather than pass into a new state of subjection.”* It is true,
subjects are seldom able to make resistance on such occasions; and, in general, their
wisest plan will be to submit to their new master, and endeavour to obtain the best
terms they can.

Has the prince—or the superior, of whatever kind—a power to §265. Whether the
dismember the state?—We answer as we have done above with prince has power to
respect to the domain:—if the fundamental laws forbid all dismember the state.
dismemberment by the sovereign, he cannot do it without the
concurrence of the nation or its representatives. But if the laws are silent, and if the
prince has received a full and absolute authority, he is then the depositary of the rights
of the nation, and the organ by which it declares its will. The nation ought never to
abandon its members but in a case of necessity, or with a view to the public safety,
and to preserve itself from total ruin; and the prince ought not to give them up except
for the same reasons. But since he has received an absolute authority, it belongs to
him to judge of the necessity of the case, and of what the safety of the state requires.

On occasion of the above-mentioned treaty of Madrid, the principal persons in France,
assembled at Cognac80 after the king’s return, unanimously resolved, “that his
authority did not extend so far as to dismember the crown.”* The treaty was declared
void, as being contrary to the fundamental law of the kingdom: and indeed it had been
concluded without sufficient powers: for as the laws in express terms refused to the
king the power of dismembering the kingdom, the concurrence of the nation was
necessary for that purpose; and it might give its consent by the medium of the states-
general. Charles V. ought not to have released his prisoner before those very states
had approved the treaty; or rather, making a more generous use of his victory, he

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 147 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

should have imposed less rigorous conditions, such as Francis I. would have been able
to comply with, and such as he could not, without dishonour, have refused to perform.
But now that there are no longer any meetings of the states-general in France, the king
remains the sole organ of the state, with respect to other powers: these latter have a
right to take his will for that of all France; and the cessions the king might make them,
would remain valid, in virtue of the tacit consent by which the nation has vested the
king with unlimited powers to treat with them. Were it otherwise, no solid treaty
could be entered into with the crown of France. For greater security, however, other
powers have often required that their treaties should be registered in the parliament of
Paris: but at present even this formality seems to be laid aside.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 148 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER XXII

Of Rivers, Streams, And Lakes.
When a nation takes possession of a country with a view to settle §266. A river that
there, it takes possession of every thing included in it, as lands, separates two
lakes, rivers, &c. But it may happen that the country is bounded territories.
and separated from another by a river;—in which case, it is
asked, to whom this river belongs? It is manifest from the principles established in
Chap. XVIII. that it ought to belong to the nation who first took possession of it. This
principle cannot be denied; but the difficulty is, to make the application. It is not easy
to determine which of the two neighbouring nations was the first to take possession of
a river that separates them.—For the decision of such questions, the rules which may
be deduced from the principles of the law of nations, are as follow:—

1. When a nation takes possession of a country bounded by a river, she is considered
as appropriating to herself the river also; for the utility of a river is too great to admit a
supposition that the nation did not intend to reserve it to herself. Consequently, the
nation that first established her dominion on one of the banks of the river, is
considered as being the first possessor of all that part of the river which bounds her
territory. When there is question of a very broad river, this presumption admits not of
a doubt, so far at least as relates to a part of the river’s breadth; and the strength of the
presumption increases or diminishes in an inverse ratio with the breadth of the river:
for the narrower the river is, the more does the safety and convenience of its use
require that it should be subject entirely to the empire and property of that nation.

2. If that nation has made any use of the river, as for navigation or fishing, it is
presumed with the greater certainty, that she has resolved to appropriate the river to
her own use.

3. If, of two nations inhabiting the opposite banks of the river, neither party can prove
that they themselves, or those whose rights they inherit, were the first settlers in those
tracts, it is to be supposed that both nations came there at the same time, since neither
of them can give any reason for claiming the preference: and in this case, the
dominion of each will extend to the middle of the river.

4. A long and undisputed possession establishes the right of nations; otherwise there
could be no peace, no stability between them: and notorious facts must be admitted to
prove the possession. Thus, when, from time immemorial, a nation has without
contradiction exercised the sovereignty upon a river which forms her boundary,
nobody can dispute with that nation the supreme dominion over the river in question.

5. Finally, if treaties determine any thing on this question, they must be observed. To
decide it by accurate and express stipulations, is the safest mode: and such is, in fact,
the method taken by most powers at present.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 149 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

If a river leaves its bed, whether it be dried up or takes its course §267. Of the bed of a
elsewhere, the bed belongs to the owner of the river; for the bed river which is dried
is a part of the river; and he who had appropriated to himself the up or takes another
whole, had necessarily appropriated to himself all its parts. course.

If a territory which terminates on a river has no other boundary §268. The right of
than that river, it is one of those territories that have natural or alluvion.
indeterminate bounds (territoria arcifinia), and it enjoys the right
of alluvion; that is to say,—every gradual increase of soil, every addition which the
current of the river may make to its bank on that side, is an addition to that territory,
stands in the same predicament with it, and belongs to the same owner. For if I take
possession of a piece of land, declaring that I will have for its boundary the river
which washes its side,—or if it is given to me upon that footing,—I thus acquire
beforehand the right of alluvion; and consequently I alone may appropriate to myself
whatever additions the current of the river may insensibly make to my land:—I say
“insensibly,” because in the very uncommon case, called avulsion, when the violence
of the stream separates a considerable part from one piece of land and joins it to
another, but in such manner that it can still be identified, the property of the soil so
removed naturally continues vested in its former owner. The civil laws have thus
provided against and decided this case when it happens between individual and
individual; they ought to unite equity with the welfare of the state, and the care of
preventing litigations.

In case of doubt, every territory terminating on a river is presumed to have no other
boundary than the river itself; because nothing is more natural than to take a river for
a boundary, when a settlement is made; and wherever there is a doubt, that is always
to be presumed, which is most natural and most probable.

As soon as it is determined that a river constitutes the boundary- §269. Whether
line between two territories, whether it remains common to the alluvion produces any
inhabitants on each of its banks, or whether each shares half of change in the right to
it,—or, finally, whether it belongs entirely to one of them,—their a river.
rights with respect to the river are in no wise changed by the
alluvion. If therefore it happens that, by a natural effect of the current, one of the two
territories receives an increase, while the river gradually encroaches on the opposite
bank,— the river still remains the natural boundary of the two territories, and,
notwithstanding the progressive changes in its course, each retains over it the same
rights which it possessed before; so that, if, for instance, it be divided in the middle
between the owners of the opposite banks, that middle, though it changes its place,
will continue to be the line of separation between the two neighbours. The one loses,
it is true, while the other gains: but nature alone produces this change: she destroys
the land of the one, while she forms new land for the other. The case cannot be
otherwise determined, since they have taken the river alone for their limits.

But if, instead of a gradual and progressive change of its bed, the §270. What is the
river, by an accident merely natural, turns entirely out of its case when the river
course, and runs into one of the two neighbouring states, the bed changes its bed.
which it has abandoned becomes thenceforward their boundary,

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 150 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

and remains the property of the former owner of the river (§267): the river itself is, as
it were, anihilated in all that part, while it is reproduced in its new bed, and there
belongs only to the state in which it flows.

This case is very different from that of a river which changes its course without going
out of the same state. The latter, in its new course, continues to belong to its former
owner, whether that owner be the state or any individual to whom the state has given
it,—because rivers belong to the public, in whatever part of the country they flow. Of
the bed which it has abandoned, a moiety accrues to the contiguous lands on each
side, if they are lands that have natural boundaries with the right of alluvion. That bed
(notwithstanding what we have said in §267) is no longer the property of the public,
because of the right of alluvion vested in the owners of its banks, and because the
public held possession of the bed, only on account of its containing a river. But if the
adjacent lands have not natural boundaries, the public still retains the property of the
bed. The new soil over which the river takes its course is lost to the proprietor,
because all the rivers in the country belong to the public.

It is not allowable to raise any works on the bank of a river, §271. Works tending
which have a tendency to turn its course, and to cast it upon the to turn the current,
opposite bank: this would be promoting our own advantage at
our neighbour’s expense. Each can only secure himself, and hinder the current from
undermining and carrying away his land.

In general, no person ought to build on a river, any more than §272. or, in general,
elsewhere, any work that is prejudicial to his neighbour’s rights. prejudicial to the
If a river belongs to one nation, and another has an incontestable rights of others.
right to navigate it, the former cannot erect upon it a dam or a
mill which might render it unfit for navigation. The right which the owners of the
river possess in this case is only that of a limited property; and, in the exercise of it,
they are bound to respect the rights of others.

But when two different rights to the same thing happen to clash §273. Rules in
with each other, it is not always easy to determine which ought relation to interfering
to yield to the other: the point cannot be satisfactorily decided, rights.
without attentively considering the nature of the rights, and their
origin. For example, a river belongs to me, but you have a right to fish in it: and the
question is, whether I may erect mills on my river, whereby the fishery will become
more difficult and less advantageous? The nature of our rights seems to determine the
question in the affirmative.—I, as proprietor, have an essential right over the river
itself:—you have only a right to make use of it,—a right which is merely accessory,
and dependent on mine: you have but a general right to fish as you can in my river,
such as you happen to find it, and in whatever state I may think fit to possess it. I do
not deprive you of your right by erecting my mills: it still exists in the general view of
it; and if it becomes less useful to you, it is by accident, and because it is dependent
on the exercise of mine.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 151 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

The case is different with respect to the right of navigation, of which we have spoken.
This right necessarily supposes that the river shall remain free and navigable, and
therefore excludes every work that will entirely interrupt its navigation.

The antiquity and origin of the rights serve, no less than their nature, to determine the
question. The more ancient right, if it be absolute, is to be exerted in its full extent,
and the other only so far as it may be extended without prejudice to the former; for it
could only be established on this footing, unless the possessor of the first right has
expressly consented to its being limited.

In the same manner, rights ceded by the proprietor of any thing are considered as
ceded without prejudice to the other rights that belong to him, and only so far as they
are consistent with these latter, unless an express declaration, or the very nature of the
right, determine it otherwise. If I have ceded to another the right of fishing in my
river, it is manifest that I have ceded it without prejudice to my other rights, and that I
remain free to build on that river such works as I think proper, even though they
should injure the fishery, provided they do not altogether destroy it. A work of this
latter kind, such as a dam that would hinder the fish from ascending it, could not be
built but in a case of necessity, and on making, according to circumstances, an
adequate compensation to the person who has a right to fish there.

What we have said of rivers and streams, may be easily applied §274. Lakes.
to lakes. Every lake, entirely included in a country, belongs to
the nation that is the proprietor of that country; for, in taking possession of a territory,
a nation is considered as having appropriated to itself every thing included in it: and
as it seldom happens that the property of a lake of any considerable extent falls to the
share of individuals, it remains common to the nation. If this lake is situated between
two states, it is presumed to be divided between them at the middle, while there is no
title, no constant and manifest custom, to determine otherwise.

What has been said of the right of alluvion in speaking of rivers, §275. Increase of a
is also to be understood as applying to lakes. When a lake, which lake.
bounds a state, belongs entirely to it, every increase in the extent
of that lake falls under the same predicament as the lake itself; but it is necessary that
the increase should be insensible, as that of land in alluvion, and moreover that it be
real, constant, and complete. To explain myself more fully,—1. I speak of insensible
increase: this is the reverse of alluvion: the question here relates to the increase of a
lake, as in the other case to an increase of soil. If this increase be not insensible,—if
the lake, overflowing its banks, inundates a large tract of land, this new portion of the
lake, this tract thus covered with water, still belongs to its former owner. Upon what
principles can we found the acquisition of it in behalf of the owner of the lake? The
space is very easily identified, though it has changed its nature: and it is too
considerable to admit a presumption that the owner had no intention to preserve it to
himself, notwithstanding the changes that might happen to it.

But, 2. If the lake insensibly undermines a part of the opposite territory, destroys it,
and renders it impossible to be known, by fixing itself there, and adding it to its bed,

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 152 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

that part of the territory is lost to its former owner; it no longer exists; and the whole
of the lake thus increased still belongs to the same state as before.

3. If some of the lands bordering on the lake are only overflowed at high water, this
transient accident cannot produce any change in their dependence. The reason why
the soil, which the lake invades by little and little, belongs to the owner of the lake,
and is lost to its former proprietor, is because the proprietor has no other boundary
than the lake, nor any other marks than its banks, to ascertain how far his possessions
extend. If the water advances insensibly, he loses; if it retires in like manner, he gains:
such must have been the intention of the nations who have respectively appropriated
to themselves the lake and the adjacent lands:—it can scarcely be supposed that they
had any other intention. But a territory overflowed for a time, is not confounded with
the rest of the lake: it can still be recognised; and the owner may still retain his right
of property in it. Were it otherwise, a town overflowed by a lake would become
subject to a different government during the inundation, and return to its former
sovereign as soon as the waters were dried up.

4. For the same reasons, if the waters of the lake, penetrating by an opening into the
neighbouring country, there form a bay, or new lake, joined to the first by a
canal,—this new body of water, and the canal, belong to the owner of the country in
which they are formed. For the boundaries are easily ascertained: and we are not to
presume an intention of relinquishing so considerable a tract of land in case of its
happening to be invaded by the waters of an adjoining lake.

It must be observed that we here treat the question as arising between two states: it is
to be decided by other principles when it relates to proprietors who are members of
the same state. In the latter case, it is not merely the bounds of the soil, but also its
nature and use, that determine the possession of it. An individual, who possesses a
field on the borders of a lake, cannot enjoy it as a field when it is overflowed; and a
person who has, for instance, the right of fishing in the lake, may exert his right in this
new extent: if the waters retire, the field is restored to the use of its former owner. If
the lake penetrates by an opening into the low lands in its neighbourhood, and there
forms a permanent inundation, this new lake belongs to the public, because all lakes
belong to the public.

The same principles shew, that if the lake insensibly forms an §276. Land formed on
accession of land on its banks, either by retiring or in any other the banks of a lake.
manner, this increase of land belongs to the country which it
joins, when that country has no other boundary than the lake. It is the same thing as
alluvion on the banks of a river.

But if the lake happened to be suddenly dried up, either totally or §277. Bed of a lake
in a great part of it, the bed would remain in the possession of the dried up.
sovereign of the lake; the nature of the soil, so easily known,
sufficiently marking out the limits.

The empire or jurisdiction over lakes and rivers is subject to the §278. Jurisdiction
same rules as the property of them, in all the cases which we over lakes and rivers.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 153 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

have examined. Each state naturally possesses it over the whole or the part, of which
it possesses the domain. We have seen (§245) that the nation, or its sovereign,
commands in all places in its possession.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 154 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER XXIII

Of The Sea.
In order to complete the exposition of the principles of the law of §279. The sea and its
nations with respect to the things a nation may possess, it use.
remains to treat of the open sea. The use of the open sea consists
in navigation, and in fishing; along its coasts it is moreover of use for the procuring of
several things found near the shore, such as shell-fish, amber, pearls, &c. for the
making of salt, and, finally, for the establishment of places of retreat and security for
vessels.

The open sea is not of such a nature as to admit the holding §280. Whether the sea
possession of it, since no settlement can be formed on it, so as to can be possessed, and
hinder others from passing. But a nation powerful at sea may its dominion
forbid others to fish in it and to navigate it, declaring that she appropriated.
appropriates to herself the dominion over it, and that she will
destroy the vessels that shall dare to appear in it without her permission. Let us see
whether she has right to do this.

It is manifest that the use of the open sea, which consists in §281. Nobody has a
navigation and fishing, is innocent and inexhaustible; that is to right to appropriate to
say—he who navigates or fishes in the open sea, does no injury himself the use of the
to any one, and the sea, in these two respects, is sufficient for all open sea.
mankind. Now nature does not give to man a right of
appropriating to himself things that may be innocently used, and that are
inexhaustible, and sufficient for all. For since those things, while common to all, are
sufficient to supply the wants of each,— whoever should, to the exclusion of all other
participants, attempt to render himself sole proprietor of them, would unreasonably
wrest the bounteous gifts of nature from the parties excluded. The earth no longer
furnishing without culture the things necessary or useful to the human race, who were
extremely multiplied, it became necessary to introduce the right of property, in order
that each might apply himself with more success to the cultivation of what had fallen
to his share, and multiply by his labour the necessaries and conveniences of life. It is
for this reason the law of nature approves the rights of dominion and property, which
put an end to the primitive manner of living in common. But this reason cannot apply
to things which are in themselves inexhaustible; and consequently it cannot furnish
any just grounds for seizing the exclusive possession of them. If the free and common
use of a thing of this nature was prejudicial or dangerous to a nation, the care of their
own safety would authorise them to reduce that thing under their own dominion if
possible, in order to restrict the use of it by such precautions as prudence might dictate
to them. But this is not the case with the open sea, on which people may sail and fish
without the least prejudice to any person whatsoever, and without putting any one in
danger. No nation therefore has a right to take possession of the open sea, or claim the
sole use of it, to the exclusion of other nations. The kings of Portugal formerly

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 155 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

arrogated to themselves the empire of the seas of Guinea and the East-Indies;* but the
other maritime powers gave themselves little trouble about such a pretension.

The right of navigating and fishing in the open sea being then a §282. The nation that
right common to all men, the nation that attempts to exclude attempts to exclude
another from that advantage, does her an injury, and furnishes another, does it an
her with sufficient grounds for commencing hostilities, since injury.
nature authorises a nation to repel an injury,—that is, to make
use of force against whoever would deprive her of her rights.

Nay more,—a nation, which, without a legitimate claim, would §283. It even does an
arrogate to itself an exclusive right to the sea, and support its injury to all nations.
pretensions by force, does an injury to all nations; it infringes
their common right; and they are justifiable in forming a general combination against
it, in order to repress such an attempt. Nations have the greatest interest in causing the
law of nations, which is the basis of their tranquillity, to be universally respected. If
any one openly tramples it under foot, they all may and ought to rise up against him;
and, by uniting their forces to chastise the common enemy, they will discharge their
duty towards themselves, and towards human society, of which they are members
(Prelim. §22).

However, as every one is at liberty to renounce his right, a nation §284. It may acquire
may acquire exclusive rights of navigation and fishing, by an exclusive right by
treaties, in which other nations renounce, in its favour, the rights treaties,
they derive from nature. The latter are obliged to observe their
treaties; and the nation they have favoured has a right to maintain by force the
possession of its advantages. Thus the house of Austria has renounced, in favour of
England and Holland, the right of sending vessels from the Netherlands to the East-
Indies. In Grotius, de Jure Belli & Pacis, Lib. II. Cap. III. §15, may be found many
instances of similar treaties.

As the rights of navigation and of fishing, and other rights which §285. but not by
may be exercised on the sea, belong to the class of those rights of prescription and long
mere ability (jura merae facultatis) which are imprescriptible use,
(§95),—they cannot be lost for want of use. Consequently,
although a nation should happen to have been, from time immemorial, in sole
possession of the navigation or fishery in certain seas, it cannot, on this foundation,
claim an exclusive right to those advantages. For though others have not made use of
their common right to navigation and fishery in those seas, it does not thence follow
that they have had any intention to renounce it; and they are entitled to exert it
whenever they think proper.

But it may happen, that the non-usage of the right may assume §286. unless by virtue
the nature of a consent or tacit agreement, and thus become a of a tacit agreement.
title in favour of one nation against another. When a nation, that
is in possession of the navigation and fishery in certain tracts of sea, claims an
exclusive right to them, and forbids all participation on the part of other nations,—if
the others obey that prohibition with sufficient marks of acquiescence, they tacitly

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 156 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

renounce their own right, in favour of that nation, and establish for her a new right,
which she may afterwards lawfully maintain against them, especially when it is
confirmed by long use.

The various uses of the sea near the coasts render it very §287. The sea near
susceptible of property. It furnishes fish, shells, pearls, amber, the coasts may
&c. Now in all these respects its use is not inexhaustible; become a property.
wherefore the nation to whom the coasts belong may appropriate
to themselves, and convert to their own profit, an advantage which nature has so
placed within their reach as to enable them conveniently to take possession of it, in
the same manner as they possessed themselves of the dominion of the land they
inhabit. Who can doubt, that the pearl fisheries of Bahrem and Ceylon may lawfully
become property? And though, where the catching of fish is the only object, the
fishery appears less liable to be exhausted,—yet if a nation have on their coast a
particular fishery of a profitable nature, and of which they may become masters, shall
they not be permitted to appropriate to themselves that bounteous gift of nature, as an
appendage to the country they possess, and to reserve to themselves the great
advantages which their commerce may thence derive in case there be a sufficient
abundance of fish to furnish the neighbouring nations? But if, so far from taking
possession of it, the nation has once acknowledged the common right of other nations
to come and fish there, it can no longer exclude them from it; it has left that fishery in
its primitive freedom, at least with respect to those who have been accustomed to take
advantage of it. The English not having originally taken exclusive possession of the
herring-fishery on their coasts, it is become common to them with other nations.

A nation may appropriate to herself those things, of which the §288. Another reason
free and common use would be prejudicial or dangerous to her. for appropriating the
This is a second reason for which governments extend their sea bordering on the
dominion over the sea along their coasts, as far as they are able coasts.
to protect their right. It is of considerable importance to the
safety and welfare of the state, that a general liberty be not allowed to all comers to
approach so near their possessions, especially with ships of war, as to hinder the
approach of trading nations, and molest their navigation. During the war between
Spain and the United Provinces,81 James I. king of England,82 marked out, along his
coasts, certain boundaries within which he declared that he would not suffer any of
the powers at war to pursue their enemies, nor even allow their armed vessels to stop
and observe the ships that should enter or sail out of the ports.* These parts of the sea,
thus subject to a nation, are comprehended in her territory; nor must any one navigate
them without her consent. But to vessels that are not liable to suspicion, she cannot,
without a breach of duty, refuse permission to approach for harmless purposes, since
it is a duty incumbent on every proprietor to allow to strangers a free passage, even by
land, when it may be done without damage or danger. It is true, that the state itself is
sole judge of what is proper to be done in every particular case that occurs: and if it
judges amiss, it is to blame; but the others are bound to submit. It is otherwise,
however, in cases of necessity,—as, for instance, when a vessel is obliged to enter a
road which belongs to you, in order to shelter herself from a tempest. In this case, the
right of entering wherever we can, provided we cause no damage, or that we repair
any damage done, is, as we shall shew more at large, a remnant of the primitive

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 157 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

freedom, of which no man can be supposed to have divested himself; and the vessel
may lawfully enter in spite of you, if you unjustly refuse her permission.

It is not easy to determine to what distance a nation may extend §289. How far this
its rights over the sea by which it is surrounded. Bodinus* possession may
pretends, that, according to the common right of all maritime extend.
nations, the prince’s dominion extends to the distance of thirty
leagues from the coast. But this exact determination can only be founded on a general
consent of nations, which it would be difficult to prove. Each state may, on this head,
make what regulations it pleases, so far as respects the transactions of the citizens
with each other, or their concerns with the sovereign: but between nation and nation,
all that can reasonably be said, is, that, in general, the dominion of the state over the
neigbouring sea extends as far as her safety renders it necessary and her power is able
to assert it; since, on the one hand, she cannot appropriate to herself a thing that is
common to all mankind, such as the sea, except so far as she has need of it for some
lawful end (§281), and, on the other, it would be a vain and ridiculous pre-tension to
claim a right which she were wholly unable to assert. The fleets of England have
given room to her kings to claim the empire of the seas which surround that island,
even as far as the opposite coasts.† Selden relates a solemn act‡ by which it appears
that, in the time of Edward I.83 that empire was acknowledged by the greatest part of
the maritime nations of Europe; and the republic of the United Provinces
acknowledged it, in some measure, by the treaty of Breda in 1667, at least so far as
related to the honours of the flag. But solidly to establish a right of such extent, it
were necessary to prove very clearly the express or tacit consent of all the powers
concerned. The French have never agreed to this pretension of England; and in that
very treaty of Breda, just mentioned, Louis XIV. would not even suffer the Channel to
be called the English Channel, or the British Sea. The republic of Venice claims the
empire of the Adriatic; and every body knows the ceremony annually performed upon
that account. In confirmation of this right, we are referred to the examples of
Uladislaus,84 king of Naples, of the emperor Frederic III.85 and of some of the kings
of Hungary, who asked permission of the Venetians for their vessels to pass through
that sea.* That the empire of the Adriatic belongs to the republic to a certain distance
from her own coasts, in the places of which she can keep possession, and of which the
possession is important to her own safety,—appears to me incontestable: but I doubt
very much whether any power is at present disposed to acknowledge her sovereignty
over the whole Adriatic sea. Such pretensions to empire are respected as long as the
nation that makes them is able to assert them by force; but they vanish of course on
the decline of her power. At present the whole space of the sea within cannon-shot of
the coast is considered as making a part of the territory; and for that reason a vessel
taken under the cannon of a neutral fortress is not a lawful prize.

The shores of the sea incontestably belong to the nation that §290. Shores and
possesses the country of which they are a part; and they belong ports.
to the class of public things. If civilians have set them down as
things common to all mankind (res communes), it is only in regard to their use; and
we are not thence to conclude that they considered them as independent of the empire:
the very contrary appears from a great number of laws. Ports and harbours are
manifestly an appendage to and even a part of the country, and consequently are the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 158 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

property of the nation. Whatever is said of the land itself, will equally apply to them,
so far as respects the consequences of the domain and of the empire.

All we have said of the parts of the sea near the coast, may be §291. Bays and
said more particularly, and with much greater reason, of roads, straits.
bays, and straits, as still more capable of being possessed, and of
greater importance to the safety of the country. But I speak of bays and straits of small
extent, and not of those great tracts of sea to which these names are sometimes given,
as Hudson’s Bay and the Straits of Magellan, over which the empire cannot extend,
and still less a right of property. A bay whose entrance can be defended, may be
possessed and rendered subject to the laws of the sovereign; and it is of importance
that it should be so, since the country might be much more easily insulted in such a
place, than on a coast that lies exposed to the winds and the impetuosity of the waves.

It must be remarked with regard to straits, that, when they serve §292. Straits in
for a communication between two seas, the navigation of which particular.
is common to all or several nations, the nation which possesses
the strait, cannot refuse the others a passage through it, provided that passage be
innocent, and attended with no danger to herself. By refusing it without just reasons,
she would deprive those nations of an advantage granted them by nature; and indeed
the right to such a passage is a remnant of the primitive liberty enjoyed by all
mankind. Nothing but the care of his own safety can authorise the owner of the strait
to make use of certain precautions, and to require certain formalities, commonly
established by the custom of nations. He has a right to levy a moderate tax on the
vessels that pass, partly on account of the inconvenience they give him by obliging
him to be on his guard,—partly as a return for the safety he procures them by
protecting them from their enemies, by keeping pirates at a distance, and by defraying
the expense attendant on the support of light-houses, sea-marks, and other things
necessary to the safety of mariners. Thus the king of Denmark requires a custom at
the straits of the Sound. Such right ought to be founded on the same reasons, and
subject to the same rules, as the tolls established on land or on a river. (See §§103 and
104.)

It is necessary to mention the right to wrecks,—a right which §293. Right to
was the wretched offspring of barbarism, and which has almost wrecks.
every-where fortunately disappeared with its parent. Justice and
humanity cannot allow of it except in those cases only where the proprietors of the
effects saved from a wreck cannot possibly be discovered. In such cases, those effects
belong to the person who is the first to take possession of them, or to the sovereign, if
the law reserves them for him.

If a sea is entirely inclosed by the territories of a nation, and has §294. A sea inclosed
no other communication with the ocean than by a channel of within the territories
which that nation may take possession, it appears that such a sea of a nation.
is no less capable of being occupied, and becoming property,
than the land; and it ought to follow the fate of the country that surrounds it. The
Mediterranean, in former times, was absolutely inclosed within the territories of the
Romans; and that people, by rendering themselves masters of the strait which joins it

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 159 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

to the ocean, might subject the Mediterranean to their empire, and assume the
dominion over it. They did not, by such procedure, injure the rights of other nations; a
particular sea being mani-festly designed by nature for the use of the countries and
nations that surround it. Besides, by barring the entrance of the Mediterranean against
all suspected vessels, the Romans, by one single stroke, secured the immense extent
of their coasts: and this reason was sufficient to authorise them to take possession of
it. And as it had absolutely no communication but with the states which belonged to
them, they were at liberty to permit or prohibit the entrance into it, in the same
manner as into any of their towns or provinces.

When a nation takes possession of certain parts of the sea, it §295. The parts of the
takes possession of the empire over them, as well as of the sea possessed by a
domain, on the same principle which we advanced in treating of power are within its
the land (§205). These parts of the sea are within the jurisdiction jurisdiction.
of the nation, and a part of its territory: the sovereign commands
there; he makes laws, and may punish those who violate them: in a word, he has the
same rights there as on land, and, in general, every right which the laws of the state
allow him.

It is however true that the empire, and the domain or property, are not inseparable in
their own nature, even in a sovereign state.* As a nation may possess the domain or
property of a tract of land or sea without having the sovereignty of it, so it may
likewise happen that she shall possess the sovereignty of a place, of which the
property or the domain, with respect to use, belongs to some other nation. But it is
always presumed, that when a nation possesses the useful domain of any place
whatsoever, she has also the higher domain and empire, or the sovereignty (§205). We
cannot, however, from the possession of the empire, infer with equal probability a co-
existent possession of the useful domain; for a nation may have good reasons for
claiming the empire over a country, and particularly over a tract of sea, without
pretending to have any property in it, or any useful domain. The English have never
claimed the property of all the seas over which they have claimed the empire.

This is all we have to say in this first book. A more minute detail of the duties and
rights of a nation, considered in herself would lead us too far. Such detail must, as we
have already observed, be sought for in particular treatises on the public and political
law. We are very far from flattering ourselves that we have omitted no important
article: this is a slight sketch of an immense picture: but an intelligent reader will
without difficulty supply all our omissions by making a proper application of the
general principles: we have taken the utmost care solidly to establish those principles,
and to develop them with precision and perspicuity.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 160 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

BOOK II

Of A Nation Considered In Its Relations To Others

CHAPTER I

Of The Common Duties Of A Nation Towards Others, Or Of
The Offices Of Humanity Between Nations.
The following maxims will appear very strange to cabinet §1. Foundation of the
politicians: and such is the misfortune of mankind, that, to many common and mutual
of those refined conductors of nations, the doctrine of this duties of nations.
chapter will be a subject of ridicule. Be it so!—but we will
nevertheless boldly lay down what the law of nature prescribes to nations. Shall we be
intimidated by ridicule, when we speak after Cicero? That great man held the reins of
the most powerful state that ever existed; and in that station he appeared no less
eminent than at the bar. The punctual observance of the law of nature he considered as
the most salutary policy to the state. In my preface, I have already quoted this fine
passage: Nihil est quod adhuc de republica putem dictum, & quo possim longius
progredi, nisi sit confirmatum, non modo falsum esse illud, sine injuria non posse, sed
hoc verissimum, sinesumma justitia rempublicam regi non posse.*1 I might say on
good grounds, that, by the words, summa justitia, Cicero means that universal justice
which consists in completely fulfilling the law of nature. But in another place he
explains himself more clearly on this head, and gives us sufficiently to understand that
he does not confine the mutual duties of men to the observance of justice, properly so
called. “Nothing,” says he, “is more agreeable to nature, more capable of affording
true satisfaction, than, in imitation of Hercules, to undertake even the most arduous
and painful labours for the benefit and preservation of all nations.” Magis est
secundum naturam, pro omnibus gentibus, si fieri possit, conservandis aut juvandis,
maximos labores molestiasque suscipere, imitantem Herculem illum, quem hominum
fama, beneficiorum memor, in concilium coelestium collocavit, quam vivere in
solitudine, non modo sine ullis molestiis, sed etiam in maximis voluptatibus,
abundantem omnibus copiis, ut excellas etiam pulchritudine & viribus. Quocirca
optimo quisque & splendidissimo ingenio longe illam vitam huic anteponit.†2 In the
same chapter, Cicero expressly refutes those who are for excluding foreigners from
the benefit of those duties to which they acknowledge themselves bound towards their
fellow citizens. Qui autem civium rationem dicunt habendam, externorum negant, hi
dirimunt communem humani generis societatem; qua sublata, beneficentia,
liberalitas, bonitas, justitia, funditus tollitur: quae qui tollunt, etiam adversus Deos
immortales impii judicandi sunt; ab iis enim constitutam inter homines societatem
evertunt.3

And why should we not hope still to find, among those who are at the head of affairs,
some wise individuals, who are convinced of this great truth, that virtue is, even for

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 161 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

sovereigns and political bodies, the most certain road to prosperity and happiness?
There is at least one benefit to be expected from the open assertion and publication of
sound maxims, which is, that even those who relish them the least, are thereby laid
under a necessity of keeping within some bounds, lest they should forfeit their
characters altogether. To flatter ourselves with the vain expectation that men, and
especially men in power, will be inclined strictly to conform to the laws of nature,
would be a gross mistake; and to renounce all hope of making impression on some of
them, would be to give up mankind for lost.

Nations being obliged by nature reciprocally to cultivate human society (Prelim. §11),
are bound to observe towards each other all the duties which the safety and advantage
of that society require.

The offices of humanity are those succours, those duties, which §2. Offices of
men owe to each other, as men, that is, as social beings formed to humanity, and their
live in society, and standing in need of mutual assistance for their foundation.
preservation and happiness, and to enable them to live in a
manner conformable to their nature. Now the laws of nature being no less obligatory
on nations than on individuals (Prelim. §5), whatever duties each man owes to other
men, the same does each nation, in its way, owe to other nations (Prelim. §10, &c.).
Such is the foundation of those common duties,—of those offices of humanity,—to
which nations are reciprocally bound towards each other. They consist, generally, in
do-ing every thing in our power for the preservation and happiness of others, as far as
such conduct is reconcilable with our duties towards ourselves.

The nature and essence of man—who, without the assistance of §3. General principle
his fellow men, is unable to supply all his wants, to preserve of all the mutual
himself, to render himself perfect, and to live happily—plainly duties of nations.
shews us that he is destined to live in society, in the interchange
of mutual aid,—and, consequently, that all men are, by their very nature and essence,
obliged to unite their common efforts for the perfection of their own being and that of
their condition. The surest method of succeeding in this pursuit is, that each individual
should exert his efforts, first for himself, and then for others. Hence it follows that
whatever we owe to ourselves, we like-wise owe to others, so far as they stand in need
of assistance, and we can grant it to them without being wanting to ourselves. Since
then one nation, in its way, owes to another nation every duty that one man owes to
another man, we may confidently lay down this general principle:—One state owes to
another state whatever it owes to itself, so far as that other stands in real need of its
assistance, and the former can grant it without neglecting the duties it owes to itself.
Such is the eternal and immutable law of nature. Those who might be alarmed at this
doctrine, as totally subversive of the maxims of sound policy, will be relieved from
their apprehensions by the two following considerations—

1. Social bodies or sovereign states are much more capable of supplying all their
wants than individual men are; and mutual assistance is not so necessary among them,
nor so frequently required. Now, in those particulars which a nation can itself
perform, no succour is due to it from others.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 162 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

2. The duties of a nation towards itself, and chiefly the care of its own safety, require
much more circumspection and reserve, than need be observed by an individual in
giving assistance to others. This remark we shall soon illustrate.

Of all the duties of a nation towards itself the chief object is its §4. Duties of a nation
preservation and perfection, together with that of its state. The for the preservation of
detail given of them in the first book of this work may serve to others.
point out the several objects in relation to which a state may and
should assist another state. Every nation ought, on occasion, to labour for the
preservation of others, and for securing them from ruin and destruction, as far as it
can do this, without exposing itself too much. Thus, when a neighbouring nation is
unjustly attacked by a powerful enemy who threatens to oppress it,—if you can
defend it without exposing yourself to great danger, unquestionably it is your duty to
do so. Let it not be said, in objection to this, that a sovereign is not to expose the lives
of his soldiers, for the safety of a foreign nation with which he has not contracted a
defensive alliance. It may be his own case to stand in need of assistance; and
consequently he is acting for the safety of his own nation, in giving energy to the
spirit and disposition to afford mutual aid. Accordingly, policy here coincides with
and enforces obligation and duty. It is the interest of princes to stop the progress of an
ambitious monarch who aims at aggrandising himself by subjugating his neighbours.
A powerful league was formed in favour of the United Provinces, when threatened
with the yoke of Lewis XIV.* When the Turks laid siege to Vienna, the brave
Sobieski king of Poland saved the house of Austria,† and possibly all Germany, and
his own kingdom.4

For the same reason, if a nation is afflicted with famine, all those §5. It ought to assist a
who have provisions to spare ought to relieve her distress, nation afflicted with
without however exposing themselves to want. But if that nation famine or any other
is able to pay for the provisions thus furnished, it is perfectly calamities.
lawful to sell them to her at a reasonable rate; for they are not
bound to furnish her with what she is herself capable of procuring; and consequently
there is no obligation of gratuitously bestowing on her such things as she is able to
purchase. To give assistance in such extreme necessity is so essentially conformable
to humanity, that the duty is seldom neglected by any nation that has received the
slightest polish of civilisation. The great Henry the Fourth5 could not forbear to
comply with it in favour of obstinate rebels who were bent on his destruction.‡ .

Whatever be the calamity with which a nation is afflicted, the like assistance is due to
it. We have seen little states in Switzerland order public collections to be made in
behalf of towns or villages of the neighbouring countries, which had been ruined by
fire, and remit them liberal succours; the difference of religion proving no bar to the
performance of so humane a deed. The calamities of Portugal have given England an
opportunity of fulfilling the duties of humanity with that noble generosity which
characterises a great nation. On the first intelligence of the disastrous fate of
Lisbon,*6 the parliament voted a hundred thousand pounds sterling for the relief of an
unfortunate people; the king also added considerable sums: ships, laden with
provisions and all kinds of succours, were sent away with the utmost dispatch; and
their arrival convinced the Portuguese, that an opposition in belief and worship does

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 163 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

not restrain the beneficence of those who understand the claims of humanity. On the
same occasion likewise the king of Spain signally displayed his tenderness for a near
ally, and exerted in a conspicuous manner his humanity and generosity.

A nation must not simply confine itself to the preservation of §6. It ought to
other states; it should likewise, according to its power and their contribute to the
want of its assistance, contribute to their perfection. We have perfection of other
already shewn (Prelim. §13) that natural society imposes on it states.
this general obligation. We are now come to the proper place for
treating of the obligation somewhat more in detail. A state is more or less perfect, as it
is more or less adapted to attain the end of civil society, which consists in procuring
for its members every thing of which they stand in need, for the necessities, the
conveniences and enjoyments of life, and for their happiness in general,—in
providing for the peaceful enjoyment of property, and the safe and easy
administration of justice,—and, finally, in defending itself against all foreign violence
(Book I. §15). Every nation therefore should occasionally, and according to its power,
contribute, not only to put another nation in possession of these advantages, but
likewise to render it capable of procuring them itself. Accordingly, a learned nation, if
applied to for masters and teachers in the sciences, by another nation desirous of
shaking off its native barbarism, ought not to refuse such a request. A nation whose
happiness it is to live under wise laws, should, on occasion, make it a point of duty to
communicate them. Thus when the wise and virtuous Romans sent ambassadors to
Greece to collect good laws, the Greeks were far from rejecting so reasonable and so
laudable a request.

But though a nation be obliged to promote, as far as lies in its §7. But not by force.
power, the perfection of others, it is not entitled forcibly to
obtrude these good offices on them. Such an attempt would be a violation of their
natural liberty. In order to compel any one to receive a kindness, we must have an
authority over him; but nations are absolutely free and independent (Prelim. §4).
Those ambitious Europeans who attacked the American nations, and subjected them
to their greedy dominion, in order, as they pretended, to civilise them, and cause them
to be instructed in the true religion,—those usurpers, I say, grounded themselves on a
pretext equally unjust and ridiculous. It is strange to hear the learned and judicious
Grotius assert, that a sovereign may justly take up arms to chastise nations which are
guilty of enormous transgressions of the law of nature, which treat their parents with
inhumanity like the Sogdians, which eat human flesh as the ancient Gauls, &c.* What
led him into this error, was his attributing to every independent man, and of course to
every sovereign, an odd kind of right to punish faults which involve an enormous
violation of the laws of nature, though they do not affect either his rights or his safety.
But we have shewn (Book I. §169) that men derive the right of punishment solely
from their right to provide for their own safety; and consequently they cannot claim it
except against those by whom they have been injured. Could it escape Grotius, that,
notwithstanding all the precautions added by him in the following paragraphs, his
opinion opens a door to all the ravages of enthusiasm and fanaticism, and furnishes
ambition with numberless pretexts? Mahomet and his successors have desolated and
subdued Asia, to avenge the indignity done to the unity of the Godhead; all whom
they termed associators or idolaters fell victims to their devout fury.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 164 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Since nations ought to perform these duties or offices of §8. The right to
humanity towards each other, according as one stands in need, require the offices of
and the other can reasonably comply with them,—every nation humanity.
being free, independent, and sole arbitress of her own actions, it
belongs to each to consider whether her situation warrants her in asking or granting
any thing on this head. Thus 1. Every nation has a perfect right to ask of another that
assistance and those kind offices which she conceives herself to stand in need of. To
prevent her, would be doing her an injury. If she makes the application without
necessity, she is guilty of a breach of duty; but in this respect, she is wholly
independent of the judgment of others. A nation has a right to ask for these kind
offices, but not to demand them.

For, 2. These offices being due only in necessity, and by a nation §9. The right of
which can comply with them without being wanting to itself; the judging whether they
nation that is applied to has, on the other hand, a right of judging are to be granted.
whether the case really demands them, and whether
circumstances will allow her to grant them consistently with that regard which she
ought to pay to her own safety and interests: for instance, a nation is in want of corn,
and applies to another nation to sell her a quantity of it:—in this case it rests with the
latter party to judge whether, by a compliance with the request, they will not expose
themselves to the danger of a scarcity: and if they refuse to comply, their
determination is to be patiently acquiesced in. We have very lately seen a prudent
performance of this duty on the part of Russia: she generously assisted Sweden when
threatened with a famine,7 but refused to other powers the liberty of purchasing corn
in Livonia, from the circumstance of standing herself in need of it, and, no doubt,
from weighty political motives likewise.

Thus the right which a nation has to the offices of humanity is §10.A nation is not to
but an imperfect one: she cannot compel another nation to the compel another to
performance of them. The nation that unreasonably refuses them, perform those offices
offends against equity, which consists in acting conformably to of which the refusal is
the imperfect right of another: but thereby no injury is done; no wrong.

injury or injustice being a trespass against the perfect right of
another.

It is impossible that nations should mutually discharge all these §11. Mutual love of
several duties if they do not love each other. This is the pure nations.
source from which the offices of humanity should proceed; they
will retain the character and perfection of it. Then nations will be seen sincerely and
cheerfully to help each other, earnestly to promote their common welfare, and
cultivate peace without jealousy or distrust.

A real friendship will be seen to reign among them; and this §12. Each nation
happy state consists in a mutual affection. Every nation is ought to cultivate the
obliged to cultivate the friendship of other nations, and carefully friendship of others.
to avoid whatever might kindle their enmity against her. Wise
and prudent nations often pursue this line of conduct from views of direct and present
interest: a more noble, more general, and less direct interest, is too rarely the motive

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 165 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

of politicians. If it be incontestable that men must love each other in order to answer
the views of nature and discharge the duties which she prescribes them, as well as for
their own private advantage,—can it be doubted that nations are under the like
reciprocal obligation? Is it in the power of men, on dividing themselves into different
political bodies, to break the ties of that universal society which nature has established
amongst them?

If a man ought to qualify himself for becoming useful to other §13. To perfect itself
men,—and a citizen, for rendering useful services to his country with a view to the
and fellow citizens,—a nation likewise, in perfecting herself, advantage of others,
ought to have in view the acquisition of a greater degree of and set them good
ability to promote the perfection and happiness of other nations: examples.

she should be careful to set them good examples, and avoid
setting them a pattern of any thing evil. Imitation is natural to mankind: the virtues of
a celebrated nation are sometimes imitated, and much more frequently its vices and
defects.

Glory being a possession of great importance to a nation, as we §14. To take care of
have shewn in a particular chapter expressly devoted to the their glory.
subject,* —the duty of a nation extends even to the care of the
glory of other nations. In the first place, she should, on occasion, contribute to enable
them to merit true glory: secondly, she should do them in this respect all the justice
due to them, and use all proper endeavours that such justice be universally done them:
finally, instead of irritating, she should kindly extenuate the bad effect which some
slight blemishes may produce.

From the manner in which we have established the obligation of §15. Difference of
performing the offices of humanity, it plainly appears to be religion ought not to
solely founded on the nature of man. Wherefore no nation can preclude the offices of
refuse them to another, under pretence of its professing a humanity.
different religion: to be entitled to them, it is sufficient that the
claimant is our fellow-creature. A conformity of belief and worship may become a
new tie of friendship between nations; but no difference in these respects can warrant
us in laying aside the character of men, or the sentiments annexed to it. As we have
already related (§5) some instances well worthy of imitation, let us here do justice to
the pontiff who at present fills the see of Rome, and has recently given a very
remarkable example, and which cannot be too highly commended. Information being
given to that prince, that several Dutch ships remained at Civita Vecchia, not daring to
put to sea for fear of the Algerine corsairs, he immediately issued orders that the
frigates of the ecclesiastical state should convoy those ships out of danger; and his
nuncio at Brussels received instructions to signify to the ministers of the states-
general, that his holiness made it a rule to protect commerce and perform the duties of
humanity, without regarding any difference of religion. Such exalted sentiments
cannot fail of raising a veneration for Benedict XIV.8 even amongst protestants.

How happy would mankind be, were these amiable precepts of §16. Rule and
nature every where observed! Nations would communicate to measure the offices of
each other their products and their knowledge; a profound peace humanity.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 166 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

would prevail all over the earth, and enrich it with its invaluable fruits; industry, the
sciences, and the arts, would be employed in promoting our happiness, no less than in
relieving our wants; violent methods of deciding contests would be no more heard of:
all differences would be terminated by moderation, justice, and equity; the world
would have the appearance of a large republic; men would live every-where like
brothers, and each individual be a citizen of the universe. That this idea should be but
a delightful dream! yet it flows from the nature and essence of man.* But disorderly
passions, and private and mistaken interest, will forever prevent its being realised. Let
us then consider what limitations the present state of men, and the ordinary maxims
and conduct of nations, may render necessary in the practice of these precepts of
nature, which are in themselves so noble and excellent.

The law of nature cannot condemn the good to become the dupes and prey of the
wicked, and the victims of their injustice and ingratitude. Melancholy experience
shews that most nations aim only to strengthen and enrich themselves at the expense
of others,—to domineer over them, and even, if an opportunity offers, to oppress and
bring them under the yoke. Prudence does not allow us to strengthen an enemy, or one
in whom we discover a desire of plundering and oppressing us; and the care of our
own safety forbids it. We have seen (§3, &c.) that a nation does not owe her
assistance and the offices of humanity to other nations, except so far as the grant of
them is reconcilable with her duties to herself. Hence it evidently follows, that, though
the universal love of mankind obliges us to grant at all times, and to all, even to our
enemies, those offices which can only tend to render them more moderate and
virtuous, because no inconvenience is to be apprehended from granting them,—we
are not obliged to give them such succours as probably may become destructive to
ourselves. Thus, 1. the exceeding importance of trade not only to the wants and
conveniences of life, but likewise to the strength of a state, and furnishing it with the
means of defending itself against its enemies,—and the insatiable avidity of those
nations which seek wholly and exclusively to engross it,—thus, I say, these
circumstances authorise a nation possessed of a branch of trade, or the secret of some
important manufacture or fabric, to reserve to herself those sources of wealth, and,
instead of communicating them to foreign nations, to take measures against it. But
where the necessaries or conveniences of life are in question, the nation ought to sell
them to others at a reasonable price, and not convert her monopoly into a system of
odious extortion. To commerce England chiefly owes her greatness, her power, and
her safety: who then will presume to blame her for endeavouring, by every fair and
just method, to retain the several branches of it in her own hand?

2. As to things directly and more particularly useful for war, a nation is under no
obligation to sell them to others, of whom it has the smallest suspicion; and prudence
even declares against it. Thus, by the Roman laws, people were very justly prohibited
to instruct the barbarous nations in building gallies. Thus, in England laws have been
enacted, to prevent the best method of ship-building from being carried out of the
kingdom.

This caution is to be carried farther, with respect to nations more justly suspected.
Thus, when the Turks were successfully pursuing their victorious career, and rapidly
advancing to the zenith of power, all christian nations ought, independent of every

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 167 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

bigotted consideration, to have considered them as enemies; even the most distant of
those nations, though not engaged in any contest with them, would have been
justifiable in breaking off all commerce with a people who made it their profession to
subdue by force of arms all who would not acknowledge the authority of their
prophet.

Let us farther observe, with regard to the prince in particular, that §17. Particular
he ought not, in affairs of this nature, to obey without reserve all limitation with regard
the suggestions of a noble and generous heart impelling him to to the prince.
sacrifice his own interests to the advantage of others or to
motives of generosity; because it is not his private interest that is in question, but that
of the state,—that of the nation who has committed herself to his care. Cicero says
that a great and elevated soul despises pleasures, wealth, life itself, and makes no
account of them, when the common utility lies at stake.* He is right, and such
sentiments are to be admired in a private person; but generosity is not to be exerted at
the expense of others. The head or conductor of a nation ought not to practise that
virtue in public affairs without great circumspection, nor to a greater extent than will
redound to the glory and real advantage of the state. As to the common good of
human society, he ought to pay the same attention to it, as the nation he represents
would be obliged to pay, were the government of her affairs in her own hand.

But though the duties of a nation towards herself set bounds to §18. No nation ought
the obligation of performing the offices of humanity, they cannot to injure others.
in the least affect the prohibition of doing any harm to others, of
causing them any prejudice,—in a word, of injuring them.† ... If every man is, by his
very nature, obliged to assist in promoting the perfection of others, much more cogent
are the reasons which forbid him to increase their imperfection and that of their
condition. The same duties are incumbent on nations (Prelim. §§5, 6). No nation
therefore ought to commit any actions tending to impair the perfection of other
nations, and that of their condition, or to impede their progress,—in other words, to
injure them. And since the perfection of a nation consists in her apptitude to attain the
end of civil society,—and the perfection of her condition, in not wanting any of the
things necessary to that end (Book I. §14)—no one nation ought to hinder another
from attaining the end of civil society, or to render her incapable of attaining it. This
general principle forbids nations to practise any evil manoeuvres tending to create
disturbance in another state, to foment discord, to corrupt its citizens, to alienate its
allies, to raise enemies against it, to tarnish its glory, and to deprive it of its natural
advantages.

However, it will be easily conceived that negligence in fulfilling the common duties
of humanity, and even the refusal of these duties or offices, is not an injury. To
neglect or refuse contributing to the perfection of a nation, is not impairing that
perfection.

It must be further observed, that when we are making use of our right, when we are
doing what we owe to ourselves or to others, if, from this action of ours, any prejudice
results to the perfection of another,—any detriment to his exterior condition,—we are
not guilty of an injury: we are doing what is lawful, or even what we ought to do. The

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 168 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

damage which accrues to the other, is no part of our intention: it is merely an accident,
the imputability of which must be determined by the particular circumstances. For
instance, in case of a lawful defence, the harm we do to the aggressor is not the object
we aim at:—we act only with a view to our own safety: we make use of our right; and
the aggressor alone is chargeable with the mischief which he brings on himself.

Nothing is more opposite to the duties of humanity, nor more §19. Offences.
contrary to that society which should be cultivated by nations,
than offences, or actions which give a just displeasure to others: every nation
therefore should carefully avoid giving any other nation real offence: I say, real; for,
should others take offence at our behaviour when we are only using our rights or
fulfilling our duties, the fault lies with them, not with us. Offences ex-cite such
asperity and rancour between nations, that we should avoid giving any room even for
ill-grounded picques, when it can be done without any inconveniency, or failure in
our duty. It is said that certain medals and dull jests irritated Lewis XIV. against the
United Provinces, to such a degree, as to induce him, in 1672, to undertake the
destruction of that republic.

The maxims laid down in this chapter,—those sacred precepts of §20. Bad custom of
nature,—were for a long time unknown to nations. The ancients the ancients.
had no notion of any duty they owed to nations with whom they
were not united by treaties of friendship.* The Jews especially placed a great part of
their zeal in hating all nations; and, as a natural consequence, they were detested and
despised by them in turn. At length the voice of nature came to be heard among
civilised nations; they perceived that all men are brethren.† When will the happy time
come that they shall behave as such?

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 169 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER II

Of The Mutual Commerce Between Nations.
All men ought to find on earth the things they stand in need of. §21. General
In the primitive state of communion, they took them wherever obligation of nations
they happened to meet with them, if another had not before to carry on mutual
appropriated them to his own use. The introduction of dominion commerce.
and property could not deprive men of so essential a right, and
consequently it cannot take place without leaving them, in general, some mean of
procuring what is useful or necessary to them. This mean is commerce: by it every
man may still supply his wants. Things being now become property, there is no
obtaining them without the owner’s consent; nor are they usually to be had for
nothing; but they may be bought, or exchanged for other things of equal value. Men
are therefore under an obligation to carry on that commerce with each other, if they
wish not to deviate from the views of nature; and this obligation extends also to whole
nations or states (Prelim. §5). It is seldom that nature is seen in one place to produce
every thing necessary for the use of man: one country abounds in corn, another in
pastures and cattle, a third in timber and metals, &c. If all those countries trade
together, as is agreeable to human nature, no one of them will be without such things
as are useful and necessary; and the views of nature, our common mother, will be
fulfilled. Further, one country is fitter for some kind of products than another, as, for
instance, fitter for the vine than for tillage. If trade and barter take place, every nation,
on the certainty of procuring what it wants, will employ its land and its industry in the
most advantageous manner; and mankind in general prove gainers by it. Such are the
foundations of the general obligation incumbent on nations reciprocally to cultivate
commerce.

Every nation ought, therefore, not only to countenance trade, as §22. They should
far as it reasonably can, but even to protect and favour it. The favour trade.
care of the public roads,—the safety of travellers,—the
establishment of ports, of places of sale, of well-regulated fairs,—all contribute to this
end. And where these are attended with expense, the nation, as we have already
observed (Book I. §103), may, by tolls and other duties equitably proportioned,
indemnify itself for its disbursements.

Freedom being very favourable to commerce, it is implied in the §23. Freedom of
duties of nations, that they should support it as far as possible, trade.
instead of cramping it by unnecessary burdens or restrictions.
Wherefore those private privileges and tolls, which obtain in many places, and press
so heavily on commerce, are deservedly to be reprobated, unless founded on very
important reasons arising from the public good.

Every nation, in virtue of her natural liberty, has a right to trade §24. Right of trading,
with those who are willing to correspond with such intentions; belonging to nations.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 170 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

and to molest her in the exercise of her right is doing her an injury. The Portuguese, at
the time of their great power in the East Indies, were for excluding all other European
nations from any commerce with the Indians: but such a pretension, no less iniquitous
than chimerical, was treated with contempt; and the other nations agreed to consider
any acts of violence in support of it, as just grounds for making war against the
Portuguese. This common right of all nations is, at present, generally acknowledged
under the appellation of freedom of trade.

But although it be in general the duty of a nation to carry on §25. Each nation is
commerce with others, and though each nation has a right to sole judge of the
trade with those countries that are willing to encourage her,—on propriety of
the other hand, a nation ought to decline a commerce which is commerce on her own
disadvantageous or dangerous (Book 1. §98); and since, in case part.

of collision, her duties to herself are paramount to her duties to
others, she has a full and clear right to regulate her conduct, in this respect, by the
consideration of what her advantage or safety requires. We have already seen (Book I.
§92) that each nation is, on her own part, the sole judge, whether or not it be
convenient for her to cultivate such or such branch of commerce: she may therefore
either embrace or reject any commercial proposals from foreign nations, without
affording them any just grounds to accuse her of injustice, or to demand a reason for
such refusal, much less to make use of compulsion. She is free in the administration
of her affairs, without being accountable to any other. The obligation of trading with
other nations is in itself an imperfect obligation (Prelim. §17), and gives them only an
imperfect right; so that, in cases where the commerce would be detrimental, that
obligation is entirely void. When the Spaniards attacked the Americans under a
pretence that those people refused to traffic with them, they only endeavoured to
throw a colourable veil over their own insatiable avarice.

These few remarks, together with what we have already said on §26. Necessity of
the subject (Book I. Chap. VIII.) may suffice to establish the commercial treaties.
principles of the natural law of nations respecting the mutual
commerce of states. It is not difficult to point out, in general, what are the duties of
nations in this respect, and what the law of nature prescribes to them for the good of
the great society of mankind. But as each nation is only so far obliged to carry on
commerce with others, as she can do it without being wanting to herself,—and as the
whole ultimately depends on the judgment that each state may form of what it can and
ought to do in particular cases,—nations cannot count on any thing more than
generalities, such as the inherent liberty of each to carry on trade,—and, moreover, on
imperfect rights, which depend on the judgment of others, and, consequently, are ever
uncertain. Wherefore, if they wish to secure to themselves any definite and constant
advantages, they must procure them by treaties.

Since a nation has a full right to regulate herself in commercial §27. General rule
affairs by what is useful or advantageous to her, she may make concerning those
such commercial treaties as she thinks proper; and no other treaties.
nation has a right to take offence, provided those treaties do not
affect the perfect rights of others. If, by the engagements contracted, a nation,
unnecessarily, or without powerful reasons, renders herself incapable of joining in the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 171 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

general trade which nature recommends between nations, she trespasses against her
duty. But the nation being the sole judge in this case (Prelim. §16), other nations are
bound to respect her natural liberty,—to acquiesce in her determination, and even to
suppose that she is actuated by substantial reasons. Every commercial treaty,
therefore, which does not impair the perfect right of others, is allowable between
nations; nor can the execution of it be lawfully opposed. But those commercial
treaties alone are in themselves just and commendable, which pay to the general
interest of mankind as great a degree of respect as is possible and reasonable in the
particular case.

As express promises and engagements should be inviolable, §28. Duty of nations
every wise and virtuous nation will be attentive to examine and in making those
weigh a commercial treaty before she concludes it, and to take treaties.
care that she be not thereby engaged to any thing contrary to the
duties which she owes to herself and others.

Nations may in their treaties insert such clauses and conditions as §29. Perpetual or
they think proper: they are at liberty to make them perpetual, or temporary treaties, or
temporary, or dependent on certain events. It is usually most treaties revocable at
prudent not to engage forever, as circumstances may afterwards pleasure.
intervene, by which the treaty might become very oppressive to
one of the contracting parties. A nation may confine a treaty to the grant of only a
precarious right,—reserving to herself the liberty of revoking it at pleasure. We have
already observed (Book I. §94), that a simple permission does not, any more than long
custom (ibid. §95), give any perfect right to a trade. These things are therefore not to
be confounded with treaties,—not even with those which give only a precarious right.

When once a nation has entered into engagements by treaty, she §30. Nothing contrary
is no longer at liberty to do, in favour of others, contrary to the to the tenor of a treaty
tenor of the treaty, what she might otherwise have granted to can be granted to a
them agreeably to the duties of humanity or the general third party.
obligation of mutual commerce: for she is to do for others no
more than what is in her power; and having deprived herself of the liberty of
disposing of a thing, that thing is no longer in her power. Therefore when a nation has
engaged to another that she will sell certain merchandise or produce to the latter
only,—as, for instance, corn,—she can no longer sell it to any other. The case is the
same in a contract to purchase certain goods of that nation alone.

But it will be asked, how and on what occasions a nation may §31. How far lawful
enter into engagements which deprive her of the liberty to fulfil to give up by treaty
her duties to others. As the duties we owe to ourselves are the liberty of trading
paramount to those we owe to others,—if a nation finds her with other nations.
safety and substantial advantage in a treaty of this nature, she is
unquestionably justifiable in contracting it,—especially as she does not thereby
interrupt the general commerce of nations, but simply causes one particular branch of
her own commerce to pass through other hands, or ensures to a particular people
certain things of which they stand in need. If a state which stands in need of salt can
secure a supply of it from another, by engaging to sell her corn and cattle only to that

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 172 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

other nation, who will doubt but she has a right to conclude so salutary a treaty? In
this case, her corn or cattle are goods which she disposes of for supplying her own
wants. But, from what we have observed (§28), engagements of this kind are not to be
entered into, without very good reasons. However, be the reasons good or bad, the
treaty is still valid, and other nations have no right to oppose it (§27).

Every one is at liberty to renounce his right: a nation therefore §32.A nation may
may lay a restriction on her commerce in favour of another abridge its commerce
nation, and engage not to traffic in a certain kind of goods, or to in favour of another.
forbear trading with such and such a country, &c. And in
departing from such engagements, she acts against the perfect right of the nation with
which she has contracted; and the latter has a right to restrain her. The natural liberty
of trade is not hurt by treaties of this nature: for that liberty consists only in every
nation being unmolested in her right to carry on commerce with those that consent to
traffic with her; each one remaining free to embrace or decline a particular branch of
commerce, as she shall judge most advantageous to the state.

Nations not only carry on trade for the sake of procuring §33.A nation may
necessary or useful articles, but also with a view to make it a appropriate to itself a
source of opulence. Now, wherever a profit is to be made, it is particular branch of
equally lawful for every one to participate in it: but the most trade.
diligent may lawfully anticipate the others by taking possession
of an advantage which lies open to the first occupier;—he may even secure the whole
entirely to himself, if he has any lawful means of appropriating it. When therefore a
particular nation is in sole possession of certain articles, another nation may lawfully
procure to herself by treaty the advantage of being the only buyer, and then sell them
again all over the world. And as it is indifferent to nations from what hand they
receive the commodities they want, provided they obtain them at a reasonable price,
the monopoly of this nation does not clash with the general duties of humanity,
provided that she do not take advantage of it to set an unreasonable and exorbitant
price on her goods. Should she, by an abuse of her monopoly, exact an immoderate
profit, this would be an offence against the law of nature, as by such an exaction she
either deprives other nations of a necessary or agreeable article which nature designed
for all men, or obliges them to purchase it at too dear a rate: nevertheless she does not
do them any positive wrong, because, strictly speaking, and according to external
right, the owner of a commodity may either keep it, or set what price he pleases on it.
Thus the Dutch, by a treaty with the king of Ceylon,9 have wholly engrossed the
cinnamon trade: yet, whilst they keep their profits within just limits, other nations
have no right to complain.

But, were the necessaries of life in question,—were the monopolist inclined to raise
them to an excessive price,—other nations would be authorised by the care of their
own safety, and for the advantage of human society, to form a general combination in
order to reduce a greedy oppressor to reasonable terms. The right to necessaries is
very different from that to things adapted only to convenience and pleasure, which we
may dispense with, if they be too dear. It would be absurd that the subsistence and
being of other nations should depend on the caprice or avidity of one.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 173 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Among the modern institutions for the advantage of commerce, §34. Consuls.
one of the most useful is that of consuls, or persons residing in
the large trading cities, and especially the seaports, of foreign countries, with a
commission to watch over the rights and privileges of their nation, and to decide
disputes between her merchants there. When a nation trades largely with a country, it
is requisite to have there a person charged with such a commission: and as the state
which allows of this commerce must naturally favour it,—for the same reason also, it
must admit the consul. But there being no absolute and perfect obligation to this, the
nation that wishes to have a consul, must procure this right by the commercial treaty
itself.

The consul being charged with the affairs of his sovereign, and receiving his orders,
continues his subject, and accountable to him for his actions.

The consul is no public minister (as will appear by what we shall say of the character
of ministers, in our fourth book), and cannot pretend to the privileges annexed to such
character. Yet, bearing his sovereign’s commission, and being in this quality received
by the prince in whose dominions he resides, he is, in a certain degree, entitled to the
protection of the law of nations. This sovereign, by the very act of receiving him,
tacitly engages to allow him all the liberty and safety necessary to the proper
discharge of his functions, without which the admission of the consul would be
nugatory and delusive.

The functions of a consul require, in the first place, that he be not a subject of the state
where he resides; as, in this case, he would be obliged in all things to conform to its
orders, and thus not be at liberty to acquit himself of the duties of his office.

They seem even to require that the consul should be independent of the ordinary
criminal justice of the place where he resides, so as not to be molested or imprisoned,
unless he himself violate the law of nations by some enormous crime.

And though the importance of the consular functions be not so great as to procure to
the consul’s person the inviolability and absolute independence enjoyed by public
ministers,—yet, being under the particular protection of the sovereign who employs
him, and intrusted with the care of his concerns,—if he commits any crime, the
respect due to his master requires that he should be sent home to be punished. Such is
the mode pursued by states that are inclined to preserve a good understanding with
each other. But the surest way is, expressly to settle all these matters, as far as is
practicable, by the commercial treaty.

Wicquefort, in his treatise of The Ambassador, Book I. §5, says that consuls do not
enjoy the protection of the law of nations, and that, both in civil and criminal cases,
they are subject to the justice of the place where they reside. But the very instances he
quotes contradict his proposition. The states-general of the United Provinces, whose
consul had been affronted and put under arrest by the governor of Cadiz, complained
of it to the court of Madrid as a breach of the law of nations. And in the year 1634 the
republic of Venice was near coming to a rupture with pope Urban VIII. on account of
the violence offered to the Venetian consul by the governor of Ancona. The governor,

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 174 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

suspecting this consul to have given information detrimental to the commerce of
Ancona, had persecuted him, seized his furniture and papers, and caused him to be
summoned, declared guilty of contumacy, and banished, under pretence that, contrary
to public prohibition, he had caused goods to be unloaded in a time of contagion.
This consul’s suc-cessor he likewise imprisoned. The Venetian senate warmly insisted
on having due satisfaction: and, on the interposition of the ministers of France, who
were apprehensive of an open rupture, the pope obliged the governor of Ancona to
give the republic satisfaction accordingly.

In default of treaties, custom is to be the rule on these occasions; for a prince who
receives a consul without express conditions, is supposed to receive him on the
footing established by custom.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 175 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER III

Of The Dignity And Equality Of Nations,—Of Titles,—And
Other Marks Of Honour.
Every nation, every sovereign and independent state, deserves §35. Dignity of
consideration and respect, because it makes an immediate figure nations or sovereign
in the grand society of the human race, is independent of all states.
earthly power, and is an assemblage of a great number of men,
which is, doubtless, more considerable than any individual. The sovereign represents
his whole nation; he unites in his person all its majesty. No individual, though ever so
free and independent, can be placed in competition with a sovereign; this would be
putting a single person upon an equality with an united multitude of his equals.
Nations and sovereigns are therefore under an obligation, and at the same time have a
right, to maintain their dignity, and to cause it to be respected, as being of the utmost
importance to their safety and tranquillity.

We have already observed (Prelim. §18) that nature has §36. Their equality.
established a perfect equality of rights between independent
nations. Consequently none can naturally lay claim to any superior prerogative: for,
whatever privileges any one of them derives from freedom and sovereignty, the others
equally derive the same from the same source.

And since precedency or pre-minence of rank is a prerogative, no §37. Precedency,
nation, no sovereign, can naturally claim it as a right. Why
should nations, that are not dependent on him, give up any point to him against their
will? However, as a powerful and extensive state is much more considerable in
universal society, than a small state, it is reasonable that the latter should yield to the
former, on occasions where one must necessarily yield to the other, as in an
assembly,—and should pay it those mere ceremonial deferences, which do not in fact
destroy their equality, and only shew a priority of order, a first place among equals.
Other nations will naturally assign the first place to the more powerful state; and it
would be equally useless as ridiculous for the weaker one obstinately to contend about
it. The antiquity of the state enters also into consideration on these occasions: a new-
comer cannot dispossess any one of the honours he has enjoyed; and he must produce
very strong reasons, before he can obtain a preference.

The form of government is naturally foreign to this question. The §38. The form of
dignity, the majesty, resides originally in the body of the state; government is foreign
that of the sovereign is derived from his representing the nation. to this question.
And can it be imagined that a state possesses more or less dignity
according as it is governed by a single person, or by many? At present kings claim a
superiority of rank over republics: but this pretension has no other support than the
superiority of their strength. Formerly, the Roman republic considered all kings as
very far beneath them: but the monarchs of Europe, finding none but feeble republics

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 176 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

to oppose them, have disdained to admit them to an equality. The republic of Venice,
and that of the United Provinces, have obtained the honours of crowned heads; but
their ambassadors yield precedency to those of kings.

In consequence of what we have just established, if the form of §39.A state ought to
government in a nation happens to be changed, she will still keep its rank, notwith-
preserve the same honours and rank of which she was before in standing any changes
possession. When England had abolished royalty,10 Cromwell in the form of its
would suffer no abatement of the honours that had been paid to government.

the crown, or to the nation; and he every-where maintained the
English ambassadors in the rank they had always possessed.

If the grades of precedency have been settled by treaties, or by §40. In this respect,
long custom founded on tacit consent, it is necessary to conform treaties and
to the established rule. To dispute with a prince the rank he has established customs
acquired in this manner, is doing him an injury, inasmuch as it is ought to be observed.
an expression of contempt for him, or a violation of engagements
that secure to him a right. Thus, by the injudicious partition between the sons of
Charlemagne,11 the elder having obtained the empire, the younger, who received the
kingdom of France, yielded precedency to him the more readily, as there still
remained at that time a recent idea of the majesty of the real Roman empire. His
successors followed the rule they found established:—they were imitated by the other
kings of Europe; and thus the imperial crown continues to possess, without
opposition, the first rank in Christendom. With most of the other crowns, the point of
precedency remains yet undetermined.

Some people would have us to look upon the precedency of the emperor as something
more than the first place among equals: they would fain attribute to him a superiority
over all kings, and in a word make him the temporal head of Christendom.* And it in
fact appears, that many emperors entertained ideas of such pretensions,—as if, by
reviving the name of the Roman empire, they could also revive its rights. Other states
have been on their guard against these pretensions. We may see in Mezeray† the
precautions taken by king Charles V.12 when the emperor Charles IV. visited
France,13 “for fear,” says the historian, “lest that prince, and his son the king of the
Romans, should found any right of superiority on his courtesy.” Bodinus relates,‡ that
“the French took great offence at the emperor Sigismund’s placing himself in the
royal seat in full parliament, and at his having knighted the senechal de Beaucaire,”14
—adding, that, “to repair the egregious error they had committed in suffering it, they
would not allow the same emperor, when at Lyons, to make the count of Savoy a
duke.” At present a king of France would doubtless think it a degradation of his
dignity, were he to intimate the most distant idea that another might claim any
authority in his kingdom.*

As a nation may confer on her conductor what degree of §41. Of the name and
authority, and what rights she thinks proper, she is equally free in honours given by the
regard to the name, the titles, and honours, with which she may nation to its
choose to decorate him. But discretion and the care of her conductor.
reputation require that she should not, in this respect, deviate too

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 177 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

far from the customs commonly established among civilised nations. Let us further
observe, that, in this point, she ought to be guided by prudence, and inclined to
proportion the titles and honours of her chief to the power he possesses, and to the
degree of authority with which she chooses to invest him. Titles and honours, it is
true, determine nothing: they are but empty names, and vain ceremonies, when they
are mis-placed: yet who does not know how powerful an influence they have on the
minds of mankind? This is then a more serious affair than it appears at the first
glance. The nation ought to take care not to debase herself before other states, and not
to degrade her chief by too humble a title: she ought to be still more careful not to
swell his heart by a vain name, by unbounded honours, so as to inspire him with the
idea of arrogating to himself a commensurate authority over her, or of acquiring a
proportionate power by unjust conquests. On the other hand, an exalted title may
engage the chief to support with greater firmness the dignity of the nation. Prudence is
guided by circumstances, and, on every occasion, keeps within due bounds.
“Royalty,” says a respectable author,15 who may be believed on this subject, “rescued
the house of Brandenburg from that yoke of servitude under which the house of
Austria then kept all the German princes. This was a bait which Frederic I. threw out
to all his posterity, saying to them as it were, I have acquired a title for you: do you
render yourselves worthy of it: I have laid the foundations of your greatness; it is you
who are to finish the work.”*

If the conductor of the state is sovereign, he has in his hands the §42. Whether a
rights and authority of the political society; and consequently he sovereign may
may himself determine what title he will assume, and what assume what title and
honours shall be paid to him, unless these have been already honours he pleases.
determined by the fundamental laws, or that the limits which
have been set to his power manifestly oppose such as he wishes to assume. His
subjects are equally obliged to obey him in this, as in whatever he commands by
virtue of a lawful authority. Thus the czar Peter I. grounding his pretensions on the
vast extent of his dominions, took upon himself the title of emperor.

But foreign nations are not obliged to give way to the will of a §43. Right of other
sovereign who assumes a new title, or of a people who call their nations in this respect.
chief by what name they please.†

However, if this title has nothing unreasonable, or contrary to §44. Their duty.
received customs, it is altogether agreeable to the mutual duties
which bind nations together, to give to a sovereign or conductor of a state the same
title that is given him by his people. But if this title is contrary to custom, if it implies
attributes which do not belong to him who affects it, foreign nations may refuse it
without his having reason to complain. The title of “Majesty” is consecrated by
custom to monarchs who command great nations. The emperors of Germany have
long affected to reserve it to themselves, as belonging solely to the imperial crown.
But the kings asserted with reason, that there was nothing on earth more eminent or
more august than their dignity: they therefore refused the title of majesty to him who
refused it to them;* and at present, except in a few instances founded on particular
reasons, the title of majesty is a peculiar attribute of the royal character.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 178 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

As it would be ridiculous for a petty prince to take the title of king, and assume the
style of “Majesty,” foreign nations, by refusing to comply with this whim, do nothing
but what is conformable to reason and their duty. However, if there reigns anywhere a
sovereign, who, notwithstanding the small extent of his power, is accustomed to
receive from his neighbours the title of king, distant nations who would carry on an
intercourse with him, cannot refuse him that title. It belongs not to them to reform the
customs of distant countries.

The sovereign who wishes constantly to receive certain titles and §45. How titles and
honours from other powers, must secure them by treaties. Those honours may be
who have entered into engagements in this way are obliged to secured.
conform to them, and cannot deviate from the treaties without
doing him an injury. Thus, in the examples we have produced (§§41 and 42), the czar
and the king of Prussia took care to negotiate before-hand with the courts in
friendship with them, to secure their being acknowledged under the new titles they
intended to assume.

The popes have formerly pretended that it belonged to the tiara alone to create new
crowns; they had the confidence to expect that the superstition of princes and nations
would allow them so sublime a prerogative. But it was eclipsed at the revival of
letters.† The emperors of Germany, who formed the same pretensions, were at least
countenanced by the example of the ancient Roman emperors. They only want the
same power in order to have the same right.

In default of treaties, we ought, with respect to titles, and, in §46. We must
general, every other mark of honour, to conform to the rule conform to general
established by general custom. To attempt a deviation from it custom.
with respect to a nation or sovereign, when there is no particular
reason for such innovation, is expressing either contempt or ill-will towards them;—a
conduct equally inconsistent with sound policy and with the duties that nations owe to
each other.

The greatest monarch ought to respect in every sovereign the §47. Mutual respect,
eminent character with which he is invested. The independence, which sovereigns owe
the equality of nations,—the reciprocal duties of humanity,—all to each other.
these circumstances should induce him to pay even to the chief
of a petty state the respect due to the station which he fills. The weakest state is
composed of men as well as the most powerful; and our duties are the same towards
all those who do not depend on us.

But this precept of the law of nature does not extend beyond what is essential to the
respect which independent nations owe to each other, or that conduct, in a word,
which shews that we acknowledge a state or its chief to be truly independent and
sovereign, and consequently entitled to every thing due to the quality of sovereignty.
But, on the other hand, a great monarch being, as we have already observed, a very
important personage in human society, it is natural, that, in matters merely
ceremonial, and not derogatory to the equality of rights between nations, he should
receive honours to which a petty prince can have no pretensions: and the latter cannot

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 179 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

refuse to pay the former every mark of respect which is not inconsistent with his own
independence and sovereignty.

Every nation, every sovereign, ought to maintain their dignity §48. How a sovereign
(§35) by causing due respect to be paid to them; and especially ought to maintain his
they ought not to suffer that dignity to be impaired. If then there dignity.
are titles and honours which by constant custom belong to a
prince, he may insist upon them; and he ought to do it on occasions where his glory is
concerned.

But it is proper to distinguish between neglect or the omission of what the established
usage requires, and positive acts of disrespect and insult. The prince may complain of
an instance of neglect, and, if it be not repaired, may consider it as an indication of ill-
will: he has a right to demand, even by force of arms, the reparation of an insult. The
czar Peter the First,16 in his manifesto against Sweden, complained that the cannon
had not been fired on his passing at Riga. He might think it strange that they did not
pay him this mark of respect, and he might complain of it; but to have made this the
subject of a war, must have indicated a preposterous prodigality of human blood.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 180 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER IV

Of The Right To Security, And The Effects Of The Sovereignty
And Independence Of Nations.
In vain does nature prescribe to nations, as well as to individuals, §49. Right to security.
the care of self-preservation, and of advancing their own
perfection and happiness, if she does not give them a right to preserve themselves
from every thing that might render this care ineffectual. This right is nothing more
than a moral power of acting, that is, the power of doing what is morally
possible,—what is proper and conformable to our duties. We have then in general a
right to do whatever is necessary to the discharge of our duties. Every nation, as well
as every man, has therefore a right to prevent other nations from obstructing her
preservation, her perfection, and happiness,—that is, to preserve herself from all
injuries (§18): and this right is a perfect one, since it is given to satisfy a natural and
indispensable obligation: for when we cannot use constraint in order to cause our
rights to be respected, their effects are very uncertain. It is this right to preserve
herself from all injury that is called the right to security.

It is safest to prevent the evil, when it can be prevented. A nation §50. It produces the
has a right to resist an injurious attempt, and to make use of force right of resistance;
and every honourable expedient against whosoever is actually
engaged in opposition to her, and even to anticipate his machinations, observing,
however, not to attack him upon vague and uncertain suspicions, lest she should incur
the imputation of becoming herself an unjust aggressor.

When the evil is done, the same right to security authorises the §51. and that of
offended party to endeavour to obtain a complete reparation, and obtaining reparation;
to employ force for that purpose, if necessary.

Finally, the offended party have a right to provide for their future §52. and the right of
security, and to chastise the offender, by inflicting upon him a punishing.
punishment capable of deterring him thenceforward from similar
aggressions, and of intimidating those who might be tempted to imitate him. They
may even, if necessary, disable the aggressor from doing further injury. They only
make use of their right in all these measures, which they adopt with good reason: and
if evil thence results to him who has reduced them to the necessity of taking such
steps, he must impute the consequences only to his own injustice.

If then there is any-where a nation of a restless and mischievous §53. Right of all
disposition, ever ready to injure others, to traverse their designs, nations against a
and to excite domestic disturbances in their dominions,—it is not mischievous people.
to be doubted that all the others have a right to form a coalition
in order to repress and chastise that nation, and to put it forever after out of her power
to injure them. Such would be the just fruits of the policy which Machiavel praises in

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 181 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Caesar Borgia. The conduct followed by Philip II. king of Spain, was calculated to
unite all Europe against him; and it was from just reasons that Henry the Great formed
the design of humbling a power, whose strength was formidable, and whose maxims
were pernicious.

The three preceding propositions are so many principles, that furnish the various
foundations for a just war, as we shall see in the proper place.

It is an evident consequence of the liberty and independence of §54. No nation has a
nations, that all have a right to be governed as they think proper, right to interfere in
and that no state has the smallest right to interfere in the the government of
government of another. Of all the rights that can belong to a another state.
nation, sovereignty is, doubtless, the most precious, and that
which other nations ought the most scrupulously to respect, if they would not do her
an injury.

The sovereign is he to whom the nation has intrusted the empire, §55. One sovereign
and the care of the government: she has invested him with her cannot make himself
rights; she alone is directly interested in the manner in which the the judge of the
conductor she has chosen makes use of his power. It does not conduct of another.
then belong to any foreign power to take cognisance of the
administration of that sovereign, to set himself up for a judge of his conduct, and to
oblige him to alter it. If he loads his subjects with taxes, and if he treats them with
severity, the nation alone is concerned in the business; and no other is called upon to
oblige him to amend his conduct, and follow more wise and equitable maxims. It is
the part of prudence to point out the occasions when officious and amicable
representations may be made to him. The Spaniards violated all rules, when they set
themselves up as judges of the Inca Athualpa.17 If that prince had violated the law of
nations with respect to them, they would have had a right to punish him. But they
accused him of having put some of his subjects to death, of having had several wives,
&c.—things, for which he was not at all accountable to them; and, to fill up the
measure of their extravagant injustice, they condemned him by the laws of Spain.*

But if the prince, by violating the fundamental laws, gives his §56. How far lawful
subjects a legal right to resist him,—if tyranny becoming to interfere in a
insupportable obliges the nation to rise in their own quarrel between a
defence,—every foreign power has a right to succour an sovereign and his
oppressed people who implore their assistance. The English subjects.

justly complained of James II. The nobility and the most
distinguished patriots, having determined to check him in the prosecution of his
schemes, which manifestly tended to overthrow the constitution, and to destroy the
liberties and the religion of the people,—applied for assistance to the United
Provinces. The authority of the prince of Orange had, doubtless, an influence on the
deliberations of the states-general; but it did not lead them to the commission of an act
of injustice: for when a people from good reasons take up arms against an oppressor,
it is but an act of justice and generosity to assist brave men in the defence of their
liberties. Whenever therefore matters are carried so far as to produce a civil war,
foreign powers may assist that party which appears to them to have justice on its side.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 182 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

He who assists an odious tyrant,—he who declares for an unjust and rebellious
people,—violates his duty. But when the bands of the political society are broken, or
at least suspended, between the sovereign and his people, the contending parties may
then be considered as two distinct powers; and since they are both equally
independent of all foreign authority, nobody has a right to judge them. Either may be
in the right; and each of those who grant their assistance may imagine that he is acting
in support of the better cause. It follows then, in virtue of the voluntary law of nations
(see Prelim. §21), that the two parties may act as having an equal right, and behave to
each other accordingly, till the decision of the affair.

But we ought not to abuse this maxim, and make a handle of it to authorise odious
machinations against the internal tranquillity of states. It is a violation of the law of
nations to invite those subjects to revolt who actually pay obedience to their
sovereign, though they complain of his government.

The practice of nations is conformable to our maxims. When the German protestants
came to the assistance of the reformed party in France, the court never attempted to
treat them otherwise than on the usual footing of enemies in general, and according to
the laws of war. France was at the same time engaged in assisting the Netherlands
then in arms against Spain,—and expected that her troops should be considered in no
other light than as auxiliaries in a regular war. But no power ever fails to complain, as
of an atrocious wrong, if any one attempts by his emissaries to excite his subjects to
revolt.

As to those monsters who, under the title of sovereigns, render themselves the
scourges and horror of the human race, they are savage beasts, whom every brave
man may justly exterminate from the face of the earth. All antiquity has praised
Hercules for delivering the world from an Antaeus, a Busiris, and a Diomede.18

After having established the position that foreign nations have no §57. Right of
right to interfere in the government of an independent state, it is opposing the
not difficult to prove that the latter has a right to oppose such interference of foreign
interference. To govern herself according to her own pleasure, is powers in the affairs
a necessary part of her independence. A sovereign state cannot of government.

be constrained in this respect, except it be from a particular right
which she has herself given to other states by her treaties; and even if she has given
them such a right, yet it cannot, in an affair of so delicate a nature as that of
government, be extended beyond the clear and express terms of the treaties. In every
other case a sovereign has a right to treat those as enemies, who attempt to interfere in
his domestic affairs otherwise than by their good offices.

Religion is in every sense an object of great importance to a §58. The same rights
nation, and one of the most interesting subjects on which the with respect to
government can be employed. An independent people are religion.
accountable for their religion to God alone: in this particular, as
in every other, they have a right to regulate their conduct according to the dictates of
their own conscience, and to prevent all foreign interference in an affair of so delicate
a nature.* The custom, long kept up in Christendom, of causing all the affairs of

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 183 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

religion to be decided and regulated in a general council, could only have been
introduced by the singular circumstance of the submission of the whole church to the
same civil government,—the Roman empire. When that empire was overthrown, and
gave place to many independent kingdoms, this custom was found contrary to the first
principles of government, to the very idea of independent states, and political
societies. It was, however, long supported by prejudice, ignorance and superstition, by
the authority of the popes, and the power of the clergy, and still respected even at the
time of the reformation. The states who had embraced the reformed religion offered to
submit to the decisions of an impartial council lawfully assembled. At present they
would not hesitate to declare, that, in matters of religion, they are equally independent
of every power on earth, as they are in the affairs of civil government. The general
and absolute authority of the pope and council is absurd in every other system than
that of those popes who strove to unite all Christendom in a single body, of which
they pretended to be the supreme monarchs.* But even catholic sovereigns have
endeavoured to restrain that authority within such limits as are consistent with their
supreme power: they do not receive the decrees of council or the popes’ bulls, till they
have caused them to be examined; and these ecclesiastical laws are of no force in their
dominions unless confirmed by the prince. In the first book of this work, Chap. XII.
we have sufficiently established the rights of a state in matters of religion; and we
introduce them here again, only to draw just consequences from them with respect to
the conduct which nations ought to observe towards each other.

It is then certain, that we cannot, in opposition to the will of a §59. No nation can be
nation, interfere in her religious concerns, without violating her constrained with
rights, and doing her an injury. Much less are we allowed to respect to religion.
employ force of arms to oblige her to receive a doctrine and a
worship which we consider as divine. What right have men to set themselves up as the
defenders and protectors of the cause of God? He can, whenever he pleases, lead
nations to the knowledge of himself, by more effectual means than those of violence.
Persecutors make no true converts. The monstrous maxim of extending religion by the
sword is a subversion of the rights of mankind, and the most terrible scourge of
nations. Every madman will fancy he is fighting in the cause of God, and every
aspiring spirit will use that pretext as a cloak for his ambition. While Charlemagne
was ravaging Saxony with fire and sword in order to plant christianity there, the
successors of Mahomet were ravaging Asia and Africa, to establish the Koran in those
parts.

But it is an office of humanity to labour by mild and lawful §60. Offices of
means to persuade a nation to receive a religion which we humanity in these
believe to be the only one that is true and salutary. Missionaries matters.
may be sent to instruct the people;
and this care is altogether conformable to the attention which Missionaries.
every nation owes to the perfection and happiness of others. But
it must be observed, that, in order to avoid doing an injury to the rights of a sovereign,
the missionaries ought to abstain from preaching clandestinely, or without his
permission, a new doctrine to his people. He may refuse to accept their proffered
services; and if he orders them to leave his dominions, they ought to obey. They
should have a very express order from the King of kings, before they can lawfully

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 184 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

disobey a sovereign who commands according to the extent of his power: and the
prince who is not convinced of that extraordinary order of the Deity, will do no more
than exert his lawful rights, in punishing a missionary for disobedience. But what if
the nation, or a considerable part of the people, are desirous of retaining the
missionary, and following his doctrine?—In a former part of this work (Book I.
§§128–136) we have established the rights of the nation and those of the citizens: and
thither we refer for an answer to this question.

This is a very delicate subject; and we cannot authorise an §61. Circumspection
inconsiderate zeal for making proselytes, without endangering to be used.
the tranquillity of all nations, and even exposing those who are
engaged in making converts, to act inconsistently with their duty, at the very time they
imagine they are accomplishing the most meritorious work. For it is certainly
performing a very bad office to a nation, and doing her an essential injury, to spread a
false and dangerous religion among the inhabitants. Now there is no person who does
not believe his own religion to be the only true and safe one. Recommend, kindle in
all hearts the ardent zeal of the missionaries, and you will see Europe inundated with
Lamas, Bonzes and Dervises, while monks of all kinds will over-run Asia and Africa.
Protestant ministers will crowd to Spain and Italy, in defiance of the inquisition, while
the jesuits will spread themselves among the protestants in order to bring them back
into the pale of the church. Let the catholics reproach the protestants as much as they
please with their lukewarmness, the conduct of the latter is undoubtedly more
agreeable to reason and the law of nations. True zeal applies itself to the task of
making a holy religion flourish in the countries where it is received, and of rendering
it useful to the manners of the people and to the state: and, without forestalling the
dispositions of providence, it can find sufficient employment at home, until an
invitation come from foreign nations, or a very evident commission be given from
heaven, to preach that religion abroad. Finally, let us add, that, before we can lawfully
undertake to preach a particular religion to the various nations of the earth, we must
ourselves be thoroughly convinced of its truth by the most serious
examination.—“What! can christians doubt of their religion?”—The Mahometan
entertains no doubt of his. Be ever ready to impart your knowledge,—simply and
sincerely expose the principles of your belief to those who are desirous of hearing
you: instruct them, convince them by evidence, but seek not to hurry them away with
the fire of enthusiasm. It is a sufficient charge on each of us, to be responsible for his
own conscience.—Thus neither will the light of knowledge be refused to any who
wish to receive it, nor will a turbulent zeal disturb the peace of nations.

When a religion is persecuted in one country, foreign nations §62. What a sovereign
who profess it may intercede for their brethren: but this is all may do in favour of
they can lawfully do, unless the persecution be carried to an those who profess his
intolerable excess: then indeed it becomes a case of manifest religion in another
tyranny, in opposition to which all nations are allowed to assist state.

an unhappy people (§56). A regard to their own safety may also
authorise them to undertake the defence of the persecuted sufferers. A king of France
replied to the ambassadors who solicited him to suffer his subjects of the reformed
religion to live in peace, “that he was master in his own kingdom.” But the protestant
sovereigns, who saw a general conspiracy of the catholics obstinately bent on their

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 185 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

destruction, were so far masters on their side as to be at liberty to give assistance to a
body of men who might strengthen their party, and help them to preserve themselves
from the ruin with which they were threatened. All distinctions of states and nations
are to be disregarded, when there is question of forming a coalition against a set of
madmen, who would exterminate all those that do not implicitly receive their
doctrines.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 186 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER V

Of The Observance Of Justice Between Nations.
Justice is the basis of all society, the sure bond of all commerce. §63. Necessity of the
Human society, far from being an intercourse of assistance and observance of justice
good offices, would be no longer any thing but a vast scene of in human society.
robbery, if no respect were paid to this virtue, which secures to
every one his own. It is still more necessary between nations, than between
individuals; because injustice produces more dreadful consequences in the quarrels of
these powerful bodies politic, and it is more difficult to obtain redress. The obligation
imposed on all men to be just is easily demonstrated from the law of nature. We here
take that obligation for granted (as being sufficiently known), and content ourselves
with observing, that it is not only indispensably binding on nations (Prelim. §5), but
even still more sacred with respect to them, from the importance of its consequences.

All nations are therefore under a strict obligation to cultivate §64. Obligation of all
justice towards each other, to observe it scrupulously, and nations to cultivate
carefully to abstain from every thing that may violate it. Each and observe justice.
ought to render to the others what belongs to them, to respect
their rights, and to leave them in the peaceable enjoyment of them.*

From this indispensable obligation which nature imposes on §65. Right of refusing
nations, as well as from those obligations which each nation to submit to injustice.
owes to herself, results the right of every state, not to suffer any
of her rights to be taken away, or any thing which lawfully be-longs to her: for in
opposing this, she only acts in conformity to all her duties; and therein consists the
right (§49).

This right is a perfect one,—that is to say, it is accompanied with §66. This right is a
the right of using force in order to assert it. In vain would nature perfect one.
give us a right to refuse submitting to injustice,—in vain would
she oblige others to be just in their dealings with us, if we could not lawfully make
use of force, when they refused to discharge this duty. The just would lie at the mercy
of avarice and injustice, and all their rights would soon become useless.

From the foregoing right arise, as distinct branches, first, the §67. It produces 1.
right of a just defence, which belongs to every nation,—or the The right of defence.
right of making use of force against whoever attacks her and her
rights. This is the foundation of defensive war.

Secondly, the right to obtain justice by force, if we cannot obtain §68.2. The right of
it otherwise, or to pursue our right by force of arms. This is the doing ourselves
foundation of offensive war. justice.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 187 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

An intentional act of injustice is undoubtedly an injury. We have §69. The right of
then a right to punish it, as we have shewn above, in speaking of punishing injustice.
injuries in general (§52). The right of refusing to suffer injustice
is a branch of the right to security.

Let us apply to the unjust what we have said above (§53) of a §70. Right of all
mischievous nation. If there were a people who made open nations against one
profession of trampling justice under foot,—who despised and that openly despises
violated the rights of others whenever they found an justice.
opportunity,—the interest of human society would authorise all
the other nations to form a confederacy in order to humble and chastise the
delinquents. We do not here forget the maxim established in our Preliminaries, that it
does not belong to nations to usurp the power of being judges of each other. In
particular cases, where there is room for the smallest doubt, it ought to be supposed
that each of the parties may have some right: and the injustice of the party that has
committed the injury may proceed from error, and not from a general contempt of
justice. But if, by her constant maxims, and by the whole tenor of her conduct, a
nation evidently proves herself to be actuated by that mischievous disposition,—if she
regards no right as sacred,—the safety of the human race requires that she should be
repressed. To form and support an unjust pretension, is only doing an injury to the
party whose interests are affected by that pretension; but to despise justice in general,
is doing an injury to all nations.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 188 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER VI

Of The Concern A Nation May Have In The Actions Of Her
Citizens.
We have seen in the preceding chapters what are the common §71. The sovereign
duties of nations towards each other,—how they ought mutually ought to revenge the
to respect each other, and to abstain from all injury, and all injuries of the state,
offence,—and how justice and equity ought to reign between and to protect the
them in their whole conduct. But hitherto we have only citizens.

considered the actions of the body of the nation, of the state, of
the sovereign. Private persons, who are members of one nation, may offend and ill-
treat the citizens of another, and may injure a foreign sovereign:—it remains for us to
examine, what share a state may have in the actions of her citizens, and what are the
rights and obligations of sovereigns in this respect.

Whoever offends the state, injures its rights, disturbs its tranquillity, or does it a
prejudice in any manner whatsoever, declares himself its enemy, and exposes himself
to be justly punished for it. Whoever uses a citizen ill, indirectly offends the state,
which is bound to protect this citizen; and the sovereign of the latter should avenge
his wrongs, punish the aggressor, and, if possible, oblige him to make full reparation;
since otherwise the citizen would not obtain the great end of the civil association,
which is safety.

But, on the other hand, the nation or the sovereign ought not to §72. He ought not to
suffer the citizens to do an injury to the subjects of another state, suffer his subjects to
much less to offend that state itself:—and this, not only because offend other nations
no sovereign ought to permit those who are under his command or their citizens.
to violate the precepts of the law of nature, which forbids all
injuries,—but also because nations ought mutually to respect each other, to abstain
from all offence, from all injury, from all wrong,—in a word, from every thing that
may be of prejudice to others. If a sovereign, who might keep his subjects within the
rules of justice and peace, suffers them to injure a foreign nation either in its body or
its members, he does no less injury to that nation, than if he injured it himself. In
short, the safety of the state, and that of human society, requires this attention from
every sovereign. If you let loose the reins to your subjects against foreign nations,
these will behave in the same manner to you; and, instead of that friendly intercourse
which nature has established between all men, we shall see nothing but one vast and
dreadful scene of plunder between nation and nation.

However, as it is impossible for the best regulated state, or for §73. The acts of
the most vigilant and absolute sovereign, to model at his pleasure individuals are not to
all the actions of his subjects, and to confine them on every be imputed to the
occasion to the most exact obedience, it would be unjust to nation,
impute to the nation or the sovereign every fault committed by

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 189 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

the citizens. We ought not then to say in general, that we have received an injury from
a nation, because we have received it from one of its members.

But if a nation or its chief approves and ratifies the act of the §74.unless it approves
individual, it then becomes a public concern; and the injured or ratifies them.
party is to consider the nation as the real author of the injury, of
which the citizen was perhaps only the instrument.

If the offended state has in her power the individual who has §75. Conduct to be
done the injury, she may without scruple bring him to justice and observed by the
punish him. If he has escaped and returned to his own country, offended party.
she ought to apply to his sovereign to have justice done in the
case.

And since the latter ought not to suffer his subjects to molest the §76. Duty of the
subjects of other states, or to do them an injury, much less to aggressor’s sovereign.
give open, audacious offence to foreign powers,—he ought to
compel the transgressor to make reparation for the damage or injury, if possible, or to
inflict on him an exemplary punishment, or, finally, according to the nature and
circumstances of the case, to deliver him up to the offended state, to be there brought
to justice. This is pretty generally observed with respect to great crimes, which are
equally contrary to the laws and safety of all nations. Assassins, incendiaries, and
robbers, are seized every where, at the desire of the sovereign in whose territories the
crime was committed, and are delivered up to his justice. The matter is carried still
farther in states that are more closely connected by friendship and good
neighbourhood. Even in cases of ordinary transgressions which are only subjects of
civil prosecution either with a view to the recovery of damages or the infliction of a
slight civil punishment, the subjects of two neighbouring states are reciprocally
obliged to appear before the magistrate of the place where they are accused of having
failed in their duty. Upon a requisition of that magistrate, called Letters Rogatory,
they are summoned in due form by their own magistrates, and obliged to appear. An
admirable institution, by means of which many neighbouring states live together in
peace, and seem to form only one republic! This is in force throughout all
Switzerland. As soon as the Letters Rogatory are issued in form, the superior of the
accused is bound to enforce them. It belongs not to him to examine whether the
accusation be true or false; he is to presume on the justice of his neighbour, and not
suffer any doubts on his own part to impair an institution so well calculated to
preserve harmony and good understanding between the states: however, if by constant
experience he should find that his subjects are oppressed by the neighbouring
magistrates who summon them before their tribunals, it would undoubtedly be right in
him to reflect on the protection due to his people, and to refuse the rogatories till
satisfaction were given for the abuses committed, and proper steps taken to prevent a
repetition of them. But in such case it would be his duty to allege his reasons, and set
them forth in the clearest point of view.

The sovereign who refuses to cause reparation to be made for the §77. If he refuses
damage done by his subject, or to punish the offender, or, finally, justice, he becomes a
to deliver him up, renders himself in some measure an

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 190 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

accomplice in the injury, and becomes responsible for it. But if party in the fault and
he delivers up either the property of the offender as an offence.
indemnification in cases that will admit of pecuniary
compensation,—or his person, in order that he may suffer the punishment due to his
crime,—the offended party has no further demand on him. King Demetrius19 having
delivered to the Romans those who had killed their ambassador, the senate sent them
back, resolving to reserve to themselves the liberty of punishing that crime by
avenging it on the king himself, or on his dominions.* If this was really the case, and
if the king had no share in the murder of the Roman ambassador, the conduct of the
senate was highly unjust, and only worthy of men who sought but a pretext to cover
their ambitious enterprises.

Finally, there is another case where the nation in general is guilty §78. Another case in
of the crimes of its members. That is when by its manners and by which the nation is
the maxims of its government it accustoms and authorises its guilty of the crimes of
citizens indiscrim-inately to plunder and maltreat foreigners, to the citizens.
make inroads into the neighbouring countries, &c. Thus the
nation of the Usbecks is guilty of all the robberies committed by the individuals of
which it is composed. The princes whose subjects are robbed and massacred, and
whose lands are infested by those robbers, may justly level their vengeance against
the nation at large. Nay more, all nations have a right to enter into a league against
such a people, to repress them, and to treat them as the common enemies of the
human race. The christian nations would be no less justifiable in forming a
confederacy against the states of Barbary, in order to destroy those haunts of pirates,
with whom the love of plunder, or the fear of just punishment, is the only rule of
peace and war. But these piratical adventurers are wise enough to respect those who
are most able to chastise them; and the nations that are able to keep the avenues of a
rich branch of commerce open for themselves, are not sorry to see them shut against
others.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 191 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER VII

Effects Of The Domain, Between Nations.
We have explained in Chap. XVIII. Book I. how a nation takes §79. General effect of
possession of a country, and at the same time gains possession of the domain.
the domain and government thereof. That country, with every
thing included in it, becomes the property of the nation in general. Let us now see
what are the effects of this property, with respect to other nations. The full domain is
necessarily a peculiar and exclusive right: for if I have a full right to dispose of a thing
as I please, it thence follows that others have no right to it at all, since, if they had
any, I could not freely dispose of it. The private domain of the citizens may be limited
and restrained in several ways by the laws of the state, and it always is so by the
eminent domain of the sovereign; but the general domain of the nation is full and
absolute, since there exists no authority upon earth by which it can be limited: it
therefore excludes all right on the part of foreigners. And as the rights of a nation
ought to be respected by all others (§64), none can form any pretensions to the
country which belongs to that nation, nor ought to dispose of it, without her consent,
any more than of the things contained in the country.

The domain of the nation extends to every thing she possesses by §80. What is
a just title: it comprehends her ancient and original possessions comprehended in the
and all her acquisitions made by means which are just in domain of a nation.
themselves, or admitted as such among nations,—concessions,
purchases, conquests made in regular war, &c. And by her possessions, we ought not
only to understand her territories, but all the rights she enjoys.

Even the property of the individuals is in the aggregate, to be §81. The property of
considered as the property of the nation, with respect to other the citizens is the
states. It, in some sort, really belongs to her from the right she property of the nation,
has over the property of her citizens, because it constitutes a part with respect to
of the sum total of her riches, and augments her power. She is foreign nations.

interested in that property by her obligation to protect all her
members. In short, it cannot be otherwise, since nations act and treat together as
bodies, in their quality of political societies, and are considered as so many moral
persons. All those who form a society, a nation, being considered by foreign nations
as constituting only one whole, one single person,—all their wealth together can only
be considered as the wealth of that same person. And this is so true, that each political
society may, if it pleases, establish within itself a community of goods, as
Campanella20 did in his republic of the sun. Others will not inquire what it does in
this respect: its domestic regulations make no change in its rights with respect to
foreigners, nor in the manner in which they ought to consider the aggregate of its
property, in what way soever it is possessed.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 192 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

By an immediate consequence of this principle, if one nation has §82.A consequence of
a right to any part of the property of another, she has an this principle.
indiscriminate right to the property of the citizens of the latter
nation, until the debt be discharged. This maxim is of great use, as shall hereafter be
shewn.

The general domain of the nation over the lands she inhabits is §83. Connection of
naturally connected with the empire: for in establishing herself in the domain of the
a vacant country, the nation certainly does not intend to possess nation with the
it in subjection to any other power: and can we suppose an sovereignty.
independent nation not vested with the absolute command in her
domestic concerns? Thus we have already observed (Book I. §205) that in taking
possession of a country the nation is presumed to take possession of its government at
the same time. We shall here proceed farther, and shew the natural connection of
these two rights in an independent nation. How could she govern herself at her own
pleasure in the country she inhabits, if she cannot truly and absolutely dispose of it?
And how could she have the full and absolute domain of a place where she has not the
command? Another’s sovereignty, and the rights it comprehends, must deprive her of
the free disposal of that place. Add to this the eminent domain which constitutes a part
of the sovereignty (Book I. §244), and you will the better perceive the intimate
connection existing between the domain and the sovereignty of the nation. And,
accordingly, what is called the high domain, which is nothing but the domain of the
body of the nation, or of the sovereign who represents it, is every where considered as
inseparable from the sovereignty. The useful domain, or the domain confined to the
rights that may belong to an individual in the state, may be separated from the
sovereignty: and nothing prevents the possibility of its belonging to a nation, in places
that are not under her jurisdiction. Thus many sovereigns have fiefs, and other
possessions, in the territories of another prince: in these cases they possess them in the
manner of private individuals.

The sovereignty united to the domain establishes the jurisdiction §84. Jurisdiction.
of the nation in her territories, or the country that belongs to her.
It is her province, or that of her sovereign, to exercise justice in all the places under
her jurisdiction, to take cognisance of the crimes committed, and the differences that
arise in the country.

Other nations ought to respect this right. And as the administration of justice
necessarily requires that every definitive sentence, regularly pronounced, be esteemed
just, and executed as such,—when once a cause in which foreigners are interested, has
been decided in form, the sovereign of the defendants cannot hear their complaints.
To undertake to examine the justice of a definitive sentence, is an attack on the
jurisdiction of him who has passed it. The prince therefore ought not to interfere in the
causes of his subjects in foreign countries, and grant them his protection, excepting in
cases where justice is refused, or palpable and evident injustice done, or rules and
forms openly violated, or, finally, an odious distinction made to the prejudice of his
subjects, or of foreigners in general. The British court established this maxim, with
great strength of evidence, on occasion of the Prussian vessels seized and declared

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 193 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

lawful prizes during the last war.* What is here said has no relation to the merits of
that particular cause, since they must depend on facts.

In consequence of these rights of jurisdiction, the decisions made §85. Effects of the
by the judge of the place within the extent of his power, ought to jurisdiction in foreign
be respected, and to take effect even in foreign countries. For countries.
instance, it belongs to the domestic judge to nominate tutors and
guardians for minors and idiots. The law of nations, which has an eye to the common
advantage and the good harmony of nations, requires therefore that such nomination
of a tutor or guardian be valid and acknowledged in all countries where the pupil may
have any concerns. Use was made of this maxim in the year 1672, even with respect
to a sovereign. The abbé D’Orléans, sovereign prince of Neufchatel in Switzerland,
being incapable of managing his own affairs, the king of France appointed, as his
guardian, his mother, the duchess dowager of Longueville. The duchess of Nemours,
sister to that prince, laid claim to the guardianship for the principality of Neufchatel:
but the title of the duchess of Longueville was acknowledged by the three estates of
the country. Her counsel rested her cause on the circumstance of her having been
nominated guardian by the domestic judge.* This was a very wrong application of a
just principle: for the prince’s domestic residence could be no where but in his state:
and it was only by the degree of the three estates, who alone had a right to chuse a
guardian for their sovereign, that the authority of the duchess of Longueville became
firm and lawful at Neufchatel.

In the same manner the validity of a testament, as to its form, can only be decided by
the domestic judge, whose sentence delivered in form ought to be every where
acknowledged. But, without affecting the validity of the testament itself, the bequests
contained in it may be disputed before the judge of the place where the effects are
situated, because those effects can only be disposed of conformably to the laws of the
country. Thus the abbé D’Orléans above mentioned having appointed the prince of
Conti21 his universal legatee,—the three estates of Neufchatel, without waiting till
the parliament of Paris should pronounce their decision on the question of two
contradictory wills made by the abbé D’Orléans, gave the investiture of the
principality to the duchess of Nemours,—declaring that the sovereignty was
unalienable. Besides, it might have been said on this occasion also, that the domestic
residence of the prince could be no where but in the state.

As every thing included in the country belongs to the §86. Desert and
nation,—and as none but the nation, or the person on whom she uncultivated places.
has devolved her right, is authorised to dispose of those things
(§79),—if she has left uncultivated and desert places in the country, no person
whatever has a right to take possession of them without her consent. Though she does
not make actual use of them, those places still belong to her: she has an interest in
preserving them for future use, and is not accountable to any person for the manner in
which she makes use of her property. It is, however, necessary to recollect here what
we have observed above (Book I. §81). No nation can lawfully appropriate to herself
a too disproportionate extent of country, and reduce other nations to want subsistence,
and a place of abode. A German chief, in the time of Nero, said to the Romans, “As
heaven belongs to the gods, so the earth is given to the human race; and desert

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 194 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

countries are common to all,”* —giving those proud conquerors to understand that
they had no right to reserve and appropriate to themselves a country which they left
desert. The Romans had laid waste a chain of country along the Rhine, to cover their
provinces from the incursions of the barbarians. The German’s remonstrance would
have had a good foundation, had the Romans pretended to keep without reason a vast
country which was of no use to them: but those lands which they would not suffer to
be inhabited, serving as a rampart against savage nations, were of considerable use to
the empire.

When there is not this singular circumstance, it is equally §87. Duty of the
agreeable to the dictates of humanity, and to the particular nation in this respect.
advantage of the state, to give those desert tracts to foreigners
who are willing to clear the land and to render it valuable. The beneficence of the
state thus turns to her own advantage; she acquires new subjects, and augments her
riches and power. This is the practice in America; and, by this wise method, the
English have carried their settlements in the new world to a degree of power, which
has considerably increased that of the nation. Thus also the king of Prussia
endeavours to repeople his states laid waste by the calamities of former wars.

The nation that possesses a country is at liberty to leave in the §88. Right of
primitive state of communion certain things that have as yet no possessing things that
owner, or to appropriate to herself the right of possessing those have no owner.
things, as well as every other advantage which that country is
capable of affording. And as such a right is of use, it is, in case of doubt, presumed
that the nation has reserved it to herself. It belongs to her then, to the exclusion of
foreigners, unless her laws expressly declare otherwise, as those of the Romans,
which left wild beasts, fish, &c. in the primitive state of communion. No foreigner,
therefore, has a natural right to hunt or fish in the territories of a state, to appropriate
to himself a treasure found there, &c.

There exists no reason why a nation, or a sovereign if authorised §89. Rights granted to
by the laws, may not grant various privileges in their territories another nation.
to another nation, or to foreigners in general, since every one
may dispose of his own property as he thinks fit. Thus several sovereigns in the Indies
have granted to the trading nations of Europe the privilege of having factories, ports,
and even fortresses and garrisons in certain places within their dominions. We may in
the same manner grant the right of fishing in a river, or on the coast, that of hunting in
the forests, &c. and when once these rights have been validly ceded, they constitute a
part of the possessions of him who has acquired them, and ought to be respected in
the same manner as his former possessions.

Whoever agrees that robbery is a crime, and that we are not §90. It is not
allowed to take forcible possession of our neighbour’s property, allowable to drive a
will acknowledge, without any other proof, that no nation has a nation out of a
right to expel another people from the country they inhabit, in country which it
order to settle in it herself. Notwithstanding the extreme inhabits;

inequality of climates and soils, every people ought to be
contented with that which has fallen to their share. Will the conductors of nations

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 195 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

despise a rule that constitutes all their safety in civil society? Let this sacred rule be
entirely forgotten, and the peasant will quit his thatched cottage to invade the palaces
of the great, or the delightful possessions of the rich. The antient Helvetians,
discontented with their native soil, burned all their habitations, and commenced their
march, in order to establish themselves, sword in hand, in the fertile plains of southern
Gaul. But they received a terrible lesson from a conqueror of superior abilities to
themselves, and who paid still less regard to the laws of justice. Caesar defeated them,
and drove them back into their own country. Their posterity, however, more wise than
they, confine their views to the preservation of the lands and the independence they
have received from nature: they live contented; and the labour of free hands counter-
balances the sterility of the soil.

There are conquerors, who, aspiring after nothing more than the §91.nor to extend by
extension of the boundaries of their dominions, without expelling violence the bounds
the inhabitants from a country, content themselves with subduing of empire.
them;—a violence less barbarous, but not less unjust: while they
spare the property of individuals, they seize all the rights of the nation, and of the
sovereign.

Since the least encroachment on the territory of another is an act §92. The limits of
of injustice,—in order to avoid the commission of any such act, territories ought to be
and to prevent every subject of discord, every occasion of carefully settled.
quarrel, the limits of territories ought to be marked out with
clearness and precision. If those who drew up the treaty of Utrecht22 had bestowed on
so important a subject all the attention it deserved, we should not see France and
England in arms, in order to decide by a bloody war what are to be the boundaries of
their possessions in America. But the makers of treaties often designedly leave in
them some obscurity, some uncertainty, in order to reserve for their nation a pretext
for a rupture:—an unworthy artifice in a transaction wherein good-faith alone ought to
preside! We have also seen commissioners endeavouring to overreach or corrupt
those of a neighbouring state, in order to gain for their master an unjust acquisition of
a few leagues of territory. How can princes or ministers stoop to dirty tricks that
would dishonour a private man?

We should not only refrain from usurping the territory of others; §93. Violation of
we should also respect it, and abstain from every act contrary to territory.
the rights of the sovereign: for a foreign nation can claim no right
in it (§79). We cannot then, without doing an injury to a state, enter its territories with
force and arms in pursuit of a criminal, and take him from thence. This would at once
be a violation of the safety of the state, and a trespass on the rights of empire or
supreme authority vested in the sovereign. This is what is called a violation of
territory; and among nations there is nothing more generally acknowledged as an
injury that ought to be vigorously repelled by every state that would not suffer itself to
be oppressed. We shall make use of this principle in speaking of war, which gives
occasion for many questions on the rights of territory.

The sovereign may forbid the entrance of his territory either to §94. Prohibition to
foreigners in general, or in particular cases, or to certain persons, enter the territory.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 196 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

or for certain particular purposes, according as he may think it advantageous to the
state. There is nothing in all this, that does not flow from the rights of domain and
sovereignty: every one is obliged to pay respect to the prohibition; and whoever dares
to violate it, incurs the penalty decreed to render it effectual. But the prohibition ought
to be known, as well as the penalty annexed to disobedience: those who are ignorant
of it, ought to be informed of it when they approach to enter the country. Formerly the
Chinese, fearing lest the intercourse of strangers should corrupt the manners of the
nation, and impair the maxims of a wise but singular government, forbade all people
entering the empire: a prohibition that was not at all inconsistent with justice,
provided they did not refuse humane assistance to those whom tempest or necessity
obliged to approach their frontiers. It was salutary to the nation, without violating the
rights of any individual, or even the duties of humanity, which permit us, in case of
competition, to prefer ourselves to others.

If at the same time two or more nations discover and take §95.A country
possession of an island or any other desert land without an possessed by several
owner, they ought to agree between themselves, and make an nations at the same
equitable partition; but if they cannot agree, each will have the time.
right of empire and the domain in the parts in which they first
settled.

An independent individual, whether he has been driven from his §96.A country
country, or has legally quitted it of his own accord, may settle in possessed by a private
a country which he finds without an owner, and there possess an person.
independent domain. Whoever would afterwards make himself
master of the entire country, could not do it with justice without respecting the rights
and independence of this person. But if he himself finds a sufficient number of men
who are willing to live under his laws, he may form a new state within the country he
has discovered, and possess there both the domain and the empire. But if this
individual should arrogate to himself alone an exclusive right to a country, there to
reign monarch without subjects, his vain pretensions would be justly held in
contempt:—a rash and ridiculous possession can produce no real right.

There are also other means by which a private person may found a new state. Thus, in
the eleventh century, some Norman noblemen founded a new empire in Sicily, after
having wrested that island by conquest from the common enemies of the christian
name. The custom of the nation permitted the citizens to quit their country, in order to
seek their fortune elsewhere.

When several independent families are settled in a country, they §97. Independent
possess the free domain, but without sovereignty, since they do families in a country.
not form a political society. Nobody can seize the empire of that
country; since this would be reducing those families to subjection against their will;
and no man has a right to command men who are born free, unless they voluntarily
submit to him.

If those families have fixed settlements, the place possessed by each is the peculiar
property of that family: the rest of the country, of which they make no use, being left

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 197 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

in the primitive state of communion, belongs to the first occupant. Whoever chooses
to settle there, may lawfully take possession of it.

Families wandering in a country, as the nations of shepherds, and ranging through it
as their wants require, possess it in common: it belongs to them, to the exclusion of all
other nations; and we cannot without injustice deprive them of the tracts of country of
which they make use. But let us here recollect what we have said more than once
(Book I. §§81 and 209, Book II. §69). The savages of North America had no right to
appropriate all that vast continent to themselves: and since they were unable to inhabit
the whole of those regions, other nations might without injustice settle in some parts
of them, provided they left the natives a sufficiency of land. If the pastoral Arabs
would carefully cultivate the soil, a less space might be sufficient for them.
Nevertheless, no other nation has a right to narrow their boundaries, unless she be
under an absolute want of land. For, in short, they possess their country; they make
use of it after their manner; they reap from it an advantage suitable to their manner of
life, respecting which, they have no laws to receive from any one. In a case of
pressing necessity, I think people might without injustice settle in a part of that
country, on teaching the Arabs the means of rendering it, by the cultivation of the
earth, sufficient for their own wants and those of the new inhabitants.

It may happen that a nation is contented with possessing only §98. Possession of
certain places, or appropriating to itself certain rights, in a certain places only, or
country that has not an owner,—without being solicitous to take of certain rights, in a
possession of the whole country. In this case, another nation may vacant country.
take possession of what the first has neglected; but this cannot be
done without allowing all the rights acquired by the first to subsist in their full and
absolute independence. In such cases it is proper that regulations should be made by
treaty; and this precaution is seldom neglected among civilised nations.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 198 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER VIII

Rules With Respect To Foreigners.
We have already treated (Book I. §213) of the inhabitants, or §99. General idea of
persons who reside in a country where they are not citizens. We the conduct the state
shall here treat only of those foreigners who pass through or ought to observe
sojourn in a country, either on business, or merely as travellers. towards foreigners.
The relation that subsists between them and the society in which
they now live,—the objects of their journey and of their temporary residence,—the
duties of humanity,—the rights, the interest, and the safety of the state which harbours
them,—the rights of that to which they belong,—all these prin-ciples, combined and
applied according to cases and circumstances, serve to determine the conduct that
ought to be observed towards them, and to point out our right and our duty with
respect to them. But the intention of this chapter is not so much to shew what
humanity and justice require towards foreigners, as to establish the rules of the law of
nations on this subject,—rules tending to secure the rights of all parties, and to
prevent the repose of nations being disturbed by the quarrels of individuals.

Since the lord of the territory may, whenever he thinks proper, §100. Entering the
forbid its being entered (§94), he has no doubt a power to annex territory.
what conditions he pleases to the permission to enter. This, as we
have already said, is a consequence of the right of domain. Can it be necessary to add,
that the owner of the territory ought in this instance to respect the duties of humanity?
The case is the same with all rights whatever: the proprietor may use them at his
discretion; and, in so doing, he does not injure any person: but if he would be free
from guilt, and keep his conscience pure, he will never use them but in such manner
as is most conformable to his duty. We speak here in general of the rights which
belong to the lord of the country, reserving for the following chapter the examination
of the cases in which he cannot refuse an entrance into his territory; and we shall see
in Chap. X. how his duty towards all mankind obliges him on other occasions to allow
a free passage through, and a residence in, his state.

If the sovereign annexes any particular condition to the permission to enter his
territories, he ought to have measures taken to make foreigners acquainted with it,
when they present themselves on the frontier. There are states, such as China, and
Japan, into which all foreigners are forbid to penetrate without an express permission:
but in Europe the access is every where free to every person who is not an enemy of
the state, except, in some countries, to vagabonds and outcasts.

But even in those countries which every foreigner may freely §101. Foreigners are
enter, the sovereign is supposed to allow him access only upon subject to the laws.
this tacit condition, that he be subject to the laws,—I mean the
general laws made to maintain good order, and which have no relation to the title of
citizen, or of subject of the state. The public safety, the rights of the nation and of the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 199 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

prince, necessarily require this condition; and the foreigner tacitly submits to it, as
soon as he enters the country, as he cannot presume that he has access upon any other
footing. The sovereignty is the right to command in the whole country; and the laws
are not simply confined to regulating the conduct of the citizens towards each other,
but also determine what is to be observed by all orders of people throughout the
whole extent of the state.

In virtue of this submission, foreigners who commit faults, are to §102. And punishable
be punished according to the laws of the country. The object of according to the laws.
punishment is to cause the laws to be respected, and to maintain
order and safety.

For the same reason, disputes that may arise between foreigners, §103. Who is the
or between a foreigner and a citizen, are to be determined by the judge of their
judge of the place, and according to the laws of the place. And as disputes.
the dispute properly arises from the refusal of the defendant, who
maintains that he is not bound to perform what is required of him, it follows from the
same principle, that every defendant ought to be prosecuted before his own judge,
who alone has a right to condemn him, and compel him to the performance. The
Swiss have wisely made this rule one of the articles of their alliance, in order to
prevent the quarrels that might arise from abuses that were formerly too frequent in
relation to this subject. The defendant’s judge is the judge of the place where that
defendant has his settled abode, or the judge of the place where the defendant is, when
any sudden difficulty arises, provided it does not relate to an estate in land, or to a
right annexed to such an estate. In this last case, as property of that kind is to be held
according to the laws of the country where it is situated, and as the right of granting
possession is vested in the ruler of the country,—disputes relating to such property
can only be decided in the state on which it depends.

We have already shewn (§84) how the jurisdiction of a nation ought to be respected
by other sovereigns, and in what cases alone they may interfere in the causes of their
subjects in foreign countries.

The sovereign ought not to grant an entrance into his state for the §104. Protection due
purpose of drawing foreigners into a snare: as soon as he admits to foreigners.
them, he engages to protect them as his own subjects, and to
afford them perfect security, as far as depends on him. Accordingly we see that every
sovereign who has given an asylum to a foreigner, considers himself no less offended
by an injury done to the latter, than he would be by an act of violence committed on
his own subject. Hospitality was in great honour among the ancients, and even among
barbarous nations, such as the Germans. Those savage nations who treated strangers
ill, that Scythian tribe who sacrificed them to Diana,* were universally held in
abhorrence; and Grotius justly says† that their extreme ferocity excluded them from
the great society of mankind. All other nations had a right to unite their forces in order
to chastise them.

From a sense of gratitude for the protection granted to him, and §105. Their duties.
the other advantages he enjoys, the foreigner ought not to content

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 200 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

himself with barely respecting the laws of the country; he ought to assist it upon
occasion, and contribute to its defence, as far as is consistent with his duty as citizen
of another state. We shall see elsewhere what he can and ought to do, when the
country is engaged in a war. But there is nothing to hinder him from defending it
against pirates or robbers, against the ravages of an inundation, or the devastations of
fire. Can he pretend to live under the protection of a state, to participate in a variety of
advantages that it affords, and yet make no exertion for its defence, but remain an
unconcerned spectator of the dangers to which the citizens are exposed?

He cannot indeed be subject to those burdens that have only a §106. To what
relation to the quality of citizens; but he ought to bear his share burdens they are
of all the others. Being exempted from serving in the militia, and subject.
from paying those taxes destined for the support of the rights of
the nation, he will pay the duties imposed upon provisions, merchandise, &c. and, in a
word, every thing that has only a relation to his residence in the country, or to the
affairs which brought him thither.

The citizen or the subject of a state who absents himself for a §107. Foreigners
time without any intention to abandon the society of which he is continue members of
a member, does not lose his privilege by his absence: he their own nation.
preserves his rights, and remains bound by the same obligations.
Being received in a foreign country, in virtue of the natural society, the
communication, and commerce, which nations are obliged to cultivate with each other
(Prelim. §§11 and 12; Book II. §21), he ought to be considered there as a member of
his own nation, and treated as such.

The state, which ought to respect the rights of other nations, and §108. The state has no
in general those of all mankind, cannot arrogate to herself any right over the person
power over the person of a foreigner, who, though he has entered of a foreigner;
her territory, has not become her subject. The foreigner cannot
pretend to enjoy the liberty of living in the country without respecting the laws: if he
violates them, he is punishable as a disturber of the public peace, and guilty of a crime
against the society in which he lives: but he is not obliged to submit, like the subjects,
to all the commands of the sovereign: and if such things are required of him as he is
unwilling to perform, he may quit the country. He is free at all times to leave it; nor
have we a right to detain him, except for a time, and for very particular reasons, as,
for instance, an apprehension, in war time, lest such foreigner, acquainted with the
state of the country and of the fortified places, should communicate his knowledge to
the enemy. From the voyages of the Dutch to the East Indies, we learn that the kings
of Corea forcibly detain foreigners who are ship-wrecked on their coast; and Bodinus
assures us,* that a custom so contrary to the law of nations was practised in his time
in Aethiopia, and even in Muscovy. This is at once a violation of the rights of
individuals, and of those of the state to which they belong. Things have been greatly
changed in Russia; a single reign—that of Peter the Great—has placed that vast
empire in the rank of civilised nations.

The property of an individual does not cease to belong to him on §109.nor over his
account of his being in a foreign country; it still constitutes a part property.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 201 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

of the aggregate wealth of his nation (§81). Any power, therefore, which the lord of
the territory might claim over the property of a foreigner, would be equally derogatory
to the rights of the individual owner, and to those of the nation of which he is a
member.

Since the foreigner still continues to be a citizen of his own §110. Who are the
country, and a member of his own nation (§107), the property he heirs of a foreigner.
leaves at his death in a foreign country ought naturally to
devolve to those who are his heirs according to the laws of the state of which he is a
member. But, notwithstanding this general rule, his immovable effects are to be
disposed of according to the laws of the country where they are situated (see §103).

As the right of making a will, or of disposing of his fortune in §111. Will of a
case of death, is a right resulting from property, it cannot, foreigner.
without injustice, be taken from a foreigner. The foreigner
therefore, by natural right, has the liberty of making a will. But it is asked by what
laws he is obliged to regulate himself either in the form of his testament or in the
disposal of his property? 1. As to the form or solemnities appointed to settle the
validity of a will, it appears that the testator ought to observe those that are established
in the country where he makes it, unless it be otherwise ordained by the laws of the
state of which he is a member; in which case he will be obliged to observe the forms
which they prescribe, if he would validly dispose of the property he possesses in his
own country. I speak here of a will which is to be opened in the place where the
person dies: for if a traveller makes his will, and sends it home under seal, it is the
same thing as if it had been written at home; and in this case it is subject to the laws of
his own country. 2. As to the bequests themselves, we have already observed that
those which relate to immovables ought to be conformable to the laws of the country
where those immovables are situated. The foreign testator cannot dispose of the
goods, movable or immovable, which he possesses in his own country, otherwise than
in a manner conformable to the laws of that country. But as to movable goods, specie,
and other effects which he possesses elsewhere, which he has with him, or which
follow his person, we ought to distinguish between the local laws whose effect cannot
extend beyond the territory, and those laws which peculiarly affect the character of
citizen. The foreigner remaining a citizen of his own country, is still bound by those
last-mentioned laws, wherever he happens to be, and is obliged to conform to them in
the disposal of his personal property, and all his movables whatsoever. The laws of
this kind made in the country where he resides at the time, but of which he is not a
citizen, are not obligatory with respect to him. Thus, a man who makes his will and
dies in a foreign country, cannot deprive his widow of the part of his movable effects
assigned to that widow by the laws of his own country. A Genevan, obliged by the
law of Geneva to leave a dividend of his personal property to his brothers or his
cousins, if they be his next heirs, cannot deprive them of it by making his will in a
foreign country, while he continues a citizen of Geneva: but a foreigner dying at
Geneva is not obliged, in this respect, to conform to the laws of the republic. The case
is quite otherwise with respect to local laws: they regulate what may be done in the
territory, and do not extend beyond it. The testator is no longer subject to them when
he is out of the territory; and they do not affect that part of his property which is also
out of it. The foreigner is obliged to observe those laws in the country where he

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 202 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

makes his will, with respect to the goods he possesses there. Thus, an inhabitant of
Neufchatel, to whom entails are forbidden in his own country with respect to the
property he possesses there, freely makes an entail of the estate he possesses out of
the jurisdiction of the country, if he dies in a place where entails are allowed; and a
foreigner making a will at Neufchatel cannot make an entail of even the movable
property he possesses there,—unless indeed we may suppose that his movable
property is excepted by the spirit of the law.

What we have established in the three preceding sections is §112. Escheatage.
sufficient to shew with how little justice the crown, in some
states, lays claim to the effects left there by a foreigner at his death. This practice is
founded on what is called Escheatage, by which foreigners are excluded from all
inheritances in the state, either of the property of a citizen or that of an alien, and
consequently cannot be appointed heirs by will, nor receive any legacy. Grotius justly
observes that this law has descended to us from those ages when foreigners were
almost considered as enemies.* Even after the Romans were become a very polite and
learned people, they could not accustom themselves to consider foreigners as men
entitled to any right in common with them. “Those nations,” says Pomponius the
civilian,23 “with whom we have neither friendship, nor hospitality, nor alliance, are
not therefore our enemies: yet if any thing belonging to us falls into their hands, it
becomes their property; our free citizens become slaves to them: and they are on the
same terms with respect to us.”* We cannot suppose that so wise a people retained
such inhuman laws with any other view than that of a necessary retaliation, as they
could not otherwise obtain satisfaction from barbarous nations with whom they had
no connection or treaties existing. Bodinus shews† that Escheatage is derived from
these worthy sources! It has been successively mitigated, or even abolished in most
civilised states. The emperor Frederic II. first abolished it by an edict, which
permitted all foreigners dying within the limits of the empire to dispose of their
substance by will, or, if they died intestate, to have their nearest relations for heirs.‡
But Bodinus complains that this edict is but ill executed. Why does there still remain
any vestige of so barbarous a law in Europe, which is now so enlightened and so full
of humanity? The law of nature cannot suffer it to be put in practice, except by way of
retaliation. This is the use made of it by the king of Poland in his hereditary states.
Escheatage is established in Saxony: but the sovereign is so just and equitable, that he
enforces it only against those nations which subject the Saxons to a similar law.

The right of traite foraine (called in Latin jus detractûs) is more §113. The right of
conformable to justice, and the mutual obligation of nations. We traite foraine.
give this name to the right by virtue of which the sovereign
retains a moderate portion of the property either of citizens or aliens which is sent out
of his territories to pass into the hands of foreigners. As the exportation of that
property is a loss to the state, she may fairly receive an equitable compensation for it.

Every state has the liberty of granting or refusing to foreigners §114. Immovable
the power of possessing lands or other immovable property property possessed by
within her territory. If she grants them that privilege, all such an alien.
property, possessed by aliens, remains subject to the jurisdiction
and laws of the country, and to the same taxes as other property of the same kind. The

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 203 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

authority of the sovereign extends over the whole territory; and it would be absurd to
except some parts of it, on account of their being possessed by foreigners. If the
sovereign does not permit aliens to possess immovable property, nobody has a right to
complain of such prohibition; for he may have very good reasons for acting in this
manner: and as foreigners cannot claim any right in his territories (§79), they ought
not to take it amiss that he makes use of his power and of his rights in the manner
which he thinks most for the advantage of the state. And as the sovereign may refuse
to foreigners the privilege of possessing immovable property, he is doubtless at liberty
to forbear granting it except with certain conditions annexed.

There exists no natural impediment to prevent foreigners from §115. Marriages of
contracting marriages in the state. But if these marriages are aliens.
found prejudicial or dangerous to a nation, she has a right, and is
even in duty bound to prohibit them, or to subject to certain conditions the permission
to contract them: and as it belongs to the nation or to her sovereign to determine what
appears most conducive to the welfare of the state, other nations ought to acquiesce in
the regulations which any sovereign state has made on this head. Citizens are almost
every-where forbid to marry foreign wives of a different religion; and in many parts
of Switzerland a citizen cannot marry a foreign woman, unless he prove that she
brings him in marriage a certain sum fixed by the law.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 204 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER IX

Of The Rights Retained By All Nations After The Introduction
Of Domain And Property.
If an obligation, as we have before observed, gives a right to §116. What are the
those things without which it cannot be fulfilled, every absolute, rights of which men
necessary, and indispensable obligation produces in this manner cannot be deprived.
rights equally absolute, necessary, and indefeasible. Nature
imposes no obligations on men, without giving them the means of fulfilling them.
They have an absolute right to the necessary use of those means: nothing can deprive
them of that right, as nothing can dispense with their fulfilling their natural
obligations.

In the primitive state of communion, men had, without §117. Right still
distinction, a right to the use of every thing, as far as was remaining from the
necessary to the discharge of their natural obligations. And as primitive state of
nothing could deprive them of this right, the introduction of communion.
domain and property could not take place without leaving to
every man the necessary use of things,—that is to say, the use absolutely required for
the fulfilment of his natural obligations. We cannot then suppose the introduction to
have taken place without this tacit restriction, that every man should still preserve
some right to the things subjected to property, in those cases, where, without this
right, he would remain absolutely deprived of the necessary use of things of this
nature. This right is a necessary remnant of the primitive state of communion.

Notwithstanding the domain of nations, therefore, each nation §118. Right retained
still retains some right to what is possessed by others, in those by each nation over
cases where she would find herself deprived of the necessary use the property others.
of certain things if she were to be absolutely debarred from using
them by the consideration of their being other people’s property. We ought carefully
to weigh every circumstance in order to make a just application of this principle.

I say the same of the right of necessity. We thus call the right §119. Right of
which necessity alone gives to the performance of certain actions necessity.
that are otherwise unlawful, when, without these actions, it is
impossible to fulfil an indispensable obligation. But it is carefully to be noted, that, in
such a case, the obligation must really be an indispensable one, and the act in question
the only means of fulfilling that obligation. If either of these conditions be wanting,
the right of necessity does not exist on the occasion. We may see these subjects
discussed in treatises on the law of nature, and particularly in that of Mr. Wolf. I
confine myself here to a brief summary of those principles whose aid is necessary to
us in developing the rights of nations.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 205 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

The earth was designed to feed its inhabitants; and he who is in §120. Right of
want of every thing is not obliged to starve because all property procuring provisions
is vested in others. When, therefore, a nation is in absolute want by force.
of provisions, she may compel her neighbours, who have more
than they want for themselves, to supply her with a share of them at a fair price: she
may even take it by force, if they will not sell it. Extreme necessity revives the
primitive communion, the abolition of which ought to deprive no person of the
necessaries of life (§117). The same right belongs to individuals when a foreign
nation refuses them a just assistance. Captain Bontekoe, a Dutchman, having lost his
vessel at sea, escaped in his boat with a part of his crew, and landed on an Indian
coast, where the barbarous inhabitants refusing him provisions, the Dutch obtained
them sword in hand.*

In the same manner, if a nation has a pressing want of the ships, §121. Right of
waggons, horses, or even the personal labour of foreigners, she making use of the
may make use of them either by free consent or by force, things that belong to
provided that the proprietors be not under the same necessity. others.
But as she has no more right to these things than necessity gives
her, she ought to pay for the use she makes of them, if she has the means of paying.
The practice of Europe is conformable to this maxim. In cases of necessity, a nation
sometimes presses foreign vessels which happen to be in her ports; but she pays a
compensation for the services performed by them.

Let us say a few words on a more singular case, since authors §122. Right of
have treated of it,—a case in which at present people are never carrying off women.
reduced to employ force. A nation cannot preserve and
perpetuate itself except by propagation. A nation of men has therefore a right to
procure women, who are absolutely necessary to its preservation: and if its
neighbours, who have a redundancy of females, refuse to give some of them in
marriage to those men, the latter may justly have recourse to force. We have a famous
example of this in the rape of the Sabine women.† But though a nation is allowed to
procure for itself, even by force of arms, the liberty of obtaining women in marriage,
no woman in particular can be constrained in her choice, nor become, by right, the
wife of a man who carries her off by force;—a circumstance which has not been
attended to by those who have decided, without restriction, that the Romans did not
commit an act of injustice on that occasion.‡ It is true, that the Sabine women
submitted to their fate with a good grace; and when their nation took up arms to
avenge them, it sufficiently appeared from the ardor with which those women rushed
between the combatants, that they willingly acknowledged the Romans for their
lawful husbands.

We may further add, that if the Romans, as many pretend, were originally only a band
of robbers united under Romulus, they did not form a true nation, or a legitimate state:
the neighbour-ing nations had a just right to refuse them women; and the law of
nature, which approves no civil society but such as is legitimate, did not require them
to furnish that society of vagabonds and robbers with the means of perpetuating itself:
much less did it authorise the latter to procure those means by force. In the same
manner, no nation was obliged to furnish the Amazons with males. That nation of

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 206 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

women, if it ever existed, put itself, by its own fault, out of a condition to support
itself without foreign assistance.

The right of passage is also a remnant of the primitive state of §123. Right of
communion, in which the entire earth was common to all passage;
mankind, and the passage was every-where free to each
individual according to his necessities. Nobody can be entirely deprived of this right
(§117); but the exercise of it is limited by the introduction of domain and property:
since they have been introduced, we cannot exert that right without paying due regard
to the private rights of others. The effect of property is to give the proprietor’s
advantage a preference over that of all others. When, therefore, the owner of a
territory thinks proper to refuse you admission into it, you must, in order to enter it in
spite of him, have some reason more cogent than all his reasons to the contrary. Such
is the right of necessity: this authorises an act on your part, which on other occasions
would be unlawful, viz. an infringement of the right of domain. When a real necessity
obliges you to enter into the territory of others,—for instance, if you cannot otherwise
escape from imminent danger, or if you have no other passage for procuring the
means of subsistence, or those of satisfying some other indispensable
obligation,—you may force a passage when it is unjustly refused. But if an equal
necessity obliges the proprietor to refuse you entrance, he refuses it justly; and his
right is paramount to yours. Thus a vessel driven by stress of weather has a right to
enter, even by force, into a foreign port. But if that vessel is infected with the plague,
the owner of the port may fire upon it and beat it off, without any violation either of
justice, or even of charity, which, in such a case, ought doubtless to begin at home.

The right of passage through a country would in most cases be §124.and of procuring
useless, without that of procuring necessaries at a fair price: and necessaries.
we have already shewn (§120) that in case of necessity it is
lawful to take provisions even by force.

In speaking of exile and banishment, we have observed (Book I. §125. Right of
§§229–231) that every man has a right to dwell some-where dwelling in a foreign
upon earth. What we have shewn with respect to individuals, country.
may be applied to whole nations. If a people are driven from the
place of their abode, they have a right to seek a retreat: the nation to which they make
application ought then to grant them a place of habitation, at least for a time, if she
has not very important reasons for a refusal. But if the country inhabited by this nation
is scarcely sufficient for herself, she is under no obligation to allow a band of
foreigners to settle in it for ever: she may even dismiss them at once, if it be not
convenient to her to grant them a permanent settlement. As they have the resource of
seeking an establishment elsewhere, they cannot claim any authority from the right of
necessity, to stay in spite of the owners of the country. But it is necessary, in short,
that these fugitives should find a retreat; and if every body rejects them, they will be
justifiable in making a settlement in the first country where they find land enough for
themselves, without depriving the inhabitants of what is sufficient for them. But, even
in this case, their necessity gives them only the right of habitation; and they are bound
to submit to all the conditions, not absolutely intolerable, which may be imposed on
them by the master of the country,—such as paying him tribute, becoming his

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 207 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

subjects, or at least living under his protection, and, in certain respects, depending on
him. This right, as well as the two preceding, is a remnant of the primitive state of
communion.

We have been occasionally obliged to anticipate the subject of §126. Things, of
the present chapter in order to follow the order of the different which the use is
subjects that presented themselves. Thus, in speaking of the open inexhaustible.
sea, we have remarked (Book I. §281) that those things, the use
of which is inexhaustible, cannot fall under the domain or property of any one;
because, in that free and independent state in which nature has produced them, they
may be equally useful to all men. And as to those things even, which in other respects
are subject to domain,—if their use is inexhaustible, they remain common with
respect to that use. Thus a river may be subject both to domain and empire; but in
quality of running water it remains common,—that is to say, the owner of the river
cannot hinder any one from drinking and drawing water out of it. Thus the sea, even
in those parts that are held in possession, being sufficient for the navigation of all
mankind, he who has the domain cannot refuse a passage through it to any vessel
from which he has nothing to fear. But it may happen, by accident, that this
inexhaustible use of the thing may be justly refused by the owner, when people cannot
take advantage of it without incommoding him or doing him a prejudice. For instance,
if you cannot come to my river for water without passing over my land and damaging
the crop it bears, I may for that reason debar you from the inexhaustible use of the
running water: in which case, it is but through accident you are deprived of it. This
leads us to speak of another right which has a great connection with that just
mentioned, and is even derived from it; that is the right of innocent use.

We call innocent use, or innocent advantage, that which may be §127. Right of
derived from a thing without causing either loss or innocent use.
inconvenience to the proprietor; and the right of innocent use is
the right we have to that advantage or use which may be made of things belonging to
another, without causing him either loss or inconvenience. I have said that this right is
derived from the right to things of which the use is inexhaustible. In fact, a thing that
may be useful to any one without loss or inconvenience to the owner, is, in this
respect, inexhaustible in the use; and that is the reason why the law of nature still
allows all men a right to it notwithstanding the introduction of domain and property.
Nature, who designs her gifts for the common advantage of mankind, does not allow
us to prevent the application of those gifts to an useful purpose which they may be
made to serve without any prejudice to the proprietor, and without any diminution of
the utility and advantages he is capable of deriving from his rights.

This right of innocent use is not a perfect right like that of §128. Nature of this
necessity; for it belongs to the owner to judge whether the use we right in general;
wish to make of a thing that belongs to him will not be attended
with damage or inconvenience. If others should presume to decide on the occasion,
and, in case of refusal, to compel the proprietor, he would be no longer master of his
own property. It may frequently happen that the person who wishes to derive
advantage from a thing shall deem the use of it perfectly innocent, though it is not so
in fact: and if, in such case, he attempts to force the proprietor, he exposes himself to

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 208 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

the risk of committing an act of injustice; nay he actually commits one, since he
infringes the owner’s right to judge of what is proper to be done on the occasion. In
all cases, therefore, which admit of any doubt, we have only an imperfect right to the
innocent use of things that belong to others.

But when the innocence of the use is evident, and absolutely §129.and in cases not
indubitable, the refusal is an injury. For, in addition to a manifest doubtful.
violation of the rights of the party by whom that innocent use is
required, such refusal is moreover a testimony of an injurious disposition of hatred or
contempt for him. To refuse a merchant-ship the liberty of passing through a strait, to
fishermen that of drying their nets on the sea-shore or of watering at a river, is an
evident infringement of the right they have to the innocent use of things in those
cases. But in every case, if we are not pressed by necessity, we may ask the owner his
reasons for the refusal; and if he gives none, we may consider him as an unjust man,
or an enemy, with whom we are to act according to the rules of prudence. In general
we should regulate our sentiments and conduct towards him, according to the greater
or lesser weight of the reasons on which he acts.

All nations do therefore still retain a general right to the innocent §130. Exercise of this
use of things that are under the domain of any one individual right between nations.
nation. But, in the particular application of this right, it is the
nation in whom the property is vested, that is to determine whether the use which
others wish to make of what belongs to her be really innocent: and if she gives them a
denial, she ought to allege her reasons; as she must not deprive others of their right
from mere caprice. All this is founded in justice: for it must be remembered that the
innocent use of things is not comprehended in the domain or the exclusive property.
The do-main gives only the right of judging, in particular cases, whether the use be
really innocent. Now he who judges ought to have his reasons; and he should mention
them, if he would have us think that he forms any judgment, and not that he acts from
caprice or ill-nature. All this, I say, is founded in justice. In the next chapter we shall
see the line of conduct which a nation is, by her duty to other nations, bound to
observe in the exercise of her rights.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 209 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER X

How A Nation Is To Use Her Right Of Domain, In Order To
Discharge Her Duties Towards Other Nations, With Respect
To The Innocent Use Of Things.
Since the law of nations treats as well of the duties of states as of §131. General duty of
their rights, it is not sufficient that we have explained, on the the proprietor.
subject of innocent use, what all nations have a right to require
from the proprietor: we are now to consider what influence his duties to others ought
to have on the proprietor’s conduct. As it belongs to him to judge whether the use be
really innocent, and not productive of any detriment or inconvenience to himself, he
ought not to give a refusal unless it be grounded upon real and substantial reasons:
this is a maxim of equity: he ought not even to stop at trifles,—a slight loss, or any
little inconvenience: humanity forbids this; and the mutual love which men owe to
each other, requires greater sacrifices. It would certainly be too great a deviation from
that universal benevolence which ought to unite the human race, to refuse a
considerable advantage to an individual, or to a whole nation, whenever the grant of it
might happen to be productive of the most trifling loss or the slightest inconvenience
to ourselves. In this respect, therefore, a nation ought on all occasions to regulate her
conduct by reasons proportioned to the advantages and necessities of others, and to
reckon as nothing a small expense or a supportable inconvenience, when great good
will thence result to another nation. But she is under no obligation to incur heavy
expenses or embarrassments, for the sake of furnishing others with the use of any
thing, when such use is neither necessary nor of any great utility to them. The
sacrifice we here require is not contrary to the interests of the nation:—it is natural to
think that the others will behave in the same manner in return; and how great the
advantages that will result to all states from such a line of conduct!

The introduction of property cannot be supposed to have §132. Innocent
deprived nations of the general right of traversing the earth for passage.
the purposes of mutual intercourse, of carrying on commerce
with each other, and for other just reasons. It is only on particular occasions when the
owner of a country thinks it would be prejudicial or dangerous to allow a passage
through it, that he ought to refuse permission to pass. He is therefore bound to grant a
passage for lawful purposes, whenever he can do it without inconvenience to himself.
And he cannot lawfully annex burthensome conditions to a permission which he is
obliged to grant, and which he cannot refuse if he wishes to discharge his duty, and
not abuse his right of property. The count of Lupfen having improperly stopped some
merchandise in Alsace, and complaints being made on the subject to the emperor
Sigismund who was then at the council of Constance,24 that prince assembled the
electors, princes, and deputies of towns, to examine the affair. The opinion of the
burgrave of Nuremberg deserves to be mentioned: “God,” said he, “has created
heaven for himself and his saints, and has given the earth to mankind, intending it for

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 210 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

the advantage of the poor as well as of the rich. The roads are for their use, and God
has not subjected them to any taxes.” He condemned the count of Lupfen to restore
the merchandise, and to pay costs and damages, because he could not justify his
seizure by any peculiar right. The emperor approved this opinion, and passed sentence
accordingly.*

But if any apprehension of danger arise from the grant of liberty §133. Sureties may be
to pass through a country, the state has a right to require sureties: required.
the party who wishes to pass cannot refuse them, a passage being
only so far due to him as it is attended with no inconvenience.

In like manner, a passage ought also to be granted for §134. Passage of
merchandise: and as this is in general productive of no merchandise.
inconvenience, to refuse it without just reason, is injuring a
nation, and endeavouring to deprive her of the means of carrying on a trade with other
states. If this passage occasions any inconvenience, any expense for the preservation
of canals and highways, we may exact a compensation for it by toll duties (Book I.
§103).

In explaining the effects of domain we have said above (§§64 §135. Residence in
and 100) that the owner of the territory may forbid the entrance the country.
into it, or permit it on such conditions as he thinks proper. We
were then treating of his external right,—that right which foreigners are bound to
respect. But now that we are considering the matter in another view, and as it relates
to his duties and to his internal right, we may venture to assert that he cannot, without
particular and important reasons, refuse permission, either to pass through or reside in
the country, to foreigners who desire it for lawful purposes. For, their passage or their
residence being in this case an innocent advantage, the law of nature does not give
him a right to refuse it: and though other nations and other men in general are obliged
to submit to his judgment (§§128 and 130), he does not the less offend against his
duty, if he refuses without sufficient reason: he then acts without any true right; he
only abuses his external right. He cannot therefore, without some particular and
cogent reason, refuse the liberty of residence to a foreigner who comes into the
country with the hope of recovering his health, or for the sake of acquiring instruction
in the schools and academies. A difference in religion is not a sufficient reason to
exclude him, provided he do not engage in controversial disputes with a view to
disseminate his tenets: for that difference does not deprive him of the rights of
humanity.

We have seen (§125) how the right of necessity may in certain §136. How we are to
cases authorise a people, who are driven from the place of their act towards foreigners
residence, to settle in the territory of another nation. Every state who desire a
ought, doubtless, to grant to so unfortunate a people every aid perpetual residence.
and assistance which she can bestow without being wanting to
herself: but to grant them an establishment in the territories of the nation, is a very
delicate step, the consequences of which should be maturely considered by the
conductor of the state. The emperors Probus and Valens25 experienced the evil
effects of their conduct in having admitted into the territories of the empire numerous

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 211 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

bands of Gepidae, Vandals, Goths, and other barbarians.* If the sovereign finds that
such a step would be attended with too great an inconvenience or danger, he has a
right to refuse an establishment to those fugitive people, or to adopt, on their
admission, every precaution that prudence can dictate to him. One of the safest will
be, not to permit those foreigners to reside together in the same part of the country,
there to keep up the form of a separate nation. Men who have not been able to defend
their own country, cannot pretend to any right to establish themselves in the territory
of another, in order to maintain themselves there as a nation in a body.† The
sovereign who harbours them may therefore disperse them, and distribute them into
the towns and provinces that are in want of inhabitants. In this manner his charity will
turn to his own advantage, to the increase of his power, and to the greater benefit of
the state. What a difference is observable in Brandenburg since the settlement of the
French refugees! The great elector, Frederic William,26 offered an asylum to those
unfortunate people; he provided for their expenses on the road, and with truly regal
munificence established them in his states; by which conduct that beneficent and
generous prince merited the title of a wise and able politician.

When, by the laws or the custom of a state, certain actions are §137. Right accruing
generally permitted to foreigners, as, for instance, travelling from a general
freely through the country without any express permission, permission.
marrying there, buying or selling merchandise, hunting, fishing,
&c. we cannot exclude any one nation from the benefit of the general permission,
without doing her an injury, unless there be some particular and lawful reason for
refusing to that nation what is granted indiscriminately to others. The question here, it
is to be observed, only relates to those actions which are productive of innocent
advantage: and as the nation allows them to foreigners without distinction, she, by the
very nature of that general permission, affords a sufficient proof that she deems them
innocent with respect to herself; which amounts to a declaration that foreigners have a
right to them (§127): the innocence of such acts is manifested by the confession of the
state; and the refusal of an advantage that is manifestly innocent, is an injury (§129).
Besides, to attempt without any reason to lay one nation under a prohibition where an
indiscriminate permission is enjoyed by all others, is an injurious distinction, since it
can only proceed from hatred or contempt. If there be any particular and well-founded
reason for the exception, the advantage resulting from the act in question can no
longer be deemed an innocent one with respect to the excepted nation; consequently
no injury is done to them. The state may also, by way of punishment, except from the
general permission a people who have given her just cause of complaint.

As to rights of this nature granted to one or more nations for §138.A right granted
particular reasons, they are conferred on them as favours, either as a favour.
by treaty, or through gratitude for some particular service: those
to whom the same rights are refused cannot consider themselves as offended. The
nation does not esteem the advantage accruing from those acts to be an innocent one,
since she does not indiscriminately allow them to all nations: and she may confer on
whom she pleases any rights over her own property, without affording just grounds to
any body else, either for uttering a complaint, or forming pretensions to the same
favour.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 212 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Humanity is not confined to the bare grant of a permission to §139. The nation
foreign nations to make an innocent use of what belongs to us: it ought to be courteous.
moreover requires that we should even facilitate to them the
means of deriving advantage from it, so far as we can do this without injury to
ourselves. Thus it becomes a well-regulated state to promote the general
establishment of inns where travellers may procure lodging and food at a fair
price,—to watch over their safety,—and to see that they be treated with equity and
humanity. A polite nation should give the kindest reception to foreigners, receive
them with politeness, and on every occasion shew a disposition to oblige them. By
these means every citizen, while he discharges his duty to mankind in general, will at
the same time render essential services to his country. Glory is the certain reward of
virtue; and the good-will which is gained by an amiable character, is often productive
of consequences highly important to the state. No nation is entitled to greater praise in
this respect than the French: foreigners no-where meet a reception more agreeable, or
better calculated to prevent their regretting the immense sums they annually spend at
Paris.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 213 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER XI

Of Usucaption And Prescription Among Nations.
Let us conclude what relates to domain and property with an examination of a
celebrated question on which the learned are much divided. It is asked whether
usucaption and prescription can take place between independent nations and states?

Usucaption is the acquisition of domain founded on a long §140. Definition of
possession, uninterrupted and undisputed,—that is to say, an usucaption and
acquisition solely proved by this possession. Wolf defines it, an prescription.
acquisition of domain founded on a presumed desertion. His
definition explains the manner in which a long and peaceable possession may serve to
establish the acquisition of domain. Modestinus,27Digest. lib. 3. de Usurp. & Usucap.
says, in conformity to the principles of the Roman law, that usucaption is the
acquisition of domain by possession continued during a certain period prescribed by
law. These three definitions are by no means incompatible with each other; and it is
easy to reconcile them by setting aside what relates to the civil law in the last of the
three. In the first of them, we have endeavoured clearly to express the idea commonly
affixed to the term usucaption.

Prescription is the exclusion of all pretensions to a right,—an exclusion founded on
the length of time during which that right has been neglected; or, according to Wolf’s
definition, it is the loss of an inherent right by virtue of a presumed consent. This
definition, too, is just; that is, it explains how a right may be forfeited by long neglect;
and it agrees with the nominal definition we give of the term, prescription, in which
we confine ourselves to the meaning usually annexed to the word. As to the rest, the
term usucaption is but little used in French; and the word prescription implies, in that
language, every thing expressed by the Latin terms usucapio and praescriptio:
wherefore we shall make use of the word prescription wherever we have not
particular reasons for employing the other.

Now, to decide the question we have proposed, we must first see §141. Usucaption and
whether usucaption and prescription are derived from the law of prescription derived
nature. Many illustrious authors have asserted and proved them from the law of
to be so.* Though in this treatise we frequently suppose the nature.
reader acquainted with the law of nature, it is proper in this place
to establish the decision, since the affair is disputed.

Nature has not herself established a private property over any of her gifts, and
particularly over land: she only approves its establishment, for the advantage of the
human race. On this ground, then, it would be absurd to suppose, that, after the
introduction of domain and property, the law of nature can secure to a proprietor any
right capable of introducing disorder into human society. Such would be the right of
entirely neglecting a thing that belongs to him,—of leaving it during a long space of

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 214 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

time, under all the appearances of a thing utterly abandoned or not belonging to
him,—and of coming at length to wrest it from a bona-fide possessor, who has
perhaps dearly purchased his title to it,—who has received it as an inheritance from
his progenitors, or as a portion with his wife,—and who might have made other
acquisitions, had he been able to discover that the one in question was neither solid
nor lawful. Far from giving such a right, the law of nature lays an injunction on the
proprietor to take care of his property, and imposes on him an obligation to make
known his rights, that others may not be led into error: it is on these conditions alone
that she approves of the property vested in him, and secures him in the possession. If
he has neglected it for such a length of time that he cannot now be admitted to reclaim
it without endangering the rights of others, the law of nature will no longer allow him
to revive and assert his claims. We must not therefore conceive the right of private
property to be a right of so extensive and imprescriptible a nature, that the proprietor
may, at the risk of every inconvenience thence resulting to human society, absolutely
neglect it for a length of time, and afterwards reclaim it, according to his caprice.
With what other view than that of the peace, the safety, and the advantage of human
society, does the law of nature ordain that all men should respect the right of private
property in him who makes use of it? For the same reason therefore, the same law
requires that every proprietor, who for a long time and without any just reason
neglects his right, should be presumed to have entirely renounced and abandoned it.
This is what forms the absolute presumption (juris & de jure) of its abandonment,—a
presumption, upon which another person is legally entitled to appropriate to himself
the thing so abandoned. The absolute presumption does not here signify a conjecture
of the secret intentions of the proprietor, but a maxim which the law of nature ordains
should be considered as true and invariable,—and this with a view of maintaining
peace and order among men. Such presumption therefore confers a title as firm and
just as that of property itself, and established and supported by the same reasons. The
bona-fide possessor, resting his title on a presumption of this kind, has then a right
which is approved by the law of nature; and that law, which requires that the rights of
each individual should be stable and certain, does not allow any man to disturb him in
his possession.

The right of usucaption properly signifies, that the bona-fide possessor is not obliged
to suffer his right of property to be disputed after a longcontinued and peaceable
possession on his part: he proves that right by the very circumstance of possession,
and sets up the plea of prescription in bar to the claims of the pretended proprietor.
Nothing can be more equitable than this rule. If the claimant were permitted to prove
his property, he might happen to bring proofs very convincing indeed in appearance,
but, in fact, deriving all their force only from the loss or destruction of some
document or deed which would have proved how he had either lost or transferred his
right. Would it be reasonable that he should be allowed to call in question the rights of
the possessor, when by his own fault he has suffered matters to proceed to such a
state, that there would be danger of mistaking the truth? If it be necessary that one of
the two should be exposed to lose his property, it is just it should be the party who is
in fault.

It is true, that if the bona-fide possessor should discover with perfect certainty, that
the claimant is the real proprietor, and has never abandoned his right, he is bound in

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 215 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

conscience, and by the internal principles of justice, to make restitution of whatever
accession of wealth he has derived from the property of the claimant. But this
estimation is not easily made; and it depends on circumstances.

As prescription cannot be grounded on any but an absolute or §142. What
lawful presumption, it has no foundation, if the proprietor has not foundation is required
really neglected his right. This condition implies three for ordinary
particulars: 1, that the proprietor cannot allege an invincible prescription.
ignorance, either on his own part, or on that of the persons from
whom he derives his right;—2, that he cannot justify his silence by lawful and
substantial reasons;—3, that he has neglected his right, or kept silence during a
considerable number of years: for the negligence of a few years, being incapable of
producing confusion, and rendering doubtful the respective rights of the parties, is not
sufficient to found or authorise a presumption of relinquishment. It is impossible to
determine by the law of nature the number of years required to found a prescription:
this depends on the nature of the property disputed, and the circumstances of the case.

What we have remarked in the preceding section, relates to §143. Immemorial
ordinary prescription. There is another called immemorial, prescription.
because it is founded on immemorial possession,—that is, on a
possession, the origin of which is unknown, or so deeply involved in obscurity, as to
allow no possibility of proving whether the possessor has really derived his right from
the original proprietor, or received the possession from another. This immemorial
prescription secures the possessor’s right, beyond the power of recovery: for it affords
a legal presumption that he is the proprietor, as long as the adverse party fails to
adduce substantial reasons in support of his claim: and, indeed, whence could these
reasons be derived, since the origin of the possession is lost in the obscurity of time?
It ought even to secure the possessor against every pretension contrary to his right.
What would be the case were it permitted to call in question a right acknowledged
time immemorial, when the means of proving it were destroyed by time? Immemorial
possession therefore is an irrefragable title, and immemorial prescription admits of no
exception: both are founded on a pre-sumption which the law of nature directs us to
receive as an incontestable truth.

In cases of ordinary prescription, the same argument cannot be §144. Claimant
used against a claimant who alleges just reasons for his silence, alleging reasons for
as the impossibility of speaking, or a well-founded fear, &c. his silence.
because there is then no longer any room for a presumption that
he has abandoned his right. It is not his fault if people have thought themselves
authorised to form such a presumption; nor ought he to suffer in consequence: he
cannot therefore be debarred the liberty of clearly proving his property. This method
of defence in bar of prescription has been often employed against princes whose
formidable power had long silenced the feeble victims of their usurpations.

It is also very evident that we cannot plead prescription in §145. Proprietor
opposition to a proprietor who, being for the present unable to sufficiently shewing
prosecute his right, confines himself to a notification, by any that he does not mean
token whatever, sufficient to shew that it is not his intention to to abandon his right.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 216 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

abandon it. Protests answer this purpose. With sovereigns it is usual to retain the title
and arms of a sovereignty or a province, as an evidence that they do not relinquish
their claims to it.

Every proprietor, who expressly commits or omits certain acts §146. Prescription
which he cannot commit or omit without renouncing his right, founded on the
sufficiently indicates by such commission or omission that it is actions of the
not his intention to preserve it, unless, by an express reservation, proprietor.
he declare the contrary. We are undoubtedly authorised to
consider as true what he sufficiently manifests on occasions where he ought to declare
the truth: consequently, we may lawfully presume that he abandons his right; and if he
would afterwards resume it, we can plead prescription in bar to his claim.

After having shewn that usucaption and prescription are founded §147. Usucaption and
in the law of nature, it is easy to prove that they are equally a part prescription take
of the law of nations, and ought to take place between different place between
states. For the law of nations is but the law of nature applied to nations.
nations in a manner suitable to the parties concerned (Prelim.
§6). And so far is the nature of the parties from affording them an exemption in the
case, that usucaption and prescription are much more necessary between sovereign
states than between individuals. Their quarrels are of much greater consequence; their
disputes are usually terminated only by bloody wars; and consequently the peace and
happiness of mankind much more powerfully require that possession on the part of
sovereigns should not be easily disturbed,—and that, if it has for a considerable length
of time continued uncontested, it should be deemed just and indisputable. Were we
allowed to recur to antiquity on every occasion, there are few sovereigns who could
enjoy their rights in security, and there would be no peace to be hoped for on earth.

It must however be confessed, that, between nations, the rights of §148. More difficult,
usucaption and prescription are often more difficult in their between nations, to
application, so far as they are founded on a presumption drawn found them on a
from long silence. Nobody is ignorant how dangerous it presumptive
commonly is for a weak state even to hint a claim to the desertion.

possessions of a powerful monarch. In such a case, therefore, it is
not easy to deduce from long silence a legal presumption of abandonment. To this we
may add, that, as the ruler of the society has usually no power to alienate what
belongs to the state, his silence, even though sufficient to afford a presumption of
abandonment on his own part, cannot impair the national right or that of his
successors. The question then will be, whether the nation has neglected to supply the
omission caused by the silence of her ruler, or has participated in it by a tacit
approbation.

But there are other principles that establish the use and force of §149. Other principles
prescription between nations. The tranquillity of the people, the that enforce
safety of states, the happiness of the human race, do not allow prescription.
that the possessions, empire, and other rights of nations should
remain uncertain, subject to dispute, and ever ready to occasion bloody wars. Between
nations therefore it becomes necessary to admit prescription founded on length of

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 217 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

time, as a valid and incontestable title. If any nation has kept silence through fear, and
as it were through necessity, the loss of her right is a misfortune which she ought
patiently to bear, since she could not avoid it: and why should she not submit to this
as well as to have her towns and provinces taken from her by an unjust conqueror, and
to be forced to cede them to him by treaty? It is however only in cases of long-
continued, undisputed, and uninterrupted possession, that prescription is established
on these grounds, because it is necessary that affairs should some time or other be
brought to a conclusion, and settled on a firm and solid foundation. But the case is
different with a possession of only a few years’ continuance, during which the party
whose rights are invaded may from prudential reasons find it expedient to keep
silence, without at the same time affording room to accuse him of suffering things to
become uncertain, and of renewing quarrels without end.

As to immemorial prescription, what we have said respecting it (§143) is sufficient to
convince every one that it ought necessarily to take place between nations.

Usucaption and prescription being so necessary to the tranquillity §150. Effects of the
and happiness of human society, it is justly presumed that all voluntary law of
nations have consented to admit the lawful and reasonable use of nations on this
them, with a view to the general advantage, and even to the subject.
private interest of each individual nation.

Prescription of many years’ standing, as well as usucaption, is then established by the
voluntary law of nations (Prelim. §21).

Nay more, as by virtue of that law nations are, in all doubtful cases, supposed to stand
on a footing of equal right in treating with each other (ibid.), prescription, when
founded on long undisputed possession, ought to have its full effect between nations,
without admitting any allegation of the possession being unjust, unless the evidence to
prove it be very clear and convincing indeed. For, without such evidence, every nation
is to be considered as a bona-fide possessor. Such is the right that a sovereign state
ought to allow to other states; but to herself she should only allow the use of the
internal and necessary right (Prelim. §28). It is the bona-fide possessor alone, whose
prescription will stand the test of conscience.

Since prescription is subject to so many difficulties, it would be §151. Law of treaties
very proper that adjoining nations should by treaty adopt some or of custom in this
rule on this subject, particularly with respect to the number of matter.
years required to found a lawful prescription, since this latter
point cannot in general be determined by the law of nature alone. If, in default of
treaties, custom has determined any thing in this matter, the nations between whom
this custom is in force, ought to conform to it (Prelim. §26).

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 218 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER XII

Of Treaties Of Alliance, And Other Public Treaties.
The subject of treaties is undoubtedly one of the most important §152. Nature of
that the mutual relations and affairs of nations can present us treaties.
with. Having but too much reason to be convinced of the little
dependence that is to be placed on the natural obligations of bodies politic, and on the
reciprocal duties imposed upon them by humanity,—the most prudent nations
endeavour to procure by treaties those succours and advantages which the law of
nature would insure to them, if it were not rendered ineffectual by the pernicious
counsels of a false policy.

A treaty, in Latin foedus, is a compact made with a view to the public welfare by the
superior power, either for perpetuity, or for a considerable time.

The compacts which have temporary matters for their object are §153. Pactions,
called agreements, conventions, and pactions. They are agreements, or
accomplished by one single act, and not by repeated acts. These conventions.
compacts are perfected in their execution once for all: treaties
receive a successive execution whose duration equals that of the treaty.

Public treaties can only be made by the superior powers, by §154. By whom
sovereigns who contract in the name of the state. Thus treaties are made.
conventions made between sovereigns respecting their own
private affairs, and those between a sovereign and a private person, are not public
treaties.

The sovereign who possesses the full and absolute authority, has, doubtless, a right to
treat in the name of the state he represents; and his engagements are binding on the
whole nation. But all rulers of states have not a power to make public treaties by their
own authority alone: some are obliged to take the advice of a senate, or of the
representatives of the nation. It is from the fundamental laws of each state that we
must learn where resides the authority that is capable of contracting with validity in
the name of the state.

Notwithstanding our assertion above, that public treaties are made only by the
superior powers, treaties of that nature may nevertheless be entered into by princes or
communities who have a right to contract them, either by the concession of the
sovereign, or by the fundamental laws of the state, by particular reservations, or by
custom. Thus the princes and free cities of Germany, though dependent on the
emperor and the empire, have the right of forming alliances with foreign powers. The
constitutions of the empire give them, in this as in many other respects, the rights of
sovereignty. Some cities of Switzerland, though subject to a prince, have made

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 219 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

alliances with the cantons: the permission or toleration of the sovereign has given
birth to such treaties, and long custom has established the right to contract them.

As a state that has put herself under the protection of another, has §155. Whether a state
not on that account forfeited her character of sovereignty (Book under protection may
I. §192), she may make treaties and contract alliances, unless she make treaties.
has, in the treaty of protection, expressly renounced that right.
But she continues for ever after bound by this treaty of protection, so that she cannot
enter into any engagements contrary to it,—that is to say, engagements which violate
the express conditions of the protection, or that are in their own nature repugnant to
every treaty of protection. Thus the protected state cannot promise assistance to the
enemies of her protector, nor grant them a passage.

Sovereigns treat with each other through the medium of agents or §156. Treaties
proxies who are invested with sufficient powers for the purpose, concluded by proxies
and are commonly called plenipotentiaries. To their office we or plenipotentiaries.
may apply all the rules of natural law which respect things done
by commission. The rights of the proxy are determined by the instructions that are
given him: he must not deviate from them; but every promise which he makes in the
terms of his commission, and within the extent of his powers, is binding on his
constituent.

At present, in order to avoid all danger and difficulty, princes reserve to themselves
the power of ratifying what has been concluded upon in their name by their ministers.
The plenipotentiary commission is but a procuration cum libera. If this commission
were to have its full effect, they could not be too circumspect in giving it. But as
princes cannot otherwise than by force of arms be compelled to fulfil their
engagements, it is customary to place no dependence on their treaties, till they have
agreed to and ratified them. Thus, as every agreement made by the minister remains
invalid till sanctioned by the prince’s ratification, there is less danger in vesting him
with unlimited powers. But before a prince can honourably refuse to ratify a compact
made in virtue of such plen-ipotentiary commission, he should be able to allege strong
and substantial reasons, and, in particular, to prove that his minister has deviated from
his instructions.

A treaty is valid if there be no defect in the manner in which it §157. Validity of
has been concluded: and for this purpose nothing more can be treaties.
required, than a sufficient power in the contracting parties, and
their mutual consent sufficiently declared.

An injury cannot then render a treaty invalid. He who enters into §158. Injury does not
engagements ought carefully to weigh every thing before he render them void.
concludes them; he may do what he pleases with his own
property, forego his rights, and renounce his advantages, as he thinks proper; the
acceptor is not obliged to inquire into his motives, and to estimate their due weight. If
we might recede from a treaty because we found ourselves injured by it, there would
be no stability in the contracts of nations. Civil laws may set bounds to injury, and
determine what degree of it shall be capable of invalidating a contract. But sovereigns

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 220 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

are subject to no superior judge. How shall they be able to prove the injury to each
other’s satisfaction? Who shall determine the degree of it sufficient to invalidate a
treaty? The peace and happiness of nations manifestly require that their treaties should
not depend on so vague and dangerous a plea of invalidity.

A sovereign nevertheless is in conscience bound to pay a regard §159. Duty of nations
to equity, and to observe it as much as possible, in all his treaties. in this respect.
And if it happens that a treaty which he has concluded with
upright intentions, and without perceiving any unfairness in it, should eventually
prove disadvantageous to an ally, nothing can be more honourable, more
praiseworthy, more conformable to the reciprocal duties of nations, than to relax the
terms of such treaty as far as he can do it consistently with his duty to himself, and
without exposing himself to danger, or incurring a considerable loss.

Though a simple injury, or some disadvantage in a treaty, be not §160. Nullity of
sufficient to invalidate it, the case is not the same with those treaties which are
inconveniences that would lead to the ruin of the nation. Since, pernicious to the state.
in the formation of every treaty, the contracting parties must be
vested with sufficient powers for the purpose, a treaty pernicious to the state is null,
and not at all obligatory, as no conductor of a nation has the power to enter into
engagements to do such things as are capable of destroying the state, for whose safety
the government is intrusted to him. The nation itself, being necessarily obliged to
perform every thing required for its preservation and safety (Book I. §16, &c.), cannot
enter into engagements contrary to its indispensable obligations. In the year 1506, the
states-general of the kingdom of France, assembled at Tours, engaged Louis XII. to
break the treaty he had concluded with the emperor Maximilian,28 and the archduke
Philip, his son, because that treaty was pernicious to the kingdom. They also decided,
that neither the treaty, nor the oath that had accompanied it, could be binding on the
king, who had no right to alienate the property of the crown.* We have treated of this
latter source of invalidity in the twenty-first chapter of Book I.

For the same reason—the want of sufficient powers—a treaty §161. Nullity of
concluded for an unjust or dishonest purpose is absolutely null treaties made for an
and void,—nobody having a right to engage to do things contrary unjust or dishonest
to the law of nature. Thus, an offensive alliance, made for the purpose.
purpose of plundering a nation from whom no injury has been
received, may or rather ought to be broken.

It is asked, whether it be allowable to contract an alliance with a §162. Whether an
nation that does not profess the true religion, and whether treaties alliance may be
made with the enemies of the faith are valid? Grotius has treated contracted with those
this subject at large:* and the discussion might have been who do not profess
necessary at a time when party-rage still obscured those the true religion.

principles which it had long caused to be forgotten: but we may
venture to believe that it would be superfluous in the present age. The law of nature
alone regulates the treaties of nations: the difference of religion is a thing absolutely
foreign to them. Different people treat with each other in quality of men, and not
under the character of Christians, or of Mahommedans. Their common safety requires

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 221 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

that they should be capable of treating with each other, and of treating with security.
Any religion that should in this case clash with the law of nature, would, on the very
face of it, wear the stamp of reprobation, and could not pretend to derive its origin
from the great author of nature, who is ever steady, ever consistent with himself. But
if the maxims of a religion tend to establish it by violence, and to oppress all those
who will not embrace it, the law of nature forbids us to favour that religion, or to
contract any unnecessary alliances with its inhuman followers; and the common
safety of mankind invites them rather to enter into an alliance against such a
people,—to repress such outrageous fanatics, who disturb the public repose, and
threaten all nations.

It is a settled point in natural law, that he who has made a §163. Obligation of
promise to any one, has conferred upon him a real right to observing treaties.
require the thing promised,—and consequently, that the breach
of a perfect promise is a violation of another person’s right, and as evidently an act of
injustice, as it would be to rob a man of his property. The tranquillity, the happiness,
the security of the human race, wholly depend on justice,—on the obligation of
paying a regard to the rights of others. The respect which others pay to our rights of
domain and property constitutes the security of our actual possessions; the faith of
promises is our security for things that cannot be delivered or executed upon the spot.
There would no longer be any security, no longer any commerce between mankind, if
they did not think themselves obliged to keep faith with each other, and to perform
their promises. This obligation is then as necessary, as it is natural and indubitable,
between na-tions that live together in a state of nature, and acknowledge no superior
upon earth, to maintain order and peace in their society. Nations, therefore, and their
conductors, ought inviolably to observe their promises and their treaties. This great
truth, though too often neglected in practice, is generally acknowledged by all
nations:* the reproach of perfidy is esteemed by sovereigns a most atrocious affront;
yet he who does not observe a treaty, is certainly perfidious, since he violates his
faith. On the contrary, nothing adds so great a glory to a prince, and to the nation he
governs, as the reputation of an inviolable fidelity in the performance of promises. By
such honourable conduct, as much or even more than by her valour, the Swiss nation
has rendered herself respectable throughout Europe, and is deservedly courted by the
greatest monarchs, who intrust their personal safety to a body-guard of her citizens.
The parliament of England has more than once thanked the king for his fidelity and
zeal in succouring the allies of his crown. This national magnanimity is the source of
immortal glory; it presents a firm basis on which nations may build their confidence;
and thus it becomes an unfailing source of power and splendor.

As the engagements of a treaty impose on the one hand a perfect §164. The violation of
obligation, they produce on the other a perfect right. The breach a treaty is an act of
of a treaty is therefore a violation of the perfect right of the party injustice.
with whom we have contracted; and this is an act of injustice
against him.

A sovereign already bound by a treaty, cannot enter into others §165. Treaties cannot
contrary to the first. The things, respecting which he has entered be made, contrary to
into engagements, are no longer at his disposal. If it happens that those already existing.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 222 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

a posterior treaty be found, in any particular point, to clash with one of more ancient
date, the new treaty is null and void with respect to that point, inasmuch as it tends to
dispose of a thing that is no longer in the power of him who appears to dispose of it.
(We are here to be understood as speaking of treaties made with different powers.) If
the prior treaty is kept secret, it would be an act of consummate perfidy to conclude a
contrary one, which may be rendered void whenever occasion serves. Nay, even to
enter into engagements, which, from the eventual turn of affairs, may chance at a
future day to militate against the secret treaty, and from that very circumstance to
prove ineffectual and nugatory, is by no means justifiable, unless we have the ability
to make ample compensation to our new ally: otherwise it would be practising a
deception on him, to promise him a thing without informing him that cases may
possibly occur, which will not allow us to substantiate our promise. The ally thus
deceived is undoubtedly at liberty to renounce the treaty; but if he chuses rather to
adhere to it, it will hold good with respect to all the articles that do not clash with the
prior treaty.

There is nothing to prevent a sovereign from entering into §166. How treaties
engagements of the same nature with two or more nations, if he may be concluded
be able to fulfil those several engagements to his different allies with several nations
at the same time. For instance, a commercial treaty with one with the same view.
nation does not deprive us of the liberty of afterwards contracting
similar engagements with other states, unless we have, in the former treaty, bound
ourselves by a promise not to grant the same advantages to any other nation. We may
in the same manner promise to assist two different allies with troops, if we are able to
furnish them, or if there is no probability that both will have occasion for them at the
same time.

If nevertheless the contrary happens, the more ancient ally is §167. The more
entitled to a preference: for the engagement was pure and ancient ally entitled to
absolute with respect to him; whereas we could not contract with a preference.
the more recent ally, without a reservation of the rights of the
former. Such reservation is founded in justice, and is tacitly understood, even if not
expressly made.

The justice of the cause is another ground of preference between §168. We owe no
two allies. We ought even to refuse assistance to the one whose assistance in an unjust
cause is unjust, whether he be at war with one of our allies, or war.
with another state: to assist him on such an occasion, would in
the event be the same thing as if we had contracted an alliance for an unjust purpose;
which we are not allowed to do (§161). No one can be validly engaged to support
injustice.

Grotius divides treaties into two general classes,—first, those §169. General
which turn merely on things to which the parties were already division of treaties.
bound by the law of nature,—secondly,
those by which they enter into further engagements.* By the 1. Those that relate to
former we acquire a perfect right to things to which we before things already due by
had only an imperfect right, so that we may thenceforward the law of nature.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 223 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

demand as our due what before we could only request as an office of humanity. Such
treaties became very necessary between the nations of antiquity, who, as we have
already observed, did not think themselves bound to any duty towards people who
were not in the number of their allies. They are useful even between the most polished
nations, in order the better to secure the succours they may expect,—to determine the
measure and degree of those succours, and to shew on what they have to depend,—to
regulate what cannot in general be determined by the law of nature,—and thus to
obviate all difficulties, by providing against the various interpretations of that law.
Finally, as no nation possesses inexhaustible means of assistance, it is prudent to
secure to ourselves a peculiar right to that assistance which cannot be granted to all
the world.

To this first class belong all simple treaties of peace and friendship, when the
engagements which we thereby contract, make no addition to those duties that men
owe to each other as brethren, and as members of the human society: such are those
treaties that permit commerce, passage, &c.

If the assistance and offices that are due by virtue of such a §170. Collision of
treaty, should on any occasion prove incompatible with the these treaties with the
duties a nation owes to herself, or with what the sovereign owes duties we owe to
to his own nation, the case is tacitly and necessarily excepted in ourselves.
the treaty. For neither the nation nor the sovereign could enter
into an engagement to neglect the care of their own safety or the safety of the state, in
order to contribute to that of their ally. If the sovereign, in order to preserve his own
nation, has occasion for the things he has promised in the treaty,—if, for instance, he
has engaged to furnish corn, and in a time of dearth he has scarcely sufficient for the
subsistence of his subjects, he ought without hesitation to give a preference to his own
nation: for it is only so far as he has it in his power to give assistance to a foreign
nation, that he naturally owes such assistance; and it was upon that footing alone that
he could promise it in a treaty. Now it is not in his power to deprive his own nation of
the means of subsistence in order to assist another nation at their expense. Necessity
here forms an exception, and he does not violate the treaty, because he cannot fulfil it.

The treaties by which we simply engage not to do any evil to an §171. Treaties in
ally, to abstain, with respect to him, from all harm, offence, and which we barely
injury, are not necessary, and produce no new right, since every promise to do no
individual already possesses a perfect natural right to be exempt injury.
from harm, injury, and real offence. Such treaties, however,
become very useful, and accidentally necessary, among those barbarous nations who
think they have a right to act as they please towards foreigners. They are not wholly
useless with nations less savage, who, without so far divesting themselves of
humanity, entertain a much less powerful sense of a natural obligation, than of one
which they have themselves contracted by solemn engagements: and would to God
that this manner of thinking were entirely confined to barbarians! We see too frequent
effects of it among those who boast of a perfection much superior to the law of nature.
But the imputation of perfidy is prejudicial to the rulers of nations, and thus becomes
formidable even to those who are little solicitous to merit the appellation of virtuous
men, and who feel no scruple in silencing the reproaches of conscience.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 224 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Treaties by which we contract engagements that were not §172. Treaties
imposed on us by the law of nature, are either equal or unequal. concerning things that

are not naturally due.
Equal treaties are those in which the contracting parties promise
the same things, or things that are equivalent, or, finally, things Equal treaties.
that are equitably proportioned, so that the condition of the
parties is equal. Such is, for example, a defensive alliance, in which the parties
reciprocally stipulate for the same succours. Such is an offensive alliance, in which it
is agreed that each of the allies shall furnish the same number of vessels, the same
number of troops, of cavalry and infantry, or an equivalent in vessels, in troops, in
artillery, or in money. Such is also a league in which the quota of each of the allies is
regulated in proportion to the interest he takes or may have in the design of the
league. Thus the emperor and the king of England,29 in order to induce the states-
general of the United Provinces to accede to the treaty of Vienna of the 16th of March
1731, consented that the republic should only promise to her allies the assistance of
four thousand foot and a thousand horse, though they engaged, in case of an attack
upon the republic, to furnish her, each, with eight thousand foot and four thousand
horse. We are also to place in the class of equal treaties those which stipulate that the
allies shall consider themselves as embarked in a common cause, and shall act with all
their strength. Notwithstanding a real inequality in their strength, they are
nevertheless willing in this instance to consider it as equal.

Equal treaties may be subdivided into as many species as there are of different
transactions between sovereigns. Thus they treat of the conditions of commerce, of
their mutual defence, of associations in war, of reciprocally granting each other a
passage, or refusing it to the enemies of their ally; they engage not to build fortresses
in certain places, &c. But it would be needless to enter into these particulars: generals
are sufficient, and are easily applied to particular cases.

Nations being no less obliged than individuals to pay a regard to §173. Obligation of
equity, they ought, as much as possible, to preserve equality in preserving equality in
their treaties. When, therefore, the parties are able reciprocally to treaties.
afford each other equal advantages, the law of nature requires
that their treaties should be equal, unless there exist some particular reason for
deviating from that equality,—such, for instance, as gratitude for a former
benefit,—the hope of gaining the inviolable attachment of a nation,—some private
motive which renders one of the contracting parties particularly anxious to have the
treaty concluded, &c. Nay, viewing the transaction in its proper point of light, the
consideration of that particular reason restores to the treaty that equality which seems
to be destroyed by the difference of the things promised.

I see those pretended great politicians smile, who employ all their subtilty in
circumventing those with whom they treat, and in so managing the conditions of the
treaty, that all the advantage shall accrue to their masters. Far from blushing at a
conduct so contrary to equity, to rectitude, and natural honesty, they glory in it, and
think themselves entitled to the appellation of able negotiators. How long shall we
continue to see men in public characters take a pride in practices that would disgrace a
private individual? The private man, if he is void of conscience, laughs also at the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 225 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

rules of morality and justice; but he laughs in secret: it would be dangerous and
prejudicial to him to make a public mockery of them. Men in power more openly
sacrifice honour and honesty to present advantage: but, fortunately for mankind, it
often happens that such seeming advantage proves fatal to them; and even between
sovereigns, candour and rectitude are found to be the safest policy. All the subtilties,
all the tergiversations of a famous minister,30 on the occasion of a treaty in which
Spain was deeply interested, turned at length to his own confusion, and to the
detriment of his master; while England, by her good faith and generosity to her allies,
gained immense credit, and rose to the highest pitch of influence and respectability.

When people speak of equal treaties, they have commonly in §174. Difference
their minds a double idea of equality, viz. equality in the between equal treaties
engagements, and equality in the dignity of the contracting and equal alliances.
parties. It becomes therefore necessary to remove all ambiguity;
and for that purpose, we may make a distinction between equal treaties and equal
alliances. Equal treaties are those in which there is an equality in the promises made,
as we have above explained (§172); and equal alliances, those in which equal treats
with equal, making no difference in the dignity of the contracting parties, or, at least,
admitting no too glaring superiority, but merely a preeminence of honour and rank.
Thus kings treat with the emperor on a footing of equality, though they do not hesitate
to allow him precedency; thus great republics treat with kings on the same footing,
notwithstanding the pre-eminence which the former now-a-days yield to the latter.
Thus all true sovereigns ought to treat with the most powerful monarch, since they are
as really sovereigns, and as independent as himself. (See §37 of this Book.)

Unequal treaties are those in which the allies do not reciprocally §175. Unequal
promise to each other the same things, or things equivalent; and treaties and unequal
an alliance is unequal when it makes a difference in the dignity alliances.
of the contracting parties. It is true, that most commonly an
unequal treaty will be at the same time an unequal alliance; as great potentates are
seldom accustomed to give or to promise more than is given or promised to them,
unless such concessions be fully compensated in the article of honour and glory; and,
on the other hand, a weak state does not submit to burthensome conditions without
being obliged also to acknowledge the superiority of her ally.

Those unequal treaties that are at the same time unequal alliances, are divided into
two classes,—the first consisting of those where the inequality prevails on the side of
the more considerable power,—the second comprehending treaties where the
inequality is on the side of the inferior power.

Treaties of the former class, without attributing to the more powerful of the
contracting parties any right over the weaker, simply allow him a superiority of
honours and respect. We have treated of this in Book I. §5. Frequently a great
monarch, wishing to engage a weaker state in his interest, offers her advantageous
conditions,—promises her gratuitous succours, or greater than he stipulates for
himself: but at the same time he claims a superiority of dignity, and requires respect
from his ally. It is this last particular which renders the alliance unequal: and to this
circumstance we must attentively advert; for with alliances of this nature we are not to

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 226 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

confound those in which the parties treat on a footing of equality, though the more
powerful of the allies, for particular reasons, gives more than he receives, promises
his assistance gratis, without requiring gratuitous assistance in his turn, or promises
more considerable succours, or even the assistance of all his forces:—here the alliance
is equal, but the treaty is unequal, unless indeed we may be allowed to say, that, as the
party who makes the greater concessions has a greater interest in concluding the
treaty, this consideration restores the equality. Thus, at a time when France found
herself embarrassed in a momentous war with the house of Austria, and the cardinal
de Richelieu wished to humble that formidable power, he, like an able minister,
concluded a treaty with Gustavus Adolphus,31 in which all the advantage appeared to
be on the side of Sweden. From a bare consideration of the stipulations of that treaty,
it would have been pronounced an unequal one; but the advantages which France
derived from it, amply compensated for that inequality. The alliance of France with
the Swiss, if we regard the stipulations alone, is an unequal treaty; but the valour of
the Swiss troops has long since counterbalanced that inequality; and the difference in
the interests and wants of the parties serves still further to preserve the equilibrium.
France, often involved in bloody wars, has received essential services from the Swiss:
the Helvetic body, void of ambition, and untainted with the spirit of conquest, may
live in peace with the whole world; they have nothing to fear, since they have
feelingly convinced the ambitious, that the love of liberty gives the nation sufficient
strength to defend her frontiers. This alliance may at certain times have appeared
unequal:—our forefathers* paid little attention to ceremony:—but in reality, and
especially since the absolute independence of the Swiss is acknowledged by the
empire itself, the alliance is certainly equal, although the Helvetic body do not
hesitate to yield to the king of France all that pre-eminence which the established
usage of modern Europe attributes to crowned heads, and especially to great
monarchs.

Treaties in which the inequality prevails on the side of the inferior power,—that is to
say, those which impose on the weaker party more extensive obligations or greater
burthens, or bind him down to oppressive and disagreeable conditions,—these
unequal treaties, I say, are always at the same time unequal alliances; for the weaker
party never submits to burthensome conditions, without being obliged also to
acknowledge the superiority of his ally. These conditions are commonly imposed by
the conqueror, or dictated by necessity, which obliges a weak state to seek the
protection or assistance of another more powerful; and by this very step, the weaker
state acknowledges her own inferiority. Besides, this forced inequality in a treaty of
alliance is a disparagement to her, and lowers her dignity, at the same time that it
exalts that of her more powerful ally. Sometimes also, the weaker state not being in a
condition to promise the same succours as the more powerful one, it becomes
necessary that she should compensate for her inability in this point, by engagements
which degrade her below her ally, and often even subject her, in various respects, to
his will. Of this kind are all those treaties in which the weaker party alone engages not
to make war without the consent of her more powerful ally,—to have the same friends
and the same enemies with him,—to support and respect his dignity,—to have no
fortresses in certain places,—not to trade or raise soldiers in certain free
countries,—to deliver up her vessels of war, and not to build others, as was the case of

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 227 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

the Carthaginians when treating with their Roman conquerors,—to keep up only a
certain number of troops, &c.

These unequal alliances are subdivided into two kinds; they either impair the
sovereignty, or they do not. We have slightly touched on this, in Book I. Ch. I. and
XVI.

The sovereignty subsists entire and unimpaired when none of its constituent rights are
transferred to the superior ally, or rendered, as to the exertion of them, dependent on
his will. But the sovereignty is impaired when any of its rights are ceded to an ally, or
even if the use of them be merely rendered dependent on the will of that ally. For
example, the treaty does not impair the sovereignty, if the weaker state only promises
not to attack a certain nation without the consent of her ally. By such an engagement
she neither divests herself of her right, nor subjects the exertion of it to another’s will;
she only consents to a restriction in favour of her ally: and thus she incurs no greater
diminution of liberty than is incurred by promises of every kind. Such reservations are
every day stipulated in alliances that are perfectly equal. But if either of the
contracting parties engages not to make war against any one whatsoever without the
consent or permission of an ally who on his side does not make the same promise, the
former contracts an unequal alliance with diminution of sovereignty; for he deprives
himself of one of the most important branches of the sovereign power, or renders the
exertion of it dependent on another’s will. The Carthaginians having, in the treaty that
terminated the second Punic war,32 promised not to make war on any state without
the consent of the Roman people, were thenceforward, and for that reason, considered
as dependent on the Romans.

When a nation is forced to submit to the will of a superior power, §176. How an alliance
she may lawfully renounce her former treaties, if the party with with diminution of
whom she is obliged to enter into an alliance requires it of her. sovereignty may
As she then loses a part of her sovereignty, her ancient treaties annul preceding
fall to the ground together with the power that had concluded treaties.

them. This is a necessity that cannot be imputed to her as a
crime: and since she would have a right to place herself in a state of absolute
subjection, and to renounce her own sovereign, if she found such measures necessary
for her preservation,—by a much stronger reason, she has a right, under the same
necessity, to abandon her allies. But a generous people will exhaust every resource
before they will submit to terms so severe and so humiliating.

In general, as every nation ought to be jealous of her glory, §177. We ought to
careful of maintaining her dignity, and preserving her avoid as much as
independence, nothing short of the last extremity, or motives the possible making
most weighty and substantial, ought ever to induce a people to unequal alliances.
contract an unequal alliance. This observation is particularly
meant to apply to treaties where the inequality prevails on the side of the weaker ally,
and still more particularly to those unequal alliances that degrade the sovereignty.
Men of courage and spirit will accept such treaties from no other hands but those of
imperious necessity.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 228 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Notwithstanding every argument which selfish policy may §178. Mutual duties
suggest to the contrary, we must either pronounce sovereigns to of nations with
be absolutely emancipated from all subjection to the law of respect to unequal
nature, or agree that it is not lawful for them, without just alliances.
reasons, to compel weaker states to sacrifice their dignity, much
less their liberty, by unequal alliances. Nations owe to each other the same assistance,
the same respect, the same friendship, as individuals living in a state of nature. Far
from seeking to humble a weaker neighbour, and to despoil her of her most valuable
advantages, they will respect and maintain her dignity and her liberty, if they are
inspired by virtue more than by pride,—if they are actuated by principles of honour
more than by the meaner views of sordid interest,—nay, if they have but sufficient
discernment to distinguish their real interests. Nothing more firmly secures the power
of a great monarch than his attention and respect to all other sovereigns. The more
cautious he is to avoid offending his weaker brethren,—the greater esteem he testifies
for them,—the more will they revere him in turn: they feel an affection for a power
whose superiority over them is displayed only by the conferring of favours: they cling
to such a monarch as their prop and support; and he becomes the arbiter of nations.
Had his demeanour been stamped with arrogance, he would have been the object of
their jealousy and fear, and might perhaps have one day sunk under their united
efforts.

But as the weaker party ought, in his necessity, to accept with §179. In alliances
gratitude the assistance of the more powerful, and not to refuse where the inequality
him such honours and respect as are flattering to the person who is on the side of the
receives them, without degrading him by whom they are more powerful party.
rendered,—so, on the other hand, nothing is more conformable to
the law of nature, than a generous grant of assistance from the more powerful state,
unaccompanied by any demand of a return, or, at least, of an equivalent. And in this
instance also, there exists an inseparable connection between interest and duty. Sound
policy holds out a caution to a powerful nation not to suffer the lesser states in her
neighbourhood to be oppressed. If she abandon them to the ambition of a conqueror,
he will soon become formidable to herself. Accordingly, sovereigns, who are in
general sufficiently attentive to their own interests, seldom fail to reduce this maxim
to practice. Hence those alliances, sometimes against the house of Austria, sometimes
against its rival, according as the power of the one or the other preponderates. Hence
that balance of power, the object of perpetual negotiations and wars.

When a weak and poor nation has occasion for assistance of another kind,—when she
is afflicted by famine,—we have seen (§5), that those nations who have provisions
ought to supply her at a fair price. It were noble and generous to furnish them at an
under price, or to make her a present of them, if she be incapable of paying their
value. To oblige her to purchase them by an unequal alliance, and especially at the
expense of her liberty,—to treat her as Joseph formerly treated the Egyptians,—would
be a cruelty almost as dreadful, as suffering her to perish with famine.

But there are cases where the inequality of treaties and alliances, §180. How inequality
dictated by some particular reasons, is not contrary to equity, of treaties and
nor, consequently, to the law of nature. Such, in general, are all alliances may be

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 229 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

those cases in which the duties that a nation owes to herself, or conformable to the
those which she owes to other nations, prescribe to her a law of nature.
departure from the line of equality. If, for instance, a weak state
attempts, without necessity, to erect a fortress, which she is incapable of defending, in
a place where it might become very dangerous to her neighbour if ever it should fall
into the hands of a powerful enemy, that neighbour may oppose the construction of
the fortress; and if he does not find it convenient to pay the lesser state a
compensation for complying with his desire, he may force her compliance, by
threatening to block up the roads and avenues of communication, to prohibit all
intercourse between the two nations, to build fortresses, or to keep an army on the
frontier, to consider that little state in a suspicious light, &c. He thus indeed imposes
an unequal condition; but his conduct is authorised by the care of his own safety. In
the same manner he may oppose the forming of a highway, that would open to an
enemy an entrance into his state. War might furnish us with a multitude of other
examples. But rights of this nature are frequently abused; and it requires no less
moderation than prudence to avoid turning them into oppression.

Sometimes those duties to which other nations have a claim, recommend and
authorise inequality in a contrary sense, without affording any ground of imputation
against a sovereign, of having neglected the duty which he owes to himself or to his
people. Thus gratitude,—the desire of shewing his deep sense of a favour
received,—may induce a generous sovereign to enter into an alliance with joy, and to
give in the treaty more than he receives.

It is also consistent with justice to impose the conditions of an §181. Inequality
unequal treaty, or even an unequal alliance, by way of penalty, in imposed by way of
order to punish an unjust aggressor, and render him incapable of punishment.
easily injuring us for the time to come. Such was the treaty to
which the elder Scipio Africanus33 forced the Carthaginians to submit, after he had
defeated Hannibal.34 The conqueror often dictates such terms: and his conduct in this
instance is no violation of the laws of justice or equity, provided he do not transgress
the bounds of moderation, after he has been crowned with success in a just and
necessary war.

The different treaties of protection,—those by which a state §182. Other kinds of
renders itself tributary or feudatory to another,—form so many which we have
different kinds of unequal alliances. But we shall not repeat here spoken elsewhere.
what we have said respecting them in Book I. Chap. I. and XVI.

By another general division of treaties or alliances, they are §183. Personal and
distinguished into personal and real: the former are those that real treaties.
relate to the persons of the contracting parties, and are confined
and in a manner attached to them. Real alliances relate only to the matters in
negotiation between the contracting parties, and are wholly independent of their
persons.

A personal alliance expires with him who contracted it.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 230 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

A real alliance attaches to the body of the state, and subsists as long as the state,
unless the period of its duration has been limited.

It is of considerable importance not to confound these two sorts of alliances.
Accordingly, sovereigns are at present accustomed to express themselves in their
treaties in such a manner as to leave no uncertainty in this respect: and this is
doubtless the best and safest method. In default of this precaution, the very subject of
the treaty, or the expressions in which it is couched, may furnish a clue to discover
whether it be real or personal.—On this head we shall lay down some general rules.

In the first place, we are not to conclude that a treaty is a §184. Naming the
personal one from the bare circumstance of its naming the contracting parties in
contracting sovereigns: for the name of the reigning sovereign is the treaty does not
often inserted with the sole view of shewing with whom the render it personal.
treaty has been concluded, without meaning thereby to intimate
that it has been made with himself personally. This is an observation of the civilians
Pedius35 and Ulpian,*36 repeated by all writers who have treated of these subjects.

Every alliance made by a republic is in its own nature real, for it §185. An alliance
relates only to the body of the state. When a free people, a made by a republic is
popular state, or an aristocratical republic, concludes a treaty, it real.
is the state herself that contracts; and her engagements do not
depend on the lives of those who were only the instruments in forming them: the
members of the people, or of the governing body, change and succeed each other; but
the state still continues the same.

Since, therefore, such a treaty directly relates to the body of the state, it subsists,
though the form of the republic should happen to be changed,—even though it should
be transformed into a monarchy. For the state and the nation are still the same,
notwithstanding every change that may take place in the form of the government; and
the treaty concluded with the nation remains in force as long as the nation exists. But
it is manifest that all treaties relating to the form of government are exceptions to this
rule. Thus two popular states, that have treated expressly, or that evidently appear to
have treated, with the view of maintaining themselves in concert in their state of
liberty and popular government, cease to be allies from the very moment that one of
them has submitted to be governed by a single person.

Every public treaty, concluded by a king or by any other §186. Treaties
monarch, is a treaty of the state; it is obligatory on the whole concluded by kings or
state, on the entire nation which the king represents, and whose other monarchs.
power and rights he exercises. It seems then at first view, that
every public treaty ought to be presumed real, as concerning the state itself. There can
be no doubt with respect to the obligation to observe the treaty: the only question that
arises, is respecting its duration. Now there is often room to doubt whether the
contracting parties have intended to extend their reciprocal engagements beyond the
term of their own lives, and to bind their successors. Conjunctures change; a burthen
that is at present light, may in other circumstances become insupportable or at least
oppressive: the manner of thinking among sovereigns is no less variable; and there are

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 231 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

certain things of which it is proper that each prince should be at liberty to dispose
according to his own system. There are others that are freely granted to one king, and
would not be allowed to his successor. It therefore becomes necessary to consider the
terms of the treaty, or the matter which forms the subject of it, in order to discover the
intentions of the contracting powers.

Perpetual treaties, and those made for a determinate period, are §187. Perpetual
real ones, since their duration cannot depend on the lives of the treaties, and those for
contracting parties. a certain time.

In the same manner, when a king declares in the treaty that it is §188. Treaties made
made “for himself and his successors,” it is manifest that this is a for the king and his
real treaty. It attaches to the state, and is intended to last as long successors.
as the kingdom itself.

When a treaty expressly declares that it is made for the good of §189. Treaties made
the kingdom, it thus furnishes an evident proof that the for the good of the
contracting powers did not mean that its duration should depend kingdom.
on that of their own lives, but on that of the kingdom itself. Such
treaty is therefore a real one.

Independently even of this express declaration, when a treaty is made for the purpose
of procuring to the state a certain advantage which is in its own nature permanent and
unfailing, there is no reason to suppose that the prince by whom the treaty has been
concluded, intended to limit it to the duration of his own life. Such a treaty ought
therefore to be considered as a real one, unless there exist very powerful evidence to
prove that the party with whom it was made, granted the advantage in question only
out of regard to the prince then reigning, and as a personal favour: in which case the
treaty terminates with the life of the prince, as the motive for the concession expires
with him. But such a reservation is not to be presumed on slight grounds: for it would
seem that if the contracting parties had had it in contemplation, they should have
expressed it in the treaty.

In case of doubt, where there exists no circumstance by which §190. How
we can clearly prove either the personality or the reality of a presumption ought to
treaty, it ought to be presumed a real treaty if it chiefly consists be founded in
of favourable articles,—if of odious ones, a personal treaty. By doubtful cases.
favourable articles we mean those which tend to the mutual
advantage of the contracting powers, and which equally favour both parties; by odious
articles, we understand those which onerate one of the parties only, or which impose a
much heavier burthen upon the one than upon the other. We shall treat this subject
more at large in the chapter on the “Interpretation of Treaties.” Nothing is more
conformable to reason and equity than this rule. Whenever absolute certainty is
unattainable in the affairs of men, we must have recourse to presumption. Now, if the
contracting powers have not explained themselves, it is natural, when the question
relates to things favourable, and equally advantageous to the two allies, to presume
that it was their intention to make a real treaty, as being the more advantageous to
their respective kingdoms: and if we are mistaken in this presumption, we do no

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 232 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

injury to either party. But if there be any thing odious in the engagements,—if one of
the contracting states finds itself overburthened by them,—how can it be presumed
that the prince who entered into such engagements, intended to lay that burthen upon
his kingdom in perpetuity? Every sovereign is presumed to desire the safety and
advantage of the state with which he is intrusted: wherefore it cannot be supposed that
he has consented to load it forever with a burthensome obligation. If necessity
rendered such a measure unavoidable, it was incumbent on his ally to have the matter
explicitly ascertained at the time; and it is probable that he would not have neglected
this precaution, well knowing that mankind in general, and sovereigns in particular,
seldom submit to heavy and disagreeable burthens, unless bound to do so by formal
obligations. If it happens then that the presumption is a mistake, and makes him lose
something of his right, it is a consequence of his own negligence. To this we may add,
that if either the one or the other must sacrifice a part of his right, it will be a less
grievous violation of the laws of equity that the latter should forego an expected
advantage, than that the former should suffer a positive loss and detriment. This is the
famous distinction de lucro captando, and de damno vitando.

We do not hesitate to include equal treaties of commerce in the number of those that
are favourable, since they are in general advantageous, and perfectly conformable to
the law of nature. As to alliances made on account of war, Grotius says with reason,
that “defensive alliances are more of a favourable nature,—offensive alliances have
something in them that approaches nearer to what is burthensome or odious.”*

We could not dispense with the preceding brief summary of those discussions, lest we
should in this part of our treatise leave a disgusting chasm. They are however but
seldom resorted to in modern practice, as sovereigns at present generally take the
prudent precaution of explicitly ascertaining the duration of their treaties. They treat
for themselves and their successors,—for themselves and their kingdoms,—for
perpetuity,—for a certain number of years, &c.—or they treat only for the time of
their own reign,—for an affair peculiar to themselves,—for their families, &c.

Since public treaties, even those of a personal nature, concluded §191. The obligations
by a king or by any other sovereign who is invested with and rights resulting
sufficient power, are treaties of state, and obligatory on the from a real treaty pass
whole nation (§186), real treaties, which were intended to subsist to the successors.
independently of the person who has concluded them, are
undoubtedly binding on his successors; and the obligation which such treaties impose
on the state, passes successively to all her rulers as soon as they assume the public
authority. The case is the same with respect to the rights acquired by those treaties:
they are acquired for the state, and successively pass to her conductors.

It is at present a pretty general custom for the successor to confirm or renew even real
alliances concluded by his predecessors: and prudence requires that this precaution
should not be neglected, since men pay greater respect to an obligation which they
have themselves contracted, than to one which devolves on them from another
quarter, or to which they have only tacitly subjected themselves. The reason is, that, in
the former case, they consider their word to be engaged, and, in the latter, their
conscience alone.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 233 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

The treaties that have no relation to the performance of reiterated §192. Treaties
acts, but merely relate to transient and single acts which are accomplished once
concluded at once,—those treaties (unless indeed it be more for-all, and perfected.
proper to call them by another name)* —those conventions,
those compacts, which are accomplished once for all, and not by successive acts,—are
no sooner executed than they are completed and perfected. If they are valid, they have
in their own nature a perpetual and irrevocable effect: nor have we them in view when
we inquire whether a treaty be real or personal. Puffendorf† gives us the following
rules to direct us in this inquiry—“1. That the successors are bound to observe the
treaties of peace concluded by their predecessors. 2. That a successor should observe
all the lawful conventions by which his predecessor has transferred any right to a third
party.” This is evidently wandering from the point in question: it is only saying that
what is done with validity by a prince, cannot be annulled by his successors.—And
who doubts it? A treaty of peace is in its own nature made with a view to its perpetual
duration: and as soon as it is once duly concluded and ratified, the affair is at an end;
the treaty must be accomplished on both sides, and observed according to its tenour. If
it is executed upon the spot, there ends the business at once. But if the treaty contains
engagements for the performance of successive and reiterated acts, it will still be
necessary to examine, according to the rules we have laid down, whether it be in this
respect real or personal,—whether the contracting parties intended to bind their
successors to the performance of those acts, or only promised them for the time of
their own reign. In the same manner, as soon as a right is transferred by a lawful
convention, it no longer belongs to the state that has ceded it; the affair is concluded
and terminated. But if the successor discovers any flaw in the deed of transfer, and
proves it, he is not to be accused of maintaining that the convention is not obligatory
on him, and refusing to fulfil it;—he only shews that such convention has not taken
place: for a defective and invalid deed is a nullity, and to be considered as having
never existed.

The third rule given by Puffendorf is no less useless with respect §193. Treaties already
to this question. It is, “that if, after the other ally has already accomplished on the
executed something to which he was bound by virtue of the one part.
treaty, the king happens to die before he has accomplished in his
turn what he had engaged to perform, his successor is indispensably obliged to
perform it. For, what the other ally has executed under the condition of receiving an
equivalent, having turned to the advantage of the state, or at least having been done
with that view, it is clear, that if he does not receive the return for which he had
stipulated, he then acquires the same right as a man who has paid what he did not
owe; and therefore the successor is obliged to allow him a complete indemnification
for what he has done or given, or to make good, on his own part, what his predecessor
had engaged to perform.” All this, I say, is foreign to our question. If the alliance is
real, it still subsists notwithstanding the death of one of the contracting parties; if it is
personal, it expires with them, or either of them (§183). But when a personal alliance
comes to be dissolved in this manner, it is quite a different ques-tion to ascertain what
one of the allied states is bound to perform, in case the other has already executed
something in pursuance of the treaty; and this question is to be determined on very
different principles. It is necessary to distinguish the nature of what has been done
pursuant to the treaty. If it has been any of those determinate and substantial acts

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 234 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

which it is usual with contracting parties mutually to promise to each other in
exchange or by way of equivalent, there can be no doubt that he who has received,
ought to give what he has promised in return, if he would adhere to the agreement,
and is obliged to adhere to it: if he is not bound, and is unwilling to adhere to it, he
ought to restore what he has received, to replace things in their former state, or to
indemnify the ally from whom he has received the advantage in question. To act
otherwise, would be keeping possession of another’s property. In this case, the ally is
in the situation, not of a man who has paid what he did not owe, but of one who has
paid before-hand for a thing that has not been delivered to him. But if the personal
treaty related to any of those uncertain and contingent acts which are to be performed
as occasions offer,—of those promises which are not obligatory if an opportunity of
fulfilling them does not occur,—it is only on occasion likewise that the performance
of similar acts is due in return: and when the term of the alliance is expired, neither of
the parties remains bound by any obligation. In a defensive alliance, for instance, two
kings have reciprocally promised each other a gratuitous assistance during the term of
their lives: one of them is attacked: he is succoured by his ally, and dies before he has
an opportunity to succour him in his turn: the alliance is at an end, and no obligation
thence devolves on the successor of the deceased, except indeed that he certainly
owes a debt of gratitude to the sovereign who has given a salutary assistance to his
state. And we must not pronounce such an alliance an injurious one to the ally who
has given assistance without receiving any. His treaty was one of those speculating
contracts in which the advantages or disadvantages wholly depend on chance: he
might have gained by it, though it has been his fate to lose.

We might here propose another question. The personal alliance expiring at the death
of one of the allies, if the survivor, under an idea that it is to subsist with the
successor, fulfils the treaty on his part in favour of the latter, defends his country,
saves some of his towns, or furnishes provisions for his army,—what ought the
sovereign to do, who is thus succoured? He ought, doubtless, either to suffer the
alliance to subsist, as the ally of his predecessor has conceived that it was to subsist
(and this will be a tacit renewal and extension of the treaty)—or to pay for the real
service he has received, according to a just estimate of its importance, if he does not
chuse to continue that alliance. It would be in such a case as this that we might say
with Puffendorf, that he who has rendered such a service has acquired the right of a
man who has paid what he did not owe.

The duration of a personal alliance being restricted to the persons §194. The personal
of the contracting sovereigns,—if, from any cause whatsoever, alliance expires if one
one of them ceases to reign, the alliance expires: for they have of the contracting
contracted in quality of sovereigns; and he who ceases to reign, powers ceases to
no longer exists as a sovereign, though he still lives as a man. reign.

Kings do not always treat solely and directly for their kingdoms; §195. Treaties in their
sometimes by virtue of the power they have in their hands, they own nature personal.
make treaties relative to their own persons, or their families; and
this they may lawfully do, as the welfare of the state is interested in the safety and
advantage of the sovereign, properly understood. These treaties are personal in their

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 235 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

own nature, and expire of course on the death of the king or the extinction of his
family. Such is an alliance made for the defence of a king and his family.

It is asked, whether such an alliance subsists with the king and §196. Alliance
the royal family, when by some revolution they are deprived of concluded for the
the crown? We have remarked above (§194), that a personal defence of the king
alliance expires with the reign of him who contracted it: but that and the royal family.
is to be understood of an alliance formed with the state, and
restricted, in its duration, to the reign of the contracting king. But the alliance of
which we are now to treat is of another nature. Although obligatory on the state, since
she is bound by all the public acts of her sovereign, it is made directly in favour of the
king and his family; it would therefore be absurd that it should be dissolved at the
moment when they stand in need of it, and by the very event which it was intended to
guard against. Besides, the king does not forfeit the character of royalty merely by the
loss of his kingdom. If he is unjustly despoiled of it by an usurper, or by rebels, he
still preserves his rights, among which are to be reckoned his alliances.

But who shall judge whether a king has been dethroned lawfully or by violence? An
independent nation acknowledges no judge. If the body of the nation declare that the
king has forfeited his right by the abuse he has made of it, and depose him, they may
justly do it when their grievances are well founded; and no other power has a right to
censure their conduct. The personal ally of this king ought not therefore to assist him
against the nation who have made use of their right in deposing him: if he attempts it,
he injures that nation. England declared war against Louis XIV. in the year 1688, for
supporting the interests of James II.37 who had been formally deposed by the nation.
The same country declared war against him a second time at the beginning of the
present century, because that prince acknowledged the son of the deposed monarch,
under the title of James III.38 In doubtful cases, and when the body of the nation has
not pronounced, or has not pronounced freely, a sovereign ought naturally to support
and defend an ally; and it is then that the voluntary law of nations subsists between
different states. The party who have expelled the king, maintain that they have right
on their side: the unfortunate prince and his allies flatter themselves with having the
same advantage; and as they have no common judge upon earth, there remains no
other mode of deciding the contest, than an appeal to arms: they therefore engage in a
formal war.

Finally, when the foreign prince has faithfully fulfilled his engagements towards an
unfortunate monarch, when he has done, in his defence, or to procure his restoration,
every thing which, by the terms of the alliance, he was bound to do,—if his efforts
have proved ineffectual, it cannot be expected by the dethroned prince that he shall
support an endless war in his favour,—that he shall forever continue at enmity with
the nation or the sovereign who has deprived him of the throne. He must at length
think of peace, abandon his unfortunate ally, and consider him as having himself
abandoned his right through necessity. Thus Louis XIV. was obliged to abandon
James II. and to acknowledge king William,39 though he had at first treated him as an
usurper.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 236 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

The same question presents itself in real alliances, and, in §197. Obligation of a
general, in all alliances made with a state, and not in particular real alliance, when the
with a king, for the defence of his person. An ally ought allied king is deposed.
doubtless to be defended against every invasion, against every
foreign violence, and even against his rebellious subjects; in the same manner a
republic ought to be defended against the enterprises of one who attempts to destroy
the public liberty. But the other party in the alliance ought to recollect that he is the
ally and not the judge of the state or the nation. If the nation has deposed her king in
form, if the people of a republic have expelled their magistrates, and set themselves at
liberty, or, either expressly or tacitly, acknowledged the authority of an usurper,—to
oppose these domestic regulations, or to dispute their justice or validity, would be
interfering in the government of the nation, and doing her an injury (see §§54, &c. of
this book). The ally remains the ally of the state, notwithstanding the change that has
happened in it. However, if this change renders the alliance useless, dangerous, or
disagreeable to him, he is at liberty to renounce it: for he may upon good grounds
assert that he would not have entered into an alliance with that nation, had she been
under her present form of government.

To this case we may also apply what we have said above respecting a personal ally.
However just the cause of that king may be, who is expelled from the throne either by
his subjects or by a foreign usurper, his allies are not obliged to support an eternal war
in his favour. After having made ineffectual efforts to reinstate him, they must at
length restore to their people the blessings of peace; they must come to an
accommodation with the usurper, and for that purpose treat with him as with a lawful
sovereign. Louis the Fourteenth, finding himself exhausted by a bloody and
unsuccessful war, made an offer at Gertruyden-berg, to abandon his grandson, whom
he had placed on the throne of Spain: and afterwards, when the aspect of affairs was
changed, Charles of Austria, the rival of Philip, saw himself, in his turn, abandoned
by his allies.40 They grew weary of exhausting their states in order to put him in
possession of a crown to which they thought him justly entitled, but which they no
longer saw any probability of being able to procure for him.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 237 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER XIII

Of The Dissolution And Renewal Of Treaties.
An alliance is dissolved at the expiration of the term for which it §198. Expiration of
had been concluded. This term is sometimes fixed, as when an alliances made for a
alliance is made for a certain number of years; sometimes it is limited time.
uncertain, as in personal alliances, whose duration depends on
the lives of the contracting powers. The term is likewise uncertain, when two or more
sovereigns form an alliance with a view to some particular object, as, for instance,
that of expelling a horde of barbarous invaders from a neighbouring country,—of
reinstating a sovereign on his throne, &c. The duration of such an alliance depends on
the completion of the enterprise for which it was formed. Thus, in the last-mentioned
instance, when the sovereign is restored, and so firmly seated on his throne, as to be
able to retain the undisturbed possession of it, the alliance, which was formed with a
sole view to his restoration, is now at an end. But, on the other hand, if the enterprise
prove unsuccessful,—the moment his allies are convinced of the impossibility of
carrying it into effect, the alliance is likewise at an end: for it is time to renounce an
undertaking when it is acknowledged to be impracticable.

A treaty, entered into for a limited time, may be renewed by the §199. Renewal of
common consent of the allies,—which consent may be either treaties.
expressly or tacitly made known. When the treaty is expressly
renewed, it is the same as if a new one were concluded, in all respects similar to the
former.

The tacit renewal of a treaty is not to be presumed upon slight grounds: for
engagements of so high importance are well entitled to the formality of an express
consent. The presumption, therefore, of a tacit renewal must be founded on acts of
such a nature as not to admit a doubt of their having been performed in pursuance of
the treaty. But, even in this case, still another difficulty arises: for, according to the
circumstances and nature of the acts in question, they may prove nothing more than a
simple continuation or extension of the treaty,—which is very different from a
renewal, especially as to the term of duration. For instance, England has entered into a
subsidiary treaty with a German prince, who is to keep on foot, during ten years, a
stated number of troops at the disposal of that country, on condition of receiving from
her a certain yearly sum. The ten years being expired, the king of England causes the
sum stipulated for one year to be paid: the ally receives it: thus the treaty is indeed
tacitly continued for one year; but it cannot be said to be renewed; for the transaction
of that year does not impose an obligation of doing the same thing for ten years
successively. But supposing a sovereign has, in consequence of an agreement with a
neighbouring state, paid her a million of money for permission to keep a garrison in
one of her strongholds during ten years,—if, at the expiration of that term, the
sovereign, instead of withdrawing his garrison, makes his ally a tender of another
million, and the latter accepts it, the treaty is, in this case, tacitly renewed.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 238 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

When the term for which the treaty was made is expired, each of the allies is perfectly
free, and may consent or refuse to renew it, as he thinks proper. It must, however, be
confessed, that, if one of the parties, who has almost singly reaped all the advantages
of the treaty, should, without just and substantial reasons, refuse to renew it now that
he thinks he will no longer stand in need of it, and foresees the time approaching
when his ally may derive advantage from it in turn,—such conduct would be
dishonourable, inconsistent with that generosity which should characterise sovereigns,
and widely distant from those sentiments of gratitude and friendship that are due to an
old and faithful ally. It is but too common to see great potentates, when arrived at the
summit of power, neglect those who have assisted them in attaining it.

Treaties contain promises that are perfect and reciprocal. If one §200. How a treaty is
of the allies fails in his engagements, the other may compel him dissolved, when
to fulfil them:—a perfect promise confers a right to do so. But if violated by one of the
the latter has no other expedient than that of arms to force his contracting parties.
ally to the performance of his promises, he will sometimes find it
more eligible to cancel the promises on his own side also, and to dissolve the treaty.
He has undoubtedly a right to do this, since his promises were made only on condition
that the ally should on his part execute every thing which he had engaged to perform.
The party, therefore, who is offended or injured in those particulars which constitute
the basis of the treaty, is at liberty to chuse the alternative of either compelling a
faithless ally to fulfil his engagements, or of declaring the treaty dissolved by his
violation of it. On such an occasion, prudence and wise policy will point out the line
of conduct to be pursued.

But when there exist between allies two or more treaties, §201. The violation of
different from and independent of each other, the violation of one treaty does not
one of those treaties does not directly disengage the injured party cancel another.
from the obligations he has contracted in the others: for the
promises contained in these, do not depend on those included in the violated treaty.
But the offended ally may, on the breach of one treaty by the other party, threaten him
with a renunciation, on his own part, of all the other treaties by which they are
united,—and may put his threats in execution if the other disregards them. For if any
one wrests or with-holds from me my right, I may, in the state of nature, in order to
oblige him to do me justice, to punish him, or to indemnify myself, deprive him also
of some of his rights, or seize and detain them till I have obtained complete
satisfaction. And if recourse is had to arms in order to obtain satisfaction for the
infringement of that treaty, the offended party begins by stripping his enemy of all the
rights which had accrued to him from the different treaties subsisting between them:
and we shall see, in treating of war, that he may do this with justice.

Some writers* would extend what we have just said to the §202. The violation of
different articles of a treaty which have no connection with the one article in a treaty
article that has been violated,—saying we ought to consider may cancel the whole.
those several articles as so many distinct treaties concluded at the
same time. They maintain therefore, that if either of the allies violates one article of
the treaty, the other has not immediately a right to cancel the entire treaty, but that he
may either refuse, in his turn, what he had promised with a view to the violated

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 239 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

article, or compel his ally to fulfil his promises if there still remains a possibility of
fulfilling them,—if not, to repair the damage; and that for this purpose he may
threaten to renounce the entire treaty,—a menace which he may lawfully put in
execution, if it be disregarded by the other. Such undoubtedly is the conduct which
prudence, moderation, the love of peace, and charity would commonly prescribe to
nations. Who will deny this, and madly assert that sovereigns are allowed to have
immediate recourse to arms, or even to break every treaty of alliance and friendship,
for the least subject of complaint? But the question here turns on the simple right, and
not on the measures which are to be pursued in order to obtain justice; and the
principle upon which those writers ground their decision, appears to me utterly
indefensible. We cannot consider the several articles of the same treaty as so many
distinct and independent treaties: for though we do not see any immediate connection
between some of those articles, they are all connected by this common relation, viz.
that the contracting powers have agreed to some of them in consideration of the
others, and by way of compensation. I would perhaps never have consented to this
article, if my ally had not granted me another, which in its own nature has no relation
to it. Every thing, therefore, which is comprehended in the same treaty, is of the same
force and nature as a reciprocal promise, unless where a formal exception is made to
the contrary. Grotius very properly observes that “every article of a treaty carries with
it a condition, by the non-performance of which, the treaty is wholly cancelled.”* He
adds that a clause is some-times inserted to the following effect, viz. “that the
violation of any one of the articles shall not cancel the whole treaty,” in order that one
of the parties may not have, in every slight offence, a pretext for receding from his
engagements. This precaution is extremely prudent, and very conformable to the care
which nations ought to take of preserving peace, and rendering their alliances durable.

In the same manner as a personal treaty expires at the death of §203. The treaty is
the king who has contracted it, a real treaty is dissolved, if one of void by the
the allied nations is destroyed,—that is to say, not only if the destruction of one of
men who compose it happen all to perish, but also if, from any the contracting
cause whatsoever, it loses its national quality, or that of a powers.

political and independent society. Thus when a state is destroyed
and the people are dispersed, or when they are subdued by a conqueror, all their
alliances and treaties fall to the ground with the public power that had contracted
them. But it is here to be observed, that treaties or alliances which impose a mutual
obligation to perform certain acts, and whose existence consequently depends on that
of the contracting powers, are not to be confounded with those contracts by which a
perfect right is once for all acquired, independent of any mutual performance of
subsequent acts. If, for instance, a nation has forever ceded to a neighbouring prince
the right of fishing in a certain river, or that of keeping a garrison in a particular
fortress, that prince does not lose his rights, even though the nation, from whom he
has received them, happens to be subdued, or in any other manner subjected to a
foreign dominion. His rights do not depend on the preservation of that nation: she had
alienated them; and the conqueror by whom she has been subjugated can only take
what belonged to her. In the same manner, the debts of a nation, or those for which
the sovereign has mortgaged any of his towns or provinces, are not cancelled by
conquest. The king of Prussia,41 on acquiring Silesia by conquest and by the treaty of
Breslau,42 took upon himself the debts for which that province stood mortgaged to

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 240 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

some English merchants. In fact, his conquest extended no further than the acquisition
of those rights which the house of Austria had possessed over the country; and he
could only take possession of Silesia, such as he found it at the time of the conquest,
with all its rights and all its burthens. For a conqueror to refuse to pay the debts of a
country he has subdued, would be robbing the creditors, with whom he is not at war.

Since a nation or a state, of whatever kind, cannot make any §204. Alliances of a
treaty contrary to those by which she is actually bound (§165), state that has
she cannot put herself under the protection of another state, afterwards put herself
without reserving all her alliances, and all her existing treaties. under the protection
For the convention by which a state places herself under the of another.

protection of another sovereign, is a treaty (§175); if she does it
of her own accord, she ought to do it in such a manner, that the new treaty may
involve no in-fringement of her pre-existing ones. We have seen (§176) what rights a
nation derives, in a case of necessity, from the duty of self-preservation.

The alliances of a nation are therefore not dissolved when she puts herself under the
protection of another state, unless they be incompatible with the conditions of that
protection. The ties by which she was bound to her former allies still subsist, and
those allies still remain bound by their engagements to her, as long as she has not put
it out of her power to fulfil her engagements to them.

When necessity obliges a people to put themselves under the protection of a foreign
power, and to promise him the assistance of their whole force against all opponents
whatsoever, without excepting their allies,—their former alliances do indeed subsist,
so far as they are not incompatible with the new treaty of protection. But if the case
should happen, that a former ally enters into a war with the protector, the protected
state will be obliged to declare for the latter, to whom she is bound by closer ties, and
by a treaty which, in case of collision, is paramount to all the others. Thus the
Nepesinians having been obliged to submit to the Etrurians, thought themselves
afterwards bound to adhere to their treaty of submission or capitulation, preferably to
the alliance which had subsisted between them and the Romans: postquam deditionis,
quam societatis, fides sanctior erat, says Livy.*

Finally, as treaties are made by the mutual agreement of the §205. Treaties
parties, they may also be dissolved by mutual consent, at the free dissolved by mutual
will of the contracting powers. And even though a third party consent.
should find himself interested in the preservation of the treaty,
and should suffer by its dissolution,—yet, if he had no share in making such treaty,
and no direct promise had been made to him, those who have reciprocally made
promises to each other, which eventually prove advantageous to that third party, may
also reciprocally release each other from them, without consulting him, or without his
having a right to oppose them. Two monarchs have bound themselves by a mutual
promise to unite their forces for the defence of a neighbouring city: that city derives
advantage from their assistance; but she has no right to it; and as soon as the two
monarchs think proper mutually to dispense with their engagements, she will be
deprived of their aid, but can have no reason to complain on the occasion, since no
promise had been made to her.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 241 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER XIV

Of Other Public Conventions,—Of Those That Are Made By
Subordinate Powers,—Particularly Of The Agreement Called
In Latin Sponsio,—And Of Conventions Of Sovereigns With
Private Persons.
The public compacts, called conventions, articles of agreement, §206. Conventions
&c. when they are made between sovereigns, differ from treaties made by sovereigns.
only in their object (§153). What we have said of the validity of
treaties, of their execution, of their dissolution, and of the obligations and rights that
flow from them, is all applicable to the various conventions which sovereigns may
conclude with each other. Treaties, conventions, and agreements, are all public
engagements, in regard to which there is but one and the same right, and the same
rules. We do not here wish to disgust the reader by unnecessary repetitions: and it
were equally unnecessary to enter into an enumeration of the various kinds of these
conventions, which are always of the same nature, and differ only in the matter which
constitutes their object.

But there are public conventions made by subordinate powers, in §207. Those made by
virtue either of an express mandate from the sovereign, or of the subordinate powers.
authority with which they are invested by the terms of their
commission, and according as the nature of the affairs with which they are intrusted,
may admit or require the exercise of that authority.

The appellation of inferior or subordinate powers is given to public persons who
exercise some portion of the sovereignty in the name and under the authority of the
sovereign: such are magistrates established for the administration of justice, generals
of armies, and ministers of state.

When, by an express order from their sovereign on the particular occasion, and with
sufficient powers derived from him for the purpose, those persons form a convention,
such convention is made in the name of the sovereign himself, who contracts by the
mediation and ministry of his delegate or proxy: this is the case we have mentioned in
§156.

But public persons, by virtue of their office, or of the commission given to them, have
also themselves the power of making conventions on public affairs, exercising on
those occasions the right and authority of the sovereign by whom they are
commissioned. There are two modes in which they acquire that power:—it is given to
them in express terms by the sovereign; or it is naturally derived from their
commission itself,—the nature of the affairs with which these persons are intrusted,
requiring that they should have a power to make such conventions, especially in cases
where they cannot await the or-ders of their sovereign. Thus the governor of a town,

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 242 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

and the general who besieges it, have a power to fettle the terms of capitulation: and
whatever agreement they thus form within the terms of their commission, is
obligatory on the state or sovereign who has invested them with the power by which
they conclude it. As conventions of this nature take place principally in war, we shall
treat of them more at large in Book III.

If a public person, an embassador, or a general of an army, §208. Treaties
exceeding the bounds of his commission, concludes a treaty or a concluded by a public
convention without orders from the sovereign, or without being person, without orders
authorised to do it by virtue of his office, the treaty is null, as from the sovereign, or
being made without sufficient powers (§157): it cannot become without sufficient

powers.
valid without the express or tacit ratification of the sovereign.
The express ratification is a written deed by which the sovereign approves the treaty,
and engages to observe it. The tacit ratification is implied by certain steps which the
sovereign is justly presumed to take only in pursuance of the treaty, and which he
could not be supposed to take without considering it as concluded and agreed upon.
Thus, on a treaty of peace being signed by public ministers who have even exceeded
the orders of their sovereigns, if one of the sovereigns causes troops to pass on the
footing of friends through the territories of his reconciled enemy, he tacitly ratifies the
treaty of peace. But if, by a reservatory clause of the treaty, the ratification of the
sovereign be required,—as such reservation is usually understood to imply an express
ratification, it is absolutely requisite that the treaty be thus expressly ratified before it
can acquire its full force.

By the Latin term, sponsio, we express an agreement relating to §209. The agreement
affairs of state, made by a public person, who exceeds the called sponsio.
bounds of his commission, and acts without the orders or
command of the sovereign. The person who treats for the state in this manner without
being commissioned for the purpose, promises of course to use his endeavours for
prevailing on the state or sovereign to ratify the articles he has agreed to: otherwise
his engagement would be nugatory and illusive. The foundation of this agreement can
be no other, on either side, than the hope of such ratification.

The Roman history furnishes us with various instances of such agreements:—the one
that first arrests our attention is that which was concluded at the Furcae
Caudinae,—the most famous instance on record, and one that had been discussed by
the most celebrated writers. The consuls Titus Veturius Calvinus and Spurius
Postumius, with the Roman army, being inclosed in the defiles of the Furcae
Caudinae without hope of escaping, concluded a shameful agreement with the
Samnites,43 —informing them, however, that they could not make a real public treaty
(foedus) without orders from the Roman people, without the feciales, and the
ceremonies consecrated by custom. The Samnite general contented himself with
exacting a promise from the consuls and principal officers of the army, and obliging
them to deliver him six hundred hostages; after which, having made the Roman troops
lay down their arms, and obliged them to pass under the yoke, he dismissed them. The
senate, however, refused to accede to the treaty,—delivered up those who had
concluded it to the Samnites, who refused to receive them,—and then thought
themselves free from all obligation, and screened from all reproach.* Authors have

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 243 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

entertained very different sentiments of this conduct. Some assert, that if Rome did
not chuse to ratify the treaty, she ought to have replaced things in the same situation
they were in before the agreement, by sending back the whole army to their
encampment at the Furcae Caudinae; and this the Samnites also insisted upon. I
confess that I am not entirely satisfied with the reasonings I have found on this
question, even in authors whose eminent superiority I am in other respects fully
inclined to acknowledge. Let us therefore endeavour, with the aid of their
observations, to set the affair in a new light.

It presents two questions,—first, what is the person bound to do, §210. The state is not
who has made an agreement (sponsor), if the state disavows bound by such an
it?—Secondly, what is the state bound to do?—But, previous to agreement.
the discussion of these questions, it is necessary to observe, with
Grotius,* that the state is not bound by an agreement of that nature. This is manifest,
even from the definition of the agreement called sponsio. The state has not given
orders to conclude it: neither has she in any manner whatever conferred the necessary
powers for the purpose: she has neither expressly given them by her injunctions or by
a plenipotentiary commission, nor tacitly, by a natural or necessary consequence of
the authority intrusted to him who makes the agreement (sponsori). The general of an
army has, indeed, by virtue of his commission, a power to enter, as circumstances
may require, into a private convention,—a compact relative to himself, to his troops,
or to the occurrences of war: but he has no power to conclude a treaty of peace. He
may bind himself, and the troops under his command, on all the occasions where his
functions require that he should have the power of treating; but he cannot bind the
state beyond the extent of his commission.

Let us now see to what the person promising (sponsor) is bound, §211. To what the
when the state disavows the agreement. We ought not here to promiser is bound
deduce our arguments from the rules which obtain between when it is disavowed.
private individuals under the law of nature: for the nature of the
things in question, and the situation of the contracting parties, necessarily make a
difference between the two cases. It is certain that, between individuals, he who
purely and simply promises what depends on the will of another, without being
authorised to make such promise, is obliged, if the other disavows the transaction, to
accomplish himself what he has promised,—to give an equivalent,—to restore things
to their former state,—or, finally, to make full compensation to the person with whom
he has treated, according to the various circumstances of the case. His promise
(sponsio) can be understood in no other light. But this is not the case with respect to a
public person, who, without orders and without authority, engages for the
performance of his sovereign. The question in such case relates to things that
infinitely surpass his power and all his faculties,—things which he can neither execute
himself, nor cause to be executed, and for which he cannot offer either an equivalent
or a compensation in any wise adequate: he is not even at liberty to give the enemy
what he has promised, without authority: finally, it is equally out of his power to
restore things entirely to their former state. The party who treats with him cannot
expect any thing of this nature. If the promiser has deceived him by saying he was
sufficiently authorised, he has a right to punish him. But if, like the Roman consuls at
the Furcae Caudinae, the promiser has acted with sincerity, informing him that he had

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 244 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

not a power to bind the state by a treaty,—nothing else can be presumed, but that the
other party was willing to run the risk of making a treaty that must become void, if not
ratified,—hoping that a regard for him who had promised, and for the hostages, would
induce the sovereign to ratify what had been thus concluded. If the event deceives his
hopes, he can only blame his own imprudence. An eager desire of obtaining peace on
advantageous conditions, and the temptation of some present advantages, may have
been his only inducements to make so hazardous an agreement. This was judiciously
observed by the consul Postumius himself, after his return to Rome. In his speech to
the senate, as given to us by Livy,44 “Your generals,” said he, “and those of the
enemy, were equally guilty of imprudence,—we, in incautiously involving ourselves
in a dangerous situation,—they, in suffering a victory to escape them, of which the
nature of the ground gave them a certainty,—still distrusting their own advantages,
and hasting, at any price, to disarm men who were ever formidable while they had
arms in their hands. Why did they not keep us shut up in our camp? Why did they not
send to Rome, in order to treat for peace, on sure grounds, with the senate and the
people?”

It is manifest that the Samnites contented themselves with the hope that the
engagement which the consuls and principal officers had entered into, and the desire
of saving six hundred knights, left as hostages, would induce the Romans to ratify the
agreement,—considering, that, at all events, they should still have those six hundred
hostages, with the arms and baggage of the army, and the vain, or rather, as it is
proved by its consequences, the fatal glory, of having made them pass under the yoke.

Under what obligation then were the consuls, and all the others who had joined with
them in the promise (sponsores)? They themselves judged that they ought to be
delivered up to the Samnites. This was not a natural consequence of the agreement
(sponsionis); and from the observations above made, it does not appear that a general
in such circumstances, having promised things which the promisee well knew to be
out of his power, is obliged, on his promise being disavowed, to surrender his own
person by way of compensation. But as he has a power expressly to enter into such an
engagement, which lies fairly within the bounds of his commission, the custom of
those times had doubtless rendered such engagement a tacit clause of the agreement
called sponsio, since the Romans delivered up all the sponsores, all those who had
promised:—this was a maxim of their fecial law.*

If the sponsor has not expressly engaged to deliver himself up, and if established
custom does not lay him under an obligation to do so, it would seem that he is bound
to nothing further by his promise than honestly to endeavour by every lawful means to
induce the sovereign to ratify what he has promised: and there cannot exist a doubt in
the case, provided the treaty be at all equitable, advantageous to the state, or
supportable in consideration of the misfortune from which it has preserved her. But to
set out with the intention of making a treaty the instrument to ward off a deadly blow
from the state, and soon after to advise the sovereign to refuse his ratification, not
because the treaty is insupportable, but because an advantage may be taken of its
having been concluded without authority,—such a proceeding would undoubtedly be
a fraudulent and shameful abuse of the faith of treaties. But what must the general do,
who, in order to save his army, has been forced to conclude a treaty that is detrimental

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 245 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

or dishonourable to the state? Must he advise the sovereign to ratify it?—He will
content himself with laying open the motives of his conduct, and the necessity that
obliged him to treat; he will shew, as Postumius did, that he alone is bound, and that
he consents to be disowned and delivered up for the public safety. If the enemy are
deceived, it is through their own folly. Was the general bound to inform them, that, in
all probability, his promises would not be ratified? It would be too much to require
this of him. In such a case, it is sufficient that he does not impose on the enemy by
pretending to more extensive powers than he really possesses, but contents himself
with embracing the overtures which they make to him, without on his side holding
forth any delusive hopes to decoy them into a treaty. It is the enemy’s business to take
all possible precautions for their own security: if they neglect them, why should not
the general avail himself of their imprudence, as of an advantage presented to him by
the hand of fortune? “It is she,” said Postumius, “who has saved our army after having
put it in danger. The enemy’s head was turned in his prosperity; and his advantages
have been no more to him than a pleasant dream.”

If the Samnites had only required of the Roman generals and army such engagements
as the nature of their situation, and their commission, empowered them to enter
into,—if they had obliged them to surrender themselves prisoners of war,—or if, from
their inability to hold them all prisoners, they had dismissed them upon their promise
not to bear arms against them for some years, in case Rome should refuse to ratify the
peace,—the agreement would have been valid, as being made with sufficient powers;
and the whole army would have been bound to observe it; for it is absolutely
necessary that the troops, or their officers, should have a power of entering into a
contract on those occasions, and upon that footing. This is the case of capitulations, of
which we shall speak in treating of war.

If the promiser has made an equitable and honourable convention, on an affair of such
a nature, that, in case the convention be disallowed, he still has it in his own power to
indemnify the party with whom he has treated,—he is presumed to have personally
pledged himself for such indemnification; and he is bound to make it, in order to
discharge his promise, as did Fabius Maximus45 in the instance mentioned by
Grotius.* But there are occasions when the sovereign may forbid him to act in that
manner, or to give any thing to the enemies of the state.

We have shewn, that a state cannot be bound by an agreement §212. To what the
made without her orders, and without her having granted any sovereign is bound.
power for that purpose. But is she absolutely free from all
obligation? That is the point which now remains for us to examine. If matters as yet
continue in their original situation, the state or the sovereign may simply disavow the
treaty, which is of course done away by such disavowal, and becomes as perfect a
nullity as if it had never existed. But the sovereign ought to make known his
intentions as soon as the treaty comes to his knowledge; not indeed that his silence
alone can give validity to a convention which the contracting parties have agreed not
to consider as valid without his approbation; but it would be a breach of good-faith in
him to suffer a sufficient time to elapse for the other party to execute on his side an
agreement which he himself is determined not to ratify.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 246 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

If any thing has already been done in consequence of the agreement,—if the party,
who has treated with the sponsor, has on his side fulfilled his engagements either in
the whole or in part,—is the other party, on disavowing the treaty, bound to indemnify
him, or restore things to their former situation,—or is he allowed to reap the fruits of
the treaty, at the same time that he refuses to ratify it? We should here distinguish the
nature of the things that have been executed, and that of the advantages which have
thence accrued to the state. He who, having treated with a public person not furnished
with sufficient powers, executes the agreement on his side without waiting for its
ratification, is guilty of imprudence, and commits an egregious error, into which he
has not been led by the state with which he supposes he has contracted. If he has
given up any part of his property, the other party is not justifiable in taking advantage
of his folly, and retaining possession of what he has so given. Thus, when a state,
thinking she has concluded a peace with the enemy’s general, has in consequence
delivered up one of her strong places, or given a sum of money, the sovereign of that
general is undoubtedly bound to restore what he has received, if he does not chuse to
ratify the agreement. To act otherwise would be enriching himself with another’s
property, and retaining that property without having any title to it.

But if the agreement has given nothing to the state which she did not before
possess,—if, as in that of the Furcae Caudinae, the advantage simply consists in her
escape from an impending danger, her preservation from a threatened loss,—such
advantage is a boon of fortune, which she may enjoy without scruple. Who would
refuse to be saved by the folly of his enemy? And who would think himself obliged to
indemnify that enemy for the advantage he had suffered to escape him, when no fraud
had been used to induce him to forego that advantage? The Samnites pretended, that if
the Romans would not ratify the treaty made by their consuls, they ought to send back
the army to the Furcae Caudinae, and restore every thing to its former state. Two
tribunes of the people, who had been in the number of the sponsores, and wished to
avoid being delivered up, had the assurance to maintain the same doctrine; and some
authors have declared themselves of their opinion. What! the Samnites take advantage
of conjunctures in order to give law to the Romans, and to wrest from them a
shameful treaty,—they are so imprudent as to treat with the consuls who expressly
declare themselves unauthorised to contract for the state,—they suffer the Roman
army to escape, after having covered them with infamy,—and shall not the Romans
take advantage of the folly of an enemy so void of generosity? Must they either ratify
a shameful treaty, or restore to that enemy all those advantages which the situation of
the ground had given him, but which he had lost merely through his own folly? Upon
what principle can such a decision be founded? Had Rome promised any thing to the
Samnites? had she prevailed upon them to let her army go, previous to the ratification
of the agreement made by the consuls?—If she had received any thing in consequence
of that agreement, she would have been bound to restore it, as we have already said,
because she would have possessed it without a title, on declaring the treaty null. But
she had no share in the conduct of her enemies: she did not contribute to the egregious
blunder they had committed; and she might as justly take advantage of it, as generals
in war do of the mistakes of an unskilful opponent. Suppose a conqueror, after having
concluded a treaty with ministers who have expressly reserved the ratification to their
master, should have the imprudence to abandon all his conquests without waiting for

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 247 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

such ratification,—must the other, with a foolish generosity, invite him back to take
possession of them again, in case the treaty be not ratified?

I confess, however, and freely acknowledge, that if the enemy who suffer an entire
army to escape on the faith of an agreement concluded with the general, who is
unprovided with sufficient powers, and a simple sponsor,—I confess, I say, that if the
enemy have behaved generously,—if they had not availed themselves of their
advantages to dictate shameful or too severe conditions,—equity requires that the
state should either ratify the agreement, or conclude a new treaty on just and
reasonable conditions, abating even of her pretensions as far as the public welfare will
allow. For we ought never to abuse the generosity and noble confidence even of an
enemy. Puffendorf* thinks that the treaty at the Furcae Caudinae contained nothing
that was too severe or insupportable. That author seems to make no great account of
the shame and ignominy with which it would have branded the whole republic. He did
not see the full extent of the Roman policy, which would never permit them, in their
greatest distresses, to accept a shameful treaty, or even to make peace on the footing
of a conquered nation:—a sublime policy, to which Rome was indebted for all her
greatness.

Finally, let us observe, that, when the inferior power has, without orders, and without
authority, concluded an equitable and honourable treaty, to rescue the state from an
imminent danger,—if the sovereign afterwards, on seeing himself thus delivered,
should refuse to ratify the treaty, not because he thinks it a disadvantageous one, but
merely through a wish to avoid performing those conditions which were annexed as
the price of his deliverance, he would certainly act in opposition to all the rules of
honour and equity. This would be a case in which we might apply the maxim,
summum jus, summa injuria.46

To the example we have drawn from the Roman history, let us add a famous one
taken from modern history. The Swiss, dissatisfied with France, entered into an
alliance with the emperor47 against Louis XII. and made an irruption into Burgundy,
in the year 1513. They laid siege to Dijon. La Trimouille, who commanded in the
place, fearing that he should be unable to save it, treated with the Swiss, and, without
waiting for a commission from the king, concluded an agreement, by virtue of which
the king of France was to renounce his pretensions to the duchy of Milan, and to pay
the Swiss, by settled instalments, the sum of six hundred thousand crowns; whereas
the Swiss, on their side, promised nothing further than to return home to their own
country,—thus remaining at liberty to attack France again, if they thought proper.
They received hostages, and departed. The king was very much dissatisfied with the
treaty, though it had saved Dijon, and rescued the kingdom from an imminent and
alarming danger; and he refused to ratify it.* It is certain that La Trimouille had
exceeded the powers he derived from his commission, especially in promising that the
king should renounce the duchy of Milan. It is probable indeed that his only view was
to rid himself of an enemy whom it was less difficult to over-reach in negotiation than
to subdue in battle. Louis was not obliged to ratify and execute a treaty concluded
without orders and without authority; and if the Swiss were deceived, they could only
blame their own imprudence. But as it manifestly appeared that La Trimouille did not
behave towards them with candor and honesty, since he had deceived them on the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 248 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

subject of the hostages, by giving, in that character, men of the meanest rank, instead
of four of the most distinguished citizens, as he had promised,* —the Swiss would
have been justifiable in refusing to make peace without obtaining satisfaction for that
act of perfidy, either by the surrender of him who was the author of it, or in some
other manner.

The promises, the conventions, all the private contracts of the §213. Private
sovereign, are naturally subject to the same rules as those of contracts of the
private persons. If any difficulties arise on the subject, it is sovereign.
equally conformable to the rules of decorum, to that delicacy of
sentiment which ought to be particularly conspicuous in a sovereign, and to the love
of justice, to cause them to be decided by the tribunals of the state. And such indeed is
the practice of all civilised states that are governed by settled laws.

The conventions and contracts which the sovereign, in his §214. Contracts made
sovereign character and in the name of the state, forms with by him with private
private individuals of a foreign nation, fall under the rules we persons in the name
have laid down with respect to public treaties. In fact, when a of the state.
sovereign enters into a contract with one who is wholly
independent of him and of the state, whether it be with a private person, or with a
nation or sovereign, this circumstance does not produce any difference in the rights of
the parties. If the private person who has treated with a sovereign is his subject, the
rights of each party in this case also are the same: but there is a difference in the
manner of deciding the controversies which may arise from the contract. That private
person, being a subject of the state, is obliged to submit his pretensions to the
established courts of justice. It is added by some writers on this subject, that the
sovereign may rescind those contracts, if they prove inimical to the public welfare.
Undoubtedly he may do so, but not upon any principle derived from the peculiar
nature of such con-tracts:—it must be either upon the same principle which
invalidates even a public treaty when it is ruinous to the state and inconsistent with
the public safety,—or by virtue of the eminent domain, which gives the sovereign a
right to dispose of the property of the citizens with a view to the common safety. We
speak here of an absolute sovereign. It is from the constitution of each state that we
are to learn who are the persons, and what is the power, entitled to contract in the
name of the state, to exercise the supreme authority, and to pronounce on what the
public welfare requires.

When a lawful power contracts in the name of the state, it lays an §215. They are
obligation on the nation itself, and consequently on all the future binding on the nation,
rulers of the society. When therefore a prince has the power to and on his successors.
form a contract in the name of the state, he lays an obligation on
all his successors; and these are not less bound than himself to fulfil his engagements.

The conductor of the nation may have dealings of his own, and §216. Debts of the
private debts; and his private property alone is liable for the sovereign and the
discharge of such debts. But loans contracted for the service of state.
the state, debts incurred in the administration of public affairs,
are contracts in all the strictness of law, and obligatory on the state and the whole

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 249 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

nation, which is indispensably bound to discharge those debts.* When once they have
been contracted by lawful authority, the right of the creditor is indefeasible. Whether
the money borrowed has been turned to the advantage of the state, or squandered in
foolish expenses, is no concern of the person who has lent it: he has intrusted the
nation with his property; and the nation is bound to restore it to him again: it is so
much the worse for her if she has committed the management of her affairs to
improper hands.

This maxim, however, has its bounds, founded even on the nature of the thing. The
sovereign has not, in general, a power to render the state or body corporate liable for
the debts he contracts, unless they be incurred with a view to the national advantage,
and in order to enable him to provide for all occurrences. If he is absolute, it belongs
to him alone to decide, in all doubtful cases, what the welfare and safety of the state
require. But if he should, without necessity, contract debts of immense magnitude and
capable of ruining the nation for ever, there could not then exist any doubt in the case:
the sovereign has evidently acted without authority; and those who have lent him their
money, have imprudently risked it. It cannot be pre-sumed that a nation has ever
consented to submit to utter ruin through the caprice and foolish prodigality of her
ruler.

As the national debts can only be paid by contributions and taxes,—wherever the
sovereign has not been intrusted by the nation with a power to levy taxes and
contributions, or, in short, to raise supplies by his own authority,—neither has he a
power to render her liable for what he borrows, or to involve the state in debt. Thus
the king of England, who has the right of making peace and war, has not that of
contracting national debts, without the concurrence of parliament, because he cannot,
without their concurrence, levy any money on his people.

The case is not the same with the donations of the sovereign as §217. Donations of
with his debts. When a sovereign has borrowed without the sovereign.
necessity, or for an unwise purpose, the creditor has intrusted the
state with his property; and it is just that the state should restore it to him, if, at the
time of the transaction, he could entertain a reasonable presumption that it was to the
state he was lending it. But when the sovereign gives away any of the property of the
state,—a part of the national domain,—a considerable fief,—he has no right to make
such grant except with a view to the public welfare, as a reward for services rendered
to the state, or for some other reasonable cause, in which the nation is concerned: if he
has made the donation without reason and without a lawful cause, he has made it
without authority. His successor, or the state, may at any time revoke such a grant: nor
would the revocation be a wrong done to the grantee, since it does not deprive him of
any thing which he could justly call his own. What we here advance holds true of
every sovereign whom the law does not expressly invest with the free and absolute
disposal of the national property: so dangerous a power is never to be founded on
presumption.

Immunities and privileges conferred by the mere liberality of the sovereign are a kind
of donations, and may be revoked in the same manner, if they prove detrimental to the
state. But a sovereign cannot revoke them by his bare authority, unless he be absolute:

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 250 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

and even in this case, he ought to be cautious and moderate in the exertion of his
power, uniting an equal share of prudence and equity on the occasion. Immunities
granted for particular reasons, or with a view to some return, partake of the nature of a
burthensome contract, and can only be revoked in case of abuse, or when they become
incompatible with the safety of the state. And if they be suppressed on this latter
account, an indemnification is due to those who enjoyed them.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 251 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER XV

Of The Faith Of Treaties.
Though we have sufficiently established (§§163 and 164) the §218. What is sacred
indispensable necessity of keeping promises, and observing among nations.
treaties, the subject is of such importance, that we cannot forbear
considering it here in a more general view, as interesting, not only to the contracting
parties, but likewise to all nations, and to the universal society of mankind.

Every thing which the public safety renders inviolable is sacred in society. Thus the
person of the sovereign is sacred, because the safety of the state requires that he
should be in perfect security, and above the reach of violence: thus the people of
Rome declared the persons of their tribunes sacred,—considering it as essential to
their own safety that their defenders should be screened from all violence, and even
exempt from fear. Every thing, therefore, which the common safety of mankind and
the peace and security of human society require to be held inviolable, is a thing that
should be sacred among nations.

Who can doubt that treaties are in the number of those things that §219. Treaties are
are to be held sacred by nations? By treaties the most important sacred between
affairs are determined; by them the pretensions of sovereigns are nations.
regulated; on them nations are to depend for the
acknowledgement of their rights, and the security of their dearest interests. Between
bodies politic,—between sovereigns who acknowledge no superior on earth,—treaties
are the only means of adjusting their various pretensions,—of establishing fixed rules
of conduct,—of ascertaining what they are entitled to expect, and what they have to
depend on. But treaties are no better than empty words, if nations do not consider
them as respectable engagements,—as rules which are to be inviolably observed by
sovereigns, and held sacred throughout the whole earth.

The faith of treaties,—that firm and sincere resolution,—that §220. The faith of
invariable constancy in fulfilling our engagements,—of which treaties is sacred.
we make profession in a treaty, is therefore to be held sacred and
inviolable between the nations of the earth, whose safety and repose it secures: and if
mankind be not wilfully deficient in their duty to themselves, infamy must ever be the
portion of him who violates his faith.

He who violates his treaties, violates at the same time the law of §221. He who violates
nations; for he disregards the faith of treaties,—that faith which his treaties, violates
the law of nations declares sacred; and, so far as depends on him, the law of nations.
he renders it vain and ineffectual. Doubly guilty, he does an
injury to his ally, he does an injury to all nations, and inflicts a wound on the great
society of mankind. “On the ob-servance and execution of treaties,” said a respectable
sovereign, “depends all the security which princes and states have with respect to each

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 252 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

other: and no dependence could henceforward be placed in future conventions, if the
existing ones were not to be observed.”*

As all nations are interested in maintaining the faith of treaties, §222. Right of nations
and causing it to be every-where considered as sacred and against him who
inviolable, so likewise they are justifiable in forming a disregards the faith of
confederacy for the purpose of repressing him who testifies a treaties.
disregard for it,—who openly sports with it,—who violates and
tramples it under foot. Such a man is a public enemy who saps the foundations of the
peace and common safety of nations. But we should be careful not to extend this
maxim to the prejudice of that liberty and independence to which every nation has a
claim. When a sovereign breaks his treaties, or refuses to fulfil them, this does not
immediately imply that he considers them as empty names, and that he disregards the
faith of treaties: he may have good reasons for thinking himself liberated from his
engagements; and other sovereigns have not a right to judge him. It is the sovereign
who violates his engagements on pretences that are evidently frivolous, or who does
not even think it worth his while to allege any pretence whatever, to give a colourable
gloss to his conduct, and cast a veil over his want of faith,—it is such a sovereign,
who deserves to be treated as an enemy of the human race.

In treating of religion, in the first book of this work, we could not §223. The law of
avoid giving several instances of the enormous abuses which the nations violated by
popes formerly made of their authority. There was one in the pope.
particular, which was equally injurious to all states, and
subversive of the law of nations. Several popes have undertaken to break the treaties
of sovereigns; they carried their daring audacity so far as to release a contracting
power from his engagements, and to absolve him from the oaths by which he had
confirmed them. Cesarini, legate of pope Eugenius the Fourth, wishing to break the
treaty which Uladislaus king of Poland and Hungary had concluded with the sultan
Amurath,48 pronounced, in the pope’s name, the king’s absolution from his oaths.* In
those times of ignorance, people thought themselves really bound by nothing but their
oaths, and they attributed to the pope the power of absolving them from oaths of every
kind. Uladislaus renewed hostilities against the Turks: but that prince, in other
respects worthy of a better fate, paid dearly for his perfidy, or rather for his
superstitious weakness: he perished, with his army, near Varna:49 —a loss which was
fatal to Christendom, and brought on her by her spiritual head. The following epitaph
was written on Uladislaus:

Romulidae Cannas, ego Varnam clade notavi.
Discite, mortales, non temerare fidem.
Me nisi pontifices jussissent rumpere foedus,
Non ferret Scythicum Pannonis ora jugum.50

Pope John XII.51 declared null the oath which the emperor Louis of Bavaria, and his
competitor Frederic of Austria, had mutually taken when the emperor set the latter at
liberty.52 Philip duke of Burgundy, abandoning the alliance of the English, procured
from the pope and the council of Basil an absolution from his oath. And at a time
when the revival of letters and the establishment of the reformation should have

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 253 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

rendered the popes more circumspect, the legate Caraffa, in order to induce Henry
II.53 of France to a renewal of hostilities, had the audacity to absolve him, in 1556,
from the oath he had made to observe the truce of Vaucelles.* The famous peace of
Westphalia displeasing the pope54 on many accounts, he did not confine himself to
protesting against the articles of a treaty in which all Europe was interested: he
published a bull in which, from his own certain knowledge, and full ecclesiastical
power, he declared several articles of the treaty null, vain, invalid, iniquitous, unjust,
condemned, reprobated, frivolous, void of force and effect, and that nobody was
bound to observe them or any of them, though they were confirmed by oath.—Nor
was this all:—his holiness, assuming the tone of an absolute master, proceeds
thus—And nevertheless, for the greater precaution, and as much as need be, from the
same motions, knowledge, deliberations, and plenitude of power, we condemn,
reprobate, break, annul, and deprive of all force and effect, the said articles, and all
the other things prejudicial to the above, &c.* Who does not see, that these daring
acts of the popes, which were formerly very frequent, were violations of the law of
nations, and directly tended to destroy all the bands that could unite mankind, and to
sap the foundations of their tranquillity, or to render the pope sole arbiter of their
affairs?

But who can restrain his indignation at seeing this strange abuse §224. This abuse
authorised by princes themselves? In the treaty concluded at authorised by princes.
Vincennes, between Charles V. king of France, and Robert
Stuart55 king of Scotland, in 1371, it was agreed, that the pope should absolve the
Scots from all the oaths they had taken in swearing to a truce with the English, and
that he should promise never to absolve the French or Scots from the oaths they were
about to make in swearing to the new treaty.†

The custom, generally received in former times, of swearing to §225. Use of an oath
the observance of treaties, had furnished the popes with a pretext in treaties.
for claiming the power of breaking them, by absolving the
contracting parties from their oaths. But in the present day, even children know that
an oath does not constitute the obligation to keep a promise or a treaty:
it only gives an additional strength to that obligation, by calling It does not constitute
God to bear witness. A man of sense, a man of honour, does not the obligation.
think himself less bound by his word alone, by his faith once
pledged, than if he had added the sanction of an oath. Cicero would not have us to
make much difference between a perjurer and a liar. “The habit of lying (says that
great man) paves the way to perjury. Whoever can be prevailed on to utter a
falsehood, may be easily won over to commit perjury: for the man who has once
deviated from the line of truth, generally feels as little scruple in consenting to a
perjury as to a lie. For, what influence can the invocation of the gods have on the
mind of him who is deaf to the voice of conscience? The same punishment, therefore,
which heaven has ordained for the perjurer, awaits also the liar: for it is not on
account of the formula of words in which the oath is couched, but of the perfidy and
villany displayed by the perjurer in plotting harm against his neighbour, that the anger
and indignation of the gods is roused.”*

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 254 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

The oath does not then produce a new obligation: it only gives additional force to the
obligation imposed by the treaty, and in every thing shares the same fate with it.
Where the treaty is of its own nature valid and obligatory, the oath (in itself a
supererogatory obligation) is so too: but where the treaty is void, the oath is void
likewise.

The oath is a personal act; it can therefore only regard the person §226. It does not
of him who swears, whether he swears himself, or deputes change the nature of
another to swear in his name. However, as this act does not obligations.
produce a new obligation, it makes no change in the nature of a
treaty. Thus an alliance confirmed by oath is so confirmed only with respect to him
who has contracted it: but if it be a real alliance, it survives him, and passes to his
successors as an alliance not confirmed by oath.

For the same reason, since the oath can impose no other §227. It gives no pre-
obligation than that which results from the treaty itself, it gives eminence to one
no pre-eminence to one treaty, to the prejudice of those that are treaty above another.
not sworn to. And as, in case of two treaties clashing with each
other, the more ancient ally is to be preferred (§167), the same rule should be
observed, even though the more recent treaty has been confirmed by an oath. In the
same manner, since it is not allowable to engage in treaties inconsistent with existing
ones (§165), the circumstance of an oath will not justify such treaties, nor give them
sufficient validity to supercede those which are incompatible with them:—if it had
such an effect, this would be a convenient mode for princes to rid themselves of their
engagements.

Thus also an oath cannot give validity to a treaty that is of its §228. It cannot give
own nature invalid,—justify a treaty which is in itself unjust,—or force to a treaty that is
impose any obligation to fulfil a treaty, however lawfully invalid.
concluded, when an occasion occurs in which the observance of
it would be unlawful,—as, for instance, if the ally to whom succours have been
promised, undertakes a war that is manifestly unjust. In short, every treaty made for a
dishonourable purpose (§161), every treaty prejudicial to the state (§160), or contrary
to her fundamental laws (Book I. §265), being in its own nature void,—the oath that
may have been added to such a treaty, is void likewise, and falls to the ground
together with the covenant which it was intended to confirm.

The asseverations used in entering into engagements are forms of §229. Asseverations.
expression intended to give the greater force to promises. Thus,
kings promise in the most sacred manner, with good faith, solemnly, irrevocably, and
engage their royal word, &c. A man of honour thinks himself sufficiently bound by
his word alone: yet these asseverations are not useless, inasmuch as they tend to prove
that the contracting parties form their engagements deliberately, and with a
knowledge of what they are about. Hence, consequently, the violation of such
engagements becomes the more disgraceful. With mankind, whose faith is so
uncertain, every circumstance is to be turned to advantage: and since the sense of
shame operates more powerfully on their minds than the sentiment of duty, it would
be imprudent to neglect this method.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 255 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

After what we have said above (§162), it were unnecessary to §230. The faith of
undertake in this place to prove that the faith of treaties has no treaties does not
relation to the difference of religion, and cannot in any manner depend on the
depend upon it. The monstrous maxim, that no faith is to be kept difference of religion.
with heretics, might formerly raise its head amidst the madness
of party, and the fury of superstition: but it is at present generally detested.

If the security of him who stipulates for any thing in his own §231. Precautions to
favour prompts him to require precision, fulness, and the greatest be taken in wording
clearness in the expressions,—good faith demands, on the other treaties.
hand, that each party should express his promises clearly, and
without the least ambiguity. The faith of treaties is basely prostituted by studying to
couch them in vague or equivocal terms, to introduce ambiguous expressions, to
reserve subjects of dispute, to over-reach those with whom we treat, and outdo them
in cunning and duplicity. Let the man who excels in these arts boast of his happy
talents, and esteem himself a keen nego-tiator: but reason and the sacred law of nature
will class him as far beneath a vulgar cheat, as the majesty of kings is exalted above
private persons. True diplomatic skill consists in guarding against imposition, not in
practising it.

Subterfuges in a treaty are not less contrary to good faith. His §232. Subterfuges in
catholic majesty Ferdinand, having concluded a treaty with the treaties.
archduke his son-in-law,56 thought he could evade it by
privately protesting against the treaty:—a puerile finesse! which, without giving any
right to that prince, only exposed his weakness and duplicity.

The rules that establish a lawful interpretation of treaties are §233. An evidently
sufficiently important to be made the subject of a distinct false interpretation
chapter. For the present let us simply observe that an evidently inconsistent with the
false interpretation is the grossest imaginable violation of the faith of treaties.
faith of treaties. He that resorts to such an expedient, either
impudently sports with that sacred faith, or sufficiently evinces his inward conviction
of the degree of moral turpitude annexed to the violation of it: he wishes to act a
dishonest part, and yet preserve the character of an honest man: he is a puritanical
impostor who aggravates his crime by the addition of a detestable hypocrisy. Grotius
quotes several instances of evidently false interpretations put upon treaties:* —the
Plateans having promised the Thebans to restore their prisoners, restored them after
they had put them to death. Pericles57 having promised to spare the lives of such of
the enemy as laid down their arms,* ordered all those to be killed who had iron clasps
to their cloaks. A Roman general†‡ having agreed with Antiochus58 to restore him
half of his fleet, caused each of the ships to be sawed in two. All these interpretations
are as fraudulent as that of Rhadamistus,59 who, according to Tacitus’s account,‡
having sworn to Mithridates60 that he would not employ either poison or the steel
against him, caused him to be smothered under a heap of clothes.

Our faith may be tacitly pledged, as well as expressly: it is §234. Faith tacitly
sufficient that it be pledged, in order to become obligatory: the pledged.
manner can make no difference in the case. The tacit pledging of

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 256 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

faith is founded on a tacit consent; and a tacit consent is that which is, by fair
deduction, inferred from our actions. Thus, as Grotius observes,§ whatever is included
in the nature of certain acts which are agreed upon, is tacitly comprehended in the
agreement: or, in other words, every thing which is indispensably necessary to give
effect to the articles agreed on, is tacitly granted. If, for instance, a promise is made to
a hostile army who have advanced far into the country, that they shall be allowed to
return home in safety, it is manifest that they cannot be refused provisions; for they
cannot return without them. In the same manner, in demanding or accepting an
interview, full security is tacitly promised. Livy justly says, that the Gallo-Greeks
violated the law of nations in attacking the consul Manlius at the time when he was
repairing to the place of interview to which they had invited him.¶ The emperor
Valerian having been defeated by Sapor king of Persia,61 sent to him to sue for peace.
Sapor declared that he wished to treat with the emperor in person; and Valerian
having consented to the interview without any suspicion of fraud, was carried off by
the perfidious enemy, who kept him a prisoner till his death, and treated him with the
most brutal cruelty.*

Grotius, in treating of tacit conventions, speaks of those in which the parties pledge
their faith by mute signs.† But we ought not to confound these two kinds of tacit
conventions: for that consent which is sufficiently notified by a sign, is an express
consent, as clearly as if it had been signified by the voice. Words themselves are but
signs established by custom: and there are mute signs which established custom
renders as clear and as express as words. Thus, at the present day, by displaying a
white flag, a parley is demanded, as expressly as it could be done by the use of
speech. Security is tacitly promised to the enemy who advances upon this invitation.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 257 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER XVI

Of Securities Given For The Observance Of Treaties.
Convinced by unhappy experience, that the faith of treaties, §235. Guaranty.
sacred and inviolable as it ought to be, does not always afford a
sufficient assurance that they shall be punctually observed,—mankind have sought for
securities against perfidy,—for methods, whose efficacy should not depend on the
good-faith of the contracting parties. A guaranty is one of these means. When those
who make a treaty of peace, or any other treaty, are not perfectly easy with respect to
its observance, they require the guaranty of a powerful sovereign. The guarantee
promises to maintain the conditions of the treaty, and to cause it to be observed. As he
may find himself obliged to make use of force against the party who attempts to
violate his promises, it is an engagement that no sovereign ought to enter into lightly,
and without good reason. Princes indeed seldom enter into it unless when they have
an indirect interest in the observance of the treaty, or are induced by particular
relations of friendship. The guaranty may be promised equally to all the contracting
parties, to some of them, or even to one alone: but it is commonly promised to all in
general. It may also happen, when several sovereigns enter into a common alliance,
that they all reciprocally pledge themselves to each other, as guarantees for its
observance. The guaranty is a kind of treaty, by which assistance and succours are
promised to any one, in case he has need of them, in order to compel a faithless ally to
fulfil his engagements.

Guaranty being given in favour of the contracting powers, or of §236. It gives the
one of them, it does not authorise the guarantee to interfere in the guarantee no right to
execution of the treaty, or to enforce the observance of it, interfere unasked in
unasked, and of his own accord. If, by mutual consent, the the execution of a
parties think proper to deviate from the tenor of the treaty, to treaty.

alter some of the articles, or to cancel it altogether,—or if one
party be willing to favour the other by a relaxation of any claim,—they have a right to
do this, and the guarantee cannot oppose it. Simply bound by his promise to support
the party who should have reason to complain of the infraction of the treaty, he has
acquired no rights for himself. The treaty was not made for him; for, had that been the
case, he would have been concerned, not merely as a guarantee, but as a principal in
the contract. This observation is of great importance: for care should be taken, lest,
under colour of being a guarantee, a powerful sovereign should render himself the
arbiter of the affairs of his neighbours, and pretend to give them laws.

But it is true, that if the parties make any change in the articles of the treaty without
the consent and concurrence of the guarantee, the latter is no longer bound to adhere
to the guaranty; for the treaty thus changed is no longer that which he guarantied.

As no nation is obliged to do any thing for another nation, which §237. Nature of the
that other is herself capable of doing, it naturally follows that the obligation it imposes.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 258 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

guarantee is not bound to give his assistance except where the party to whom he has
granted his guaranty is of himself unable to obtain justice.

If there arises any dispute between the contracting parties respecting the sense of any
article of the treaty, the guarantee is not immediately obliged to assist him in favour of
whom he has given his guaranty. As he cannot engage to support injustice, he is to
examine, and to search for the true sense of the treaty, to weigh the pretensions of him
who claims his guaranty; and if he finds them ill founded, he may refuse to support
them, without failing in his engagements.

It is no less evident that the guaranty cannot impair the rights of §238. The guaranty
any one who is not a party to the treaty. If, therefore, it happens cannot impair the
that the guarantied treaty proves derogatory to the rights of those rights of a third party.
who are not concerned in it,—the treaty being unjust in this
point, the guarantee is in no wise bound to procure the performance of it; for, as we
have shewn above, he can never have incurred an obligation to support injustice. This
was the reason alleged by France, when, notwithstanding her having guarantied the
famous pragmatic sanction of Charles VI. she declared for the house of Bavaria, in
opposition to the heiress of that emperor.62 This reason is incontestably a good one,
in the general view of it: and the only question to be decided at that time, was,
whether the court of France made a just application of it.

Non nostrum inter vos tantas componere lites.63

I shall observe on this occasion, that, according to common usage, the term guaranty
is often taken in a sense somewhat different from that we have given to it. For
instance, most of the powers of Europe guarantied the act by which Charles VI. had
regulated the succession to his dominions;—sovereigns sometimes reciprocally
guaranty their respective states. But we should rather denominate those transactions
treaties of alliance, for the purpose, in the former case, of maintaining that rule of
succession,—and, in the latter, of supporting the possession of those states.

The guaranty naturally subsists as long as the treaty that is the §239. Duration of the
object of it; and in case of doubt, this ought always to be guaranty.
presumed, since it is required, and given, for the security of the
treaty. But there is no reason which can naturally prevent its limitation to a certain
period,—to the lives of the contracting powers, to that of the guarantee, &c. In a
word, whatever we have said of treaties in general, is equally applicable to a treaty of
guaranty.

When there is question of things which another may do or give §240. Treaties with
as well as he who promises, as for instance, the payment of a surety.
sum of money, it is safer to demand a security than a guaranty;
for the surety is bound to make good the promise in default of the principal,—whereas
the guarantee is only obliged to use his best endeavours to obtain a performance of the
promise from him who has made it.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 259 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

A nation may put some of her possessions into the hands of §241. Pawns,
another, for the security of her promises, debts, or engagements. securities, and
If she thus deposits movable property, she gives pledges. Poland mortgages.
formerly pledged a crown and other jewels to the sovereigns of
Prussia. But sometimes towns and provinces are given in pawn. If they are only
pledged by a deed which assigns them as security for a debt, they serve as a
mortgage: if they are actually put into the hands of the creditor, or of him with whom
the affair has been transacted, he holds them as pledges: and if the revenues are ceded
to him as an equivalent for the interest of the debt, the transaction is called a compact
of antichresis.

The right which the possession of a town or province confers §242.A nation’s right
upon him who holds it in pledge, extends no further than to over what she holds
secure the payment of what is due to him, or the performance of as a pledge.
the promise that has been made to him. He may therefore retain
the town or the province in his hands, till he is satisfied; but he has no right to make
any change in it; for that town, or that country, does not belong to him as proprietor.
He cannot even interfere in the government of it, beyond what is required for his own
security, unless the empire, or the exercise of sovereignty, has been expressly made
over to him. This last point is not naturally to be presumed, since it is sufficient for
the security of the mortgagee, that the country is put into his hands, and under his
power. Further, he is obliged, like every other person who has received a pledge, to
preserve the country he holds as a security, and, as far as in his power, to prevent its
suffering any damage or dilapidation: he is responsible for it; and if the country is
ruined through his fault, he is bound to indemnify the state that intrusted him with the
possession of it. If the sovereignty is deposited in his hands together with the country
itself, he ought to govern it according to its constitution, and precisely in the same
manner as the sovereign of the country was obliged to govern it; for the latter could
only pledge his lawful right.

As soon as the debt is paid, or the treaty is fulfilled, the term of §243. How she is
the security expires, and he who holds a town or a province by obliged to restore it.
this title, is bound to restore it faithfully, in the same state in
which he received it, so far as this depends on him.

But to those who have no law but their avarice, or their ambition,—who, like
Achilles, place all their right in the point of their sword,* —a tempting allurement
now presents itself: they have recourse to a thousand quibbles, a thousand pretences,
to retain an important place, or a country which is conveniently situated for their
purposes. The subject is too odious for us to allege examples: they are well enough
known, and sufficiently numerous to convince every sensible nation, that it is very
imprudent to make over such securities.

But if the debt be not paid at the appointed time, or if the treaty §244. How she may
be not fulfilled, what has been given in security, may be retained appropriate it to
and appropriated, or the mortgage seized, at least until the debt herself.
be discharged, or a just compensation made. The house of Savoy
had mortgaged the country of Vaud to the cantons of Bern and Fribourg; and those

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 260 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

two cantons, finding that no payments were made, had recourse to arms, and took
possession of the country. The duke of Savoy, instead of immediately satisfying their
just demands, opposed force to force, and gave them still further grounds of
complaint: wherefore the cantons, finally successful in the contest, have since retained
possession of that fine country, as well for the payment of the debt, as to defray the
expenses of the war, and to obtain a just indemnification.

Finally, there is, in the way of security, another precaution, of §245. Hostages.
very ancient institution, and much used among nations,—which
is, to require hostages. These are persons of consequence, delivered up by the
promising party, to him with whom he enters into an engagement, and to be detained
by the latter until the performance of the promises which are made to him. In this
case, as well as in those above mentioned, the transaction is a pignorary contract, in
which free men are delivered up, instead of towns, countries, or jewels. With respect
to this contract, therefore, we may confine ourselves to those particular observations
which the difference of the things pledged renders necessary.

The sovereign who receives hostages, has no other right over §246. What right we
them, than that of securing their persons, in order to detain them have over hostages.
till the entire accomplishment of the promises of which they are
the pledge. He may therefore take precautions to prevent their escaping from him: but
those precautions should be moderated by humanity, towards men whom he has no
right to use ill; and they ought not to be extended beyond what prudence requires.

It is pleasing to behold the European nations in the present age content themselves
with the bare parole of their hostages. The English noblemen who were sent to France
in that character in pursuance of the treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle, in 1748, to stay till the
restitution of Cape Breton, were solely bound by their word of honour, and lived at
court, and at Paris, rather as ministers of their nation, than as hostages.

The liberty of the hostages is the only thing pledged: and if he §247. Their liberty
who has given them breaks his promise, they may be detained in alone is pledged.
captivity. Formerly they were in such cases put to death;—an
inhuman cruelty, founded on an error. It was imagined that the sovereign might
arbitrarily dispose of the lives of his subjects, or that every man was the master of his
own life, and had a right to stake it as a pledge when he delivered himself up as an
hostage.

As soon as the engagements are fulfilled, the cause for which the §248. When they are
hostages were delivered no longer subsists: they then to be sent back.
immediately become free, and ought to be restored without
delay. They ought also to be restored, if the reason for which they were demanded
does not take place: to detain them then, would be to abuse the sacred faith upon
which they were delivered. The perfidious Christiern II. king of Denmark,64 being
delayed by contrary winds before Stockholm, and, together with his whole fleet, ready
to perish with famine, made proposals of peace: whereupon, the administrator,
Steno,65 imprudently trusting to his promises, furnished the Danes with provisions,
and even gave Gustavus and six other noblemen as hostages for the safety of the king,

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 261 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

who pretended to have a desire to come on shore: but, with the first fair wind,
Christiern weighed anchor, and carried off the hos-tages; thus repaying the generosity
of his enemy by an infamous act of treachery.*

Hostages being delivered on the faith of treaties, and he who §249. Whether they
receives them, promising to restore them, as soon as the promise, may be detained on
of which they are the surety, shall be fulfilled,—such any other account.
engagements ought to be literally accomplished: and the hostages
should be really and faithfully restored to their former condition, as soon as the
accomplishment of the promise has disengaged them. It is therefore not allowable to
detain them for any other cause; and I am astonished to find that some learned writers
teach a contrary doctrine.† They ground their opinion upon the principle which
authorises a sovereign to seize and detain the subjects of another state in order to
compel their rulers to do him justice. The principle is true; but the application is not
just. These authors seem to have overlooked the circumstance, that, were it not for the
faith of the treaty by virtue of which the hostage has been delivered, he would not be
in the power of that sovereign, nor exposed to be so easily seized; and that the faith of
such a treaty does not allow the sovereign to make any other use of his hostage than
that for which he was intended, or to take advantage of his detention beyond what has
been expressly stipulated. The hostage is delivered for the security of a promise, and
for that alone. As soon, therefore, as the promise is fulfilled, the hostage, as we have
just observed, ought to be restored to his former condition. To tell him that he is
released as a hostage, but detained as a pledge for the security of any other pretension,
would be taking advantage of his situation as a hostage, in evident violation of the
spirit and even the letter of the convention, according to which, as soon as the promise
is accomplished, the hostage is to be restored to himself and his country, and
reinstated in his pristine rank, as if he had never been a hostage. Without a rigid
adherence to this principle, it would no longer be safe to give hostages, since princes
might on every occasion easily devise some pretext for detaining them. Albert the
Wise,66 duke of Austria, making war against the city of Zurich in the year 1351, the
two parties referred the decision of their disputes to arbitrators, and Zurich gave
hostages. The arbitrators passed an unjust sentence, dictated by partiality. Zurich,
nevertheless, after having made a well-grounded complaint on the subject, determined
to submit to their decision. But the duke formed new pretensions, and detained the
hostages,* contrary to the faith of the compromise, and in evident contempt of the law
of nations.

But a hostage may be detained for his own actions, for crimes §250. They may be
committed, or debts contracted in the country while he is in detained for their own
hostage there. This is no violation of the faith of the treaty. In actions.
order to be sure of recovering his liberty according to the terms
of the treaty, the hostage must not claim a right to commit, with impunity, any
outrages against the nation by which he is kept; and when he is about to depart, it is
just that he should pay his debts.

It is the party who gives the hostages, that is to provide for their §251. Of the support
support; for it is by his order, and for his service, that they are in of hostages.
hostage. He who receives them for his own security is not bound

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 262 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

to defray the expense of their subsistence, but simply that of their custody if he thinks
proper to set a guard over them.

The sovereign may dispose of his subjects for the service of the §252.A subject cannot
state; he may therefore give them also as hostages; and the refuse to be a hostage.
person who is nominated for that purpose, is bound to obey, as
he is on every other occasion when commanded for the service of his country. But as
the expenses ought to be borne equally by the citizens, the hostage is entitled to be
defrayed and indemnified at the public charge.

It is, evidently, a subject alone, who can be given as a hostage against his will. With a
vassal, the case is otherwise. What he owes to the sovereign, is determined by the
conditions of his fief; and he is bound to nothing more. Accordingly, it is a decided
point that a vassal cannot be constrained to go as a hostage, unless he be at the same
time a subject.

Whoever has a power to make treaties or conventions, may give and receive hostages.
For this reason, not only the sovereign, but also the subordinate authorities, have a
right to give hostages in the agreements they make, according to the powers annexed
to their office, and the extent of their commission. The governor of a town, and the
besieging general, give and receive hostages for the security of the capitulation:
whoever is under their command, is bound to obey, if he is nominated for that
purpose.

Hostages ought naturally to be persons of consequence, since §253. Rank of the
they are required as a security. Persons of mean condition would hostages.
furnish but a feeble security, unless they were given in great
numbers. Care is commonly taken to settle the rank of the hostages that are to be
delivered; and the violation of a compact in this particular is a flagrant dereliction of
good-faith and honour. It was a shameful act of perfidy in La Trimouille to give the
Swiss only hostages from the dregs of the people, instead of four of the principle
citizens of Dijon, as had been stipulated in the famous treaty we have mentioned
above (§212). Sometimes the principal persons of the state, and even princes, are
given in hostage. Francis I. gave his own sons as security for the treaty of Madrid.67

The sovereign who gives hostages ought to act ingenuously in §254. They ought not
the affair,—giving them in reality as pledges of his word, and to make their escape.
consequently with the intention that they should be kept till the
entire accomplishment of his promise. He cannot therefore approve of their making
their escape: and if they take such a step, so far from harbouring them, he is bound to
send them back. The hostage, on his side, conformably to the presumed intention of
his sovereign, ought faithfully to remain with him to whom he is delivered, without
endeavouring to escape. Cloelia made her escape from the hands of Porsenna,68 to
whom she had been delivered as a hostage: but the Romans sent her back, that they
might not incur the guilt of violating the treaty.*

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 263 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

If the hostage happens to die, he who has given him is not §255. Whether a
obliged to replace him, unless this was made a part of the hostage who dies is to
agreement. The hostage was a security required of him: that be replaced.
security is lost without any fault on his side; and there exists no
reason why he should be obliged to give another.

If any one substitutes himself for a time in the place of a hostage, §256. Of him who
and the hostage happens in the interim to die a natural death, the takes the place of a
substitute is free: for in this case, things are to be replaced in the hostage.
same situation in which they would have been if the hostage had
not been permitted to absent himself, and substitute another in his stead: and for the
same reason, the hostage is not free by the death of him who has taken his place only
for a time. It would be quite the contrary, if the hostage had been exchanged for
another: the former would be absolutely free from all engagement; and the person
who had taken his place would alone be bound.

If a prince, who has been given in hostage, succeeds to the §257.A hostage
crown, he ought to be released on the delivery of another succeeding to the
sufficient hostage, or a number of others, who shall together crown.
constitute an aggregate security equivalent to that which he
himself afforded when he was originally given. This is evident from the treaty itself,
which did not import that the king should be a hostage. The detention of the king’s
person by a foreign power is a thing of too interesting a nature to admit a presumption
that the state had intended to expose herself to the consequences of such an event.
Good-faith ought to preside in all conventions; and the manifest or justly presumed
intention of the contracting parties ought to be adhered to. If Francis I. had died after
having given his sons as hostages, certainly the dauphin should have been released:
for he had been delivered only with a view of restoring the king to his kingdom; and if
the emperor had detained him, that view would have been frustrated, since the king of
France would still have been a captive. It is evident that, in this reasoning, I proceed
on the supposition that no violation of the treaty has taken place on the part of the
state which has given a prince in hostage. In case that state had broken its promise,
advantage might reasonably be taken of an event which rendered the hostage still
more valuable, and his release the more necessary.

The liability of a hostage, as that of a city or a country, expires §258. The liability of
with the treaty which it was intended to secure (§§243, 248): and the hostage ends with
consequently if the treaty is personal, the hostage is free at the the treaty.
moment when one of the contracting powers happens to die.

The sovereign who breaks his word after having given hostages, §259. The violation of
does an injury not only to the other contracting power, but also to the treaty is an injury
the hostages themselves. For though subjects are indeed bound to done to the hostages.
obey their sovereign who gives them in hostage, that sovereign
has not a right wantonly to sacrifice their liberty, and expose their lives to danger
without just reasons. Delivered up as a security for their sovereign’s promise, not for
the purpose of suffering any harm,—if he entails misfortune on them by violating his
faith, he covers himself with double infamy. Pawns and mortgages serve as securities

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 264 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

for what is due; and their acquisition indemnifies the party to whom the other fails in
his engagements. Hostages are rather pledges of the faith of him who gives them; and
it is supposed that he would abhor the idea of sacrificing innocent persons. But if
particular conjunctures oblige a sovereign to abandon the hostages,—if, for example,
the party who has received them violates his engagements in the first instance, and, in
consequence of his violation, the treaty can no longer be accomplished without
exposing the state to danger,—no measure should be left untried for the delivery of
those unfortunate hostages; and the state cannot refuse to compensate them for their
sufferings, and to make them amends, either in their own persons, or in those of their
relatives.

At the moment when the sovereign, who has given the hostage, §260. The fate of the
has violated his faith, the latter ceases to retain the character of a hostage, when he who
hostage, and becomes a prisoner to the party who had received has given him fails in
him, and who has now a right to detain him in perpetual his engagements.
captivity. But it becomes a generous prince to refrain from an
exertion of his rights at the expense of an innocent individual. And as the hostage is
no longer bound by any tie to his own sovereign who has perfidiously abandoned
him,—if he chooses to transfer his allegiance to the prince who is now the arbiter of
his fate, the latter may acquire a useful subject, instead of a wretched prisoner, the
troublesome object of his commiseration. Or he may liberate and dismiss him, on
settling with him the conditions.

We have already observed that the life of a hostage cannot be §261. Of the right
lawfully taken away on account of the perfidy of the party who founded on custom.
has delivered him. The custom of nations, the most constant
practice, cannot justify such an instance of barbarous cruelty, repugnant to the law of
nature. Even at a time when that dreadful custom was but too much authorised, the
great Scipio publicly declared that he would not suffer his vengeance to fail on
innocent hostages, but on the persons themselves who had incurred the guilt of
perfidy, and that he was incapable of punishing any but armed enemies.* The emperor
Julian made the same declaration.† All that such a custom can produce, is impunity
among the nations who practise it. Whoever is guilty of it cannot complain that
another is so too: but every nation may and ought to declare, that she considers the
action as a barbarity injurious to human nature.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 265 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER XVII

Of The Interpretation Of Treaties.
If the ideas of men were always distinct and perfectly §262. Necessity of
determinate,—if, for the expression of those ideas, they had none establishing rules of
but proper words, no terms but such as were clear, precise, and interpretation.
susceptible only of one sense,—there would never be any
difficulty in discovering their meaning in the words by which they intended to express
it: nothing more would be necessary, than to understand the language. But, even on
this supposition, the art of interpretation would still not be useless. In concessions,
conventions, and treaties, in all contracts, as well as in the laws, it is impossible to
foresee and point out all the particular cases that may arise: we decree, we ordain, we
agree upon certain things, and express them in general terms; and though all the
expressions of a treaty should be perfectly clear, plain, and determinate, the true
interpretation would still consist in making, in all the particular cases that present
themselves, a just application of what has been decreed in a general manner. But this
is not all:—conjunctures vary, and produce new kinds of cases, that cannot be brought
within the terms of the treaty or the law, except by inferences drawn from the general
views of the contracting parties, or of the legislature. Between different clauses, there
will be found contradictions and inconsistencies, real or apparent; and the question is,
to reconcile such clauses, and point out the path to be pursued. But the case is much
worse if we consider that fraud seeks to take advantage even of the imperfection of
language, and that men designedly throw obscurity and ambiguity into their treaties,
in order to be provided with a pretence for eluding them upon occasion. It is therefore
necessary to establish rules founded on reason, and authorised by the law of nature,
capable of diffusing light over what is obscure, of determining what is uncertain, and
of frustrating the views of him who acts with duplicity in forming the compact. Let us
begin with those that tend particularly to this last end,—with those maxims of justice
and equity which are calculated to repress fraud, and to prevent the effect of its
artifices.

The first general maxim of interpretation is, that It is not §263.1st General
allowable to interpret what has no need of interpretation. When maxim: it is not
a deed is worded in clear and precise terms,—when its meaning allowable to interpret
is evident, and leads to no absurd conclusion,—there can be no what has no need of
reason for refusing to admit the meaning which such deed interpretation.

naturally presents. To go elsewhere in search of conjectures in
order to restrict or extend it, is but an attempt to elude it. If this dangerous method be
once admitted, there will be no deed which it will not render useless. However
luminous each clause may be,—however clear and precise the terms in which the
deed is couched,—all this will be of no avail, if it be allowed to go in quest of
extraneous arguments to prove that it is not to be understood in the sense which it
naturally presents.*

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 266 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Those cavillers, who dispute the sense of a clear and determinate §264.2d General
article, are accustomed to seek their frivolous subterfuges in the maxim: if he who
pretended intentions and views which they attribute to its author. could and ought to
It would be very often dangerous to enter with them into the have explained
discussion of those supposed views, that are not pointed out in himself, has not done

it, it is to his own
the piece itself. The following rule is better calculated to foil detriment.
such cavillers, and will at once cut short all chicanery:—If he
who could and ought to have explained himself clearly and fully, has not done it, it is
the worse for him: he cannot be allowed to introduce subsequent restrictions which he
has not expressed. This is a maxim of the Roman law: Pactionem obscuram iis
nocere, in quorum fuit potesiate legem apertius conscribere.†69 The equity of this
rule is glaringly obvious, and its necessity is not less evident. There will be no
security in conventions, no stability in grants or concessions, if they may be rendered
nugatory by subsequent limitations, which ought to have been originally specified in
the deed, if they were in the contemplation of the contracting parties.

The third general maxim, or principle, on the subject of §265.3d General
interpretation is, that Neither the one nor the other of the parties maxim: neither of the
interested in the contract has a right to interpret the deed or contracting parties has
treaty according to his own fancy. For if you are at liberty to a right to interpret the
affix whatever meaning you please to my promise, you will have treaty according to his

own fancy.
the power of obliging me to do whatever you choose, contrary to
my intention, and beyond my real engagements: and on the other hand, if I am
allowed to explain my promises as I please, I may render them vain and illusory, by
giving them a meaning quite different from that which they presented to you, and in
which you must have understood them at the time of your accepting them.

On every occasion when a person could and ought to have made §266.4th General
known his intention, we assume for true against him what he has maxim: what is
sufficiently declared. This is an incontestable principle, applied sufficiently declared,
to treaties; for if they are not a vain play of words, the is to be taken for true.
contracting parties ought to express themselves in them with
truth, and according to their real intentions. If the intention which is sufficiently
declared were not to be taken of course as the true intention of him who speaks and
enters into engagements, it would be perfectly useless to form contracts or treaties.

But it is here asked, which of the contracting parties ought to §267. We ought to
have his expressions considered as the more decisive, with attend rather to the
respect to the true meaning of the contract,—whether we should words of the person
lay a greater stress on the words of him who makes the promise promising, than to
than on those of the party who stipulates for its those of the party

stipulating.
performance?—As the force and obligation of every contract
arises from a perfect promise,—and the person who makes the promise is no further
engaged than his will is sufficiently declared,—it is very certain, that, in order to
discover the true meaning of the contract, attention ought principally to be paid to the
words of the promising party. For he voluntarily binds himself by his words; and we
take for true against him, what he has sufficiently declared. This question seems to
have originated from the manner in which conventions are sometimes made: the one

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 267 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

party offers the conditions, and the other accepts them; that is to say, the former
proposes what he requires that the other shall oblige himself to perform, and the latter
declares the obligations into which he really enters. If the words of him who accepts
the conditions bear relation to the words of him who offers them, it is certainly true
that we ought to lay our principal stress on the expressions of the latter; but this is
because the person promising is considered as merely repeating them in order to form
his promise. The capitulations of besieged towns may here serve us for an example.
The besieged party proposes the conditions on which he is willing to surrender the
place: the besieger accepts them: the expressions of the former lay no obligation on
the latter, unless so far as he adopts them. He who accepts the conditions is in reality
the promising party; and it is in his words that we ought to seek for the true meaning
of the articles, whether he has himself chosen and formed his expressions, or adopted
those of the other party by referring to them in his promise. But still we must bear in
mind the maxim above laid down, viz. that what he has sufficiently declared, is to be
taken as true against him. I proceed to explain myself more particularly on this
subject.

In the interpretation of a treaty, or of any other deed whatsoever, §268.5th General
the question is, to discover what the contracting parties have maxim: the
agreed upon,—to determine precisely, on any particular interpretation ought to
occasion, what has been promised and accepted,—that is to say, be made according to
not only what one of the parties intended to promise, but also certain rules.

what the other must reasonably and candidly have supposed to be
promised to him,—what has been sufficiently declared to him, and what must have
influenced him in his acceptance. Every deed, therefore, and every treaty, must be
interpreted by certain fixed rules calculated to determine its meaning, as naturally
understood by the parties concerned, at the time when the deed was drawn up and
accepted. This is a fifth principle.

As these rules are founded on right reason, and are consequently approved and
prescribed by the law of nature, every man, every sovereign, is obliged to admit and
to follow them. Unless certain rules be admitted for determining the sense in which
the expressions are to be taken, treaties will be only empty words; nothing can be
agreed upon with security, and it will be almost ridiculous to place any dependence on
the effect of conventions.

But as sovereigns acknowledge no common judge, no superior §269. The faith of
that can oblige them to adopt an interpretation founded on just treaties lays an
rules, the faith of treaties constitutes, in this respect, all the obligation to follow
security of the contracting powers. That faith is no less violated these rules.
by a refusal to admit an evidently fair interpretation, than by an
open infraction. It is the same injustice, the same want of good-faith; nor is its
turpitude rendered less odious by being cloaked up in the subtilties of fraud.

Let us now enter into the particular rules on which the §270. General rule of
interpretation ought to be formed, in order to be just and fair. interpretation.
Since the sole object of the lawful interpretation of a deed ought
to be the discovery of the thoughts of the author or authors of that deed,—whenever

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 268 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

we meet with any obscurity in it, we are to consider what probably were the ideas of
those who drew up the deed, and to interpret it accordingly. This is the general rule
for all interpretations. It particularly serves to ascertain the meaning of particular
expressions whose signification is not sufficiently determinate. Pursuant to this rule,
we should take those expressions in their utmost latitude when it seems probable that
the person speaking had in contemplation every thing which, in that extensive sense,
they are capable of designating: and, on the other hand, we ought to restrict their
meaning, if the author appears to have confined his idea to what they comprehend in
their more limited signification. Let us suppose that a husband has bequeathed to his
wife all his money. It is required to know whether this expression means only his
ready money, or whether it extends also to that which is lent out, and is due on notes
and other securities. If the wife is poor,—if she was beloved by her husband,—if the
amount of the ready money be inconsiderable, and the value of the other property
greatly superior to that of the money both in specie and in paper,—there is every
reason to presume that the husband meant to bequeath to her as well the money due to
him as that actually contained in his coffers. On the other hand, if the woman be
rich,—if the amount of the ready specie be very considerable, and the money due
greatly exceeds in value all the other property,—the probability is, that the husband
meant to bequeath to his wife his ready money only.

By the same rule, we are to interpret a clause in the utmost latitude that the strict and
appropriate meaning of the words will admit, if it appears that the author had in view
every thing which that strict and appropriate meaning comprehends: but we must
interpret it in a more limited sense when it appears probable that the author of the
clause did not mean to extend it to every thing which the strict propriety of the terms
might be made to include. As for instance, a father, who has an only son, bequeaths to
the daughter of his friend all his jewels. He has a sword enriched with diamonds,
given him by a sovereign prince. In this case it is certainly very improbable that the
testator had any intention of making over that honourable badge of distinction to a
family of aliens. That sword, therefore, together with the jewels with which it is
ornamented, must be excepted from the legacy, and the meaning of the words be
restricted to his other jewels. But if the testator has neither son nor heir of his own
name, and bequeaths his property to a stranger, there is no reason to limit the
signification of the terms; they should be taken in their full import, it being probable
that the testator used them in that sense.

The contracting parties are obliged to express themselves in such §271. The terms are
manner that they may mutually understand each other. This is to be explained
evident from the very nature of the transaction. Those who form conformably to
the contract, concur in the same intentions; they agree in desiring common usage.
the same thing; and how shall they agree in this instance, if they
do not perfectly understand each other? Without this, their contract will be no better
than a mockery or a snare. If then they ought to speak in such a manner as to be
understood, it is necessary that they should employ the words in their proper
signification,—the signification which common usage has affixed to them,—and that
they annex an established meaning to every term, every expression, they make use of.
They must not, designedly and without mentioning it, deviate from the common usage
and the appropriate meaning of words: and it is presumed that they have conformed to

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 269 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

established custom in this particular, as long as no cogent reasons can be adduced to
authorise a presumption to the contrary; for the presumption is, in general, that things
have been done as they ought. From all these incontestable truths, results this rule: In
the interpretation of treaties, compacts, and promises, we ought not to deviate from
the common use of the language, unless we have very strong reasons for it. In all
human affairs, where absolute certainty is not at hand to point out the way, we must
take probability for our guide. In most cases, it is extremely probable that the parties
have expressed themselves conformably to the established usage: and such probability
ever affords a strong presumption, which cannot be over-ruled but by a still stronger
presumption to the contrary. Camden* gives us a treaty, in which it is expressly said
that the treaty shall be precisely understood according to the force and appropriate
signification of the terms. After such a clause, we cannot, under any pretence, deviate
from the proper meaning which custom has affixed to the terms,—the will of the
contracting parties being thereby formally declared in the most unambiguous manner.

The usage we here speak of, is that of the time when the treaty, §272. Interpretation
or the deed, of whatever kind, was drawn up and concluded. of ancient treaties.
Languages incessantly vary, and the signification and force of
words changes with time. When, therefore, an ancient deed is to be interpreted, we
should be acquainted with the com-mon use of the terms at the time when it was
written; and that knowledge is to be acquired from deeds of the same period, and from
contemporary writers, by diligently comparing them with each other. This is the only
source from which to derive any information that can be depended on. The use of the
vulgar languages being, as every one knows, very arbitrary,—etymological and
grammatical investigations, pursued with a view to discover the true import of a word
in common usage, would furnish but a vain theory, equally useless and destitute of
proof.

Words are only designed to express the thoughts; thus the true §273. Of quibbles on
signification of an expression, in common use, is the idea which words.
custom has affixed to that expression. It is then a gross quibble to
affix a particular sense to a word, in order to elude the true sense of the entire
expression. Mahomet,70 emperor of the Turks, at the taking of Negropont,71 having
promised a man to spare his head, caused him to be cut in two through the middle of
the body. Tamerlane, after having engaged the city of Sebastia to capitulate72 under
his promise of shedding no blood, caused all the soldiers of the garrison to be buried
alive:* gross subterfuges which, as Cicero remarks,† only serve to aggravate the guilt
of the perfidious wretch who has recourse to them. To spare the head of any one, and
to shed no blood, are expressions, which, according to common custom, and
especially on such an occasion, manifestly imply to spare the lives of the parties.

All these pitiful subtilties are overthrown by this unerring rule: §274.A rule on this
When we evidently see what is the sense that agrees with the subject.
intention of the contracting parties, it is not allowable to wrest
their words to a contrary meaning. The intention, sufficiently known, furnishes the
true matter of the convention,—what is promised and accepted, demanded and
granted. A violation of the treaty is rather a deviation from the intention which it

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 270 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

sufficiently manifests, than from the terms in which it is worded: for the terms are
nothing without the intention by which they must be dictated.

Is it necessary, in an enlightened age, to say that mental §275. Mental
reservations cannot be admitted in treaties? This is manifest, reservations.
since, by the very nature of the treaty, the parties are bound to
express themselves in such manner that they may mutually understand each other
(§271). There is scarcely an individual now to be found, who would not be ashamed
of building upon a mental reservation. What can be the use of such an artifice, unless
to lull the opposite party into a false security, under the vain appearance of a contract?
It is then a real piece of knavery.

Technical terms, or terms peculiar to the arts and sciences, ought §276. Interpretation
commonly to be interpreted according to the definition given of of technical terms.
them by masters of the art, or persons versed in the knowledge of
the art or science to which the terms belong. I say commonly; for this rule is not so
absolute, but that we may and even ought to deviate from it, when we have good
reasons for such deviation; as, for instance, if it were proved that he who speaks in a
treaty, or in any other deed, did not understand the art or science from which he
borrowed the term,—that he was unacquainted with its import as a technical
word,—that he employed it in a vulgar acceptation, &c.

If, however, the technical or other terms relate to things that §277. Of terms whose
admit of different degrees, we ought not scrupulously to adhere signification admits of
to definitions, but rather to take the terms in a sense agreeable to degrees.
the context: for, a regular definition describes a thing in its most
perfect state; and yet it is certain that we do not always mean it in that state of its
utmost perfection, whenever we speak of it. Now the interpretation should only tend
to the discovery of the will of the contracting parties (§268): to each term, therefore,
we should affix that meaning, which the party whose words we interpret, probably
had in contemplation. Thus, when the parties in a treaty have agreed to submit their
pretensions to the decision of two or three able civilians, it would be ridiculous to
endeavour to elude the compromise, under the pretence that we can find no civilian
accomplished in every point, or to strain the terms so far as to reject all who do not
equal Cujas73 or Grotius. Would he who had stipulated for the assistance of ten
thousand good troops have any reason to insist upon soldiers of whom the very worst
should be comparable to the veterans of Julius Caesar? And if a prince had promised
his ally a good general, must he send him none but a Marlborough or a Turenne?

There are figurative expressions that are become so familiar in §278. Of figurative
the common use of language, that, in numberless instances, they expressions.
supply the place of proper terms, so that we ought to take them in
a figurative sense, without paying any attention to their original, proper, and direct
signification: the subject of the discourse sufficiently indicates the meaning that
should be affixed to them. To hatch a plot, to carry fire and sword into a country,*
are expressions of this sort; and there scarcely can occur an instance where it would
not be absurd to take them in their direct and literal sense.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 271 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

There is not perhaps any language that does not also contain §279. Of equivocal
words which signify two or more different things, and phrases expressions.
which are susceptible of more than one sense. Thence arises
ambiguity in discourse. The contracting parties ought carefully to avoid it. Designedly
to use it with a view to elude their engagements in the sequel, is downright perfidy,
since the faith of treaties obliges the contracting parties to express their intentions
clearly (§271). But if an ambiguous expression has found its way into a deed, it is the
part of the interpreter to clear up any doubt thereby occasioned.

The following is the rule that ought to direct the interpretation in §280. The rule for
this as well as in the preceding case: We ought always to affix these two cases.
such meaning to the expressions, as is most suitable to the
subject or matter in question. For, by a true interpretation, we endeavour to discover
the thoughts of the persons speaking, or of the contracting parties in a treaty. Now it
ought to be presumed that he who has employed a word which is susceptible of many
different significations, has taken it in that which agrees with his subject. In
proportion as he employs his attention on the matter in question, the terms proper to
express his thoughts present themselves to his mind; this equivocal word could
therefore only present itself in the sense proper to express the thought of him who
makes use of it, that is, in the sense agreeable to the subject. It would be a feeble
objection to this, to allege that a man sometimes designedly employs equivocal
expressions, with a view of holding out ideas quite different from his real thoughts,
and that, in such case, the sense which agrees with the subject is not that which
corresponds with the intention of the person speaking. We have already observed, that
whenever a man can and ought to make known his intention, we assume for true
against him what he has sufficiently declared (§266). And as good-faith ought to
preside in conventions, they are always interpreted on the supposition that it actually
did preside in them. Let us illustrate this rule by examples. The word day is
understood of the natural day, or the time during which the sun affords us his light,
and of the civil day, or the space of twenty-four hours. When it is used in a convention
to point out a space of time, the subject itself manifestly shews that the parties mean
the civil day, or the term of twenty-four hours. It was therefore a pitiful subterfuge, or
rather a notorious perfidy, in Cleomenes,74 when, having concluded a truce of some
days with the people of Argos, and finding them asleep on the third night in reliance
on the faith of the treaty, he killed a part of their number, and made the rest prisoners,
alleging that the nights were not comprehended in the truce.* The word steel may be
understood of the metal itself, or of certain instruments made of it:—in a convention
which stipulates that the enemy shall lay down their steel, it evidently means their
weapons: wherefore Pericles, in the example related above (§233), gave a fraudulent
interpretation to those words, since it was contrary to what the nature of the subject
manifestly pointed out. Q. Fabius Labeo, of whom we made mention in the same
section, shewed equal dishonesty in the interpretation of his treaty with Antiochus; for
a sovereign who stipulates that the half of his fleet or of his vessels shall be restored
to him, undoubtedly means that the other party shall restore to him vessels which he
can make use of, and not the half of each vessel, when sawed into two. Pericles and
Fabius are also condemned by the rule established above (§274), which forbids us to
wrest the sense of the words contrary to the evident intention of the contracting
parties.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 272 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

If any one of those expressions which are susceptible of different §281. Not necessary
significations occurs more than once in the same piece, we to give a term the
cannot make it a rule to take it every-where in the same same sense
signification. For we must, conformably to the preceding rule, everywhere in the
take such expression, in each article, according as the subject same deed.

requires,—pro substrata materia,75 as the masters of the art say.
The word day, for instance, has two significations, as we have just observed (§280). If
therefore it be said in a convention, that there shall be a truce of fifty days, on
condition that commissioners from both parties shall, during eight successive days,
jointly endeavour to adjust the dispute,—the fifty days of the truce are civil days of
twenty-four hours; but it would be absurd to understand them in the same sense in the
second article, and to pretend that the commissioners should labour eight days and
nights without intermission.

Every interpretation that leads to an absurdity, ought to be §282. We ought to
rejected; or, in other words, we should not give to any piece a reject every
meaning from which any absurd consequences would follow, but interpretation that
must interpret it in such a manner as to avoid absurdity. As it is leads to an absurdity;
not to be presumed that any one means what is absurd, it cannot
be supposed that the person speaking intended that his words should be understood in
a manner from which an absurdity would follow. Neither is it allowable to presume
that he meant to indulge a sportive levity in a serious deed: for what is shameful and
unlawful is not to be presumed. We call absurd not only what is physically
impossible, but what is morally so,—that is to say, what is so contrary to reason, that
it cannot be attributed to a man in his right senses. Those fanatic Jews, who scrupled
to defend themselves when the enemy attacked them on the sabbath day, gave an
absurd interpretation to the fourth commandment. Why did they not also abstain from
dressing, walking, and eating? These also are “works,” if the term be strained to its
utmost rigour. It is said that a man in England married three wives, in order that he
might not be subject to the penalty of the law which forbids marrying two. This is
doubtless a popular tale, invented with a view to ridicule the extreme circumspection
of the English, who will not allow the smallest departure from the letter in the
application of the law. That wise and free people have too often seen, by the
experience of other nations, that the laws are no longer a firm barrier and secure
defence, when once the executive power is allowed to interpret them at pleasure. But
surely they do not mean that the letter of the law should on any occasion be strained
to a sense that is manifestly absurd.

The rule we have just mentioned is absolutely necessary, and ought to be followed,
even when the text of the law or treaty does not, considered in itself, present either
obscurity or ambiguity in the language. For it must be observed, that the uncertainty
of the sense we are to give to a law or a treaty, does not solely proceed from the
obscurity or other defect in the expression, but also from the limited nature of the
human mind, which cannot foresee all cases and circumstances, nor take in at one
view all the consequences of what is decreed or promised,—and, finally, from the
impossibility of entering into that immense detail. Laws and treaties can only be
worded in a general manner; and it is the interpreter’s province to apply them to
particular cases, conformably to the intention of the legislature, or of the contracting

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 273 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

powers. Now we are not in any case to presume that it was their intention to establish
an absurdity: and therefore, when their expressions, taken in their proper and ordinary
meaning, would lead to absurd consequences, it becomes necessary to deviate from
that meaning, just so far as is sufficient to avoid absurdity. Let us suppose a captain
has received orders to advance in a right line with his troops to a certain post: he finds
a precipice in his way: surely his orders do not oblige him to leap headlong down: he
must therefore deviate from the right line, so far as is necessary to avoid the precipice,
but no farther.

The application of the rule is more easy, when the expressions of the law, or of the
treaty, are susceptible of two different meanings. In this case we adopt without
hesitation that meaning from which no absurdity follows. In the same manner, when
the expression is such, that we may give it a figurative sense, we ought doubtless to
do this, when it becomes necessary, in order to avoid falling into an absurdity.

It is not to be presumed that sensible persons, in treating §283.and that which
together, or transacting any other serious business, meant that the renders the act null
result of their proceedings should prove a mere nullity. The and void of effect.
interpretation, therefore, which would render a treaty null and
inefficient, cannot be admitted. We may consider this rule as a branch of the
preceding; for it is a kind of absurdity to suppose that the very terms of a deed should
reduce it to mean nothing. It ought to be interpreted in such a manner, as that it may
have its effect, and not prove vain and nugatory: and in this interpretation we proceed
according to the mode pointed out in the foregoing section. In both cases, as in all
interpretations, the question is, to give the words that sense which ought to be
presumed most conformable to the intention of the parties speaking. If many different
interpretations present themselves, by which we can conveniently avoid construing
the deed into a nullity or an absurdity, we are to prefer that which appears the most
agreeable to the intention of those who framed the deed: the particular circumstances
of the case, aided by other rules of interpretation, will serve to point it out.
Thucydides relates,* that the Athe-nians, after having promised to retire from the
territories of the Boeotians, claimed a right to remain in the country under pretence
that the lands actually occupied by their army did not belong to the Boeotians;—a
ridiculous quibble, since, by giving that sense to the treaty, they reduced it to nothing,
or rather to a puerile play. The territories of the Boeotians should evidently have been
construed to mean all that was comprised within their former boundaries, without
excepting what the enemy had seized during the war.

If he who has expressed himself in an obscure or equivocal §284. Obscure
manner has spoken elsewhere more clearly on the same subject, expressions
he is the best interpreter of his own words. We ought to interpret interpreted by others
his obscure or equivocal expressions in such a manner, that they more clear in the
may agree with those clear and unequivocal terms which he has same author.

elsewhere used, either in the same deed, or on some other
similar occasion. In fact, while we have no proof that a man has changed his mind or
manner of thinking, it is presumed that his thoughts have been the same on similar
occasions; so that if he has anywhere clearly shewn his intention with respect to a
certain thing, we ought to affix the same meaning to what he has elsewhere obscurely

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 274 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

said on the same subject. Let us suppose, for instance, that two allies have
reciprocally promised each other, in case of necessity, the assistance of ten thousand
foot-soldiers who are to be supported at the expense of the party that sends them, and
that, by a posterior treaty, they agree that the number of the auxiliary troops shall be
fifteen thousand, without mentioning their support: the obscurity or uncertainty which
remains in this article of the new treaty, is dissipated by the clear and express
stipulation contained in the former one. As the allies do not give any indication that
they have changed their minds with respect to the support of the auxiliary troops, we
are not to presume any such change; and those fifteen thousand men are to be
supported as the ten thousand promised in the first treaty. The same holds good, and
with much stronger reason, when there is question of two articles of the same
treaty,—when, for example, a prince promises to furnish ten thousand men, paid and
maintained at his own expense, for the defence of the states of his ally,—and, in
another article, only promises four thousand men, in case that ally be engaged in an
offensive war.

It frequently happens, that, with a view to conciseness, people §285. Interpretation
express imperfectly, and with some degree of obscurity, things founded on the
which they suppose to be sufficiently elucidated by the preceding connection of the
matter, or which they intend to explain in the sequel: and discourse.
moreover, words and expressions have a different force,
sometimes even a quite different signification, according to the occasion, their
connection, and their relation to other words. The connection and train of the
discourse is therefore another source of interpretation. We must consider the whole
discourse together, in order perfectly to conceive the sense of it, and to give to each
expression, not so much the signification which it may individually ad-mit of, as that
which it ought to have from the context and spirit of the discourse. Such is the maxim
of the Roman law, Incivile est, nisi totâ lege perspectâ, unâ aliquâ particulâ ejus
propositâ, judicare, vel respondere.*76

The very connection and relation of the things in question helps §286. Interpretation
also to discover and establish the true sense of a treaty, or of any drawn from the
other piece. The interpretation ought to be made in such a connection and
manner, that all the parts may appear consonant to each relation of the things
other,—that what follows may agree with what themselves,

preceded,—unless it evidently appear, that, by the subsequent
clauses, the parties intended to make some alteration in the preceding ones. For it is
to be presumed that the authors of a deed had an uniform and steady train of
thinking,—that they did not aim at inconsistencies and contradictions,—but rather that
they intended to explain one thing by another,—and, in a word, that one and the same
spirit reigns throughout the same production or the same treaty. Let us render this
more plain by an example. A treaty of alliance declares, that, in case one of the allies
be attacked, each of the others shall assist him with a body of ten thousand foot, paid
and supported; and in another article, it is said that the ally who is attacked shall be at
liberty to demand the promised assistance in cavalry rather than in infantry. Here we
see, that, in the first article, the allies have determined the quantum of the succour,
and its value,—that of ten thousand foot; and, in the latter article, without appearing
to intend any variation in the value or number, they leave the nature of the succours to

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 275 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

the choice of the party who may stand in need of them. If therefore the ally who is
attacked calls upon the others for cavalry, they will give him, according to the
established proportion, an equivalent to ten thousand foot. But if it appears that the
intention of the latter article was, that the promised succours should in certain cases
be augmented,—if, for instance, it be said, that, in case one of the allies happen to be
attacked by an enemy of considerably superior strength, and more powerful in
cavalry, the succours shall be furnished in cavalry, and not in infantry,—it appears
that, in this case, the promised assistance ought to be ten thousand horse.

As two articles in one and the same treaty may bear relation to each other, two
different treaties may in like manner have a relative connection; and in this case, each
serves to explain the other. For instance, one of the contracting parties has, in
consideration of a certain object, promised to deliver to the other ten thousand sacks
of wheat. By a subsequent agreement, it is determined, that, instead of wheat, he shall
give him oats. The quantity of oats is not expressed; but it is determined by comparing
the second convention with the first. If there be no circumstance to prove that it was
the intention of the parties, in the second agreement, to diminish the value of what
was to be delivered, we are to understand a quantity of oats proportioned to the price
of ten thousand sacks of wheat: but if it evidently appears, from the circumstances and
motives of the second convention, that it was their intention to reduce the value of
what was due under the former agreement,—in this case, ten thousand sacks of oats
are to be substituted in lieu of the ten thousand sacks of wheat.

The reason of the law, or of the treaty,—that is to say, the motive §287. Interpretation
which led to the making of it, and the object in contemplation at founded on the reason
the time,—is the most certain clue to lead us to the discovery of of the deed.
its true meaning; and great attention should be paid to this
circumstance, whenever there is question either of explaining an obscure, ambiguous,
indeterminate passage in a law or treaty, or of applying it to a particular case. When
once we certainly know the reason which alone has determined the will of the person
speaking, we ought to interpret and apply his words in a manner suitable to that
reason alone. Otherwise he will be made to speak and act contrary to his intention,
and in opposition to his own views. Pursuant to this rule, a prince, who, on granting
his daughter in marriage, has promised to assist his intended son-in-law in all his
wars, is not bound to give him any assistance if the marriage does not take place.

But we ought to be very certain that we know the true and only reason of the law, the
promise, or the treaty. In matters of this nature, it is not allowable to indulge in vague
and uncertain conjectures, and to suppose reasons and views where there are none
certainly known. If the piece in question is in itself obscure,—if, in order to discover
its meaning, we have no other resource than the investigation of the author’s views, or
the motives of the deed,—we may then have recourse to conjecture, and, in default of
absolute certainty, adopt, as the true meaning, that which has the greatest degree of
probability on its side. But it is a dangerous abuse, to go, without necessity, in search
of motives and uncertain views, in order to wrest, restrict, or extend the meaning of a
deed which is of itself sufficiently clear, and carries no absurdity on the face of it.
Such a procedure is a violation of that incontestable maxim,—that it is not allowable
to interpret what has no need of interpretation (§263). Much less are we

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 276 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

allowed,—when the author of a piece has in the piece itself declared his reasons and
motives,—to attribute to him some secret reason, which may authorise us in giving an
interpretation repugnant to the natural meaning of the expressions. Even though he
should have entertained the views which we attribute to him,—yet, if he has
concealed them, and announced different ones, it is upon the latter alone that we must
build our interpretation, and not upon those which the author has not expressed:—we
assume, as true, against him, what he has sufficiently declared (§266).

We ought to be the more circumspect in this kind of §288. Where many
interpretation, as it frequently happens that several motives reasons have
concur to determine the will of the party who speaks in a law or a concurred to
promise. Perhaps the combined influence of all those motives determine the will.
was necessary in order to determine his will;—perhaps each one
of them, taken individually, would have been sufficient to produce that effect. In the
former case, if we are perfectly certain that it was only in consideration of several
concurrent reasons and motives that the legislature or the contracting parties
consented to the law or the contract, the interpretation and application ought to be
made in a manner agreeable to all those concurrent reasons, and none of them must
be overlooked. But in the latter case, when it is evident that each of the reasons which
have concurred in determining the will, was sufficient to produce that effect, so that
the author of the piece in question would, by each of the reasons separately
considered, have been induced to form the same determination which he has formed
upon all the reasons taken in the aggregate, his words must be so interpreted and
applied, as to make them accord with each of those reasons taken individually.
Suppose a prince has promised certain advantages to all foreign protestants and
artisans who will come and settle in his states: if that prince is in no want of subjects,
but of artisans only,—and if, on the other hand, it appears that he does not choose to
have any other subjects than protestants,—his promise must be so interpreted, as to
relate only to such foreigners as unite those two characters, of protestants and artisans.
But if it is evident that this prince wants to people his country, and that, although he
would prefer protestant subjects to others, he has in particular so great a want of
artisans, that he would gladly receive them, of whatever religion they be,—his words
should be taken in a disjunctive sense, so that it will be sufficient to be either a
protestant or an artisan, in order to enjoy the promised advantages.

To avoid tedious and complex circumlocution, we shall make use §289. What
of the term, “sufficient reason for an act of the will,” to express constitutes a sufficient
whatever has produced that act,—whatever has determined the reason for an act of
will on a particular occasion; whether the will has been the will.
determined by a single reason, or by many concurrent reasons.
That sufficient reason, then, will be sometimes found to consist in a combination of
many different reasons, so that, where a single one of those reasons is wanting, the
sufficient reason no longer exists: and in those cases where we say that many motives,
many reasons, have concurred to determine the will, yet so as that each in particular
would have been alone capable of producing the same effect,—there will then be
many sufficient reasons for producing one single act of the will. Of this we see daily
instances. A prince, for example, declares war for three or four injuries received, each
of which would have been sufficient to have produced the declaration of war.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 277 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

The consideration of the reason of a law or promise not only §290. Extensive
serves to explain the obscure or ambiguous expressions which interpretation founded
occur in the piece, but also to extend or restrict its several on the reason of the
provisions independently of the expressions, and in conformity act.
to the intention and views of the legislature or the contracting
parties, rather than to their words. For, according to the remark of Cicero,* the
language, invented to explain the will, ought not to hinder its effect. When the
sufficient and only reason of a provision, either in a law or a promise, is perfectly
certain, and well understood, we extend that provision to cases to which the same
reason is applicable, although they be not comprised within the signification of the
terms. This is what is called extensive interpretation. It is commonly said, that we
ought to adhere rather to the spirit than to the letter. Thus the Mahomedans justly
extend the prohibition of wine, in the Koran, to all intoxicating liquors; that dangerous
quality being the only reason that could induce their legislator to prohibit the use of
wine. Thus also, if, at the time when there were no other fortifications than walls, it
was agreed not to inclose a certain town with walls, it would not be allowable to
fortify it with fossés and ramparts, since the only view of the treaty evidently was, to
prevent its being converted into a fortified place.

But we should here observe the same caution above recommended (§287), and even
still greater, since the question relates to an application in no wise authorised by the
terms of the deed. We ought to be thoroughly convinced that we know the true and
only reason of the law or the promise, and that the author has taken it in the same
latitude which must be given to it in order to make it reach the case to which we mean
to extend the law or promise in question. As to the rest, I do not here forget what I
have said above (§268), that the true sense of a promise is not only that which the
person promising had in his mind, but also that which has been sufficiently
declared,—that which both the contracting parties must reasonably have understood.
In like manner, the true reason of a promise is that which the contract, the nature of
the things in question, and other circumstances, sufficiently indicate: it would be
useless and ridiculous to allege any by-views which the person might have secretly
entertained in his own mind.

The rule just laid down serves also to defeat the pretexts and §291. Frauds tending
pitiful evasions of those who endeavour to elude laws or treaties. to elude laws or
Good-faith adheres to the intention; fraud insists on the terms, promises.
when it thinks that they can furnish a cloak for its prevarications.
The isle of Pharos near Alexandria was, with other islands, tributary to the Rhodians.
The latter having sent collectors to levy the tribute, the queen of Egypt amused them
for some time at her court, using in the mean while every possible exertion to join
Pharos to the main land by means of moles: after which she laughed at the Rhodians,
and sent them a message intimating that it was very unreasonable in them to pretend
to levy on the main land a tribute which they had no title to demand except from the
islands.* There existed a law which forbade the Corinthians to give vessels to the
Athenians:—they sold them a number at five drachmae each.† The following was an
expedient worthy of Tiberius:77 custom not permitting him to cause a virgin to be
strangled, he ordered the executioner first to deflower the young daughter of
Sejanus,78 and then to strangle her.* To violate the spirit of the law while we pretend

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 278 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

to respect the letter, is a fraud no less criminal than an open violation of it; it is
equally repugnant to the intention of the law-maker, and only evinces a more artful
and deliberate villany in the person who is guilty of it.

Restrictive interpretation, which is the reverse of extensive §292. Restrictive
interpretation, is founded on the same principle. As we extend a interpretation.
clause to those cases, which, though not comprised within the
meaning of the terms, are nevertheless comprised in the intention of that clause, and
included in the reasons that produced it,—in like manner, we restrict a law or a
promise, contrary to the literal signification of the terms,—our judgment being
directed by the reason of that law or that promise: that is to say, if a case occurs, to
which the well-known reason of a law or promise is utterly inapplicable, that case
ought to be excepted, although, if we were barely to consider the meaning of the
terms, it should seem to fall within the purview of the law or promise. It is impossible
to think of every thing, to foresee every thing, and to express every thing; it is
sufficient to enounce certain things in such a manner as to make known our thoughts
concerning things of which we do not speak: and, as Seneca the rhetorician says,†
there are exceptions so clear, that it is unnecessary to express them. The law
condemns to suffer death whoever strikes his father: shall we punish him who has
shaken and struck his father, to recover him from a lethargic stupor? shall we punish a
young child, or a man in a delirium, who has lifted his hand against the author of his
life? In the former case the reason of the law does not hold good; and to the two latter
it is inapplicable. We are bound to restore what is intrusted to us: shall I restore what a
robber has intrusted to me, at the time when the true proprietor makes himself known
to me, and demands his property? A man has left his sword with me: shall I restore it
to him, when, in a transport of fury, he demands it for the purpose of killing an
innocent person?

We have recourse to restrictive interpretation, in order to avoid §293. Its use, in order
falling into absurdities (see §282). A man bequeaths his house to to avoid falling into
one, and to another his garden, the only entrance into which is absurdities, or into
through the house. It would be absurd to suppose that he had what is unlawful;
bequeathed to the latter a garden into which he could not enter:
we must therefore restrict the pure and simple donation of the house, and understand
that it was given only upon condition of allowing a passage to the gar-den. The same
mode of interpretation is to be adopted whenever a case occurs, in which the law or
the treaty, if interpreted according to the strict meaning of the terms, would lead to
something unlawful. On such an occasion, the case in question is to be excepted, since
nobody can ordain or promise what is unlawful. For this reason, though assistance has
been promised to an ally in all his wars, no assistance ought to be given him when he
undertakes one that is manifestly unjust.

When a case arises in which it would be too severe and too §294.or what is too
prejudicial to any one to interpret a law or a promise according to severe and
the rigour of the terms, a restrictive interpretation is then also burthensome.
used, and we except the case in question, agreeably to the
intention of the legislature, or of him who made the promise: for the legislature
intends only what is just and equitable; and, in contracts, no one can enter into such

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 279 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

engagements in favour of another, as shall essentially supersede the duty he owes to
himself. It is then presumed with reason, that neither the legislature nor the
contracting parties have intended to extend their regulations to cases of this nature,
and that they themselves, if personally present, would except them. A prince is no
longer obliged to send succours to his allies, when he himself is attacked, and has
need of all his forces for his own defence. He may also, without the slightest
imputation of perfidy, abandon an alliance, when, through the ill success of the war,
he sees his state threatened with impending ruin if he does not immediately treat with
the enemy. Thus, towards the end of the last century, Victor Amadeus, duke of
Savoy,79 found himself under the necessity of separating from his allies, and of
receiving law from France, to avoid losing his states. The king his son80 would have
had good reasons to justify a separate peace in the year 1745: but upheld by his
courage, and animated by just views of his true interest, he embraced the generous
resolution to struggle against an extremity which might have dispensed with his
persisting in his engagements.

We have said above (§280), that we should take the expressions §295. How it ought to
in the sense that agrees with the subject or the matter. Restrictive restrict the
interpretation is also directed by this rule. If the subject or the signification
matter treated of will not allow that the terms of a clause should agreeably to the
be taken in their full extent, we should limit the sense according subject.

as the subject requires. Let us suppose that the custom of a
particular country confines the entail of fiefs to the male line properly so called: if an
act of enfeoffment in that country declares that the fief is given to a person for himself
and his male descendents, the sense of these last words must be restricted to the males
descending from males; for the subject will not admit of our understanding them also
of males who are the issue of females, though they are reckoned among the male
descendents of the first possessor.

The following question has been proposed and §296. How a change
debated,—“Whether promises include a tacit condition of the happening in the state
state of af-fairs continuing the same,—or whether a change of things may form an
happening in the state of affairs can create an exception to the exception.
promise, and even render it void.” The principle derived from the
reason of the promise, must solve the question. If it be certain and manifest, that the
consideration of the present state of things was one of the reasons which occasioned
the promise,—that the promise was made in consideration or in consequence of that
state of things,—it depends on the preservation of things in the same state. This is
evident, since the promise was made only upon that supposition. When therefore that
state of things, which was essential to the promise, and without which it certainly
would not have been made, happens to be changed, the promise falls to the ground,
when its foundation fails. And in particular cases where things cease for a time to be
in the state that has produced or concurred to produce the promise, an exception is to
be made to it. An elective prince being without issue, has promised to an ally that he
will procure his appointment to the succession. He has a son born: who can doubt that
the promise is made void by this event? He who in a time of peace has promised
succours to an ally, is not bound to give him any when he himself has need of all his
forces for the defence of his own dominions. A prince, possessed of no very

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 280 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

formidable power, has received from his allies a promise of faithful and constant
assistance, in order to his aggrandisement,—in order to enable him to obtain a
neighbouring state by election or by marriage: yet those allies will have just grounds
for refusing him the smallest aid or support, and even forming an alliance against him,
when they see him elevated to such a height of power, as to threaten the liberties of all
Europe. If the great Gustavus had not been killed at Lutzen,81 cardinal de Richelieu,
who had concluded an alliance for his master with that prince, and who had invited
him into Germany, and assisted him with money, would perhaps have found himself
obliged to traverse the designs of that conqueror, when become formidable,—to set
bounds to his astonishing progress, and to support his humbled enemies. The states-
general of the United Provinces conducted themselves on these principles in 1668. In
favour of Spain, which before had been their mortal enemy, they formed the triple
alliance against Louis XIV. their former ally. It was necessary to raise a barrier to
check the progress of a power which threatened to inundate and overwhelm all before
it.

But we ought to be very cautious and moderate in the application of the present rule:
it would be a shameful perversion of it, to take advantage of every change that
happens in the state of affairs, in order to disengage ourselves from our promises:
were such conduct adopted, there could be no dependence placed on any promise
whatever. That state of things alone, in consideration of which the promise was made,
is essential to the promise: and it is only by a change in that state, that the effect of the
promise can be lawfully prevented or suspended.—Such is the sense in which we are
to understand that maxim of the civilians, conventio omnis intelligitur rebus sic
stantibus.82

What we say of promises, must also be understood as extending to laws. A law which
relates to a certain situation of affairs can only take place in that situation. We ought
to reason in the same manner with respect to a commission. Thus, Titus83 being sent
by his father to pay his respects to the emperor, turned back on being informed of the
death of Galba.84

In unforeseen cases, that is to say, when the state of things §297. Interpretation
happens to be such as the author of a deed has not foreseen, and of a deed in
could not have thought of, we should rather be guided by his unforeseen cases.
intention than by his words, and interpret the instrument as he
himself would interpret it if he were on the spot, or conformably to what he would
have done if he had foreseen the circumstances which are at present known. This rule
is of great use to judges, and to all those in society who are appointed to carry into
effect the testamentary regulations of the citizens. A father appoints by will a guardian
for his children, who are under age. After his death the magistrate finds that the
guardian he has nominated is an extravagant profligate, without property or conduct:
he therefore dismisses him, and appoints another, according to the Roman laws,*
adhering to the intention of the testator, and not to his words; for it is but reasonable
to suppose,—and we are to presume it as a fact,—that the father never intended to
give his children a guardian who should ruin them, and that he would have nominated
another, had he known the vices of the person he appointed.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 281 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

When the things which constitute the reason of a law or §298. Reasons arising
convention, are considered, not as actually existing, but simply from the possibility
as possible,—or, in other words, when the fear of an event is the and not the existence
reason of a law or a promise, no other cases can be excepted of a thing.
from it, than those in which it can be proved to demonstration
that the event is really impossible. The bare possibility of the event is sufficient to
preclude all exceptions. If, for instance, a treaty declares that no army or fleet shall be
conducted to a certain place, it will not be allowable to conduct thither an army or a
fleet, under pretence that no harm is intended by such a step: for the object of a clause
of this nature is not only to prevent a real evil, but also to keep all danger at a
distance, and to avoid even the slightest subject of uneasiness. It is the same with the
law which forbids walking the streets by night with a lighted torch or candle. It would
be an unavailing plea for the transgressor of that law to allege that no mischief has
ensued, and that he carried his torch with such circumspection, that no ill consequence
was to be apprehended. The bare possibility of causing a conflagration was sufficient
to have rendered it his duty to obey the law; and he has transgressed it by ex-citing
fears which it was the intention of the legislature to prevent.

At the beginning of this chapter, we observed that men’s ideas §299. Expressions
and language are not always perfectly determinate. There is, capable of an
doubtless, no language in which there do not occur expressions, extensive and a
words, or entire phrases, susceptible of a more or less extensive limited sense.
signification. Many a word is equally applicable to the genus or
the species:—the word fault implies intentional guilt or simple error:—several
species of animals have but one name common to both sexes, as partridge, lark,
sparrow, &c.—when we speak of horses merely with a view to the services they
render to mankind, mares also are comprehended under that name. In technical
language a word has sometimes a more and sometimes a less extensive sense, than in
vulgar use: the word death, among civilians, signifies not only natural death, but also
civil death: verbum, in the Latin grammar, signifies only that part of speech called the
verb; but, in common use, it signifies any word in general. Frequently also the same
phrase implies more things on one occasion, and fewer on another, according to the
nature of the subject or matter: thus, when we talk of sending succours, sometimes we
understand a body of auxiliary troops maintained and paid by the party who sends
them, at other times a body whose expenses are to be entirely defrayed by the party
who receives them. It is therefore necessary to establish rules for the interpretation of
those indeterminate expressions, in order to ascertain the cases in which they are to be
understood in the more extensive sense, and those in which they are to be restricted to
their more limited meaning. Many of the rules we have already given may serve for
this purpose.

But it is to this head that the famous distinction, between things §300. Of things
of a favourable and those of an odious nature, particularly favourable, and things
belongs. Some writers have rejected the distinction,* odious.
—doubtless, for want of properly understanding it.85 In fact, the
definitions that have been given of what is favourable and what is odious, are not
fully satisfactory, nor easily applied. After having maturely considered what the most
judicious authors have written on the subject, I conceive the whole of the question to

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 282 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

be reducible to the following positions, which convey a just idea of that famous
distinction. When the provisions of a law or a convention are plain, clear, determinate,
and attended with no doubt or difficulty in the application, there is no room for any
interpretation or comment (§263). The precise point of the will of the legislature or
the contracting parties, is what we must adhere to. But if their expressions are
indeterminate, vague, or susceptible of a more or less extensive sense,—if that precise
point of their intention cannot, in the particular case in question, be discovered and
fixed by the other rules of interpretation,—we must presume it according to the laws
of reason and equity: and, for this purpose, it is necessary to pay attention to the
nature of the things to which the question relates. There are certain things of which
equity admits the extension rather than the restriction; that is to say, that, with respect
to those things, the precise point of the will not being discovered in the expressions of
the law or the contract, it is safer and more consistent with equity, to suppose and fix
that point in the more extensive than in the more limited sense of the terms,—to give
a latitude to the meaning of the expressions, than to restrict it. These are the things
called favourable. Odious things, on the other hand, are those, of which the restriction
tends more certainly to equity, than the extension. Let us figure to ourselves the
intention or the will of the legislature or the contracting parties, as a fixed point. At
that point precisely should we stop, if it be clearly known;—if uncertain, we should at
least endeavour to approach it. In things favourable, it is better to pass beyond that
point, than not to reach it; in things odious, it is better not to reach it, than to pass
beyond it.

It will not now be difficult to shew, in general, what things are §301. What tends to
favourable, and what are odious. In the first place, every thing the common
that tends to the common advantage in conventions, or that has a advantage, and to
tendency to place the contracting parties on a footing of equality, equality, is
is favourable. The voice of equity, and the general rule of favourable; the

contrary is odious.
contracts, require that the conditions between the parties should
be equal. We are not to presume, without very strong reasons, that one of the
contracting parties intended to favour the other to his own prejudice; but there is no
danger in extending what is for the common advantage. If, therefore, it happens that
the contracting parties have not made known their will with sufficient clearness, and
with all the necessary precision, it is certainly more conformable to equity to seek for
that will in the sense most favourable to equality and the common advantage, than to
suppose it in the contrary sense. For the same reason, every thing that is not for the
common advantage, every thing that tends to destroy the equality of a contract, every
thing that onerates only one of the parties, or that onerates the one more than the
other, is odious. In a treaty of strict friendship, union, and alliance, every thing which,
without being burthensome to any of the parties, tends to the common advantage of
the confederacy, and to draw the bonds of union closer, is favourable. In unequal
treaties, and especially in unequal alliances, all the clauses of inequality, and
principally those that onerate the inferior ally, are odious. Upon this principle, that we
ought, in case of doubt, to extend what leads to equality, and restrict what destroys it,
is founded that well-known rule—Incommoda vitantis melior quam commoda petentis
est causa,*—the party who endeavours to avoid a loss, has a better cause to support
than he who aims at obtaining an advantage.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 283 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

All those things which, without proving too burthensome to any §302. What is useful
one in particular, are useful and salutary to human society, are to human society, is
to be ranked in the class of favourable things: for a nation is favourable; the
already under a natural obligation with respect to things of this contrary is odious.
nature; so that if she has entered into any particular engagements
of this kind, we run no risk in giving those engagements the most extensive meaning
of which they are susceptible. Can we be afraid of violating the rules of equity by
following the law of nature, and giving the utmost extent to obligations that tend to
the common advantage of mankind? Besides, things which are useful to human
society, are, from that very circumstance, conducive to the common advantage of the
contracting parties, and are consequently favourable (see the preceding section). On
the other hand, let us consider as odious, every thing that is, in its own nature, rather
injurious than useful to mankind. Those things which have a tendency to promote
peace are favourable; those that lead to war are odious.

Every thing that contains a penalty, is odious. With respect to the §303. Whatever
laws, it is universally agreed, that, in case of doubt, the judge contains a penalty, is
ought to incline to the merciful side, and that it is indisputably odious.
better to suffer a guilty person to escape, than to punish one who
is innocent. Penal clauses in treaties lay a burthen upon one of the parties; they are
therefore odious (§301).

Whatever tends to render a deed void and ineffectual, either in §304. Whatever
the whole or in part, and consequently, whatever introduces any renders a deed void, is
change in things already agreed upon, is odious: for men treat odious.
together with a view to their common benefit; and if I enjoy any
particular advantage acquired by a lawful contract, I must not be deprived of it except
by my own renunciation. When therefore I consent to new clauses that seem to
derogate from it, I can lose my right only so far as I have clearly given it up; and
consequently these new clauses are to be understood in the most limited sense they
will admit of; as is the case in things of an odious nature (§300). If that which tends to
render a deed void and ineffectual, is contained in the deed itself, it is evident that
such passages ought to be construed in the most limited sense, in the sense best
calculated to preserve the deed in force. We have already seen, that we should reject
every interpretation which tends to render a deed void and ineffectual (§283).

Whatever tends to change the present state of things, is also to be §305. Whatever tends
ranked in the class of odious things: for the proprietor cannot be to change the present
deprived of his right except so far, precisely, as he relinquishes it state of things, is
on his part; and in case of doubt, the presumption is in favour of odious; the contrary is
the possessor. It is less repugnant to equity to with-hold from the favourable.

owner a possession which he has lost through his own neglect,
than to strip the just possessor of what lawfully belongs to him. In the interpretation,
therefore, we ought rather to hazard the former inconvenience than the latter. Here
also may be applied, in many cases, the rule we have mentioned in §301, that the
party who endeavours to avoid a loss, has a better cause to support than he who aims
at obtaining an advantage.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 284 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Finally, there are things which are at once of a favourable or an §306. Things of a
odious nature, according to the point of view in which they are mixed nature.
considered. Whatever derogates from treaties, or changes the
state of things, is odious; but if it is conducive to peace, it is, in that particular,
favourable. A degree of odium always attaches to penalties: they may, however, be
viewed in a favourable light on those occasions when they are particularly necessary
for the safety of society. When there is question of interpreting things of this nature,
we ought to consider whether what is favourable in them greatly exceeds what
appears odious,—whether the advantage that arises from their being extended to the
utmost latitude of which the terms are susceptible, will materially outweigh the severe
and odious circumstances attending them; and if that is the case, they are to be ranked
in the class of favourable things. Thus an inconsiderable change in the state of things
or in conventions is reckoned as nothing, when it procures the inestimable blessings
of peace. In the same manner, penal laws may be interpreted in their most extensive
meaning, on critical occasions when such an instance of severity becomes necessary
to the safety of the state. Cicero caused the accomplices of Catiline86 to be executed
by virtue of a decree of the senate,—the safety of the republic rendering it improper to
wait till they should be condemned by the people. But where there is not so great a
disproportion in the case, and where things are in other respects equal, favour inclines
to that side of the question which presents nothing odious;—that is to say, we ought to
abstain from things of an odious nature, unless the attendant advantage so far exceed
the odious part, as in a manner to conceal it from view. If there be any appearance,
however small, of an equilibrium between the odious and the favourable in one of
those things of a mixed nature, it is ranked in the class of odious things, by a natural
consequence drawn from the principle on which we have founded the distinction
between things of a favourable and things of an odious nature (§300), because, in case
of doubt, we should in preference pursue that line of conduct by which we are least
exposed to deviate from the principles of equity. In a doubtful case, we may
reasonably refuse to give succours (though a thing favourable), when there is question
of giving them against an ally,—which would be odious.

The following are the rules of interpretation, which flow from §307. Interpretation
the principles we have just laid down. of favourable things.

1. When the question relates to things favourable, we ought to give the terms the
utmost latitude of which they are susceptible according to the common usage of the
language; and if a term has more than one signification, the most extensive meaning
is to be preferred: for equity ought to be the rule of conduct with all mankind
wherever a perfect right is not exactly determined and known in its precise extent.
When the legislature or the contracting parties have not expressed their will in terms
that are precise and perfectly determinate, it is to be presumed that they intended what
is most equitable. Now, when there is question of favourable things, the more
extensive signification of the terms accords better with equity than their more
confined signification. Thus Cicero, in pleading the cause of Caecina, justly maintains
that the interlocutory decree, ordaining, “that the person expelled from his inheritance
be reinstated in the possession,” should be understood as extending to the man who
has been forcibly prevented from entering upon it:* and the Digest decides it in the
same manner.* It is true that this decision is also founded on the rule taken from

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 285 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

parity of reasoning (§290). For it amounts to the same thing in effect, to drive a
person from his inheritance, or forcibly to prevent him from entering upon it; and, in
both cases, the same reason exists for putting him in possession.

2. In questions relating to favourable things, all terms of art are to be interpreted in
the fullest latitude of which they are susceptible, not only in common usage, but also
as technical terms, if the person speaking understands the art to which those terms
belong, or conducts himself by the advice of men who understand that art.

3. But we ought not, from the single reason that a thing is favourable, to take the
terms in an improper signification: this is not allowable, except when necessary in
order to avoid absurdity, injustice, or the nullity of the instrument, as is practised on
every subject (§§282, 283): for we ought to take the terms of a deed in their proper
sense, conformably to custom, unless we have very strong reasons for deviating from
it (§271).

4. Though a thing appears favourable when viewed in one particular light,—yet,
where the proper meaning of the terms would, if taken in its utmost latitude, lead to
absurdity or injustice, their signification must be restricted according to the rules
given above (§§293, 294). For here, in this particular case, the thing becomes of a
mixed nature, and even such as ought to be ranked in the class of odious things.

5. For the same reason, although neither absurdity nor injustice results from the
proper meaning of the terms,—if, nevertheless, manifest equity or a great common
advantage requires their restriction, we ought to adhere to the most limited sense
which the proper signification will admit, even in an affair that appears favourable in
its own nature,—because here also the thing is of a mixed kind, and ought, in this
particular case, to be esteemed odious. As to the rest, it is to be carefully remembered
that all these rules relate only to doubtful cases; since we are not allowed to go in
quest of interpretations for what is already clear and determinate (§263). If any one
has clearly and formally bound himself to burthensome conditions, he has knowingly
and willingly done it, and cannot afterwards be admitted to appeal to equity.

Since odious things are those whose restriction tends more §308. Interpretation
certainly to equity than their extension,—and since we ought to of odious things.
pursue that line which is most conformable to equity, when the
will of the legislature or of the contracting parties is not exactly determined and
precisely known,—we should, when there is question of odious things, interpret the
terms in the most limited sense: we may even, to a certain degree, adopt a figurative
meaning, in order to avert the oppressive consequences of the proper and literal
sense, or any thing of an odious nature, which it would involve: for we are to favour
equity, and to do away every thing odious, as far as that can be accomplished without
going in direct opposition to the tenor of the instrument, or visibly wresting the text.
Now neither the limited nor even the figurative sense offers any violence to the text. If
it is said in a treaty, that one of the allies shall assist the other with a certain number of
troops at his own expense, and that the latter shall furnish the same number of
auxiliary troops at the expense of the party to whom they are sent, there is something
odious in the engagement of the former ally, since he is subject to a greater burthen

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 286 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

than the other: but the terms being clear and express, there is no room for any
restrictive interpretation. But if it were stipulated in this treaty, that one of the allies
shall furnish a body of ten thousand men, and the other only of five thousand, without
mentioning the expense, it ought to be understood that the auxiliary troops shall be
supported at the expense of the ally to whose assistance they are sent; this
interpretation being necessary, in order that the inequality between the contracting
powers may not be carried too far. Thus the cession of a right or of a province, made
to a conqueror in order to obtain peace, is interpreted in its most confined sense. If it
be true that the boundaries of Acadia have always been uncertain, and that the French
were the lawful possessors of it, that nation will be justified in maintaining that their
cession of Acadia to the English by the treaty of Utrecht did not extend beyond the
narrowest limits of that province.

In point of penalties, in particular when they are really odious, we ought not only to
restrict the terms of the law, or of the contract, to their most limited signification, and
even adopt a figurative meaning, according as the case may require or authorise
it,—but also to admit of reasonable excuses; which is a kind of restrictive
interpretation, tending to exempt the party from the penalty.

The same conduct must be observed with respect to what may render an act void and
without effect. Thus, when it is agreed that the treaty shall be dissolved whenever one
of the contracting parties fails in the observance of any article of it, it would be at
once both unreasonable and contrary to the end proposed in making treaties, to extend
that clause to the slightest faults, and to cases in which the defaulter can allege well-
grounded excuses.

Grotius proposes the following question—“Whether, in a treaty §309. Examples.
which makes mention of allies, we are to understand those only
who were in alliance at the time when the treaty was made, or all the allies present
and future?”* And he gives, as an instance, that article of the treaty concluded
between the Romans and Carthaginians, after the war of Sicily,—that “neither of the
two nations should do any injury to the allies of the other.” In order to understand this
part of the treaty, it is necessary to call to mind the barbarous law of nations observed
by those ancient people. They thought themselves authorised to attack, and to treat as
enemies, all with whom they were not united by any alliance. The article therefore
signifies, that on both sides they should treat as friends the allies of their ally, and
abstain from molesting or invading them: upon this footing it is in all respects so
favourable, so conformable to humanity, and to the sentiments which ought to unite
two allies, that it should, without hesitation, be extended to all the allies, present and
future. The clause cannot be said to involve any thing of an odious nature, as
cramping the freedom of a sovereign state, or tending to dissolve an alliance: for, by
engaging not to injure the allies of another power, we do not deprive ourselves of the
liberty to make war on them if they give us just cause for hostilities; and when a
clause is just and reasonable, it does not become odious from the single circumstance
that it may perhaps eventually occasion a rupture of the alliance. Were that to be the
case, there could be no clause whatever, that might not be deemed odious. This
reason, which we have touched upon in the preceding section and in §304, holds good
only in doubtful cases: in the case before us, for instance, it ought to have prevented a

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 287 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

too hasty decision that the Carthaginians had causelessly attacked an ally of the
Romans. The Carthaginians, therefore, might, without any violation of the treaty,
attack Saguntum, if they had lawful grounds for such an attack, or (in virtue of the
voluntary law of nations) even apparent or specious grounds (Prelim. §21). But they
might have attacked in the same manner the most ancient ally of the Romans; and the
Romans might also, without breaking the treaty of peace, have confined themselves to
the succouring of Saguntum. At present, treaties include the allies on both sides: but
this does not imply that one of the contracting powers may not make war on the allies
of the other if they give him cause for it,—but simply, that, in case of any quarrel
arising between them, each of the contracting parties reserves to himself a power of
assisting his more ancient ally: and, in this sense, the future allies are not included in
the treaty.

Another example mentioned by Grotius is also taken from a treaty concluded between
Rome and Carthage. When the latter city was reduced to extremities by Scipio
Aemilianus, and obliged to capitulate,87 the Romans promised “that Carthage should
remain free, or in possession of the privilege of governing herself by her own laws.”*
In the sequel, however, those merciless conquerors pretended that the promised
liberty regarded the inhabitants, and not the city: they insisted that Carthage should be
demolished, and that the wretched inhabitants should settle in a place at a greater
distance from the sea. One cannot read the account of this perfidious and cruel
treatment, without being concerned that the great, the amiable Scipio was obliged to
be the instrument of it. To say nothing of the chicanery of the Romans respecting the
meaning to be annexed to the word “Carthage,”—certainly, the “liberty” promised
to the Carthaginians, though narrowly circumscribed by the existing state of affairs,
should at least have extended to the privilege of remaining in their city. To find
themselves obliged to abandon it and settle elsewhere,—to lose their houses, their
port, and the advantages of their situation,—was a subjection incompatible with the
smallest degree of liberty, and involved such considerable losses as they could not
have bound themselves to submit to, unless by a positive engagement in the most
express and formal terms.

Liberal promises, benefactions, and rewards, naturally come §310. How we ought
under the class of favourable things, and receive an extensive to interpret deeds of
interpretation, unless they prove onerous or unreasonably pure liberality.
chargeable to the benefactor, or that other circumstances
evidently shew they are to be taken in a limited sense. For kindness, benevolence,
beneficence, and generosity, are liberal virtues; they do not act in a penurious manner,
and know no other bounds than those set by reason. But if the benefaction falls too
heavy upon him who grants it, in this respect it partakes of the odious; and, in case of
doubt, equity will not admit the presumption that it has been granted or promised in
the utmost extent of the terms: we ought therefore, in such case, to confine ourselves
to the most limited signification which the words are capable of receiving, and thus
reduce the benefaction within the bounds of reason. The same mode should be
adopted when other circumstances evidently point out the more limited signification
as the more equitable.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 288 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Upon these principles, the bounties of a sovereign are usually taken in the fullest
extent of the terms.* It is not presumed that he finds himself over-burthened by them:
it is a respect due to majesty, to suppose that he had good reasons to induce him to
confer them. They are therefore, in their own nature, altogether favourable; and, in
order to restrict them, it must be proved that they are burthensome to the prince, or
prejudicial to the state. On the whole, we ought to apply to deeds of pure liberality the
general rule established above (§270); if those instruments are not precise and very
determinate, they should be interpreted as meaning what the author probably had in
his mind.

Let us conclude this subject of interpretation with what relates to §311. Collision of
the collision or opposition of laws or treaties. We do not here laws or treaties.
speak of the collision of a treaty with the law of nature: the latter
is unquestionably paramount, as we have proved elsewhere (§§160, 161, 170, and
293). There is a collision or opposition between two laws, two promises, or two
treaties, when a case occurs in which it is impossible to fulfil both at the same time,
though otherwise the laws or treaties in question are not contradictory, and may be
both fulfilled under different circumstances. They are considered as contrary in this
particular case; and it is required to shew which deserves the preference, or to which
an exception ought to be made on the occasion. In order to guard against all mistake
in the business, and to make the exception conformably to reason and justice, we
should observe the following rules.

1. In all cases where what is barely permitted is found §312. First rule in
incompatible with what is positively prescribed, the latter claims cases of collision.
a preference: for the mere permission imposes no obligation to
do or not to do: what is permitted is left to our own option: we are at liberty either to
do it or forbear to do it. But we have not the same liberty with respect to what is
prescribed: we are obliged to do that: nor can the bare permission in the former case
interfere with the discharge of our obligation in the latter; but, on the contrary, that
which was before permitted in general, ceases to be so in this particular instance,
where we cannot take advantage of the permission without violating a positive duty.

2. In the same manner, the law or treaty which permits, ought to §313.2d Rule.
give way to the law or treaty which forbids: for the prohibition
must be obeyed; and what was, in its own nature, or in general, permitted, must not be
attempted when it cannot be done without contravening a prohibition: the permission,
in that case, ceases to be available.

3. All circumstances being otherwise equal, the law or the treaty §314.3d Rule.
which ordains, gives way to the law or the treaty which forbids. I
say, “all circumstances being otherwise equal”; for many other reasons may occur,
which will authorise the exception being made to the prohibitory law or treaty. The
rules are general; each relates to an abstract idea, and shews what follows from that
idea, without derogation to the other rules. Upon this footing, it is evident, that, in
general, if we cannot obey an injunctive law without violating a prohibitory one, we
should abstain from fulfilling the former: for the prohibition is absolute in itself,
whereas every precept, every injunction, is in its own nature conditional, and

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 289 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

supposes the power, or a favourable opportunity, of doing what is prescribed. Now
when that cannot be accomplished without contravening a prohibition, the opportunity
is wanting, and this collision of laws produces a moral impossibility of acting; for
what is prescribed in general, is no longer so in the case where it cannot be done
without committing an action that is forbidden.* Upon this ground rests the generally
received maxim that we are not justifiable in employing unlawful means to
accomplish a laudable end,—as, for instance, in stealing with a view to give alms. But
it is evident that the question here regards an absolute prohibition, or those cases to
which the general prohibition is truly applicable, and therefore equivalent to an
absolute one: there are, however, many prohibitions to which circumstances form an
exception. Our meaning will be better explained by an example. It is expressly
forbidden, for reasons to me unknown, to pass through a certain place under any
pretence whatsoever. I am ordered to carry a message; I find every other avenue shut;
I therefore turn back rather than take my passage over that ground which is so strictly
forbidden. But if the prohibition to pass be only a general one with a view to prevent
any injury being done to the productions of the soil, it is easy for me to judge that the
orders with which I am charged ought to form an exception.

As to what relates to treaties, we are not obliged to accomplish what a treaty
prescribes, any farther than we have the power. Now we have not a power to do what
another treaty forbids: wherefore, in case of collision, an exception is made to the
injunctive treaty, and the prohibitory treaty has a superior claim to our
observance,—provided, however, that all circumstances be in other respects equal; for
it will presently appear, for instance, that a subsequent treaty cannot derogate from a
prior one concluded with another state, nor hinder its effect directly or indirectly.

4. The dates of laws or treaties furnish new reasons for §315.4th Rule.
establishing the exception in cases of collision. If the collision
happen between two affirmative laws, or two affirmative treaties concluded between
the same persons or the same states, that which is of more recent date claims a
preference over the older one: for it is evident, that, since both laws or both treaties
have emanated from the same power, the subsequent act was capable of derogating
from the former. But still this is on the supposition of circumstances being in other
respects equal.—If there be a collision between two treaties made with two different
powers, the more ancient claims the preference: for, no engagement of a contrary
tenor could be contracted in the subsequent treaty; and if this latter be found, in any
case, incompatible with that of more ancient date, its execution is considered as
impossible, because the person promising had not the power of acting contrary to his
antecedent engagements.

5. Of two laws or two conventions, we ought (all other §316.5th Rule.
circumstances being equal) to prefer the one which is less
general, and which approaches nearer to the point in question: because special matter
admits of fewer exceptions than that which is general; it is enjoined with greater
precision, and appears to have been more pointedly intended. Let us make use of the
following example from Puffendorf:* —One law forbids us to appear in public with
arms on holidays: another law commands us to turn out under arms, and repair to our
posts, as soon as we hear the sound of the alarm-bell. The alarm is rung on a holiday.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 290 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

In such case we must obey the latter of the two laws, which creates an exception to
the former.

6. What will not admit of delay, is to be preferred to what may be §317.6th Rule.
done at another time. For this is the mode to reconcile every
thing, and fulfil both obligations; whereas if we gave the preference to the one which
might be fulfilled at another time, we would unnecessarily reduce ourselves to the
alternative of failing in our observance of the other.

7. When two duties stand in competition, that one which is the §318.7th Rule.
more considerable, the more praiseworthy, and productive of the
greater utility, is entitled to the preference. This rule has no need of proof. But as it
relates to duties that are equally in our power, and, as it were, at our option, we should
carefully guard against the erroneous application of it to two duties which do not
really stand in competition, but of which the one absolutely precludes the other,—our
obligation to fulfil the former wholly depriving us of the liberty to perform the latter.
For instance, it is a more praiseworthy deed to defend one nation against an unjust
aggressor, than to assist another in an offensive war. But if the latter be the more
ancient ally, we are not at liberty to refuse her our assistance and give it to the former;
for we stand pre-engaged. There is not, strictly speaking, any competition between
these two duties: they do not lie at our option: the prior engagement renders the
second duty, for the present, impracticable. However, if there were question of
preserving a new ally from certain ruin, and that the more ancient ally were not
reduced to the same extremity, this would be the case to which the foregoing rule
should be applied.

As to what relates to laws in particular, the preference is undoubtedly to be given to
the more important and necessary ones. This is the grand rule to be observed
whenever they are found to clash with each other; it is the rule which claims the
greatest attention, and is therefore placed by Cicero at the head of all the rules he lays
down on the subject.* It is counteracting the general aim of the legislature, and the
great end of the laws, to neglect one of great importance, under pretence of observing
another which is less necessary, and of inferior consequence: in fact, such conduct is
criminal; for, a lesser good, if it exclude a greater, assumes the nature of an evil.

8. If we cannot acquit ourselves at the same time of two things §319.8th Rule.
promised to the same person, it rests with him to choose which of
the two we are to perform; for he may dispense with the other on this particular
occasion; in which case there will no longer be any collision of duties. But if we
cannot obtain a knowledge of his will, we are to presume that the more important one
is his choice; and we should of course give that the preference. And, in case of doubt,
we should perform the one to which we are the more strongly bound;—it being
presumable that he chose to bind us more strongly to that in which he is more deeply
interested.

9. Since the stronger obligation claims a preference over the §320.9th Rule.
weaker,—if a treaty that has been confirmed by an oath happens
to clash with another treaty that has not been sworn to,—all circumstances being in

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 291 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

other respects equal, the preference is to be given to the former; because the oath
adds a new force to the obligation. But as it makes no change in the nature of treaties
(§§225, &c.), it cannot, for instance, entitle a new ally to a preference over a more
ancient ally whose treaty has not been confirmed by an oath.

10. For the same reason, and, all circumstances being in other §321.10th Rule.
respects equal, what is enjoined under a penalty claims a
preference over that which is not enforced by one,—and what is enjoined under a
greater penalty, over that which is enforced by a lesser; for the penal sanction and
convention give additional force to the obligation: they prove that the object in
question was more earnestly desired,* and the more so in proportion as the penalty is
more or less severe.

All the rules contained in this chapter ought to be combined §322. General remark
together, and the interpretation be made in such manner as to on the manner of
accord with them all, so far as they are applicable to the case. observing all the
When these rules appear to clash, they reciprocally preceding rules.
counterbalance and limit each other, according to their strength
and importance, and according as they more particularly belong to the case in
question.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 292 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER XVIII

Of The Mode Of Terminating Disputes Between Nations.
The disputes that arise between nations or their rulers, originate §323. General
either from contested rights or from injuries received. A nation direction on this
ought to preserve the rights which belong to her; and the care of subject.
her own safety and glory forbids her to submit to injuries. But in
fulfilling the duty which she owes to her-self, she must not forget her duties to others.
These two views, combined together, will furnish the maxims of the law of nations
respecting the mode of terminating disputes between different states.

What we have said in Chap. I. IV. and V. of this book, dispenses §324. Every nation is
with our proving here, that a nation ought to do justice to all bound to give
others with respect to their pretensions, and to remove all their satisfaction respecting
just subjects of complaint. She is therefore bound to render to the just complaints of
each nation what is her due,—to leave her in the peaceable another.

enjoyment of her rights,—to repair any damage that she herself
may have caused, or any injury she may have done,—to give adequate satisfaction for
such injuries as cannot be repaired, and reasonable security against any injury which
she has given cause to apprehend. These are so many maxims evidently dictated by
that justice which nations as well as individuals are, by the law of nature, bound to
observe.

Every one is at liberty to recede from his right, to relinquish a §325. How nations
just subject of complaint, and to forget an injury. But the ruler of may abandon their
a nation is not, in this respect, so free as a private individual. The rights and just
latter may attend solely to the voice of generosity; and, in an complaints.
affair which concerns none but himself alone, he may indulge in
the pleasure which he derives from doing good, and gratify his love of peace and
quiet. The representative of a nation, the sovereign, must not consult his own
gratification, or suffer himself to be guided by his private inclinations. All his actions
must be directed to the greatest advantage of the state, combined with the general
interests of mankind, from which it is inseparable. It behoves the prince, on every
occasion, wisely to consider, and firmly to execute, whatever is most salutary to the
state, most conformable to the duties of the nation towards other states,—and, at the
same time, to consult justice, equity, humanity, sound policy, and prudence. The
rights of the nation are a property of which the sovereign is only the trustee; and he
ought not to dispose of them in any other manner than he has reason to presume the
nation herself would dispose of them. And as to injuries, it is often laudable in a
citizen generously to pardon them: he lives under the protection of the laws; the
magistrates are capable of defending or avenging him against those ungrateful or
unprincipled wretches whom his indulgence might encourage to a repetition of the
offence. A nation has not the same security: it is seldom safe for her to overlook or
forgive an injury, unless she evidently possess sufficient power to crush the rash

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 293 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

aggressor who has dared to offend her. In such a case, indeed, it will reflect glory on
her, to pardon those who acknowledge their faults,—

Parcere subjectis, et debellare superbos;88

and she may do it with safety. But between powers that are nearly equal, the
endurance of an injury without insisting on complete satisfaction for it, is almost
always imputed to weakness or cowardice, and seldom fails long to subject the injured
party to further wrongs of a more atrocious nature. Why do we often see the very
reverse of this conduct pursued by those who fancy themselves possessed of souls so
highly exalted above the level of the rest of mankind? Scarcely can they receive
concessions sufficiently humble from weaker states who have had the misfortune to
offend them: but to those whom they would find it dangerous to punish, they behave
with greater moderation.

If neither of the nations who are engaged in a dispute thinks §326. Means
proper to abandon her right or her pretensions, the contending suggested by the law
parties are, by the law of nature, which recommends peace, of nature, for
concord, and charity, bound to try the gentlest methods of terminating their
terminating their differences. These are, disputes.

—first, an amicable accommodation.—Let each party coolly and 1. Amicable
candidly examine the subject of the dispute, and do justice to the accommodation.
other; or let him whose right is too uncertain, voluntarily
renounce it. There are even occasions when it may be proper for him who has the
clearer right, to renounce it, for the sake of preserving peace,—occasions, which it is
the part of prudence to discover. To renounce a right in this manner, is not
abandoning or neglecting it. People are under no obligation to you for what you
abandon: but you gain a friend in the party to whom you amicably yield up what was
the subject of a dispute.

Compromise is a second method of bringing disputes to a §327.2. Compromise.
peaceable termination. It is an agreement, by which, without
precisely deciding on the justice of the jarring pretensions, the parties recede on both
sides, and determine what share each shall have of the thing in dispute, or agree to
give it entirely to one of the claimants on condition of certain indemnifications
granted to the other.

Mediation, in which a common friend interposes his good §328.3. Mediation.
offices, frequently proves efficacious in engaging the contending
parties to meet each other half-way,—to come to a good understanding,—to enter into
an agreement or compromise respecting their rights,—and, if the question relates to an
injury, to offer and accept a reasonable satisfaction. The office of mediator requires as
great a degree of integrity, as of prudence and address. He ought to observe a strict
impartiality; he should soften the reproaches of the disputants, calm their resentments,
and dispose their minds to a reconciliation. His duty is to favour well-founded claims,
and to effect the restoration, to each party, of what belongs to him: but he ought not
scrupulously to insist on rigid justice. He is a conciliator, and not a judge: his business

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 294 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

is to procure peace; and he ought to induce him who has right on his side to relax
something of his pretensions, if necessary, with a view to so great a blessing.

The mediator is not guarantee for the treaty which he has conducted, unless he has
expressly undertaken to guarantee it. That is an engagement of too great consequence
to be imposed on any one, without his own consent clearly manifested. At present,
when the affairs of the sovereigns of Europe are so connected, that each has an eye on
what passes between those who are the most distant, mediation is a mode of
conciliation much used. Does any dispute arise? The friendly powers, those who are
afraid of seeing the flames of war kindled, offer their mediation, and make overtures
of peace and accommodation.

When sovereigns cannot agree about their pretensions, and are §329.4. Arbitration.
nevertheless desirous of preserving or restoring peace, they
sometimes submit the decision of their disputes to arbitrators chosen by common
agreement. When once the contending parties have entered into articles of arbitration,
they are bound to abide by the sentence of the arbitrators: they have engaged to do
this; and the faith of treaties should be religiously observed.

If, however, the arbitrators, by pronouncing a sentence evidently unjust and
unreasonable, should forfeit the character with which they were invested, their
judgment would deserve no attention: the parties had appealed to it only with a view
to the decision of doubtful questions. Suppose a board of arbitrators should, by way of
reparation for some offence, condemn a sovereign state to become subject to the state
she has offended, will any man of sense assert that she is bound to submit to such
decision? If the injustice is of small consequence, it should be borne for the sake of
peace; and if it is not absolutely evident, we ought to endure it, as an evil to which we
have voluntarily exposed ourselves. For if it were necessary that we should be
convinced of the justice of a sentence before we would submit to it, it would be of
very little use to appoint arbitrators.

There is no reason to apprehend, that, by allowing the parties a liberty of refusing to
submit to a manifestly unjust and unreasonable sentence, we should render arbitration
useless: our decision is by no means repugnant to the nature of recognisances or
arbitration articles. There can be no difficulty in the affair, except in case of the
parties having signed vague and unlimited articles, in which they have not precisely
specified the subject of the dispute, or marked the bounds of their opposite
pretensions. It may then happen, as in the example just alleged, that the arbitrators
will exceed their power, and pronounce on what has not been really submitted to their
decision. Being called in to determine what satisfaction a state ought to make for an
offence, they may condemn her to become subject to the state she has offended. But
she certainly never gave them so extensive a power; and their absurd sentence is not
binding. In order to obviate all difficulty, and cut off every pretext of which fraud
might make a handle, it is necessary that the arbitration articles should precisely
specify the subject in dispute, the respective and opposite pretensions of the parties,
the demands of the one, and the objections of the other. These constitute the whole of
what is submitted to the decision of the arbitrators; and it is upon these points alone
that the parties promise to abide by their judgment. If then their sentence be confined

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 295 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

within these precise bounds, the disputants must acquiesce in it. They cannot say that
it is manifestly unjust, since it is pronounced on a question which they have
themselves rendered doubtful by the discordance of their claims, and which has been
referred, as such, to the decision of the arbitrators. Before they can pretend to evade
such a sentence, they should prove, by incontestable facts, that it was the offspring of
corruption or flagrant partiality.

Arbitration is a very reasonable mode, and one that is perfectly conformable to the
law of nature, for the decision of every dispute which does not directly interest the
safety of the nation. Though the claim of justice may be mistaken by the arbitrators, it
is still more to be feared that it will be overpowered in an appeal to the sword. The
Swiss have had the precaution, in all their alliances among themselves, and even in
those they have contracted with the neighbouring powers, to agree before-hand on the
manner in which their disputes were to be submitted to arbitrators, in case they could
not adjust them in an amicable manner. This wise precaution has not a little
contributed to maintain the Helvetic republic in that flourishing state which secures
her liberty, and renders her respectable throughout Europe.

In order to put in practice any of these methods, it is necessary to §330. Conferences
speak with each other, and to confer together. Conferences and and congresses.
congresses are therefore a mode of conciliation, which the law of
nature recommends to nations, as well calculated to bring their differences to an
amicable termination. Congresses are assemblies of plenipotentiaries appointed to
find out means of conciliation, and to discuss and adjust the reciprocal pretensions of
the contending parties. To afford the prospect of a happy issue of their deliberations,
such meetings should be formed and directed by a sincere desire of peace and
concord. In the present century, Europe has witnessed two general congresses,—that
of Cambray,* and that of Soissons,† —both tedious farces acted on the political
theatre, in which the principal performers were less desirous of coming to an
accommodation than of appearing to desire it.

In order at present to ascertain in what manner and how far a §331. Distinction to
nation is bound to resort or accede to these various modes of be made between
accommodation, and which of them she ought to prefer, it evident and doubtful
becomes necessary, in the first place, to distinguish between cases.
cases that are evident, and those that are doubtful. Does the
question relate to a right that is clear, certain, and incontestable? A sovereign, if he
possesses sufficient strength, may peremptorily prosecute and defend that right,
without exposing it to the doubtful issue of an arbitration. Shall he submit to negotiate
and compound for a thing that evidently belongs to him, and which is disputed with-
out the least shadow of justice? Much less will he subject it to arbitration. But he
ought not to neglect those methods of conciliation, which, without endangering his
own right, may induce his opponent to listen to reason,—such as mediation and
conferences. Nature gives us no right to have recourse to forcible means, except
where gentle and pacific methods prove ineffectual. It is not permitted to be so
inflexible in uncertain and doubtful questions. Who will dare to insist that another
shall immediately, and without examination, relinquish to him a disputable right? This
would be a means of rendering wars perpetual and inevitable. Both the contending

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 296 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

parties may be equally convinced of the justice of their claims: why, therefore, should
either yield to the other? In such a case, they can only demand an examination of the
question, propose a conference or an arbitration, or offer to settle the point by articles
of agreement.

In the disputes that arise between sovereigns, it is moreover §332. Of essential
necessary to make a proper distinction between essential rights rights, and those of
and rights of inferior importance: for, according to the difference less importance.
in the two cases, a different line of conduct is to be pursued. A
nation is under many obligations of duty towards herself, towards other nations, and
towards the great society of mankind. We know that the duties we owe to ourselves
are, generally speaking, paramount to those we owe to others: but this is to be
understood only of such duties as bear some proportion to each other. We cannot
refuse, in some degree, to forget ourselves with respect to interests that are not
essential, and to make some sacrifices, in order to assist other persons, and especially
for the greater benefit of human society: and let us even remark, that we are invited by
our own advantage, by our own safety, to make these generous sacrifices; for the
private good of each is intimately connected with the general happiness. What idea
should we entertain of a prince or a nation who would refuse to give up the smallest
advantage for the sake of procuring to the world the inestimable blessings of peace?
Every power therefore owes this respect to the happiness of human society, to shew
himself open to every mode of conciliation, in questions relating to interests which are
neither essential nor of great importance. If he exposes himself to the loss of
something by an accommodation, by a compromise, or by an arbitration, he ought to
be sensible what are the dangers, the evils, the calamities of war, and to consider that
peace is well worth a small sacrifice.

But if any one would rob a nation of one of her essential rights, or a right without
which she could not hope to support her national existence,—if an ambitious
neighbour threatens the liberty of a republic,—if he attempts to subjugate and enslave
her,—she will take counsel only from her own courage. She will not even attempt the
mode of conferences on so odious a pretension: she will, in such a quarrel, exert her
utmost efforts, exhaust every resource, and gloriously lavish her blood to the last drop
if necessary. To listen to the smallest proposition, is putting every thing to the risk. On
such an occasion she may truly say—

Una salus——nullam sperare salutem:89

and if fortune prove unfavourable, a free people will prefer death to servitude. What
would have become of Rome, had she listened to timid counsels, when Hannibal was
encamped before her walls? The Swiss, ever so ready to embrace pacific measures or
submit to legal decisions in disputes respecting less essential points, have uniformly
spurned at all idea of compromise with those who harboured designs against their
liberty. They even refused on such occasions to submit their disputes to arbitration, or
to the judgment of the emperors.*

In doubtful causes which do not involve essential points, if one §333. How we
of the parties will not accede either to a conference, an acquire a right of

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 297 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

accommodation, a compromise, or an arbitration, the other has having recourse to
only the last resource for the defence of himself and his force in a doubtful
rights,—an appeal to the sword; and he has justice on his side in cause,
taking up arms against so untractable an adversary. For, in a
doubtful cause, we can only demand all the reasonable methods of elucidating the
question, and of deciding or accommodating the dispute (§331).

But let us never lose sight of what a nation owes to her own §334.and even
security, nor of that prudence by which she ought constantly to without attempting
be directed. To authorise her to have recourse to arms, it is not other measures.
always necessary that every conciliatory measure be first
expressly rejected: it is sufficient that she have every reason to believe that the enemy
would not enter into those measures with sincerity,—that they could not be brought to
terminate in a happy result,—and that the intervening delay would only expose her to
a greater danger of being overpowered. This maxim is incontestable; but its
application in practice is very delicate. A sovereign who would not be considered as a
disturber of the public peace, will not be induced abruptly to attack him who has not
refused to accede to pacific measures, unless he be able to justify his conduct in the
eyes of all mankind, by proving that he has reason to consider those peaceable
appearances as an artifice employed for the purpose of amusing him, and taking him
by surprise. To make his bare suspicions serve as sufficient authority for such a step,
would be sapping every foundation on which rests the security of nations.

The faith of one nation has ever been suspected by another, and §335. Voluntary law
sad experience but too plainly proves that this distrust is not ill- of nations on this
founded. Independence and impunity are a touchstone that subject.
discovers the alloy of the human heart: the private individual
assumes the character of candour and probity; and, in default of the reality, his
dependence frequently obliges him to exhibit in his conduct at least the appearance of
those virtues. The great man, who is independent, boasts still more of them in his
discourse; but as soon as he finds himself possessed of superior strength, he scarcely
endeavours to save appearances, unless his heart be moulded of materials which,
unfortunately, are very rare indeed: and if powerful interests intervene, he will give
himself a latitude in the pursuit of measures that would cover a private person with
shame and infamy. When, therefore, a nation pretends that it would be dangerous for
her to attempt pacific measures, she can find abundance of pretexts to give a colour of
justice to her precipitation in having recourse to arms. And as, in virtue of the natural
liberty of nations, each one is free to judge in her own conscience how she ought to
act, and has a right to make her own judgment the sole guide of her conduct with
respect to her duties in every thing that is not determined by the perfect rights of
another (Prelim. §20), it belongs to each nation to judge whether her situation will
admit of pacific measures, before she has recourse to arms. Now, as the voluntary law
of nations ordains, that, for these reasons, we should esteem lawful whatever a nation
thinks proper to do in virtue of her natural liberty (Prelim. §21), by that same
voluntary law, nations are bound to consider as lawful the conduct of that power who
suddenly takes up arms in a doubtful cause, and attempts to force his enemy to come
to terms, without having previously tried pacific measures. Louis XIV. was in the
heart of the Netherlands before it was known in Spain that he laid claim to the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 298 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

sovereignty of a part of those rich provinces in right of the queen his wife. The king of
Prussia, in 1741, published his manifesto in Silesia, at the head of sixty thousand men.
Those princes might have wise and just reasons for acting thus: and this is sufficient
at the tribunal of the voluntary law of nations. But a thing which that law tolerates
through necessity, may be found very unjust in itself: and a prince who puts it in
practice, may render himself very guilty in the sight of his own conscience, and very
unjust towards him whom he attacks, though he is not accountable for it to other
nations, as he cannot be accused of violating the general rules which they are bound to
observe towards each other. But if he abuses this liberty, he gives all nations cause to
hate and suspect him; he authorises them to confederate against him; and thus, while
he thinks he is promoting his interests, he sometimes irretrievably ruins them.

A sovereign ought, in all his quarrels, to entertain a sincere §336. Equitable
desire of rendering justice and preserving peace. He is bound, conditions to be
before he take up arms, and also after having taken them up, to offered.
offer equitable conditions: and then alone he is justifiable in ap-
pealing to the sword against an obstinate enemy who refuses to listen to the voice of
justice or equity.

It is the business of the appellant to prove his right; for he ought §337. Possessor’s
to shew a good foundation for demanding a thing which he does right in doubtful
not possess. He must have a title: and people are not obliged to cases.
respect that title any farther than he shews its validity. The
possessor may therefore remain in possession till proof be adduced to convince him
that his possession is unjust. As long as that remains undone, he has a right to
maintain himself in it, and even to recover it by force, if he has been despoiled of it.
Consequently it is not allowable to take up arms in order to obtain possession of a
thing to which the claimant has but an uncertain or doubtful right. He is only
justifiable in compelling the possessor, by force of arms if necessary, to come to a
discussion of the question, to accede to some reasonable mode of decision or
accommodation, or, finally, to settle the point by articles of agreement upon an
equitable footing (§333).

If the subject of the dispute be an injury received, the offended §338. How reparation
party ought to follow the rules we have just established. His own of an injury is to be
advantage, and that of human society, require, that, previous to sought.
taking up arms, he should try every pacific mode of obtaining
either a reparation of the injury or a just satisfaction, unless there be substantial
reasons to dispense with his recurrence to such measures (§334). This moderation,
this circumspection, is the more becoming, and in general even indispensable, as the
action which we look upon as an injury does not always proceed from a design to
offend us, and is sometimes rather a mistake, than an act of malice. It even frequently
happens that the injury is done by inferior persons, without their sovereign having any
share in it: and on these occasions it is natural to presume that he will not refuse us a
just satisfaction. When some petty officers, not long since, violated the territory of
Savoy in order to carry off from thence a noted smuggling chief, the king of
Sardinia90 caused his complaints to be laid before the court of France; and Louis XV.
thought it no derogation to his greatness to send an embassador extraordinary to Turin

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 299 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

to give satisfaction for that violence. Thus an affair of so delicate a nature was
terminated in a manner equally honourable to the two kings.

When a nation cannot obtain justice, whether for a wrong or an §339. Retaliation.
injury, she has a right to do herself justice. But before she declare
war (of which we shall treat in the following book), there are various methods
practised among nations, which remain to be treated of here. Among those methods of
obtaining satisfaction, has been reckoned what is called the law of retaliation,
according to which we make another suffer precisely as much evil as he has done.
Many have extolled that law, as being founded in the strictest justice:—and can we be
surprised at their having proposed it to princes, since they have presumed to make it a
rule even for the deity himself? The ancients called it the law of Rhadamanthus. The
idea is wholly derived from the obscure and false notion which represents evil as
essentially and in its own nature worthy of punishment. We have shewn above (Book
I. §169), what is the true origin of the right of punishing;* whence we have deduced
the true and just proportion of penalties (Book I. §171). Let us say then, that a nation
may punish another which has done her an injury, as we have shewn above (see Chap.
IV. and VI. of this Book), if the latter refuses to give her a just satisfaction: but she
has not a right to extend the penalty beyond what her own safety requires. Retaliation,
which is unjust between private persons, would be much more so between nations,
because it would, in the latter case, be difficult to make the punishment fall on those
who had done the injury. What right have you to cut off the nose and ears of the
embassador of a barbarian who had treated your embassador in that manner? As to
those reprisals in time of war which partake of the nature of retaliation, they are
justified on other principles; and we shall speak of them in their proper place. The
only truth in this idea of retaliation is, that, all circumstances being in other respects
equal, the punishment ought to bear some proportion to the evil for which we mean to
inflict it,—the very object and foundation of punishment requiring thus much.

It is not always necessary to have recourse to arms, in order to §340. Various modes
punish a nation. The offended party may, by way of punishment, of punishing, without
deprive her of the privileges she enjoyed in his having recourse to
dominions,—seize on some of her property, if he has an arms.
opportunity,—and detain it till she has given him sufficient
satisfaction.

When a sovereign is not satisfied with the manner in which his §341. Retortion.
subjects are treated by the laws and customs of another nation, he
is at liberty to declare that he will treat the subjects of that nation in the same manner
as his are treated. This is what is called retortion. There is nothing in this, but what is
conformable to justice and sound policy. No one can complain on receiving the same
treatment which he gives to others. Thus the king of Poland, elector of Saxony,
enforces the law of escheatage only against the subjects of those princes who make
the Saxons liable to it. This retortion may also take place with respect to certain
regulations, of which we have no right to complain, and which we are even obliged to
approve, though it is proper to guard against their effect, by imitating them. Such are
the orders relating to the importation or exportation of certain commodities or
merchandise. On the other hand, circumstances frequently forbid us to have recourse

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 300 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

to retortion. In this respect, each nation may act according to the dictates of her own
prudence.

Reprisals are used between nation and nation, in order to do §342. Reprisals.
themselves justice when they cannot otherwise obtain it. If a
nation has taken possession of what belongs to another,—if she refuses to pay a debt,
to repair an injury, or to give adequate satisfaction for it,—the latter may seize
something belonging to the former, and apply it to her own advantage till she obtains
payment of what is due to her, together with interest and damages,—or keep it as a
pledge till she has received ample satisfaction. In the latter case, it is rather a stoppage
or a seizure, than reprisals: but they are frequently confounded in common language.
The effects thus seized on are preserved while there is any hope of obtaining
satisfaction or justice. As soon as that hope disappears, they are confiscated, and then
the reprisals are accomplished. If the two nations, upon this ground of quarrel, come
to an open rupture, satisfaction is considered as refused from the moment that war is
declared or hostilities commenced; and then also the effects seized may be
confiscated.

It is only upon evidently just grounds, or for a well-ascertained §343. What is
and undeniable debt, that the law of nations allows us to make required to render
reprisals. For he who advances a doubtful pretension, cannot in them lawful.
the first instance demand any thing more than an equitable
examination of his right. In the next place, before he proceed to such extremities, he
should be able to shew that he has ineffectually demanded justice, or at least that he
has every reason to think it would be in vain for him to demand it. Then alone does it
become lawful for him to take the matter into his own hands, and do himself justice. It
would be too inconsistent with the peace, the repose, and the safety of nations, with
their mutual commerce, and the duties which bind them to each other, that each one
should be authorised to have immediate recourse to violent measures, without
knowing whether there exist on the other side a disposition to do her justice, or to
refuse it.

But in order perfectly to understand this article, it must be observed, that if, in a
disputable case, our adversary either refuses to pursue or artfully evades the necessary
steps for bringing the matter to the proof,—if he does not candidly and sincerely
accede to some pacific mode of terminating the dispute,—especially if he is foremost
in adopting violent measures,—he gives justice to our cause which before was
problematical: we may then have recourse to reprisals, or the seizure of his effects, in
order to compel him to embrace the methods of conciliation which the law of nature
prescribes. This is the last remaining effort previous to a commencement of open
hostilities.

We have observed above (§81), that the wealth of the citizens §344. Upon what
constitutes a part of the aggregate wealth of a nation,—that, effects reprisals are
between state and state, the private property of the members is made.
considered as belonging to the body, and is answerable for the
debts of that body (§82): whence it follows, that in reprisals we seize on the property
of the subject just as we would on that of the state or sovereign. Every thing that

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 301 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

belongs to the nation is subject to reprisals, whenever it can be seized, provided it be
not a deposit intrusted to the public faith. As it is only in consequence of that
confidence which the proprietor has placed in our goodfaith, that we happen to have
such deposit in our hands, it ought to be respected, even in case of open war. Such is
the conduct observed in France, England, and elsewhere, with respect to the money
which foreigners have placed in the public funds.

He who makes reprisals against a nation, on the property of its §345. The state ought
members indiscriminately, cannot be taxed with seizing the to compensate those
property of an innocent person for the debt of another: for in this who suffer by
case the sovereign is to compensate those of his subjects on reprisals.
whom the reprisals fall; it is a debt of the state or nation, of
which each citizen ought only to pay his quota.*

It is only between state and state that all the property of the §346. The sovereign
individuals is considered as belonging to the nation. Sovereigns alone can order
transact their affairs between themselves; they carry on business reprisals.
with each other directly, and can only consider a foreign nation
as a society of men who have but one common interest. It belongs therefore to
sovereigns alone to make and order reprisals on the footing we have just described.
Besides, this violent measure approaches very near to an open rupture, and is
frequently followed by one. It is therefore an affair of too serious a nature to be left to
the discretion of private individuals. And accordingly we see, that, in every civilised
state, a subject who thinks himself injured by a foreign nation, has recourse to his
sovereign in order to obtain permission to make reprisals. This is what the French call
applying for letters of marque.

We may make reprisals against a nation not only for the actions §347. Reprisals
of the sovereign, but also for those of his subjects: and this may against a nation for
take place when the state or the sovereign participates in the act actions of its subjects,
of his subject, and takes it upon himself; which he may do in and in favour of the
several ways, as we have shewn in Chap. VI. of this Book. injured subjects.

In the same manner the sovereign demands justice, or makes reprisals, not only for his
own concerns, but also for those of his subjects, whom he is bound to protect, and
whose cause is that of the nation.

But to grant reprisals against a nation in favour of foreigners, is §348. But not in
to set himself up as judge between that nation and those favour of foreigners.
foreigners; which no sovereign has a right to do. The cause of
reprisals ought to be just: they ought even to be grounded on a denial of
justice,—either an actual denial, or one which there is good reason to apprehend
(§343). Now what right have we to judge whether the complaint of a stranger against
an independent state is just, if he has really been denied justice? If it be objected, that
we may espouse the quarrel of another state in a war that appears to us to be just,—to
assist her, and even to unite with her,—the case is different. In granting succours
against a nation, we do not detain her property or her people that happen to be within
our territories under the public faith; and in declaring war against her, we suffer her to

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 302 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

withdraw her subjects and her effects, as will hereafter appear. In the case of reprisals
granted to our own subjects, a nation cannot complain that we violate the public faith
in seizing on her people or her property; because we are under no other obligation to
grant security to that property and those people, than what arises from a reasonable
supposition that their nation will not in the first instance violate, with respect to us or
our subjects, the rules of justice which nations ought to observe towards each other. If
she violate them, we have a right to obtain satisfaction; and the mode of reprisals is
more easy, safe, and mild, than that of war. We cannot urge the same arguments in
justification of reprisals ordered in favour of foreigners. For the security we owe to
the subjects of a foreign power does not depend, as a condition, on the security which
that power shall grant to all other nations, to people who do not belong to us, and are
not under our protection. England having, in 1662, granted reprisals against the
United Provinces, in favour of the knights of Malta,* the states of Holland asserted
with good reason, that, according to the law of nations, reprisals can only be granted
to maintain the rights of the state, and not for an affair in which the nation has no
concern.†

The individuals who by their actions have given cause for just §349. Those who
reprisals, are bound to indemnify those on whom they fall; and have given cause for
the sovereign ought to compel them to do it. For we are under an reprisals ought to
obligation to repair the damage we have occasioned by our own indemnify those who
fault. And although the sovereign, by refusing justice to the suffer by them.

offended party, has brought on the reprisals against his subjects,
those who were the first cause of them do not become the less guilty: the fault of the
sovereign does not exempt them from repairing the consequences of theirs. However,
if they were ready to give satisfaction to the party whom they had injured or offended,
and their sovereign has prevented their doing it, they are not bound to do any thing
more in that case, than they would before have been obliged to do in order to prevent
the reprisals; and it is the sovereign’s duty to repair the additional damage, which is
the consequence of his own fault (§345).

We have said (§343) that we ought not to make reprisals, except §350. What may be
when we are unable to obtain justice. Now justice is refused in deemed a refusal to
several ways:—First, by a denial of justice, properly so called, or do justice.
by a refusal to hear your complaints or those of your subjects, or
to admit them to establish their right before the ordinary tribunals. Secondly, by
studied delays, for which no good reasons can be given,—delays equivalent to a
refusal, or still more ruinous. Thirdly, by an evidently unjust and partial decision. But
it is necessary that this injustice should be manifest and palpable. In all cases
susceptible of doubt, a sovereign ought not to listen to the complaints of his subjects
against a foreign tribunal, nor to attempt to screen them from the effects of a sentence
passed in due form: for that would be the means of exciting continual troubles. The
law of nations directs that states should reciprocally pay that kind of deference to each
other’s jurisdiction, for the same reason as the civil law ordains within the state that
every definitive sentence, passed in due form, shall be esteemed just. Between nation
and nation, the obligation is neither so express nor so extensive: but it cannot be
denied, that it is highly conducive to their peace, and conformable to their duties
towards human society, to oblige their subjects, in all doubtful cases, and unless

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 303 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

where there is a manifest wrong done to them, to submit to the sentences of the
foreign tribunals before which their causes have been tried. (See above §84.)

As we may seize the things which belong to a nation, in order to §351. Subjects
compel her to do justice, we may equally, for the same reason, arrested by way of
arrest some of her citizens, and not release them till we have reprisals.
received full satisfaction. This is what the Greeks called
Androlépsia.* At Athens the law permitted the relatives of him who had been
assassinated in a foreign country, to seize three of the inhabitants of that country, and
to detain them till the murderer was punished or delivered up.† But in the practice of
modern Europe, this method is seldom resorted to, except with a view to obtain
satisfaction for an injury of the same nature,—that is to say, to compel a sovereign to
release a person whom he detains unjustly.

The persons, however, who are thus arrested, being detained only as a security or
pledge in order to oblige a nation to do justice,—if their sovereign obstinately persists
in refusing it, we cannot take away their lives, or inflict any corporal punishment upon
them, for a refusal, of which they are not guilty. Their property, their liberty itself,
may be staked for the debts of the state; but not their lives, of which man has not the
power of disposing. A sovereign has no right to put to death the subjects of a state
which has done him an injury, except when they are engaged in war; and we shall see
elsewhere, what it is that gives him that right.

But the sovereign is authorised to employ forcible means against §352. Our right
those who resist him in the exertion of his right, and to pursue against those who
such means as far as is necessary to overcome their unjust oppose reprisals.
resistance. It is therefore lawful to repel those who undertake to
oppose the making of just reprisals: and if, for that purpose, it be necessary to proceed
even so far as to put them to death, the whole blame of that misfortune is imputable to
their unjust and inconsiderate resistance. In such a case, Grotius would have us rather
abstain from making reprisals.‡ Between private persons, and for things that are not
of the highest importance, it is certainly worthy, not only of a christian, but, in
general, of every man of principle, rather to abandon his right than to kill the person
who unjustly resists him. But, between sovereigns, the case is otherwise. To suffer
themselves to be bullied, would be attended with consequences of too serious a
nature. The true and just welfare of the state is the grand rule: moderation is ever
laudable in itself; but the conductors of nations ought to practise that virtue so far only
as it is consistent with the happiness and safety of their people.

After having demonstrated the lawfulness of making reprisals §353. Just reprisals do
when we can no otherwise obtain justice, we may thence readily not afford a just cause
conclude that a sovereign is not justifiable in making forcible for war.
opposition to, or waging war against, the party, who, by ordering
or making reprisals in such a case, only exerts his just right.

And as the law of humanity directs nations as well as individuals §354. How we ought
ever to prefer the gentlest measures when they are sufficient to to confine ourselves
obtain justice,—whenever a sovereign can, by the mode of to reprisals, or at

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 304 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

reprisals, procure a just indemnification or a suitable satisfaction, length proceed to
he ought to confine himself to this method, which is less violent hostilities.
and less fatal than war. On this subject, I cannot avoid noticing
an error which is too general to be wholly disregarded. If it happens that a prince,
having reason to complain of some injustice or some acts of hostility, and not finding
his adversary disposed to give him satisfaction, determines to make reprisals with the
view of endeavouring to compel him to listen to the voice of justice before he
proceeds to an open rupture,—if, without a declaration of war, he seizes on his
effects, his shipping, and detains them as pledges,—you hear certain men cry out that
this is robbery. If that prince had at once declared war, they would not have said a
word; they would perhaps have praised his conduct. Strange forgetfulness of reason,
and of every sound principle! Would we not, at this rate, be tempted to suppose that
nations were bound to observe the laws of chivalry,—to challenge each other to the
lists,—and decide their quarrels like a pair of doughty champions engaged in regular
duel? It is the duty of sovereigns attentively to maintain the rights of their people, and
to obtain justice by every lawful means,—still, however, prefer-ring the gentlest
methods: and we again repeat the assertion—it is evident that the mode of reprisals, of
which we are speaking, is infinitely more gentle and less fatal than that of war. But
since, between powers whose strength is nearly equal, reprisals often lead to war, they
ought not to be attempted except in the last extremity. In such circumstances, the
prince who has recourse to that expedient instead of proceeding to an open rupture, is
undoubtedly entitled to praise for his moderation and prudence.

Those who run to arms without necessity, are the scourges of the human race,
barbarians, enemies to society, and rebellious violators of the laws of nature, or rather
the laws of the common father of mankind.

There are cases, however, in which reprisals would be justly condemnable, even when
a declaration of war would not be so: and these are precisely those cases in which
nations may with justice take up arms. When the question which constitutes the
ground of a dispute, relates, not to an act of violence, or an injury received, but to a
contested right,—after an ineffectual endeavour to obtain justice by conciliatory and
pacific measures, it is a declaration of war that ought to follow, and not pretended
reprisals, which, in such a case, would only be real acts of hostility without a
declaration of war, and would be contrary to public faith as well as to the mutual
duties of nations. This will more evidently appear, when we shall have explained the
reasons which establish the obligation of declaring war previous to a commencement
of hostilities.*

But if, from particular conjunctures, and from the obstinacy of an unjust adversary,
neither reprisals, nor any of the methods of which we have been treating, should prove
sufficient for our defence and for the protection of our rights, there remains only the
wretched and melancholy alternative of war, which will be the subject of the
following book.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 305 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

BOOK III

Of War

CHAPTER I

Of War,—Its Different Kinds,— And The Right Of Making
War.
War is that state in which we prosecute our right by force. We §1. Definition of war.
also understand, by this term, the act itself, or the manner of
prosecuting our right by force: but it is more conformable to general usage, and more
proper in a treatise on the law of war, to understand this term in the sense we have
annexed to it.

Public war is that which takes place between nations or §2. Public war.
sovereigns, and which is carried on in the name of the public
power, and by its order. This is the war we are here to consider:—private war, or that
which is carried on between private individuals, belongs to the law of nature properly
so called.

In treating of the right to security (Book II. Chap. IV.) we have §3. Right of making
shewn that nature gives men a right to employ force, when it is war.
necessary for their defence, and for the preservation of their
rights. This principle is generally acknowledged: reason demonstrates it; and nature
herself has engraved it on the heart of man. Some fanatics indeed, taking in a literal
sense the moderation recommended in the gospel, have adopted the strange fancy of
suffering themselves to be massacred or plundered, ra-ther than oppose force to
violence. But we need not fear that this error will make any great progress. The
generality of mankind will, of themselves, guard against its contagion,—happy, if
they as well knew how to keep within the just bounds which nature has set to a right
that is granted only through necessity! To mark those just bounds,—and, by the rules
of justice, equity, and humanity, to moderate the exercise of that harsh though too
often necessary right,—is the intention of this third book.

As nature has given men no right to employ force, unless when it §4. It belongs only to
becomes necessary for self-defence and the preservation of their the sovereign power.
rights (Book II. §49, &c.), the inference is manifest, that, since
the establishment of political societies, a right, so dangerous in its exercise, no longer
remains with private persons, except in those rencounters where society cannot
protect or defend them. In the bosom of society, the public authority decides all the
disputes of the citizens, represses violence, and checks every attempt to do ourselves
justice with our own hands. If a private person intends to prosecute his right against
the subject of a foreign power, he may apply to the sovereign of his adversary, or to

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 306 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

the magistrates invested with the public authority: and if he is denied justice by them,
he must have recourse to his own sovereign, who is obliged to protect him. It would
be too dangerous to allow every citizen the liberty of doing himself justice against
foreigners; as, in that case, there would not be a single member of the state who might
not involve it in war. And how could peace be preserved between nations, if it were in
the power of every private individual to disturb it? A right of so momentous a
nature,—the right of judging whether the nation has real grounds of
complaint,—whether she is authorised to employ force, and justifiable in taking up
arms,—whether prudence will admit of such a step,—and whether the welfare of the
state requires it,—that right, I say, can belong only to the body of the nation, or to the
sovereign, her representative. It is doubtless one of those rights, without which there
can be no salutary government, and which are therefore called rights of majesty (Book
I. §45).

Thus the sovereign power alone is possessed of authority to make war. But as the
different rights which constitute this power, originally resident in the body of the
nation, may be separated or limited according to the will of the nation (Book I. §§31
and 45), it is from the particular constitution of each state, that we are to learn where
the power resides, that is authorised to make war in the name of the society at large.
The kings of England, whose power is in other respects so limited, have the right of
making war and peace.* Those of Sweden have lost it. The brilliant but ruinous
exploits of Charles XII.1 suffici-ently warranted the states of that kingdom to reserve
to themselves a right of such importance to their safety.

War is either defensive or offensive. He who takes up arms to §5. Defensive and
repel the attack of an enemy, carries on a defensive war. He who offensive war.
is foremost in taking up arms, and attacks a nation that lived in
peace with him, wages offensive war. The object of a defensive war is very simple; it
is no other than self-defence: in that of offensive war, there is as great a variety as in
the multifarious concerns of nations: but, in general, it relates either to the prosecution
of some rights, or to safety. We attack a nation with a view either to obtain something
to which we lay claim, to punish her for an injury she has done us, or to prevent one
which she is preparing to do, and thus avert a danger with which she seems to threaten
us. I do not here speak of the justice of war: that shall make the subject of a particular
chapter:—all I here propose is to indicate, in general, the various objects for which a
nation takes up arms,—objects which may furnish lawful reasons, or unjust pretences,
but which are at least susceptible of a colour of right. I do not therefore, among the
objects of offensive war, set down conquest, or the desire of invading the property of
others:—views of that nature, destitute even of any reasonable pretext to countenance
them, do not constitute the object of regular warfare, but of robbery, which we shall
consider in its proper place.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 307 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER II

Of The Instruments Of War,—The Raising Of Troops,
&C.—Their Commanders, Or The Subordinate Powers In
War.
The sovereign is the real author of war, which is carried on in his §6. Instruments of
name, and by his order. The troops, officers, soldiers, and, in war.
general, all those by whose agency the sovereign makes war, are
only instruments in his hands. They execute his will and not their own. The arms, and
all the apparatus of things used in war, are instruments of an inferior order. For the
decision of questions that will occur in the sequel, it is of importance to determine
precisely what are the things which belong to war. Without entering here into a
minute detail, we shall only observe that whatever is peculiarly used in waging war, is
to be classed among the instruments of war; and things which are equally used at all
times, such as provisions, belong to peace, unless it be in certain particular junctures
when those things appear to be specially destined for the support of war. Arms of all
kinds, artillery, gun-powder, salt-petre and sulphur of which it is composed, ladders,
gabions, tools, and all other implements for sieges, materials for building ships of
war, tents, soldiers’ clothes, &c. these always belong to war.

As war cannot be carried on without soldiers, it is evident that §7. Right of levying
whoever has the right of making war, has also naturally that of troops.
raising troops. The latter therefore belongs likewise to the
sovereign (§4), and is one of the prerogatives of majesty (Book I. §45). The power of
levying troops, or raising an army, is of too great consequence in a state, to be
intrusted to any other than the sovereign. The subordinate authorities are not invested
with it; they exercise it only by order or commission from the sovereign. But it is not
always necessary that they should have an express order for the purpose. On those
urgent exigencies which do not allow time to wait for the supreme order, the governor
of a province, or the commandant of a town, may raise troops for the defence of the
town or province committed to their care; and this they do by virtue of the power
tacitly given them by their commission in cases of this nature.

I say that this important power is the appendage of sovereignty; it makes a part of the
supreme authority. But we have already seen that those rights which together
constitute the sovereign power, may be divided (Book I. §§31, 45), if such be the will
of the nation. It may then happen that a nation does not intrust her chief with a right
so dangerous to her liberty as that of raising and supporting troops, or at least that she
limits the exercise of it, by making it depend on the consent of her representatives.
The king of England, who has the right of making war, has also, indeed, that of
granting commissions for raising troops; but he cannot compel any person to enlist,
nor, without the concurrence of parliament, keep an army on foot.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 308 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Every citizen is bound to serve and defend the state as far as he is §8. Obligation of the
capable. Society cannot otherwise be maintained; and this citizens or subjects.
concurrence for the common defence is one of the principal
objects of every political association. Every man capable of carrying arms should take
them up at the first order of him who has the power of making war.2

In former times, and especially in small states, immediately on a §9. Enlisting or
declaration of war, every man became a soldier; the whole raising of troops.
community took up arms, and engaged in the war. Soon after, a
choice was made, and armies were formed of picked men,—the remainder of the
people pursuing their usual occupations. At present the use of regular troops is almost
every-where adopted, especially in powerful states. The public authority raises
soldiers, distributes them into different bodies under the command of generals and
other officers, and keeps them on foot as long as it thinks necessary. As every citizen
or subject is bound to serve the state, the sovereign has a right, in case of necessity, to
enlist whom he pleases. But he ought to choose such only as are fit for the occupation
of war; and it is highly proper that he should, as far as possible, confine his choice to
volunteers, who enlist without compulsion.

No person is naturally exempt from taking up arms in defence of §10. Whether there be
the state,—the obligation of every member of society being the any exemptions from
same. Those alone are excepted, who are incapable of handling carrying arms.
arms, or supporting the fatigues of war. This is the reason why
old men, children, and women, are exempted. Although there be some women who
are equal to men in strength and courage, yet such instances are not usual; and rules
must necessarily be general, and derived from the ordinary course of things. Besides,
women are necessary for other services in society; and, in short, the mixture of both
sexes in armies would be attended with too many inconveniences.

A good government should, as far as possible, so employ all the citizens, and
distribute posts and employments in such manner, that the state may be the most
effectually served in all its affairs. Therefore, when not urged by necessity, it should
exempt from military service all those who are employed in stations useful or
necessary to society. Upon this ground, magistrates are usually exempted,—their
whole time not being too much for the administration of justice, and the maintenance
of order.

The clergy cannot naturally, and as matter of right, arrogate to themselves any
peculiar exemption. To defend one’s country, is an action not unworthy of the most
sacred hands. That article of the canon law which forbids ecclesiastics to shed blood,
is a convenient device to exempt from personal danger those men who are often so
zealous to fan the flame of discord and excite bloody wars. Indeed, for the same
reasons which we have above alleged in favour of magistrates, an exemption from
bearing arms should be allowed to such of the clergy as are really useful,—to those
who are employed in teaching religion, governing the church, and celebrating the
public worship.*

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 309 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

But those immense multitudes of useless monks and friars,—those drones, who, under
pretence of dedicating themselves to God, dedicate themselves in fact to sloth and
effeminacy,—by what right do they pretend to a prerogative that is ruinous to the
state? And if the prince exempts them from military service, is he not guilty of
injustice to the other members, on whom he thus throws the whole burthen? I do not
here mean to advise a sovereign to fill his armies with monks, but gradually to
diminish a useless class of men, by depriving them of injurious and ill-founded
privileges. History mentions a martial bishop* whose weapon was a club, with which
he knocked down the enemy, to avoid incurring the censure of the canon-law by
shedding their blood. It would be much more reasonable, when monks are exempted
from carrying arms, that they should be employed in the works as pioneers, and thus
made to alleviate the toil of the soldiers. They have on many occasions zealously
undertaken the task in cases of necessity. I could mention more than one famous
siege, where monks have usefully served in defence of their country. When the Turks
besieged Malta, the ecclesiastics, the women, the very children, all, according to their
respective strength or capacity, contributed to that glorious defence which baffled the
utmost efforts of the Ottoman empire.

There is another class of idle drones, whose exemption is a still more glaring
abuse,—I mean those swarms of useless footmen who crowd the dwellings of the
great and the wealthy,—and who, by the very nature of their employment, are
themselves corrupted in displaying the luxury of their masters.

Among the Romans, while every citizen took his turn to serve in §11. Soldiers’ pay and
the army, their service was gratuitous. But when a choice is quarters.
made, and standing armies are kept on foot, the state is bound to
pay them, as no individual is under an obligation to perform more than his quota of
the public service: and if the ordinary revenues are not sufficient for the purpose, the
deficiency must be provided for by taxation. It is but reasonable that those who do not
serve should pay their defenders.

When the soldier is not in the field, he must necessarily be provided with quarters.
The burthen, in such case, naturally falls on house-keepers: but as that is attended
with many inconveniences, and proves very distressing to the citizens, it becomes a
good prince, or a wise and equitable government, to ease them of it as far as possible.
In this particular, the king of France has made magnificent and ample provision in
many towns, by the erection of barracks for the accommodation of the garrison.

The asylums prepared for indigent soldiers and officers who are §12. Hospitals for
grown grey in the service, and whom toil or the enemy’s sword invalids.
has rendered incapable of providing for their own subsistence,
may be considered as part of the military pay. In France and England, magnificent
establishments have been made in favour of invalids, which, while they discharge a
debt of a sacred nature, do honour to the sovereign and the nation. The care of those
unfortunate victims of war is the indispensable duty of every state, in proportion to its
ability. It is repugnant, not only to humanity, but to the strictest justice, that generous
citizens, heroes who have shed their blood for the safety of their country, should be
left to perish with want, or unworthily forced to beg their bread. The honourable

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 310 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

maintenance of such persons might very properly be imposed upon rich convents, and
large ecclesiastical benefices. Nothing can be more just than that those citizens who
avoid all the dangers of war, should bestow part of their riches for the relief of their
valiant defenders.

Mercenary soldiers are foreigners voluntarily engaging to serve §13. Mercenary
the state for money, or a stipulated pay. As they owe no service soldiers.
to a sovereign whose subjects they are not, the advantages he
offers them are their sole motive. By enlisting they incur the obligation to serve him;
and the prince on his part promises them certain conditions which are settled in the
articles of enlistment. Those articles, being the rule and measure of the respective
obligations and rights of the contracting parties, are to be religiously observed. The
complaints of some French historians against the Swiss troops, who on several
occasions formerly refused to march against the enemy, and even withdrew from the
service, because they were not paid,—those complaints, I say, are equally ridiculous
and unjust. Why should the articles of enlistment be more strongly binding on one of
the parties than on the other? Whenever the prince fails to perform what he has
promised, the foreign soldiers are discharged from any further duty to him. I own it
would be ungenerous to forsake a prince who, without any fault on his own part, is,
by accident alone, rendered for a while unable to make good his payments. There may
even be occasions when such an inflexibility on the part of the soldier would be, if not
contrary to strict justice, at least very repugnant to equity. But this was never the case
with the Switzers:—they never were known to quit the service on the first failure of
payment; and when they perceived the good intentions of a sovereign labouring under
a real inability to satisfy them, their patience and zeal always supported them under
such difficulties. Henry the Fourth owed them immense sums: yet they did not, in his
greatest necessities, abandon him; and that hero found the nation equally generous as
brave. I here speak of the Switzers, because, in fact, those above alluded to were often
mere mercenaries. But a distinction is to be made between troops of this kind and
those Switzers who at present serve different powers, with the permission of their
sovereign, and in virtue of alliances subsisting between those powers and the Helvetic
body or some particular canton. The latter are real auxiliaries, though paid by the
sovereigns whom they serve.

Much has been said on the question—Whether the profession of a mercenary soldier
be lawful, or not,—whether individuals may, for money or any other reward, engage
to serve a foreign prince in his wars? This question does not to me appear very
difficult to be solved. Those who enter into such engagements without the express or
tacit consent of their sovereign, offend against their duty as citizens. But if their
sovereign leaves them at liberty to follow their inclination for a military life, they are
perfectly free in that respect. Now, every free man may join whatever society he
pleases, according as he finds it most to his advantage. He may make its cause his
own, and espouse its quarrels. He becomes in some measure, at least for a time, a
member of the state in whose service he engages: and as an officer is commonly at
liberty to quit the service when he thinks proper, and the private soldier at the
expiration of his engagement,—if that state embark in a war which is evidently unjust,
the foreigner may quit its service. And the mercenary soldier, having now learned the
art of war, has rendered himself more capable of serving his country, if ever she

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 311 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

require his assistance. This last consideration will furnish us with an answer to a
question proposed on this head—Whether the sovereign can with propriety permit his
subjects to serve foreign powers indiscriminately for money? He can, for this simple
reason, that his subjects will thus learn an art, of which a thorough knowledge is both
useful and necessary. The tranquillity, the profound peace, which Switzerland has so
long enjoyed in the midst of all the commotions and wars which have agitated
Europe,—that long repose would soon become fatal to her, did not her citizens, by
serving foreign princes, qualify themselves for the operations of war, and keep alive
their martial spirit.3

Mercenary soldiers enlist voluntarily. The sovereign has no right §14. What is to be
to compel foreigners: he must not even employ stratagem or observed in their
artifice in order to induce them to engage in a contract, which, enlistment.
like all others, should be founded on candor and good faith.

As the right of levying soldiers belongs solely to the nation or the §15. Enlisting in
sovereign (§7), no person must attempt to enlist soldiers in a foreign countries.
foreign country, without the permission of the sovereign; and
even with that permission, none but volunteers are to be enlisted: for the service of
their country is out of the question here; and no sovereign has a right to give or sell
his subjects to another.

The man who undertakes to enlist soldiers in a foreign country without the
sovereign’s permission,—and, in general, whoever entices away the subjects of
another state,—violates one of the most sacred rights of the prince and the nation.
This crime is distinguished by the name of kidnapping or man-stealing, and is
punished with the utmost severity in every well-regulated state. Foreign recruiters are
hanged without mercy, and with great justice. It is not presumed that their sovereign
has ordered them to commit a crime: and supposing even that they had received such
an order, they ought not to have obeyed it,—their sovereign having no right to
command what is contrary to the law of nature. It is not, I say, presumed that these
recruiters act by order of their sovereign: and with respect to such of them as have
practised seduction only, it is generally thought sufficient to punish them when they
can be detected and caught: if they have used violence, and made their escape, it is
usual to demand a surrender of the delinquents, and to claim the persons they have
carried off. But if it appears that they acted by order, such a proceeding in a foreign
sovereign is justly considered as an injury, and as a sufficient cause for declaring war
against him, unless he make suitable reparation.

All soldiers, natives or foreigners, are to take an oath to serve §16. Obligation of
faithfully, and not desert the service. This is no more than what soldiers.
they are already obliged to, the former as subjects, the latter by
their engagement: but their fidelity is of so great importance to the state, that too
many precautions cannot be taken for rendering it secure. Deserters merit severe and
exemplary punishment; and the sovereign may, if he thinks it necessary, annex the
penalty of death to desertion. The emissaries who solicit them to desert are far more
guilty than the recruiters mentioned in the preceding section.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 312 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Good order and subordination, so useful in all places, are §17. Military laws.
nowhere so necessary as in the army. The sovereign should
exactly specify and determine the functions, duties, and rights of military men,—of
soldiers, officers, commanders of corps, and generals. He should regulate and fix the
authority of commanders in all the gradations of rank,—the punishments to be
inflicted on offenders,—the form of trials, &c. The laws and ordinances relative to
these several particulars form the military code.

Those regulations, whose particular tendency is to maintain order §18. Military
among the troops, and to enable them to perform their military discipline.
service with advantage to the state, constitute what is called
military discipline. This is of the highest importance. The Switzers were the first
among the modern nations that revived it in its ancient vigour. It was a good
discipline, added to the valour of a free people, that produced, even in the infancy of
their republic, those brilliant achievements which astonished all Europe. Machiavel
says that the Switzers are the masters of all Europe in the art of war.* In our times, the
Prussians have shewn what may be expected from good discipline and assiduous
exercise: soldiers, collected from all quarters, have, by the force of habit and the
influence of command, performed all that could be expected from the most zealous
and loyal subjects.

Every military officer, from the ensign to the general, enjoys the §19. Subordinate
rights and authority assigned him by the sovereign; and the will powers in war.
of the sovereign in this respect is known by his express
declarations, contained either in the commissions he confers or in the military
code,—or is, by fair deduction, inferred from the nature of the functions assigned to
each officer: for every man who is intrusted with an employment, is presumed to be
invested with all the powers necessary to enable him to fill his station with propriety,
and successfully discharge the several functions of his office.

Thus the commission of a commander in chief, when it is simple and unlimited, gives
him an absolute power over the army, a right to march it whither he thinks proper, to
undertake such operations as he finds conducive to the service of the state, &c. It is
true, indeed, that the powers of a general are often limited; but the example of marshal
Turenne sufficiently shews, that, when the sovereign is certain of having made a good
choice, the best thing he can do in this respect is to give the general an unlimited
power. Had the operations of the duke of Marlborough depended on the directions of
the cabinet, there is little probability that all his campaigns would have been crowned
with such distinguished success.

When a governor is besieged in the place where he commands, and all communication
with his sovereign is cut off, that very circumstance confers on him the whole
authority of the state, so far as respects the defence of the town and the safety of the
garrison.

These particulars merit the utmost attention, as they furnish a principle for
determining what the several commanders, who are the subordinate or inferior powers
in war, may execute with sufficient authority. Exclusive of the consequences which

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 313 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

may be deduced from the very nature of their employments, we are likewise to
consider the general practice and established usage in this respect. If it be a known
fact, that, in the service of a particular nation, officers of a certain rank have been
uniformly invested with such or such powers, it may reasonably be presumed that the
person we are engaged with, is furnished with the same powers.

Every promise made by any of the subordinate powers, by any §20. How their
commander within his department, in conformity to the terms of promises bind the
his commission and to the authority which he naturally derives sovereign.
from his office and the functions intrusted to his care,—every
such promise, I say, is, for the reasons above alleged, made in the name and by the
authority of the sovereign, and equally obligatory on him, as if he had himself
personally made it. Thus a governor capitulates for the town which he commands, and
for the garrison; and what he has promised, the sovereign cannot invalidate. In the last
war,4 the general who commanded the French at Lintz5 engaged to march back his
troops on this side the Rhine. Governors of towns have often promised that, for a
limited time, their garrisons should not carry arms against the enemy with whom they
capitulated: and these capitulations have always been faithfully observed.

But if a subordinate power allows himself a greater latitude, and §21. In what cases
exceeds the authority annexed to his office, his promise becomes their promises bind
no more than a private engagement, or what is called sponsio, of only themselves.
which we have already treated (B. II. Ch. XIV.). This was the
case of the Roman consuls at the Furcae Caudinae. They might indeed agree to
deliver hostages, and that their army should pass under the yoke, &c. but they were
not authorised to conclude a peace, as they took care to signify to the Samnites.

If a subordinate power assumes an authority which he does not §22. Their assumption
possess, and thus deceives the party treating with him, though an of an authority which
enemy,— he is naturally responsible for the damage caused by they do not possess.
his deception, and bound to make reparation. I say “though an
ene-my”: for the faith of treaties is to be observed between enemies, as all men of
principle agree, and as we shall prove in the sequel. The sovereign of that fraudulent
officer ought to punish him, and oblige him to repair his fault:— it is a duty which the
prince owes to justice, and to his own character.

Promises, made by a subordinate power, are obligatory on those §23. How they bind
who are subject to his control, and bind them in every particular their inferiors.
in which he is authorised and accustomed to command their
obedience: for, with respect to such particulars, he is vested with the sovereign
authority, which his inferiors are bound to respect in his person. Thus, in a
capitulation, the governor of a town stipulates and promises for his garrison, and even
for the magistrates and citizens.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 314 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER III

Of The Just Causes Of War.
Whoever entertains a true idea of war,—whoever considers its §24. War never to be
terrible effects, its destructive and unhappy consequences,—will undertaken without
readily agree that it should never be undertaken without the most very cogent reasons.
cogent reasons. Humanity revolts against a sovereign, who,
without necessity or without very powerful reasons, lavishes the blood of his most
faithful subjects, and exposes his people to the calamities of war, when he has it in his
power to maintain them in the enjoyment of an honourable and salutary peace. And if
to this imprudence, this want of love for his people, he moreover adds injustice
towards those he attacks,—of how great a crime, or rather, of what a frightful series of
crimes, does he not become guilty! Responsible for all the misfortunes which he
draws down on his own subjects, he is moreover loaded with the guilt of all those
which he inflicts on an innocent nation. The slaughter of men, the pillage of cities, the
devastation of provinces,—such is the black catalogue of his enormities. He is
responsible to God, and accountable to human nature, for every individual that is
killed, for every hut that is burned down. The violences, the crimes, the disorders of
every kind, attendant on the tumult and licentiousness of war, pollute his conscience,
and are set down to his account, as he is the original author of them all.
Unquestionable truths! alarming ideas! which ought to affect the rulers of nations,
and, in all their military enterprises, inspire them with a degree of circumspection
proportionate to the importance of the subject!

Were men always reasonable, they would terminate their §25. Justificatory
contests by the arms of reason only: natural justice and equity reasons, and motives
would be their rule, or their judge. Force is a wretched and for making war.
melancholy expedient against those who spurn at justice, and re-
fuse to listen to the remonstrances of reason: but, in short, it becomes necessary to
adopt that mode, when every other proves ineffectual. It is only in extremities that a
just and wise nation or a good prince has recourse to it, as we have shewn in the
concluding chapter of the second book. The reasons which may determine him to take
such a step, are of two classes. Those of the one class shew that he has a right to make
war,—that he has just grounds for undertaking it:—these are called justificatory
reasons. The others, founded on fitness and utility, determine whether it be expedient
for the sovereign to undertake a war:—these are called motives.

The right of employing force, or making war, belongs to nations §26. What is in
no farther than is necessary for their own defence and for the general a just cause of
maintenance of their rights (§3). Now if any one attacks a nation, war.
or violates her perfect rights, he does her an injury. Then, and not
till then, that nation has a right to repel the aggressor, and reduce him to reason.
Further, she has a right to prevent the intended injury, when she sees herself
threatened with it (Book II. §50). Let us then say in general, that the foundation or

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 315 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

cause of every just war is injury, either already done, or threatened. The justificatory
reasons for war shew that an injury has been received, or so far threatened as to
authorise a prevention of it by arms. It is evident, however, that here the question
regards the principal in the war, and not those who join in it as auxiliaries. When,
therefore, we would judge whether a war be just, we must consider whether he who
undertakes it has in fact received an injury, or whether he be really threatened with
one. And in order to determine what is to be considered as an injury, we must be
acquainted with a nation’s rights, properly so called,—that is to say, her perfect
rights. These are of various kinds, and very numerous, but may all be referred to the
general heads of which we have already treated, and shall further treat in the course of
this work. Whatever strikes at these rights is an injury, and a just cause of war.

The immediate consequence of the premisses is, that if a nation §27. What war is
takes up arms when she has received no injury, nor is threatened unjust.
with any, she undertakes an unjust war. Those alone, to whom an
injury is done or intended, have a right to make war.

From the same principle we shall likewise deduce the just and §28. The object of
lawful object of every war, which is, to avenge or prevent injury. war.
To avenge signifies here to prosecute the reparation of an injury,
if it be of a nature to be repaired,—or, if the evil be irreparable, to obtain a just
satisfaction,—and also to punish the offender, if requisite, with a view of providing
for our future safety. The right to security authorises us to do all this (Book II.
§§49–52). We may therefore distinctly point out, as objects of a lawful war, the three
following—1. To recover what belongs or is due to us. 2. To provide for our future
safety by punishing the aggressor or offender. 3. To defend ourselves, or to protect
our-selves from injury, by repelling unjust violence. The two first are the objects of an
offensive, the third that of a defensive war. Camillus, when on the point of attacking
the Gauls, concisely set forth to his soldiers all the subjects on which war can be
grounded or justified—omnia, quae defendi, repetique, et ulcisci fas sit.*6

As the nation, or her ruler, ought, in every undertaking, not only §29. Both
to respect justice, but also to keep in view the advantage of the justificatory reasons
state,—it is necessary that proper and commendable motives and proper motives
should concur with the justificatory reasons, to induce a requisite in
determination to embark in a war. These reasons shew that the undertaking a war.

sovereign has a right to take up arms, that he has just cause to do
so. The proper motives shew that in the present case it is advisable and expedient to
make use of his right. These latter relate to prudence, as the justificatory reasons come
under the head of justice.

I call proper and commendable motives those derived from the §30. Proper motives.
good of the state, from the safety and common advantage of the
citizens. They are inseparable from the justificatory reasons,—a breach of justice
being never truly advantageous. Though an unjust war may for a time enrich a state,
and extend her frontiers, it renders her odious to other nations, and exposes her to the
danger of being crushed by them. Besides, do opulence and extent of dominion
always constitute the happiness of states? Amidst the multitude of examples which

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 316 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

might here be quoted, let us confine our view to that of the Romans. The Roman
republic ruined herself by her triumphs, by the excess of her conquests and power.
Rome, when mistress of the world, but enslaved by tyrants and oppressed by a
military government, had reason to deplore the success of her arms, and to look back
with regret on those happy times when her power did not extend beyond the bounds
of Italy, or even when her dominion was almost confined within the circuit of her
walls.

Vicious motives are those which have not for their object the Vicious motives.
good of the state, and which, instead of being drawn from that
pure source, are suggested by the violence of the passions. Such are the arrogant
desire of command, the ostentation of power, the thirst of riches, the avidity of
conquest, hatred and revenge.

The whole right of the nation, and consequently of the sovereign, §31. War undertaken
is derived from the welfare of the state; and by this rule it is to be upon just grounds, but
measured. The obligation to promote and maintain the true from vicious motives.
welfare of the society or state gives the nation a right to take up
arms against him who threatens or attacks that valuable enjoyment. But if a nation, on
an injury done to her, is induced to take up arms, not by the necessity of procuring a
just reparation, but by a vicious motive, she abuses her right. The viciousness of the
motive tarnishes the lustre of her arms, which might otherwise have shone in the
cause of justice:—the war is not undertaken for the lawful cause which the nation had
to engage in it: that cause is now no more than a pretext. As to the sovereign in
particular, the ruler of the nation,—what right has he to expose the safety of the state,
with the lives and fortunes of the citizens, to gratify his passions? It is only for the
good of the nation that the supreme power is intrusted to him; and it is with that view
that he ought to exert it: that is the object prescribed to him even in his least important
measures: and shall he undertake the most important and the most dangerous, from
motives foreign or contrary to that great end? Yet nothing is more common than such
a destructive inversion of views; and it is remarkable, that, on this account, the
judicious Polybius gives the name of causes* to the motives on which war is
undertaken,—and of pretexts* to the justificatory reasons alleged in defence of it.
Thus he informs us that the cause of the war which Greece undertook against the
Persians was the experience she had had of their weakness, and that the pretext
alleged by Philip, or by Alexander after him, was the desire of avenging the injuries
which the Greeks had so often suffered, and of providing for their future safety.

Let us however entertain a better opinion of nations and their §32. Pretexts.
rulers. There are just causes of war, real justificatory reasons;
and why should there not be sovereigns who sincerely consider them as their warrant,
when they have besides reasonable motives for taking up arms? We shall therefore
give the name of pretexts to those reasons alleged as justificatory, but which are so
only in appearance, or which are even absolutely destitute of all foundation. The name
of pretexts may likewise be applied to reasons which are, in themselves, true and
well-founded, but, not being of sufficient importance for undertaking a war, are made
use of only to cover ambitious views, or some other vicious motive. Such was the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 317 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

complaint of the czar Peter I. that sufficient honours had not been paid him on his
passage through Riga. His other reasons for declaring war against Sweden I here omit.

Pretexts are at least a homage which unjust men pay to justice. He who screens
himself with them shews that he still retains some sense of shame. He does not openly
trample on what is most sacred in human society: he tacitly acknowledges that a
flagrant injustice merits the indignation of all mankind.

Whoever, without justificatory reasons, undertakes a war merely §33. War undertaken
from motives of advantage, acts without any right, and his war is merely for advantage.
unjust. And he, who, having in reality just grounds for taking up
arms, is nevertheless solely actuated by interested views in resorting to hostilities,
cannot indeed be charged with injustice, but he betrays a vicious disposition: his
conduct is reprehensible, and sullied by the badness of his motives. War is so dreadful
a scourge, that nothing less than manifest justice, joined to a kind of necessity, can
authorise it, render it commendable, or at least exempt it from reproach.

Nations that are always ready to take up arms on any prospect of §34. Nations who
advantage, are lawless robbers: but those who seem to delight in make war without
the ravages of war, who spread it on all sides, without reasons or reason or apparent
pretexts, and even without any other motive than their own motives.
ferocity, are monsters, unworthy the name of men. They should
be considered as enemies to the human race, in the same manner as, in civil society,
professed assassins and incendiaries are guilty, not only towards the particular victims
of their nefarious deeds, but also towards the state, which therefore proclaims them
public enemies. All nations have a right to join in a confederacy for the purpose of
punishing and even exterminating those savage nations. Such were several German
tribes mentioned by Tacitus,— such those barbarians who destroyed the Roman
empire: nor was it till long after their conversion to Christianity that this ferocity wore
off. Such have been the Turks and other Tartars,—Genghis-khan, Timur-Bec or
Tamerlane, who, like Attila, were scourges employed by the wrath of heaven, and
who made war only for the pleasure of making it. Such are, in polished ages and
among the most civilised nations, those supposed heroes, whose supreme delight is a
battle, and who make war from inclination purely, and not from love to their country.

Defensive war is just when made against an unjust aggressor. §35. How defensive
This requires no proof. Self-defence against unjust violence is war is just or unjust.
not only the right but the duty of a nation, and one of her most
sacred duties. But if the enemy who wages offensive war has justice on his side, we
have no right to make forcible opposition; and the defensive war then becomes unjust:
for that enemy only exerts his lawful right:—he took up arms only to obtain justice
which was refused to him; and it is an act of injustice to resist any one in the exertion
of his right.

All that remains to be done in such a case is to offer the invader a §36. How it may
just satisfaction. If he will not be content with this, a nation gains become just against
one great advantage,—that of having turned the balance of an offensive war

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 318 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

justice on her own side; and his hostilities now becoming unjust, which at first was
as having no longer any foundation, may very justly be opposed. just.

The Samnites, instigated by the ambition of their chiefs, had ravaged the lands of the
allies of Rome. When they became sensible of their misconduct, they offered full
reparation for the damages, with every reasonable satisfaction: but all their
submissions could not appease the Romans; whereupon Caius Pontius, general of the
Samnites, said to his men, “Since the Romans are absolutely determined on war,
necessity justifies it on our side; an appeal to arms becomes lawful on the part of
those who are deprived of every other resource”—Justum est bellum, quibus
necessarium; et pia arma, quibus nulla nisi in armis relinquitur spes.*7

In order to estimate the justice of an offensive war, the nature of §37. How an
the subject for which a nation takes up arms must be first offensive war is just
considered. We should be thoroughly assured of our right before in an evident cause.
we proceed to assert it in so dreadful a manner. If, therefore, the
question relate to a thing which is evidently just, as the recovery of our property, the
assertion of a clear and incontestable right, or the attainment of just satisfaction for a
manifest injury,—and if we cannot obtain justice otherwise than by force of
arms,—offensive war becomes lawful. Two things are therefore necessary to render it
just,—first, some right which is to be asserted,— that is to say, that we be authorised
to demand something of another nation:—2. that we be unable to obtain it otherwise
than by force of arms. Necessity alone warrants the use of force. It is a dangerous and
terrible resource. Nature, the common parent of mankind, allows of it only in cases of
the last extremity, and when all other means fail. It is doing wrong to a nation, to
make use of violence against her, before we know whether she be disposed to do us
justice, or to refuse it.

Those who, without trying pacific measures, run to arms on every trifling occasion,
sufficiently shew that justificatory reasons are, in their mouths, mere pretexts: they
eagerly seize the opportunity of indulging their passions and gratifying their ambition
under some colour of right.

In a doubtful cause, where the rights are uncertain, obscure, and §38. In a doubtful
disputable, all that can be reasonably required, is, that the cause.
question be discussed (Book II. §331), and that, if it be
impossible fully to clear it up, the contest be terminated by an equitable compromise.
If therefore one of the parties should refuse to accede to such conciliatory measures,
the other is justifiable in taking up arms to compel him to an accommodation. And we
must observe, that war does not decide the question; victory only compels the
vanquished to subscribe to the treaty which terminates the difference. It is an error, no
less absurd than pernicious, to say that war is to decide controversies between those
who acknowledge no superior judge,—as is the case with nations. Victory usually
favours the cause of strength and prudence rather than that of right and justice. It
would be a bad rule of decision; but it is an effectual mode of compelling him who
refuses to accede to such measures as are consonant to justice; and it becomes just in
the hands of a prince who uses it seasonably and for a lawful cause.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 319 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

War cannot be just on both sides. One party claims a right; the §39. War cannot be
other disputes it:—the one complains of an injury; the other just on both sides.
denies having done it. They may be considered as two
individuals disputing on the truth of a proposition; and it is impossible that two
contrary sentiments should be true at the same time.

It may however happen that both the contending parties are §40. Sometimes
candid and sincere in their intentions; and, in a doubtful cause, it reputed lawful.
is still uncertain which side is in the right. Wherefore, since
nations are equal and independent (Book II. §36, and Prelim. §§18, 19), and cannot
claim a right of judgment over each other, it follows, that, in every case susceptible of
doubt, the arms of the two parties at war are to be accounted equally lawful, at least as
to external effects, and until the decision of the cause. But neither does that
circumstance deprive other nations of the liberty of forming their own judgment on
the case, in order to determine how they are to act, and to assist that party who shall
appear to have right on his side,—nor does that effect of the independence of nations
operate in exculpation of the author of an unjust war, who certainly incurs a high
degree of guilt. But if he acts in consequence of invincible ignorance or error, the
injustice of his arms is not imputable to him.

When offensive war has for its object the punishment of a nation, §41. War undertaken
it ought, like every other war, to be founded on right and to punish a nation.
necessity. 1. On right:—an injury must have been actually
received. Injury alone being a just cause of war (§26), the reparation of it may be
lawfully prosecuted: or if in its nature it be irreparable (the only case in which we are
allowed to punish), we are authorised to provide for our own safety, and even for that
of all other nations, by inflicting on the offender a punishment capable of correcting
him, and serving as an example to others. 2. A war of this kind must have necessity to
justify it: that is to say, that, to be lawful, it must be the only remaining mode to
obtain a just satisfaction; which implies a reasonable security for the time to come. If
that complete satisfaction be offered, or if it may be obtained without a war, the injury
is done away, and the right to security no longer authorises us to seek vengeance for
it.—See Book II. §§49, 52.

The nation in fault is bound to submit to a punishment which she has deserved, and to
suffer it by way of atonement: but she is not obliged to give herself up to the
discretion of an incensed enemy. Therefore, when attacked, she ought to make a
tender of satisfaction, and ask what penalty is required; and if no explicit answer be
given, or the adversary attempts to impose a disproportionate penalty, she then
acquires a right to resist, and her defence becomes lawful.

On the whole, however, it is evident that the offended party alone has a right to punish
independent persons. We shall not here repeat what we have said elsewhere (Book II.
§7) of the dangerous mistake or extravagant pretensions of those who assume a right
of punishing an independent nation for faults which do not concern them,—who,
madly setting themselves up as defenders of the cause of God, take upon them to
punish the moral depravity or irreligion of a people not committed to their
superintendency.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 320 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Here a very celebrated question, and of the highest importance, §42. Whether the
presents itself. It is asked, whether the aggrandisement of a aggrandisement of a
neighbouring power, by whom a nation fears she may one day be neighbouring power
crushed, be a sufficient reason for making war against can authorise a war
him,—whether she be justifiable in taking up arms to oppose his against him.

aggrandisement, or to weaken him, with the sole view of
securing herself from those dangers which the weaker states have almost always
reason to apprehend from an overgrown power. To the majority of politicians this
question is no problem: it is more difficult of solution to those who wish to see justice
and prudence ever inseparably united.

On the one hand, a state that increases her power by all the arts of good government,
does no more than what is commendable: she fulfils her duties towards herself,
without violating those which she owes to other nations. The sovereign, who, by
inheritance, by free election, or by any other just and honourable means, enlarges his
dominions by the addition of new provinces or entire kingdoms, only makes use of his
right, without injuring any person. How then should it be lawful to attack a state
which, for its aggrandisement, makes use only of lawful means? We must either have
actually suffered an injury or be visibly threatened with one, before we are authorised
to take up arms, or have just grounds for making war (§§26, 27). On the other hand it
is but too well known from sad and uniform experience, that predominating powers
seldom fail to molest their neighbours, to oppress them, and even totally subjugate
them, whenever an opportunity occurs, and they can do it with impunity. Europe was
on the point of falling into servitude for want of a timely opposition to the growing
fortune of Charles V. Is the danger to be waited for? Is the storm, which might be
dispersed at its rising, to be permitted to increase? Are we to allow of the
aggrandisement of a neighbour, and quietly wait till he makes his preparations to
enslave us? Will it be a time to defend ourselves when we are deprived of the
means?—Prudence is a duty incumbent on all men, and most pointedly so on the
heads of nations, as being commissioned to watch over the safety of a whole people.
Let us endeavour to solve this momentous question, agreeably to the sacred principles
of the law of nature and of nations. We shall find that they do not lead to weak
scruples, and that it is an invariable truth that justice is inseparable from sound policy.

And first, let us observe, that prudence, which is, no doubt, a §43. Alone and of
virtue highly necessary in sovereigns, can never recommend the itself, it cannot give a
use of unlawful means for the attainment of a just and laudable right to attack him.
end. Let not the safety of the people, that supreme law of the
state, be alleged here in objection; for the very safety of the people itself, and the
common safety of nations, prohibit the use of means which are repugnant to justice
and probity. Why are certain means unlawful? If we closely consider the point, if we
trace it to its first principles, we shall see that it is purely because the introduction of
them would be pernicious to human society, and productive of fatal consequences to
all nations. See particularly what we have said concerning the observance of justice
(Book II. Ch. V.). For the interest, therefore, and even the safety of nations, we ought
to hold it as a sacred maxim, that the end does not sanctify the means. And since war
is not justifiable on any other ground than that of avenging an injury received, or
preserving ourselves from one with which we are threatened (§26), it is a sacred

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 321 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

principle of the law of nations, that an increase of power cannot, alone and of itself,
give any one a right to take up arms in order to oppose it.

No injury has been received from that power (so the question §44. How the
supposes). We must therefore have good grounds to think appearances of danger
ourselves threatened by him, before we can lawfully have give that right.
recourse to arms. Now power alone does not threaten an
injury:—it must be accompanied by the will. It is indeed very unfortunate for
mankind, that the will and inclination to oppress may be almost always supposed,
where there is a power of oppressing with impunity. But these two things are not
necessarily inseparable: and the only right which we derive from the circumstance of
their being generally or frequently united, is that of taking the first appearances for a
sufficient indication. When once a state has given proofs of injustice, rapacity, pride,
ambition, or an imperious thirst of rule, she becomes an object of suspicion to her
neighbours, whose duty it is to stand on their guard against her. They may come upon
her at the moment when she is on the point of acquiring a formidable accession of
power,—may demand securities,—and, if she hesitates to give them, may prevent her
designs by force of arms. The interests of nations are, in point of importance, widely
different from those of individuals: the sovereign must not be remiss in his attention
to them, nor suffer his generosity and greatness of soul to supercede his suspicions. A
nation that has a neighbour at once powerful and ambitious, has her all at stake. As
men are under a necessity of regulating their conduct in most cases by probabilities,
those probabilities claim their attention in proportion to the importance of the subject:
and (to make use of a geometrical expression) their right to obviate a danger is in a
compound ratio of the degree of probability, and the greatness of the evil threatened.
If the evil in question be of a supportable nature,—if it be only some slight loss,—
matters are not to be precipitated: there is no great danger in delaying our opposition
to it, till there be a certainty of our being threatened. But if the safety of the state lies
at stake, our precaution and foresight cannot be extended too far. Must we delay to
avert our ruin till it is become inevitable? If the appearances are so easily credited, it
is the fault of that neighbour, who has betrayed his ambition by several indications. If
Charles the Second, king of Spain,8 instead of settling the succession on the duke of
Anjou, had appointed for his heir Louis XIV. himself,—to have tamely suffered the
union of the monarchy of Spain with that of France, would, according to all the rules
of human foresight, have been nothing less than delivering up all Europe to servitude,
or at least reducing it to the most critical and precarious situation. But then, if two
independent nations think fit to unite, so as afterwards to form one joint empire, have
they not a right to do it? And who is authorised to oppose them? I answer, they have a
right to form such a union, provided the views by which they are actuated be not
prejudicial to other states. Now if each of the two nations in question be, separately
and without assistance, able to govern and support herself, and to defend herself from
insult and oppression, it may be reasonably presumed that the object of their coalition
is to domineer over their neighbours. And on occasions where it is impossible or too
dangerous to wait for an absolute certainty, we may justly act on a reasonable
presumption. If a stranger levels a musket at me in the middle of a forest, I am not yet
certain that he intends to kill me: but shall I, in order to be convinced of his design,
allow him time to fire? What reasonable casuist will deny me the right to anticipate
him? But presumption becomes nearly equivalent to certainty, if the prince who is on

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 322 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

the point of rising to an enormous power, has already given proofs of imperious pride
and insatiable ambition. In the preceding supposition, who could have advised the
powers of Europe to suffer such a formidable accession to the power of Louis the
Fourteenth? Too certain of the use he would have made of it, they would have joined
in opposing it: and in this their safety warranted them.9 To say that they should have
allowed him time to establish his dominion over Spain, and consolidate the union of
the two monarchies,—and that, for fear of doing him an injury, they should have
quietly waited till he crushed them all,—would not this be, in fact, depriving mankind
of the right to regulate their conduct by the dictates of prudence, and to act on the
ground of probability? Would it not be robbing them of the liberty to provide for their
own safety, as long as they have not mathematical demonstration of its being in
danger? It would have been in vain to have preached such a doctrine. The principal
sovereigns of Europe, habituated, by the administration of Louvois,10 to dread the
views and power of Louis XIV. carried their mistrust so far, that they would not even
suffer a prince of the house of France to sit on the throne of Spain, though invited to it
by the nation, whose approbation had sanctioned the will of her former sovereign. He
ascended it, however, notwithstanding the efforts of those who so strongly dreaded his
elevation; and it has since appeared that their policy was too suspicious.

It is still easier to prove, that, should that formidable power §45. Another case
betray an unjust and ambitious disposition by doing the least more evident.
injustice to another, all nations may avail themselves of the
occasion, and, by joining the injured party, thus form a coalition of strength, in order
to humble that ambitious potentate, and disable him from so easily oppressing his
neighbours, or keeping them in continual awe and fear. For an injury gives us a right
to provide for our future safety, by depriving the unjust aggressor of the means of
injuring us; and it is lawful and even praise-worthy to assist those who are oppressed,
or unjustly attacked.

Enough has been said on this subject, to set the minds of politicians at ease, and to
relieve them from all apprehension that a strict and punctilious observance of justice
in this particular would pave the way to slavery. It is perhaps wholly unprecedented
that a state should receive any remarkable accession of power, without giving other
states just causes of complaint. Let the other nations be watchful and alert in
repressing that growing power, and they will have nothing to fear. The emperor
Charles V. laid hold on the pretext of religion, in order to oppress the princes of the
empire, and subject them to his absolute authority. If, by following up his victory over
the elector of Saxony,11 he had accomplished that vast design, the liberties of all
Europe would have been endangered. It was therefore with good reason that France
assisted the protestants of Germany:—the care of her own safety authorised and urged
her to the measure. When the same prince seized on the duchy of Milan, the
sovereigns of Europe ought to have assisted France in contending with him for the
possession of it, and to have taken advantage of the circumstance, in order to reduce
his power within just bounds. Had they prudently availed themselves of the just
causes which he soon gave them to form a league against him, they would have saved
themselves the subsequent anxieties for their tottering liberty.12

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 323 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

But, suppose that powerful state, by the justice and §46. Other allowable
circumspection of her conduct, affords us no room to take means of defence
exception to her proceedings, are we to view her progress with against a formidable
an eye of indifference? are we to remain quiet spectators of the power.
rapid increase of her power, and imprudently expose ourselves to
such designs as it may inspire her with?—No, beyond all doubt. In a matter of so high
importance, imprudent supineness would be unpardonable. The example of the
Romans is a good lesson for all sovereigns. Had the potentates of those times
concerted together to keep a watchful eye on the enterprises of Rome, and to check
her encroachments, they would not have successively fallen into servitude. But force
of arms is not the only expedient by which we may guard against a formidable power.
There are other means, of a gentler nature, and which are at all times lawful. The most
effectual is a confederacy of the less powerful sovereigns, who, by this coalition of
strength, become able to hold the balance against that potentate whose power excites
their alarms. Let them be firm and faithful in their alliance; and their union will prove
the safety of each.

They may also mutually favour each other, to the exclusion of him whom they fear;
and by reciprocally allowing various advantages to the subjects of the allies,
especially in trade, and refusing them to those of that dangerous potentate, they will
augment their own strength, and diminish his, without affording him any just cause of
complaint, since every one is at liberty to grant favours and indulgences at his own
pleasure.

Europe forms a political system, an integral body, closely §47. Political
connected by the relations and different interests of the nations equilibrium.
inhabiting this part of the world. It is not, as formerly, a con-
fused heap of detached pieces, each of which thought herself very little concerned in
the fate of the others, and seldom regarded things which did not immediately concern
her. The continual attention of sovereigns to every occurrence, the constant residence
of ministers, and the perpetual negotiations, make of modern Europe a kind of
republic, of which the members— each independent, but all linked together by the ties
of common interest—unite for the maintenance of order and liberty. Hence arose that
famous scheme of the political balance, or the equilibrium of power; by which is
understood such a disposition of things, as that no one potentate be able absolutely to
predominate, and prescribe laws to the others.

The surest means of preserving that equilibrium would be, that §48. Ways of
no power should be much superior to the others,—that all, or at maintaining it.
least the greater part, should be nearly equal in force. Such a
project has been attributed to Henry the Fourth:* but it would have been impossible to
carry it into execution without injustice and violence. Besides, suppose such equality
once established, how could it always be maintained by lawful means? Commerce,
industry, military pre-eminence, would soon put an end to it. The right of inheritance,
vesting even in women and their descendents,—a rule, which it was so absurd to
establish in the case of sovereignties, but which nevertheless is established,—would
completely overturn the whole system.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 324 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

It is a more simple, an easier, and a more equitable plan, to have recourse to the
method just mentioned, of forming confederacies in order to oppose the more
powerful potentate, and prevent him from giving law to his neighbours. Such is the
mode at present pursued by the sovereigns of Europe. They consider the two principal
powers, which on that very account are naturally rivals, as destined to be checks on
each other; and they unite with the weaker, like so many weights thrown into the
lighter scale, in order to keep it in equilibrium with the other. The house of Austria
has long been the preponderating power: at present France is so in her turn. England,
whose opulence and formidable fleets have a powerful influence, without alarming
any state on the score of its liberty, because that nation seems cured of the rage of
conquest,— England, I say, has the glory of holding the political balance. She is
attentive to preserve it in equilibrium:—a system of policy, which is in itself highly
just and wise, and will ever entitle her to praise, as long as she continues to pursue it
only by means of alliances, confederacies, and other methods equally lawful.13

Confederacies would be a sure mode of preserving the §49. How he who
equilibrium, and thus maintaining the liberty of nations, did all destroys the
princes thoroughly understand their true interests, and make the equilibrium may be
welfare of the state serve as the rule in all their proceedings. restrained, or even
Great potentates, however, are but too successful in gaining over weakened.

par-tisans and allies, who blindly adopt all their views. Dazzled
by the glare of a present advantage, seduced by their avarice, deceived by faithless
ministers,—how many princes become the tools of a power which will one day
swallow up either themselves or their successors! The safest plan, therefore, is to
seize the first favourable opportunity when we can, consistently with justice, weaken
that potentate who destroys the equilibrium (§45)—or to employ every honourable
means to prevent his acquiring too formidable a degree of power. For that purpose, all
the other nations should be particularly attentive not to suffer him to aggrandise
himself by arms: and this they may at all times do with justice. For if this prince
makes an unjust war, every one has a right to succour the oppressed party. If he makes
a just war, the neutral nations may interfere as mediators for an
accommodation,—they may induce the weaker state to propose reasonable terms and
offer a fair satisfaction,—and may save her from falling under the yoke of a
conqueror. On the offer of equitable conditions to the prince who wages even the
most justifiable war, he has all that he can demand. The justice of his cause, as we
shall soon see, never gives him a right to subjugate his enemy, unless when that
extremity becomes necessary to his own safety, or when he has no other mode of
obtaining indemnification for the injury he has received. Now, that is not the case
here, as the interposing nations can by other means procure him a just
indemnification, and an assurance of safety.

In fine, there cannot exist a doubt, that, if that formidable potentate certainly entertain
designs of oppression and conquest,—if he betray his views by his preparations and
other proceedings,—the other states have a right to anticipate him: and if the fate of
war declares in their favour, they are justifiable in taking advantage of this happy
opportunity to weaken and reduce a power too contrary to the equilibrium, and
dangerous to the common liberty.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 325 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

This right of nations is still more evident against a sovereign, who, from an habitual
propensity to take up arms without reasons or even so much as plausible pretexts, is
continually disturbing the public tranquillity.

This leads us to a particular question nearly allied to the §50. Behaviour
preceding. When a neighbour, in the midst of a profound peace, allowable towards a
erects fortresses on our frontier, equips a fleet, augments his neighbour preparing
troops, assembles a powerful army, fills his magazines,—in a for war.
word, when he makes preparations for war,—are we allowed to
attack him with a view to prevent the danger with which we think ourselves
threatened? The answer greatly depends on the manners and character of that
neighbour. We must inquire into the reasons of those preparations, and bring him to
an explanation:— such is the mode of proceeding in Europe: and if his sincerity be
justly suspected, securities may be required of him. His refusal in this case would
furnish ample indication of sinister designs, and a sufficient reason to justify us in
anticipating them. But if that sovereign has never betrayed any symptoms of baseness
and perfidy, and especially if at that time there is no dispute subsisting between him
and us, why should we not quietly rest on his word, only taking such precautions as
prudence renders indispensable? We ought not, without sufficient cause, to presume
him capable of exposing himself to infamy by adding perfidy to violence. As long as
he has not rendered his sincerity questionable, we have no right to require any other
security from him.

It is true, however, that if a sovereign continues to keep up a powerful army in
profound peace, his neighbours must not suffer their vigilance to be entirely lulled to
sleep by his bare word; and prudence requires that they should keep themselves on
their guard. However certain they may be of the good-faith of that prince, unforeseen
differences may intervene; and shall they leave him the advantage of being provided
at that juncture with a numerous and well-disciplined army, while they themselves
will have only new levies to oppose it? Unquestionably, no. This would be leaving
themselves almost wholly at his discretion. They are therefore under the necessity of
following his example, and keeping, as he does, a numerous army on foot:—and what
a burden is this to a state! Formerly, and without going any farther back than the last
century, it was pretty generally made an article in every treaty of peace, that the
belligerent powers should disarm on both sides,—that they should disband their
troops. If, in a time of profound peace, a prince was disposed to keep up any
considerable number of forces, his neighbours took their measures accordingly,
formed leagues against him, and obliged him to disarm. Why has not that salutary
custom been preserved? The constant maintenance of numerous armies deprives the
soil of its cultivators, checks the progress of population, and can only serve to destroy
the liberties of the nation by whom they are maintained. Happy England! whose
situation exempts it from any considerable charge in supporting the instruments of
despotism. Happy Switzerland! if, continuing carefully to exercise her militia, she
keeps herself in a condition to repel any foreign enemies, without feeding a host of
idle soldiers who might one day crush the liberties of the people, and even bid
defiance to the lawful authority of the sovereign. Of this the Roman legions furnish a
signal instance. This happy method of a free republic,—the custom of training up all
her citizens to the art of war,—renders the state respectable abroad, and saves it from

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 326 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

a very pernicious defect at home. It would have been every-where imitated, had the
public good been every-where the only object in view.

Sufficient has now been said on the general principles for estimating the justice of a
war. Those who are thoroughly acquainted with the principles, and have just ideas of
the various rights of nations, will easily apply the rules to particular cases.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 327 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER IV

Of The Declaration Of War,— And Of War In Due Form.
The right of making war belongs to nations only as a remedy §51. Declaration of
against injustice: it is the offspring of unhappy necessity. This war.
remedy is so dreadful in its effects, so destructive to mankind, so
grievous even to the party who has recourse to it, that unquestionably the law of
nature allows of it only in the last extremity,—that is to say, when every other
expedient proves ineffectual for the maintenance of justice. It is demonstrated in the
foregoing chapter, that, in order to be justifiable in taking up arms, it is necessary—1.
That we have a just cause of complaint. 2. That a reasonable satisfaction have been
denied us. 3. The ruler of the nation, as we have observed, ought maturely to consider
whether it be for the advantage of the state to prosecute his right by force of arms. But
all this is not sufficient. As it is possible that the present fear of our arms may make
an impression on the mind of our adversary, and induce him to do us justice,—we
owe this farther regard to humanity, and especially to the lives Necessity thereof.
and peace of the subjects, to declare to that unjust nation, or its
chief, that we are at length going to have recourse to the last remedy, and make use of
open force for the purpose of bringing him to reason. This is called declaring war. All
this is included in the Roman manner of proceeding, regulated in their fecial law.
They first sent the chief of the feciales or heralds, called pater patratus, to demand
satisfaction of the nation who had offended them; and if within the space of thirty-
three days that nation did not return a satisfactory answer, the herald called the gods
to be witnesses of the injustice, and came away, saying that the Romans would
consider what measures they should adopt. The king, and in after times the consul,
hereupon asked the senate’s opinion; and when war was resolved on, the herald was
sent back to the frontier, where he declared it.* It is surprising to find among the
Romans such justice, such moderation and prudence, at a time too when apparently
nothing but courage and ferocity was to be expected from them. By such scrupulous
delicacy in the conduct of her wars, Rome laid a most solid foundation for her
subsequent greatness.

A declaration of war being necessary as a further effort to §52. What it is to
terminate the difference without the effusion of blood, by making contain.
use of the principle of fear in order to bring the enemy to more
equitable sentiments,— it ought, at the same time that it announces our settled
resolution of making war, to set forth the reasons which have induced us to take up
arms. This is at present the constant practice among the powers of Europe.

After a fruitless application for justice, a nation may proceed to a §53. It is simple or
declaration of war, which is then pure and simple. But, to include conditional.
the whole business in a single act instead of two separate ones,
the demand of justice (called by the Romans rerum repetitio) may, if we think proper,
be accompanied by a conditional declaration of war, notifying that we will

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 328 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

commence hostilities unless we obtain immediate satisfaction on such or such subject.
In this case there is no necessity for adding a pure and simple declaration of war,—the
conditional one sufficing, if the enemy delays giving satisfaction.

If the enemy, on either declaration of war, offers equitable §54. The right to
conditions of peace, we are bound to refrain from hostilities; for make war ceases on
as soon as justice is done to us, that immediately supercedes all the offer of equitable
right to employ force, which we are not allowed to use unless for conditions.
the necessary maintenance of our rights. To these offers,
however, are to be added securities; for we are under no obligation to suffer ourselves
to be amused by empty proposals. The word of a sovereign is a sufficient security, as
long as he has not disgraced his credit by any act of perfidy: and we should be
contented with it. As to the conditions themselves,—besides the principal subject, we
have a right to demand a reimbursement of the expenses incurred in our preparations
for war.

It is necessary that the declaration of war be known to the state §55. Formalities of a
against whom it is made. This is all which the natural law of declaration of war.
nations requires. Nevertheless, if custom has introduced certain
formalities in the business, those nations, who, by adopting the custom, have given
their tacit consent to such formalities, are under an obligation of observing them, as
long as they have not set them aside by a public renunciation (Prelim. §26). Formerly
the powers of Europe used to send heralds or embassadors to declare war; at present
they content themselves with publishing the declaration in the capital, in the principal
towns, or on the frontiers: manifestoes are issued; and through the easy and
expeditious channels of communication which the establishment of posts now affords,
the intelligence is soon spread on every side.

Besides the foregoing reasons, it is necessary for a nation to §56. Other reasons for
publish the declaration of war for the instruction and direction of the necessity of its
her own subjects, in order to fix the date of the rights which publication.
belong to them from the moment of this declaration, and in
relation to certain effects which the voluntary law of nations attributes to a war in
form. Without such a public declaration of war, it would, in a treaty of peace, be too
difficult to determine those acts which are to be considered as the effects of war, and
those that each nation may set down as injuries of which she means to demand
reparation. In the last treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle,14 between France and Spain on the
one side, and England on the other, it was agreed that all the prizes taken before the
declaration of war should be restored.

He who is attacked and only wages defensive war, needs not to §57. Defensive war
make any hostile declaration,—the state of warfare being requires no
sufficiently ascertained by the enemy’s declaration or open declaration.
hostilities. In modern times, however, the sovereign who is
attacked, seldom omits to declare war in his turn, whether from an idea of dignity, or
for the direction of his subjects.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 329 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

If the nation on whom we have determined to make war will not §58. When it may be
admit any minister or herald to declare it,—whatever the custom omitted in an
may otherwise be, we may content ourselves with publishing the offensive war.
declaration of hostilities within our own territories, or on the
frontier; and if the declaration does not come to the knowledge of that nation before
hostilities are commenced, she can only blame herself. The Turks imprison and
maltreat even the embassadors of those powers with whom they are determined to
come to a rupture: it would be a perilous undertaking for a herald to go and declare
war against them in their own country. Their savage disposition, therefore, supercedes
the necessity of sending one.

But no person being exempted from his duty for the sole reason §59. It is not to be
that another has been wanting in his, we are not to omit declaring omitted by way of
war against a nation previous to a commencement of hostilities, retaliation.
because that nation has on a former occasion attacked us without
any declaration. That nation, in so doing, has violated the law of nature (§51); and her
fault does not authorise us to commit a similar one.

The law of nations does not impose the obligation of declaring §60. Time of the
war, with a view to give the enemy time to prepare for an unjust declaration.
defence. The declaration, therefore, need not be made till the
army has reached the frontiers; it is even lawful to delay it till we have entered the
enemy’s territories, and there possessed ourselves of an advantageous post: it must,
however, necessarily precede the commission of any act of hostility. For thus we
provide for our own safety, and equally attain the object of a declaration of war,
which is, to give an unjust adversary the opportunity of seriously considering his past
conduct, and avoiding the horrors of war, by doing justice. Such was the conduct of
that generous prince, Henry the Fourth, towards Charles Emanuel duke of Savoy, who
had wearied his patience by vain and fraudulent negotiations.*15

If he who enters a country with an army kept under strict §61. Duty of the
discipline, declares to the inhabitants that he does not come as an inhabitants on a
enemy, that he will commit no violence, and will acquaint the foreign army’s
sovereign with the cause of his coming,—the inhabitants are not entering a country
to attack him; and should they dare to attempt it, he has a right to before a declaration

of war.
chastise them. But they are not to admit him into any strong-
holds, nor can he demand admission. It is not the business of subjects to commence
hostilities without orders from their sovereign: but if they are brave and loyal, they
will in the mean time seize on all the advantageous posts, and defend themselves
against any attempt made to dislodge them.

After a declaration of war on the part of the sovereign who has §62. Commencement
thus invaded the country, if equitable conditions are not offered of hostilities.
him without delay, he may commence his operations: for, I
repeat it, he is under no obligation to suffer himself to be amused. But, at the same
time, we are never to lose sight of the principles before laid down (§§26 and 51)
concerning the only legitimate causes of war. To march an army into a neighbouring
country by which we are not threatened, and without having endeavoured to obtain,

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 330 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

by reason and justice, an equitable reparation for the wrongs of which we complain,
would be introducing a mode pregnant with evils to mankind, and sapping the
foundations of the safety and tranquillity of states. If this mode of proceeding be not
exploded and proscribed by the public indignation and the concurrence of every
civilised people, it will become necessary to continue always in a military posture,
and to keep ourselves constantly on our guard, no less in times of profound peace,
than during the existence of declared and open war.

The sovereign declaring war can neither detain the persons nor §63. Conduct to be
the property of those subjects of the enemy who are within his observed towards the
dominions at the time of the declaration. They came into his subjects of an enemy,
country under the public faith. By permitting them to enter and who are in the country
reside in his territories, he tacitly promised them full liberty and at the time of the

declaration of war.
security for their return. He is therefore bound to allow them a
reasonable time for withdrawing with their effects; and if they stay beyond the term
prescribed, he has a right to treat them as enemies,—as unarmed enemies, however.
But if they are detained by an insurmountable impediment, as by sickness, he must
necessarily, and for the same reasons, grant them a sufficient extension of the term. At
present, so far from being wanting in this duty, sovereigns carry their attention to
humanity still farther, so that foreigners, who are subjects of the state against which
war is declared, are very frequently allowed full time for the settlement of their
affairs. This is observed in a particular manner with regard to merchants; and the case
is moreover carefully provided for, in commercial treaties. The king of England has
done more than this. In his last declaration of war against France, he ordained that all
French subjects who were in his dominions, should be at liberty to remain, and be
perfectly secure in their persons and effects, “provided they demeaned themselves
properly.”

We have said (§56) that a sovereign is to make the declaration of §64. Publication of
war public within his dominions, for the information and the war, and
direction of his subjects. He is also to make known his manifestoes.
declaration of war to the neutral powers, in order to acquaint
them with the justificatory reasons which authorise it,—the cause which obliges him
to take up arms,—and to notify to them that such or such a nation is his enemy, that
they may conduct themselves accordingly. We shall even see that this is necessary in
order to obviate all difficulty, when we come to treat of the right to seize certain
things which neutral persons are carrying to the enemy, and of what is termed
contraband in time of war. This publication of the war may be called declaration, and
that which is notified directly to the enemy, denunciation; and indeed the Latin term
is denunciatio belli.

War is at present published and declared by manifestoes. These pieces never fail to
contain the justificatory reasons, good or bad, on which the party grounds his right to
take up arms. The least scrupulous sovereign would wish to be thought just, equitable,
and a lover of peace: he is sensible that a contrary reputation might be detrimental to
him. The manifesto implying a declaration of war, or the declaration itself, printed,
published, and circulated throughout the whole state, contains also the sovereign’s
general orders to his subjects relative to their conduct in the war.*

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 331 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

In so civilised an age, it may be unnecessary to observe, that, in §65. Decorum and
those pieces which are published on the subject of war, it is moderation to be
proper to abstain from every opprobrious expression, indicative observed in the
of hatred, animosity, and rage, and only calculated to excite manifestoes.
similar sentiments in the bosom of the enemy. A prince ought to
preserve the most dignified decorum, both in his words and in his writings. He ought
to respect himself in the person of his equals: and though it is his misfortune to be at
variance with a nation, shall he inflame the quarrel by offensive expressions, and thus
deprive himself even of the hopes of a sincere reconciliation? Homer’s heroes call
each other “dog” and “drunkard”: but this was perfectly in character, since, in their
enmity, they knew no bounds. Frederic Barbarossa, and other emperors, and the popes
their enemies, treated each other with as little delicacy. Let us congratulate our age on
the superior gentleness of its manners, and not give the name of unmeaning politeness
to those attentions which are productive of real and substantial effects.

Those formalities of which the necessity is deducible from the §66. What is a lawful
principles and the very nature of war, are the characteristics of a war in due form.
lawful war in due form (justum bellum). Grotius says,* that,
according to the law of nations, two things are requisite to constitute a solemn or
formal war—first, that it be, on both sides, made by the sovereign authority,—
secondly, that it be accompanied by certain formalities. These formalities consist in
the demand of a just satisfaction (rerum repetitio), and in the declaration of war, at
least on the part of him who attacks;—for defensive war requires no declaration (§57),
nor even, on urgent occasions, an express order from the sovereign. In effect, these
two conditions are necessarily required in every war which shall, according to the law
of nations, be a legitimate one, that is to say, such a war as nations have a right to
wage. The right of making war belongs only to the sovereign (§4); and it is only after
satisfaction has been refused to him (§37), and even after he has made a declaration of
war (§51), that he has a right to take up arms.

A war in due form is also called a regular war, because certain rules, either prescribed
by the law of nature, or adopted by custom, are observed in it.

Legitimate and formal warfare must be carefully distinguished §67. It is to be
from those illegitimate and informal wars, or rather predatory distinguished from
expeditions, undertaken, either without lawful authority, or informal and unlawful
without apparent cause, as likewise without the usual formalities, war.
and solely with a view to plunder. Grotius relates several
instances of the latter.† Such were the enterprises of the grandes compagnies which
had assembled in France during the wars with the English,—armies of banditti, who
ranged about Europe, purely for spoil and plunder: such were the cruises of the
buccaneers, without commission, and in time of peace; and such in general are the
depredations of pirates. To the same class belong almost all the expeditions of the
Barbary corsairs: though authorised by a sovereign, they are undertaken without any
apparent cause, and from no other motive than the lust of plunder. These two species
of war, I say,—the lawful and the illegitimate,—are to be carefully distinguished, as
the effects and the rights arising from each are very different.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 332 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

In order fully to conceive the grounds of this distinction, it is §68. Grounds of this
necessary to recollect the nature and object of lawful war. It is distinction.
only as the last remedy against obstinate injustice that the law of
nature allows of war. Hence arise the rights which it gives, as we shall explain in the
sequel: hence likewise the rules to be observed in it. Since it is equally possible that
either of the parties may have right on his side,—and since, in consequence of the
independence of nations, that point is not to be decided by others (§40),—the
condition of the two enemies is the same, while the war lasts. Thus, when a nation or
a sovereign has declared war against another sovereign on account of a difference
arisen between them, their war is what among nations is called a lawful and formal
war; and its effects are, by the voluntary law of nations, the same on both sides,
independently of the justice of the cause, as we shall more fully shew in the sequel.*
Nothing of this kind is the case in an informal and illegitimate war, which is more
properly called depredation. Undertaken without any right, without even an apparent
cause, it can be productive of no lawful effect, nor give any right to the author of it. A
nation attacked by such sort of enemies is not under any obligation to observe towards
them the rules prescribed in formal war-fare. She may treat them as robbers. The
inhabitants of Geneva, after defeating the famous attempt to take their city by
escalade,† caused all the prisoners whom they took from the Savoyards on that
occasion, to be hanged up as robbers, who had come to attack them without cause and
without a declaration of war. Nor were the Genevese censured for this proceeding,
which would have been detested in a formal war.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 333 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER V

Of The Enemy, And Of Things Belonging To The Enemy.
The enemy is he with whom a nation is at open war. The Latins §69. Who is an
had a particular term (Hostis) to denote a public enemy, and enemy.
distinguished him from a private enemy (Inimicus). Our
language affords but one word for these two classes of persons, who ought
nevertheless to be carefully distinguished. A private enemy is one who seeks to hurt
us, and takes pleasure in the evil that befalls us. A public enemy forms claims against
us, or rejects ours, and maintains his real or pretended rights by force of arms. The
former is never innocent; he fosters rancour and hatred in his heart. It is possible that
the public enemy may be free from such odious sentiments, that he does not wish us
ill, and only seeks to maintain his rights. This observation is necessary in order to
regulate the dispositions of our heart towards a public enemy.

When the sovereign or ruler of the state declares war against §70. All the subjects
another sovereign, it is understood that the whole nation declares of the two states at
war against another nation: for the sovereign represents the war are enemies,
nation, and acts in the name of the whole society (Book I. §§40,
41); and it is only in a body, and in her national character, that one nation has to do
with another. Hence, these two nations are enemies, and all the subjects of the one are
enemies to all the subjects of the other. In this particular, custom and principles are in
accord.

Enemies continue such, wherever they happen to be. The place §71. and continue to
of abode is of no consequence here. It is the political ties which be enemies in all
determine the character. Whilst a man continues a citizen of his places.
own country, he is the enemy of all those with whom his nation
is at war. But we must not hence conclude that these enemies may treat each other as
such, wherever they happen to meet. Every one being master in his respective
country, a neutral prince will not allow them to use any violence in his territories.

Since women and children are subjects of the state, and mem- §72. Whether women
bers of the nation, they are to be ranked in the class of enemies. and children are to be
But it does not thence follow that we are justifiable in treating accounted enemies.
them like men who bear arms, or are capable of bearing them. It
will appear in the sequel, that we have not the same rights against all classes of
enemies.

When once we have precisely determined who our enemies are, §73. Things
it is easy to know what are the things belonging to the enemy belonging to the
(res hostiles). We have shewn that not only the sovereign with enemy
whom we are at war is an enemy, but also his whole nation, even
the very women and children. Every thing, therefore, which belongs to that

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 334 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

nation,—to the state, to the sovereign, to the subjects, of whatever age or sex,—every
thing of that kind, I say, falls under the description of things belonging to the enemy.

And, with respect to things, the case is the same as with respect §74. continue such
to persons:—things belonging to the enemy continue such every-where.
wherever they are. But we are not hence to conclude, any more
than in the case of persons (§71), that we every-where possess a right to treat those
things as things belonging to the enemy.

Since it is not the place where a thing is, which determines the §75. Neutral things
nature of that thing, but the character of the person to whom it found with an enemy.
belongs,— things belonging to neutral persons, which happen to
be in an enemy’s country or on board an enemy’s ships, are to be distinguished from
those which belong to the enemy. But it is the owner’s business to adduce evident
proof that they are his property: for, in default of such proof, a thing is naturally
presumed to belong to the nation in whose possession it is found.

The preceding section relates to movable property: but the rule is §76. Lands possessed
different with respect to immovable possessions, such as landed by foreigners in an
estates. Since all these do in some measure belong to the nation, enemy’s country.
are part of its domain, of its territory, and under its government
(Book I. §§204, 235, Book II. §114)—and since the owner is still a subject of the
country as possessor of a landed estate,—property of this kind does not cease to be
enemy’s property (res hostiles), though possessed by a neutral foreigner.
Nevertheless, war being now carried on with so much moderation and indulgence,
protections are granted for houses and lands possessed by foreigners in an enemy’s
country. For the same reason, he who declares war does not confiscate the immovable
property possessed in his country by his enemy’s subjects. By permitting them to
purchase and possess such property, he has in that respect admitted them into the
number of his subjects. But the income may be sequestrated, in order to prevent its
being remitted to the enemy’s country.

Among the things belonging to the enemy, are likewise §77. Things due to the
incorporeal things,—all his rights, claims, and debts, excepting enemy by a third
however those kind of rights granted by a third party, and in party.
which the grantor is so far concerned, that it is not a matter of
indiffe-rence to him, in what hands they are vested. Such, for instance, are the rights
of commerce. But as debts are not of this number, war gives us the same rights over
any sums of money due by neutral nations to our enemy, as it can give over his other
property.

When Alexander, by conquest, became absolute master of Thebes, he remitted to the
Thessalians a hundred talents which they owed to the Thebans.* The sovereign has
naturally the same right over what his subjects may owe to enemies. He may therefore
confiscate debts of this nature, if the term of payment happen in the time of war; or at
least he may prohibit his subjects from paying while the war continues. But at present,
a regard to the advantage and safety of commerce has induced all the sovereigns of
Europe to act with less rigour in this point. And as the custom has been generally

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 335 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

received, he who should act contrary to it, would violate the public faith; for strangers
trusted his subjects only from a firm persuasion that the general custom would be
observed. The state does not so much as touch the sums which it owes to the enemy:
money lent to the public is every-where exempt from confiscation and seizure in case
of war.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 336 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER VI

Of The Enemy’S Allies—Of Warlike Associations— Of
Auxiliaries And Subsidies.
We have sufficiently spoken of treaties in general, and shall here §78. Treaties relative
touch on this subject only in its particular relations to war. to war.
Treaties relating to war are of several kinds, and vary in their
objects and clauses, according to the will of those who make them. Besides applying
to them all that we have said of treaties in general (Book II. Ch. XII. &c.), they may
also be divided into treaties real and personal, equal and unequal, &c. But they have
also their specific differences, viz. those which relate to their particular object, war.

Under this relation, alliances made for warlike purposes are §79. Defensive and
divided in general into defensive and offensive alliances. In the offensive alliances.
former, the nation engages only to defend her ally in case he be
attacked: in the latter, she unites with him for the purpose of making an attack,—of
jointly waging war against another nation. Some alliances are both offensive and
defensive; and there seldom is an offensive alliance which is not also a defensive one.
But it is very usual for alliances to be purely defensive: and these are in general the
most natural and lawful. It would be a tedious and even a useless task to enumerate in
detail all the varieties incident to such alliances. Some are made, without restriction,
against all opponents: in others, certain states are excepted: others again are formed
against such or such a nation expressly mentioned by name.

But a difference, of great importance to be observed, especially §80. Difference
in defensive alliances, is that between an intimate and complete between warlike
alliance, in which we agree to a union of interests,—and another, associations and
in which we only promise a stated succour. The alliance in which auxiliary treaties.
we agree to a union of interests, is a warlike association: each of
the parties acts with his whole force; all the allies become principals in the war; they
have the same friends and the same enemies. But an alliance of this nature is more
particularly termed a warlike association, when it is offensive.

When a sovereign, without directly taking part in the war made §81. Auxiliary troops.
by another sovereign, only sends him succours of troops or ships,
these are called auxiliaries.

The auxiliary troops serve the prince to whom they are sent, according to their
sovereign’s orders. If they are purely and simply sent without restriction, they are to
serve equally on the offensive and the defensive; and, for the particulars of their
operations, they are to obey the directions of the prince to whose assistance they
come. Yet this prince has not the free and entire disposal of them, as of his own
subjects: they are granted to him only for his own wars; and he has no right to transfer
them, as auxiliaries, to a third power.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 337 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Sometimes this succour from a potentate who does not directly §82. Subsidies.
take part in the war, consists in money; and then it is called a
subsidy. This term is now often taken in another sense, and signifies a sum of money
annually paid by one sovereign to another, in return for a body of troops, which the
latter furnishes to the other to carry on his wars, or keeps in readiness for his service.
The treaties for procuring such a resource are called subsidiary treaties. France and
England have at present such treaties existing with several of the northern powers and
princes in Germany, and continue them even in times of peace.

In order, now, to judge of the morality of these several treaties or §83. When a nation is
alliances,—of their legitimacy according to the law of allowed to assist
nations,—we must, in the first place, lay down this another,
incontrovertible principle, that It is lawful and commendable to
succour and assist, by all possible means, a nation engaged in a just war; and it is
even a duty incumbent on every nation, to give such assistance, when she can give it
without injury to herself. But no assistance whatever is to be afforded to him who is
engaged in an unjust war. There is nothing in this which is not demonstrated by what
we have said of the common duties of nations towards each other (Book II. Ch. I.). To
support the cause of justice when we are able, is always commendable: but, in
assisting the unjust, we partake of his crime, and become, like him, guilty of injustice.

If, to the principle we have now laid down, you add the consi- §84. and to make
deration of what a nation owes to her own safety, and of the care alliances for war.
which it is so natural and so fit that she should take to put herself
in a condition to resist her enemies, you will the more readily perceive how clear a
right a nation has to make warlike alliances, and especially defensive alliances, whose
sole tendency is to maintain all parties in the quiet and secure possession of their
property.

But great circumspection is to be used in forming such alliances. Engagements by
which a nation may be drawn into a war at a moment when she least expects it, ought
not to be contracted without very important reasons, and a direct view to the welfare
of the state. We here speak of alliances made in time of peace, and by way of
precaution against future contingencies.

If there be question of contracting an alliance with a nation §85. Alliances made
already engaged in a war or on the point of engaging in one, two with a nation actually
things are to be considered,—1. The justice of that nation’s engaged in war.
quarrel. 2. The welfare of the state. If the war which a prince
wages or is preparing to wage, be unjust, it is not allowable to form an alliance with
him; for injustice is not to be supported. If he is justifiable in taking up arms, it still
remains to be considered whether the welfare of the state allows or requires us to
embark in his quarrel: for it is only with a view to the welfare of the state that the
sovereign ought to use his authority: to that all his measures should tend, and
especially those of the most important nature. What other consideration can authorise
him to expose his people to the calamities of war?

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 338 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

As it is only for the support of a just war that we are allowed to §86. Tacit clause in
give assistance or contract alliances,—every alliance, every every warlike
warlike association, every auxiliary treaty, contracted by way of alliance.
anticipation in time of peace, and with no view to any particular
war, necessarily and of itself includes this tacit clause, that the treaty shall not be
obligatory except in case of a just war. On any other footing, the alliance could not be
validly contracted. (Book II. §§161, 168.)

But care must be taken that treaties of alliance be not thereby reduced to empty and
delusive formalities. The tacit restriction is to be understood only of a war which is
evidently unjust; for otherwise a pretence for eluding treaties would never be wanting.
Is there question of contracting an alliance with a power actually at war?—It behoves
you most religiously to weigh the justice of his cause: the judgment depends solely on
you, since you owe him no assistance any farther than as his quarrel is just, and your
own circumstances make it convenient for you to embark in it. But when once
engaged, nothing less than the manifest injustice of his cause can excuse you from
assisting him. In a doubtful case, you are to presume that your ally has justice on his
side;—that being his concern.

But if you entertain strong doubts, you may very fairly and commendably interpose to
effect an accommodation. Thus you may bring the justice of the cause to the test of
evidence, by dis-covering which of the contending parties refuses to accede to
equitable conditions.

As every alliance implies the tacit clause above-mentioned, he §87. To refuse
who refuses to succour his ally in a war that is manifestly unjust, succours for an unjust
is not chargeable with a breach of alliance. war, is no breach of

alliance.
When alliances have thus been contracted beforehand, the
question is to determine, in the course of events, those cases in §88. What the casus

foederis is.
which our engagements come in force, and we are bound to act
in consequence of the alliance. This is what is called casus foederis, or case of the
alliance, and is to be discovered in the concurrence of the circumstances for which the
treaty has been made, whether those circumstances have been expressly specified in
it, or tacitly supposed. Whatever has been promised in the treaty of alliance, is due in
the casus foederis, and not otherwise.

As the most solemn treaties cannot oblige any one to favour an §89. It never takes
unjust quarrel (§86), the casus foederis never takes place in a war place in an unjust
that is manifestly unjust. war.

In a defensive alliance, the casus foederis does not exist §90. How it exists in a
immediately on our ally being attacked. It is still our duty to defensive war,
examine whether he has not given his enemy just cause to make
war against him: for we cannot have engaged to undertake his defence with the view
of enabling him to insult others, or to refuse them justice. If he is in the wrong, we
must induce him to offer a reasonable satisfaction; and if his enemy will not be

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 339 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

contented with it,—then, and not till then, the obligation of defending him
commences.

But if the defensive alliance contains a guarantee of all the §91. and in a treaty of
territories at that time possessed by the ally, the casus foederis guarantee.
immediately takes place whenever those territories are invaded
or threatened with an invasion. If they are attacked for a just cause, we must prevail
on our ally to give satisfaction; but we may on good grounds oppose his being
deprived of his possessions, as it is generally with a view to our own security that we
undertake to guaranty them. On the whole, the rules of interpretation, which we have
given in an express chapter,* are to be consulted, in order to determine, on particular
occasions, the existence of the casus foederis.

If the state that has promised succours finds herself unable to §92. The succour is
furnish them, her inability alone is sufficient to dispense with the not due under an
obligation: and if she cannot give her assistance without inability to furnish it,
exposing herself to evident danger, this circumstance also or when the public
dispenses with it. This would be one of those cases in which a safety would be

exposed.
treaty becomes pernicious to the state, and therefore not
obligatory (Book II. §160). But we here speak of an imminent danger, threatening the
very existence of the state. The case of such a danger is tacitly and necessarily
reserved in every treaty. As to remote dangers, or those of no extraordinary
magnitude,—since they are inseparable from every military alliance, it would be
absurd to pretend that they should create an exception: and the sovereign may expose
the nation to them in consideration of the advantages which she reaps from the
alliance.

In virtue of these principles, we are absolved from the obligation of sending assistance
to an ally while we are ourselves engaged in a war which requires our whole strength.
If we are able to oppose our own enemies, and to assist our ally at the same time, no
reason can be pleaded for such dispensation. But, in such cases, it rests with ourselves
to determine what our circumstances and strength will allow. It is the same with other
things which may have been promised, as, for instance, provisions. There is no
obligation to furnish an ally with them when we want them for our own use.

We forbear to repeat in this place what we have said of various §93. Other cases.
other cases in discoursing of treaties in general, as, for example,
of the preference due to the more ancient ally (Book II. §167), and to a protector (ibid.
§204), of the meaning to be annexed to the term “allies,” in a treaty in which they are
reserved (ibid. §309). Let us only add, on this last question, that, in a warlike alliance
made against all opponents, the allies excepted, this exception is to be understood
only of the present allies. Otherwise it would afterwards be easy to elude the former
treaty by new alliances; and it would be impossible for us to know either what we are
doing in concluding such a treaty, or what we gain by it.

A case which we have not spoken of is this:—Three powers have Two of the parties in
entered into a treaty of defensive alliance: two of them quarrel, an alliance coming to
and make war on each other:—how is the third to act? The treaty a rupture.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 340 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

does not bind him to assist either the one or the other. For it would be absurd to say
that he has promised his assistance to each against the other, or to one of the two in
prejudice of the other. The only obligation, therefore, which the treaty imposes on
him, is, to endeavour, by the interposition of his good offices, to effect a
reconciliation between his allies: and if his mediation proves unsuccessful, he remains
at liberty to assist the party who appears to have justice on his side.

To refuse an ally the succours due to him, without having any §94. Refusal of the
just cause to allege for such refusal, is doing him an injury, since succours due in virtue
it is a violation of the perfect right which we gave him by a of an alliance.
formal engagement. I speak of evident cases, it being then only
that the right is perfect; for, in those of a doubtful nature, it rests with each party to
judge what he is able to do (§92): but he is to judge maturely and impartially, and to
act with candor. And as it is an obligation naturally incumbent on us, to repair any
damage caused by our fault, and especially by our injustice, we are bound to
indemnify an ally for all the losses he may have sustained in consequence of our
unjust refusal. How much circumspection therefore is to be used in forming
engagements, which we cannot refuse to fulfil without material injury to our affairs or
our honour, and which, on the other hand, if complied with, may be productive of the
most serious consequences!

An engagement which may draw us into a war is of great §95. The enemy’s
moment: in it, the very existence of the state is at stake. He who associates.
in an alliance promises a subsidy or a body of auxiliaries,
sometimes imagines that he only risks a sum of money or a certain number of
soldiers; whereas he often exposes himself to war and all its calamities. The nation
against whom he furnishes assistance will look upon him as her enemy; and should
her arms prove successful, she will carry the war into his country. But it remains to be
determined whether she can do this with justice, and on what occasions. Some
authors* decide in general, that whoever joins our enemy, or assists him against us
with money, troops, or in any other manner whatever, becomes thereby our enemy,
and gives us a right to make war against him:—a cruel decision, and highly inimical
to the peace of nations! It cannot be supported by principles; and happily the practice
of Europe stands in opposition to it.

It is true, indeed, that every associate of my enemy is himself my enemy. It is of little
consequence whether any one makes war on me directly, and in his own name, or
under the auspices of another. Whatever rights war gives me against my principal
enemy, the like it gives me against all his associates: for I derive those rights from the
right to security,—from the care of my own defence; and I am equally attacked by the
one and the other party. But the question is, to know whom I may lawfully account
my enemy’s associates, united against me in war.

First, in that class I shall rank all those who are really united in a §96. Those who make
warlike association with my enemy, and who make a common a common cause with
cause with him, though it is only in the name of that principal the enemy, are his
enemy that the war is carried on. There is no need of proving associates;

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 341 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

this. In the ordinary and open warlike associations, the war is carried on in the name
of all the allies, who are all equally enemies (§80).

In the second place, I account as associates of my enemy, those §97. and those who
who assist him in his war without being obliged to it by any assist him, without
treaty. Since they freely and voluntarily declare against me, they, being obliged to it by
of their own accord, chuse to become my enemies. If they go no treaties;
farther than furnishing a determined succour, allowing some
troops to be raised, or advancing money,—and, in other respects, preserve towards me
the accustomed relations of friendship or neutrality,—I may overlook that ground of
complaint; but still I have a right to call them to account for it. This prudent caution,
of not always coming to an open rupture with those who give such assistance to our
enemy, that we may not force them to join him with all their strength,—this
forbearance, I say, has gradually introduced the custom of not looking on such
assistance as an act of hostility, especially when it consists only in the permission to
enlist volunteers. How often have the Switzers granted levies to France, at the same
time that they refused such an indulgence to the house of Austria, though both powers
were in alliance with them! How often have they allowed one prince to levy troops in
their country, and refused the same permission to his enemy, when they were not in
alliance with either! They granted or denied that favour according as they judged it
most expedient for themselves; and no power has ever dared to attack them on that
account. But if prudence dissuades us from making use of all our right, it does not
thereby destroy that right. A cautious nation chuses rather to overlook certain points
than unnecessarily to increase the number of her enemies.

Thirdly, those who, being united with my enemy by an offensive §98. or who are in an
alliance, actively assist him in the war which he declares against offensive alliance
me,— those, I say, concur in the injury intended against me. with him.
They shew themselves my enemies, and I have a right to treat
them as such. Accordingly the Switzers, whose example we have above quoted,
seldom grant troops except for defensive war. To those in the service of France, it has
ever been a standing order from their sovereigns, not to carry arms against the empire,
or against the states of the house of Austria in Germany. In 1644, the captains of the
Neufchatel regiment of Guy, on information that they were destined to serve under
marshal Turenne in Germany, declared that they would rather die than disobey their
sovereign, and violate the alliances of the Helvetic body. Since France has been
mistress of Alsace, the Switzers who serve in her armies, never pass the Rhine to
attack the empire. The gallant Daxelhoffer, captain of a Berne company in the French
service, consisting of 200 men, and of which his four sons formed the first rank,
seeing the general would oblige him to pass the Rhine, broke his espontoon, and
marched back with his company to Berne.

Even a defensive alliance made expressly against me, or (which §99. How a defensive
amounts to the same thing) concluded with my enemy during the alliance associates
war, or on the certain prospect of its speedy declaration, is an act with the enemy.
of association against me; and if followed by effects, I may look
on the party who has contracted it, as my enemy. The case is here precisely the same

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 342 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

as that of a nation assisting my enemy without being under any obligation to do so,
and chusing of her own accord to become my enemy. (See §97.)

A defensive alliance, though of a general nature, and made §100. Another case.
before any appearance of the present war, produces also the same
effect, if it stipulates the assistance of the whole strength of the allies: for in this case
it is a real league or warlike association; and, besides, it were absurd that I should be
debarred from making war on a nation who opposes me with all her might, and thus
exhausting the source of those succours with which she furnishes my enemy. In what
light am I to consider an auxiliary who comes to make war on me at the head of all his
forces? It would be mockery on his part, to pretend that he is not my enemy. What
more could he do, were he openly to declare himself such? He shews no tenderness
for me on the occasion: he only wishes that a tender regard should be paid to himself.
And shall I suffer him to preserve his provinces in peace, and secure from all danger,
whilst he is doing me all the mischief in his power? No! the law of nature, the law of
nations, obliges us to be just, but does not condemn us to be dupes.

But if a defensive alliance has not been made against me in §101. In what case it
particular, nor concluded at the time when I was openly does not produce the
preparing for war, or had already begun it,—and if the allies same effect.
have only stipulated in it, that each of them shall furnish a stated
succour to him who shall be attacked,— I cannot require that they should neglect to
fulfil a solemn treaty, which they had an unquestionable right to conclude without any
injury to me. In furnishing my enemy with assistance, they only acquit themselves of
a debt: they do me no wrong in discharging it; and consequently they afford me no
just grounds for making war on them (§26). Neither can I say that my safety obliges
me to attack them; for I should thereby only increase the number of my enemies, and,
instead of a slender succour which they furnish against me, should draw on myself the
whole power of those nations. It is, therefore, only the troops which they send as
auxiliaries, that I am to consider as enemies. These are actually united with my
enemies, and fighting against me.

The contrary principles would tend to multiply wars, and spread them beyond all
bounds, to the common ruin of nations. It is happy for Europe, that, in this instance,
the established custom is in accord with the true principles. A prince seldom presumes
to complain of a nation’s contributing to the defence of her ally by furnishing him
with succours which were promised in former treaties,—in treaties that were not made
against that prince in particular. In the last war,16 the United Provinces long
continued to supply the queen of Hungary17 with subsidies, and even with troops; and
France never complained of these proceedings till those troops marched into Alsace to
attack the French frontier. Switzerland, in virtue of her alliance with France, furnishes
that crown with numerous bodies of troops, and, nevertheless, lives in peace with all
Europe.

There is one case, however, which might form an exception to the general rule: it is
that of a defensive war which is evidently unjust. For in such case there no longer
exists any obligation to assist an ally (§§86, 87, 89). If you undertake to do it without
necessity, and in violation of your duty, you do an injury to the enemy, and declare

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 343 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

against him out of mere wantonness. But this is a case that very rarely occurs between
nations. There are few defensive wars without at least some apparent reason to
warrant their justice or necessity. Now, on any dubious occasion, each state is sole
judge of the justice of her own cause; and the presumption is in favour of your ally
(§86). Besides, it belongs to you alone to determine what conduct on your part will be
conformable to your duties and to your engagements; and consequently nothing less
than the most palpable evidence can authorise the enemy of your ally to charge you
with supporting an unjust war, contrary to the conviction of your own conscience. In
fine, the voluntary law of nations ordains, that, in every case susceptible of doubt, the
arms of both parties shall, with regard to external effects, be accounted equally lawful
(§40).

The real associates of my enemy being my enemies, I have §102. Whether it be
against them the same rights as against the principal enemy necessary to declare
(§95). And as their own conduct proclaims them my enemies, war against the
and they take up arms against me in the first instance, I may enemy’s associates.
make war on them without any declaration; the war being
sufficiently declared by their own act. This is especially the case of those who in any
manner whatever concur to make an offensive war against me; and it is likewise the
case of all those whom we have mentioned in §§96, 97, 98, 99, 100.

But it is not thus with those nations which assist my enemy in a defensive war: I
cannot consider them as his associates (§101). If I am entitled to complain of their
furnishing him with succours, this is a new ground of quarrel between me and them. I
may expostulate with them, and, on not receiving satisfaction, prosecute my right, and
make war on them. But in this case there must be a previous declaration (§51). The
example of Manlius, who made war on the Galatians18 for having supplied Antiochus
with troops, is not a case in point. Grotius* censures the Roman general for having
begun that war without a declaration. The Galatians, in furnishing troops for an
offensive war against the Romans, had declared themselves enemies to Rome. It
would appear, indeed, that, on peace being concluded with Antiochus, Manlius ought
to have waited for orders from Rome before he attacked the Galatians; and then, if
that expedition was considered as a fresh war, he should have not only issued a
declaration, but also made a demand of satisfaction, previous to the commencement of
hostilities (§51). But the treaty with the king of Syria had not yet received its
consummation: and it concerned that monarch alone, without making any mention of
his adherents. Therefore Manlius undertook the expedition against the Galatians, as a
consequence or a remnant of the war with Antiochus. This is what he himself very
well observed in his speech to the senate;† and he even added, that his first measure
was to try whether he could bring the Galatians to reasonable terms. Grotius more
appositely quotes the example of Ulysses and his followers,—blaming them for
having, without any declaration of war, attacked the Ciconians, who had sent succours
to Priam during the siege of Troy.*

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 344 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER VII

Of Neutrality—And The Passage Of Troops Through A
Neutral Country.
Neutral nations are those who, in time of war, do not take any §103. Neutral nations.
part in the contest, but remain common friends to both parties,
without favouring the arms of the one to the prejudice of the other. Here we are to
consider the obligations and rights flowing from neutrality.

In order rightly to understand this question, we must avoid §104. Conduct to be
confounding what may lawfully be done by a nation that is free observed by a neutral
from all engagements, with what she may do if she expects to be nation.
treated as perfectly neutral in a war. As long as a neutral nation
wishes securely to enjoy the advantages of her neutrality, she must in all things shew
a strict impartiality towards the belligerent powers: for, should she favour one of the
parties to the prejudice of the other, she cannot complain of being treated by him as an
adherent and confederate of his enemy. Her neutrality would be a fraudulent
neutrality, of which no nation will consent to be the dupe. It is sometimes suffered to
pass unnoticed, merely for want of ability to resent it; we chuse to connive at it, rather
than excite a more powerful opposition against us. But the present question is, to
determine what may lawfully be done, not what prudence may dictate according to
circumstances. Let us therefore examine, in what consists that impartiality which a
neutral nation ought to observe.

It solely relates to war, and includes two articles,—1. To give no assistance when
there is no obligation to give it,—nor voluntarily to furnish troops, arms, ammunition,
or any thing of direct use in war. I do not say “to give assistance equally,” but “to give
no assistance”: for it would be absurd that a state should at one and the same time
assist two nations at war with each other; and besides it would be impossible to do it
with equality. The same things, the like number of troops, the like quantity of arms, of
stores, &c. furnished in different circumstances, are no longer equivalent succours. 2.
In whatever does not relate to war, a neutral and impartial nation must not refuse to
one of the parties, on account of his present quarrel, what she grants to the other. This
does not deprive her of the liberty to make the advantage of the state still serve as her
rule of conduct in her negotiations, her friendly connections, and her commerce.
When this reason induces her to give preferences in things which are ever at the free
disposal of the possessor, she only makes use of her right, and is not chargeable with
partiality. But to refuse any of those things to one of the parties purely because he is at
war with the other, and because she wishes to favour the latter, would be departing
from the line of strict neutrality.

I have said that a neutral state ought to give no assistance to §105. An ally may
either of the parties, when “under no obligation to give it.” This furnish the succour
restriction is necessary. We have already seen that when a

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 345 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

sovereign furnishes the moderate succour due in virtue of a due from him, and
former defensive alliance, he does not become an associate in the remain neuter.
war (§101). He may therefore fulfil his engagement, and yet
observe a strict neutrality. Of this Europe affords frequent instances.

When a war breaks out between two nations, all other states that §106. Right of
are not bound by treaties, are free to remain neuter; and if either remaining neuter.
of the belligerent powers attempted to force them to a junction
with him, he would do them an injury, inasmuch as he would be guilty of an
infringement on their independency in a very essential point. To themselves alone it
belongs to determine whether any reason exists to induce them to join in the contest:
and there are two points which claim their consideration,—1. The justice of the cause.
If that be evident, injustice is not to be countenanced: on the contrary, it is generous
and praiseworthy to succour oppressed innocence, when we possess the ability. If the
case be dubious, the other nations may suspend their judgment, and not engage in a
foreign quarrel. 2. When convinced which party has justice on his side, they have still
to consider whether it be for the advantage of the state to concern themselves in this
affair, and to embark in the war.

A nation making war, or preparing to make it, often proposes a §107. Treaties of
treaty of neutrality to a state of which she entertains suspicions. neutrality.
It is prudent to learn betimes what she has to expect, and not run
the risk of a neighbour’s suddenly joining with the enemy in the heat of the war. In
every case where neutrality is allowable, it is also lawful to bind ourselves to it by
treaty.

Sometimes even necessity renders this justifiable. Thus, although it be the duty of all
nations to assist oppressed innocence (Book II. §4), yet, if an unjust conqueror, ready
to invade his neighbour’s possessions, makes me an offer of neutrality when he is able
to crush me, what can I do better than to accept it? I yield to necessity; and my
inability discharges me from a natural obligation. The same inability would even
excuse me from a perfect obligation contracted by an alliance. The enemy of my ally
threatens me with a vast superiority of force: my fate is in his hand: he requires me to
renounce the liberty of furnishing any assistance against him. Necessity, and the care
of my own safety, absolve me from my engagements. Thus it was that Louis the
Fourteenth compelled Victor Amadeus duke of Savoy to quit the party of the allies.19
But then the necessity must be very urgent. It is only the cowardly or the perfidious
who avail themselves of the slightest grounds of alarm, to violate their promises and
desert their duty. In the late war, the king of Poland, elector of Saxony, and the king
of Sardinia,20 firmly held out against the unfortunate course of events, and, to their
great honour, could not be brought to treat without the concurrence of their allies.

Another reason renders these treaties of neutrality useful, and §108. Additional
even necessary. A nation that wishes to secure her own peace, reason for making
when the flames of war are kindling in her neighbourhood, these treaties.
cannot more successfully attain that object than by concluding
treaties with both parties, expressly agreeing what each may do or require in virtue of

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 346 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

the neutrality. This is a sure mode to preserve herself in peace, and to obviate all
disputes and cavils.

Without such treaties, it is to be feared that disputes will often §109. Foundation of
arise respecting what neutrality does or does not allow. This the rules of neutrality.
subject presents many questions which authors have discussed
with great heat, and which have given rise to the most dangerous quarrels between
nations. Yet the law of nature and of nations has its invariable principles, and affords
rules on this head, as well as on the others. Some things also have grown into custom
among civilised nations, and are to be conformed to by those who would not incur the
reproach of unjustly breaking the peace.* As to the rules of the natural law of nations,
they result from a just combination of the laws of war, with the liberty, the safety, the
advantages, the commerce, and the other rights of neutral nations. It is on this
principle that we shall lay down the following rules.

First, No act on the part of a nation, which falls within the §110. How levies may
exercise of her rights, and is done solely with a view to her own be allowed, money
good, without partiality, without a design of favouring one power lent, and every kind
to the prejudice of another,—no act of that kind, I say, can in of things sold, without
general be considered as contrary to neutrality; nor does it a breach of neutrality.

become such, except on particular occasions when it cannot take
place without injury to one of the parties, who has then a particular right to oppose it.
Thus, the besieger has a right to prohibit access to the place besieged (see §117 in the
sequel). Except in cases of this nature, shall the quarrels of others deprive me of the
free exercise of my rights in the pursuit of measures which I judge advantageous to
my people? Therefore, when it is the custom of a nation, for the purpose of employing
and training her subjects, to permit levies of troops in favour of a particular power to
whom she thinks proper to intrust them,—the enemy of that power cannot look upon
such permissions as acts of hostility, unless they are given with a view to the invasion
of his territories, or the support of an odious and evidently unjust cause. He cannot
even demand, as matter of right, that the like favour be granted to him,—because that
nation may have reasons for refusing him, which do not hold good with regard to his
adversary; and it belongs to that nation alone to judge of what best suits her
circumstances. The Switzers, as we have already observed, grant levies of troops to
whom they please; and no power has hitherto thought fit to quarrel with them on that
head. It must, however, be owned, that, if those levies were considerable, and
constituted the principal strength of my enemy, while, without any substantial reason
being alleged, I were absolutely refused all levies whatever,— I should have just
cause to consider that nation as leagued with my enemy; and, in this case, the care of
my own safety would authorise me to treat her as such.

The case is the same with respect to money which a nation may have been
accustomed to lend out at interest. If the sovereign or his subjects lend money to my
enemy on that footing, and refuse it to me because they have not the same confidence
in me, this is no breach of neutrality. They lodge their property where they think it
safest. If such preference be not founded on good reasons, I may impute it to ill-will
against me, or to a predilection for my enemy. Yet if I should make it a pretence for
declaring war, both the true principles of the law of nations, and the general custom

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 347 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

happily established in Europe, would join in condemning me. While it appears that
this nation lends out her money purely for the sake of gaining an interest upon it, she
is at liberty to dispose of it according to her own discretion; and I have no right to
complain.

But if the loan were evidently granted for the purpose of enabling an enemy to attack
me, this would be concurring in the war against me.

If the troops, above alluded to, were furnished to my enemy by the state herself, and
at her own expense, or the money in like manner lent by the state, without interest, it
would no longer be a doubtful question whether such assistance were incompatible
with neutrality.

Further, it may be affirmed on the same principles, that if a nation trades in arms,
timber for ship-building, vessels, and warlike stores,—I cannot take it amiss that she
sells such things to my enemy, provided she does not refuse to sell them to me also at
a reasonable price. She carries on her trade without any design to injure me; and by
continuing it in the same manner as if I were not engaged in war, she gives me no just
cause of complaint.

In what I have said above, it is supposed that my enemy goes §111. Trade of neutral
himself to a neutral country to make his purchases. Let us now nations with those
discuss another case,—that of neutral nations resorting to my which are at war.
enemy’s country for commercial purposes. It is certain, that, as
they have no part in my quarrel, they are under no obligation to renounce their
commerce for the sake of avoiding to supply my enemy with the means of carrying on
the war against me. Should they affect to refuse selling me a single article, while at
the same time they take pains to convey an abundant supply to my enemy, with an
evident intention to favour him,—such partial conduct would exclude them from the
neutrality they enjoyed. But if they only continue their customary trade, they do not
thereby declare themselves against my interest; they only exercise a right which they
are under no obligation of sacrificing to me.

On the other hand, whenever I am at war with a nation, both my safety and welfare
prompt me to deprive her, as far as possible, of every thing which may enable her to
resist or injure me. In this instance, the law of necessity exerts its full force. If that law
warrants me, on occasion, to seize what belongs to other people, will it not likewise
warrant me to intercept every thing belonging to war, which neutral nations are
carrying to my enemy? Even if I should, by taking such measure, render all those
neutral nations my enemies, I had better run that hazard than suffer him who is
actually at war with me, thus freely to receive supplies, and collect additional strength
to oppose me. It is therefore very proper, and perfectly conformable to the law of
nations (which disapproves of multiplying the causes of war), not to consider those
seizures of the goods of neutral nations as acts of hostility.

When I have notified to them my declaration of war against such or such a nation, if
they will afterwards expose themselves to risk in supplying her with things which
serve to carry on war, they will have no reason to complain if their goods fall into my

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 348 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

possession; and I, on the other hand, do not declare war against them for having
attempted to convey such goods. They suffer indeed by a war in which they have no
concern; but they suffer accidentally. I do not oppose their right: I only exert my own;
and if our rights clash with and reciprocally injure each other, that circumstance is the
effect of inevitable necessity. Such collisions daily happen in war. When, in
pursuance of my rights, I exhaust a country from which you derived your
subsistence,—when I besiege a city with which you carried on a profitable trade,—I
doubtless injure you; I subject you to losses and inconveniences; but it is without any
design of hurting you. I only make use of my rights, and consequently do you no
injustice.

But that limits may be set to these inconveniences, and that the commerce of neutral
nations may subsist in as great a degree of freedom as is consistent with the laws of
war, there are certain rules to be observed, on which Europe seems to be generally
agreed.

The first is, carefully to distinguish ordinary goods which have §112. Contraband
no relation to war, from those that are peculiarly subservient to goods.
it. Neutral nations should enjoy perfect liberty to trade in the
former: the belligerent powers cannot with any reason refuse it, or prevent the
importation of such goods into the enemy’s country: the care of their own safety, the
necessity of self-defence, does not authorise them to do it, since those things will not
render the enemy more formidable. An attempt to interrupt or put a stop to this trade
would be a violation of the rights of neutral nations, a flagrant injury to
them;—necessity, as we have above observed, being the only reason which can
authorise any restraint on their trade and navigation to the ports of the enemy.
England and the United Provinces having agreed, in the treaty of Whitehall, signed on
the 22d of August, 1689, to notify to all states not at war with France, that they would
attack every ship bound to or coming from any port of that kingdom, and that they
before-hand declared every such ship to be a lawful prize,—Sweden and Denmark,
from whom some ships had been taken, entered into a counter-treaty on the 17th of
March, 1693, for the purpose of maintaining their rights and procuring just
satisfaction. And the two maritime powers, being convinced that the complaints of the
two crowns were well founded, did them justice.*

Commodities particularly useful in war, and the importation of which to an enemy is
prohibited, are called contraband goods. Such are arms, ammunition, timber for ship-
building, every kind of naval stores, horses,—and even provisions, in certain
junctures, when we have hopes of reducing the enemy by famine.†

But in order to hinder the transportation of contraband goods to §113. Whether such
an enemy, are we only to stop and seize them, paying the value goods may be
to the owner,—or have we a right to confiscate them? Barely to confiscated.
stop those goods would in general prove an ineffectual mode,
especially at sea, where there is no possibility of entirely cutting off all access to the
enemy’s harbours. Recourse is therefore had to the expedient of confiscating all
contraband goods that we can seize on, in order that the fear of loss may operate as a
check on the avidity of gain, and deter the merchants of neutral countries from

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 349 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

supplying the enemy with such commodities. And indeed it is an object of such high
importance to a nation at war to prevent, as far as possible, the enemy’s being
supplied with such articles as will add to his strength and render him more dangerous,
that necessity and the care of her own welfare and safety authorise her to take
effectual methods for that purpose, and to declare that all commodities of that nature,
destined for the enemy, shall be considered as lawful prize. On this account she
notifies to the neutral states her declaration of war (§63); whereupon, the latter usually
give orders to their subjects to refrain from all contraband commerce with the nations
at war, declaring that if they are captured in carrying on such trade, the sovereign will
not protect them. This rule is the point where the general custom of Europe seems at
present fixed, after a number of variations, as will appear from the note of Grotius
which we have just quoted, and particularly from the ordinances of the kings of
France, in the years 1543 and 1584, which only allow the French to seize contraband
goods, and to keep them on paying the value. The modern usage is certainly the most
agreeable to the mutual duties of nations, and the best calculated to reconcile their
respective rights. The nation at war is highly interested in depriving the enemy of all
foreign assistance; and this circumstance gives her a right to consider all those, if not
absolutely as enemies, at least as people that feel very little scruple to injure her, who
carry to her enemy the articles of which he stands in need for the support of the war:
she therefore punishes them by the confiscation of their goods. Should their sovereign
undertake to protect them, such conduct would be tantamount to his furnishing the
enemy with those succours himself:—a measure which were undoubtedly inconsistent
with neutrality. When a nation, without any other motive than the prospect of gain, is
employed in strengthening my enemy, and regardless of the irreparable evil which she
may thereby entail upon me,* she is certainly not my friend, and gives me a right to
consider and treat her as an associate of my enemy. In order, therefore, to avoid
perpetual subjects of complaint and rupture, it has, in perfect conformity to sound
principles, been agreed that the belligerent powers may seize and confiscate all
contraband goods which neutral persons shall attempt to carry to their enemy, without
any complaint from the sovereign of those merchants; as, on the other hand, the power
at war does not impute to the neutral sovereigns these practices of their subjects. Care
is even taken to settle every particular of this kind in treaties of commerce and
navigation.

We cannot prevent the conveyance of contraband goods, without §114. Searching
searching neutral vessels that we meet at sea: we have therefore a neutral ships.
right to search them. Some powerful nations have indeed, at
different times, refused to submit to this search. “After the peace of Vervins,21 queen
Elizabeth, continuing the war against Spain, requested permission of the king of
France to cause all French ships bound for Spain to be searched, in order to discover
whether they secretly carried any military stores to that country: but this was refused,
as an injury to trade, and a favourable occasion for pillage.”* At present a neutral ship
refusing to be searched, would from that proceeding alone be condemned as a lawful
prize. But to avoid inconveniences, oppression, and every other abuse, the manner of
the search is settled in the treaties of navigation and commerce. It is the established
custom at present to give full credit to the certificates, bills of lading, &c. produced by
the master of the ship, unless any fraud appear in them, or there be good reasons for
suspecting it.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 350 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

If we find an enemy’s effects on board a neutral ship, we seize §115. Enemy’s
them by the rights of war: but we are naturally bound to pay the property on board a
freight to the master of the vessel, who is not to suffer by such neutral ship.
seizure.†

The effects of neutrals, found in an enemy’s ship, are to be §116. Neutral
restored to the owners, against whom there is no right of property on board an
confiscation,—but without any allowance for detainder, decay, enemy’s ship.
&c. The loss sustained by the neutrals on this occasion is an
accident to which they exposed themselves by embarking their property in an enemy’s
ship; and the captor, in exercising the rights of war, is not responsible for the
accidents which may thence result, any more than if his cannon kills a neutral
passenger who happens unfortunately to be on board an enemy’s vessel.

Hitherto we have considered the commerce of neutral nations §117. Trade with a
with the territories of the enemy in general. There is a particular besieged town.
case in which the rights of war extend still farther. All commerce
with a besieged town is absolutely prohibited. If I lay siege to a place, or even simply
blockade it, I have a right to hinder any one from entering, and to treat as an enemy
whoever attempts to enter the place, or carry any thing to the besieged, without my
leave; for he opposes my undertaking, and may contribute to the miscarriage of it, and
thus involve me in all the misfortunes of an unsuccessful war. King Demetrius22
hanged up the master and pilot of a vessel carrying provisions to Athens at a time
when he was on the point of reducing that city by famine.* In the long and bloody war
carried on by the United Provinces against Spain for the recovery of their liberties,
they would not suffer the English to carry goods to Dunkirk, before which the Dutch
fleet lay.†

A neutral nation preserves, towards both the belligerent powers, §118. Impartial
the several relations which nature has instituted between nations. offices of neutrals.
She ought to shew herself ready to render them every office of
humanity reciprocally due from one nation to another: she ought, in every thing not
directly relating to war, to give them all the assistance in her power, and of which they
may stand in need. Such assistance, however, must be given with impartiality; that is
to say, she must not refuse any thing to one of the parties on account of his being at
war with the other (§104). But this is no reason why a neutral state, under particular
connections of friendship and good-neighbourhood with one of the belligerent
powers, may not, in every thing that is unconnected with war, grant him all those
preferences which are due to friends: much less does she afford any grounds of
exception to her conduct, if, in commerce, for instance, she continues to allow him
such indulgences as have been stipulated in her treaties with him. She ought therefore,
as far as the public welfare will permit, equally to allow the subjects of both parties to
visit her territories on business, and there to purchase provisions, horses, and, in
general, every thing they stand in need of,—unless she has, by a treaty of neutrality,
promised to refuse to both parties such articles as are used in war. Amidst all the wars
which disturb Europe, the Switzers preserve their territories in a state of neutrality.
Every nation indiscriminately is allowed free access, for the purchase of provisions if
the country has a surplus, and for that of horses, ammunition, and arms.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 351 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

An innocent passage is due to all nations with whom a state is at §119. Passage of
peace (Book II. §123); and this duty extends to troops as well as troops through a
to individuals. But it rests with the sovereign of the country to neutral country.
judge whether the passage be innocent; and it is very difficult for
that of an army to be entirely so. In the late wars of Italy,23 the territories of the
republic of Venice, and those of the pope, sustained very great damages by the
passage of armies, and often became the theatre of the war.

Since, therefore, the passage of troops, and especially that of a §120. Passage to be
whole army, is by no means a matter of indifference, he who asked.
desires to march his troops through a neutral country, must apply
for the sovereign’s permission. To enter his territory without his consent, is a
violation of his rights of sovereignty and supreme dominion, by virtue of which, that
country is not to be disposed of for any use whatever, without his express or tacit
permission. Now a tacit permission for the entrance of a body of troops is not to be
presumed, since their entrance may be productive of the most serious consequences.

If the neutral sovereign has good reasons for refusing a passage, §121. It may be
he is not obliged to grant it,—the passage in that case being no refused for good
longer innocent. reasons.

In all doubtful cases, we must submit to the judgment of the §122. In what case it
proprietor respecting the innocence of the use we desire to make may be forced.
of things belonging to another (Book II. §§128, 130), and must
acquiesce in his refusal, even though we think it unjust. If the refusal be evidently
unjust,—if the use, and, in the case now before us, the passage, be unquestionably
innocent,—a nation may do herself justice, and take by force what is unjustly denied
to her. But we have already observed that it is very difficult for the passage of an
army to be absolutely innocent, and much more so for the innocence to be very
evident. So various are the evils it may occasion, and the dangers that may attend
it,—so complicated are they in their nature, and so numerous are the circumstances
with which they are connected,—that to foresee and provide for every thing, is next to
impossible. Besides, self-interest has so powerful an influence on the judgments of
men, that if he who requires the passage is to be the judge of its innocence, he will
admit none of the reasons brought against it; and thus a door is opened to continual
quarrels and hostilities. The tranquillity, therefore, and the common safety of nations,
require that each should be mistress of her own territory, and at liberty to refuse every
foreign army an entrance, when she has not departed from her natural liberties in that
respect, by treaties. From this rule, however, let us except those very uncommon cases
which admit of the most evident demonstration that the passage required is wholly
unattended with inconvenience or danger. If, on such an occasion, a passage be
forced, he who forces it will not be so much blamed as the nation that has indiscreetly
subjected herself to this violence. Another case, which carries its own exception on
the very face of it, and admits not of the smallest doubt, is that of extreme necessity.
Urgent and absolute necessity suspends all the rights of property (Book II. §§119,
123): and if the proprietor be not under the same pressure of necessity as you, it is
allowable for you, even against his will, to make use of what belongs to him. When,
therefore, an army find themselves exposed to imminent destruction or unable to

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 352 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

return to their own country unless they pass through neutral territories, they have a
right to pass in spite of the sovereign, and to force their way, sword in hand. But they
ought first to request a passage, to offer securities, and pay for whatever damages they
may occasion. Such was the mode pursued by the Greeks on their return from Asia,
under the conduct of Agesilaüs.*

Extreme necessity may even authorise the temporary seizure of a neutral town, and
the putting a garrison therein, with a view to cover ourselves from the enemy, or to
prevent the execution of his designs against that town, when the sovereign is not able
to defend it. But when the danger is over, we must immediately restore the place, and
pay all the charges, inconveniences, and damages, which we have occasioned by
seizing it.

When the passage is not of absolute necessity, the bare danger §123. The fear of
which attends the admission of a powerful army into our danger authorises a
territory, may authorise us to refuse them permission to enter. refusal,
We may have reason to apprehend that they will be tempted to
take possession of the country, or at least to act as masters while they are in it, and to
live at discretion. Let it not be said with Grotius,† that he who requires the passage is
not to be deprived of his right on account of our unjust fears. A probable fear, founded
on good reasons, gives us a right to avoid whatever may realise it; and the conduct of
nations affords but too just grounds for the fear in question. Besides, the right of
passage is not a perfect right, unless in a case of urgent necessity, or when we have
the most perfect evidence that the passage is innocent.

But, in the preceding section, I suppose it impracticable to obtain §124. or a demand of
sufficient security which shall leave us no cause to apprehend every reasonable
any hostile attempts or violent proceedings on the part of those security.
who ask permission to pass. If any such security can be obtained
(and the safest one is, to allow them to pass only in small bodies, and upon delivering
up their arms, as has been sometimes required),‡ the reason arising from fear no
longer exists. But those who wish to pass should consent to give every reasonable
security required of them, and consequently submit to pass by divisions and deliver up
their arms, if the passage be denied them on any other terms. The choice of the
security they are to give does not rest with them. Hostages or a bond would often
prove very slender securities. Of what advantage will it be to me to hold hostages
from one who will render himself master over me? And as to a bond, it is of very little
avail against a prince of much superior power.

But, is it always incumbent on us to give every security a nation §125. Whether always
may require, when we wish to pass through her territories?—In necessary to give
the first place we are to make a distinction between the different every kind of security
reasons that may exist for our passing through the country; and required.
we are next to consider the manners of the people whose
permission we ask. If the passage be not essentially necessary, and can be obtained
only on suspicious or disagreeable conditions, we must relinquish all idea of it, as in
the case of a refusal (§122). But if necessity authorises me to pass, the conditions on
which the passage will be granted may be accepted or rejected, according to the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 353 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

manners of the people I am treating with. Suppose I am to cross the country of a
barbarous, savage, and perfidious nation,—shall I leave myself at their discretion, by
giving up my arms and causing my troops to march in divisions? No one, I presume,
will condemn me to take so dangerous a step. Since necessity authorises me to pass, a
kind of new necessity arises for my passing in such a posture as will secure me from
any ambuscade or violence. I will offer every security that can be given without
foolishly exposing myself; and if the offer is rejected, I must be guided by necessity
and prudence,—and, let me add, by the most scrupulous moderation, in order to avoid
exceeding the bounds of that right which I derive from necessity.

If the neutral state grants or refuses a passage to one of the §126. Equality to be
parties at war, she ought in like manner to grant or refuse it to the observed towards
other, unless a change of circumstances affords her substantial both parties as to the
reasons for acting otherwise. Without such reasons, to grant to passage.
one party what she refuses to the other, would be a partial
distinction, and a departure from the line of strict neutrality.

When I have no reason to refuse a passage, the party against §127. No complaint
whom it is granted has no right to complain of my conduct, much lies against a neutral
less to make it the ground of a hostile attack upon me, since I state for granting a
have done no more than what the law of nations enjoins (§119). passage.
Neither has he any right to require that I should deny the
passage; for he must not pretend to hinder me from doing what I think agreeable to
my duty. And even on those occasions when I might with justice refuse permission to
pass, I am at liberty to abstain from the exertion of my right. But especially when I
should be obliged to support my refusal by the sword, who will take upon him to
complain of my having permitted the war to be carried into his country, rather than
draw it on myself? No sovereign can require that I should take up arms in his favour,
unless obliged to it by treaty. But nations, more attentive to their own interests than to
the observance of strict justice, are often very loud on this pretended subject of
complaint. In war especially, they stick at no measures; and if by their threats they can
induce a neighbouring state to refuse a passage to their enemy, the generality of their
rulers consider this conduct only as a stroke of good policy.

A powerful state will despise these unjust menaces: firm and §128. This state may
unshaken in what she thinks due to justice and to her own refuse it from a fear
reputation, she will not suffer herself to be diverted by the fear of of the resentment of
a groundless resentment: she will not even bear the menace. But the opposite party;
a weak nation, unable to support her rights, will be under a
necessity of consulting her own safety; and this important concern will authorise her
to refuse a passage, which would expose her to dangers too powerful for her to repel.

Another fear may also warrant her in refusing a passage, namely, §129. and lest her
that of involving her country in the disorders and calamities of country should
war. For, even if the party against whom a passage is requested, become the theatre of
should observe such moderation as not to employ menaces for war.
the purpose of intimidating the neutral nation into a refusal, he
will hardly fail to demand a passage for himself also: he will march to meet his

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 354 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

enemy; and thus the neutral country will become the theatre of war. The infinite evils
of such a situation are an unexceptionable reason for refusing the passage. In all these
cases, he who attempts to force a passage, does an injury to the neutral nation, and
gives her most just cause to unite her arms with those of his adversary. The Switzers,
in their alliances with France, have promised not to grant a passage to her enemies.
They ever refuse it to all sovereigns at war, in order to secure their frontiers from that
calamity; and they take care that their territory shall be respected. But they grant a
passage to recruits, who march in small bodies, and without arms.

The grant of permission to pass includes a grant of every thing §130. What is
which is naturally connected with the passage of troops, and included in the grant
without which the passage would be impracticable; such as the of passage.
liberty of carrying with them whatever may be necessary for an
army,—that of exercising military discipline on the soldiers and officers, and of
purchasing at a fair price every thing the army may want, unless, through fear of
scarcity, a particular exception has been made, to oblige them to carry with them their
own provisions.

He who grants the passage is bound to render it safe, as far as §131. Safety of the
depends on him. Good-faith requires this: and to act otherwise passage.
would be ensnaring those to whom the passage is granted.

For this reason, and because foreigners can do nothing in a §132. No hostility to
territory against the will of the sovereign, it is unlawful to attack be committed in a
an enemy in a neutral country, or to commit in it any other act of neutral country.
hostility. The Dutch East-India fleet having put into Bergen in
Norway, in 1666, to avoid the English, the British admiral had the temerity to attack
them there. But the governor of Bergen fired on the assailants; and the court of
Denmark complained, though perhaps too faintly, of an attempt so injurious to her
rights and dignity.*

To conduct prisoners, to convey spoil to a place of safety, are acts of war,
consequently not to be done in a neutral country; and whoever should permit them
would depart from the line of neutrality, by favouring one of the parties. But I here
speak of prisoners and spoil not yet perfectly in the enemy’s power, and whose
capture is, as it were, not yet fully completed. A flying party, for instance, cannot
make use of a neighbouring and neutral country as a place of deposit to secure their
prisoners and spoil. To permit this, would be giving countenance and support to their
hostilities. When the capture is completed, and the booty absolutely in the enemy’s
power, no inquiry is made how he came by such effects, and he may dispose of them
in a neutral country. A privateer carries his prize into a neutral port, and there freely
sells it; but he cannot land his prisoners there for the purpose of keeping them in
confinement, because the detention and custody of prisoners of war is a continuation
of hostilities.

On the other hand, it is certain, that, if my neighbour affords a §133. Neutral country
retreat to my enemies when defeated and too much weakened to not to afford a retreat
escape me, and allows them time to recover, and watch a to troops, that they

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 355 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

favourable opportunity of making a second attack on my may again attack their
territories, this conduct, so prejudicial to my safety and interests, enemies.
would be incompatible with neutrality. If therefore my enemies,
on suffering a discomfiture, retreat into his country, although charity will not allow
him to refuse them permission to pass in security, he is bound to make them continue
their march beyond his frontiers as soon as possible, and not suffer them to remain in
his territories on the watch for a convenient opportunity to attack me a-new; otherwise
he gives me a right to enter his country in pursuit of them. Such treatment is often
experienced by nations that are unable to command respect. Their territories soon
become the theatre of war; armies march, encamp, and fight in it, as in a country open
to all comers.

Troops to whom a passage is granted, are not to occasion the §134. Conduct to be
least damage in the country; they are to keep to the public roads, observed by troops
and not enter the possessions of private persons,—to observe the passing through a
most exact discipline, and punctually pay for every thing with neutral country.
which the inhabitants supply them. And if the licentiousness of
the soldiers, or the necessity of certain operations, as encamping or intrenching, has
caused any damage, their commander or their sovereign is bound to make reparation.
All this requires no proof. What right have an army to injure a country, when the most
they could require was an innocent passage through it?

There can be no reason why the neutral state should not stipulate for a sum of money
as an indemnification for certain damages which it would be difficult to estimate, and
for the inconveniences naturally resulting from the passage of an army. But it would
be scandalous to sell the very grant of passage,—nay even unjust, if the passage be
attended with no damage, since, in that case, the permission is due. As to the rest, the
sovereign of the country is to take care that the compensation be paid to the parties
who have suffered the damage: for no right authorises him to reserve for his own use
what is given for their indemnification. It is indeed too often the case that the weak
sustain the loss, and the powerful receive the compensation.

Finally, as we are not bound to grant even an innocent passage §135. A passage may
except for just causes, we may refuse it to him who requires it for be refused for a war
a war that is evidently unjust,—as, for instance, to invade a evidently unjust.
country without any reason, or even colourable pretext. Thus
Julius Caesar denied a passage to the Helvetii, who were quitting their country in
order to conquer a better. I conceive indeed that policy had a greater share in his
refusal, than the love of justice; but, in short, justice authorised him on that occasion
to obey the dictates of prudence. A sovereign who is in a condition to refuse without
fear, should doubtless refuse in the case we now speak of. But if it would be
dangerous for him to give a refusal, he is not obliged to draw down the impending
evil on his own head for the sake of averting it from that of his neighbour: nay, rashly
to hazard the quiet and welfare of his people would be a very great breach of his duty.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 356 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER VIII

Of The Rights Of Nations In War,—And First, Of What We
Have A Right To Do, And What We Are Allowed To Do, To
The Enemy’S Person In A Just War.
What we have hitherto said concerns the right of making §136. General
war:—let us now proceed to those rights which are to be principle of the rights
respected during the war itself, and to the rules which nations against an enemy in a
should reciprocally observe, even when deciding their just war.
differences by arms. Let us begin by laying down the rights of a
nation engaged in a just war: let us see what she is allowed to do to her enemy. The
whole is to be deduced from one single principle,—from the object of a just war: for,
when the end is lawful, he who has a right to pursue that end, has, of course, a right to
employ all the means which are necessary for its attainment. The end of a just war is
to avenge or prevent injury (§28)—that is to say, to obtain justice by force, when not
obtainable by any other method,—to compel an unjust adversary to repair an injury
already done, or give us securities against any wrong with which we are threatened by
him. As soon, therefore, as we have declared war, we have a right to do against the
enemy whatever we find necessary for the attainment of that end,—for the purpose of
bringing him to reason, and obtaining justice and security from him.

The lawfulness of the end does not give us a real right to any §137. Difference
thing further than barely the means necessary for the attainment between what we
of that end. Whatever we do beyond that, is reprobated by the have a right to do and
law of nature, is faulty, and condemnable at the tribunal of what is barely
conscience. Hence it is that the right to such or such acts of allowed to be done

with impunity,
hostility varies according to circumstances. What is just and between enemies.
perfectly innocent in war in one particular situation, is not
always so on other occasions. Right goes hand in hand with necessity and the
exigency of the case, but never exceeds them.

But as it is very difficult, always to form a precise judgment of what the present case
requires, and as, moreover, it belongs to each nation to judge of what her own
particular situation authorises her to do (Prelim. §16)—it becomes absolutely
necessary that nations should reciprocally conform to general rules on this subject.
Accordingly, whenever it is certain and evident that such a measure, such an act of
hostility, is necessary in general for overpowering the enemy’s resistance, and
attaining the end of a lawful war,—that measure, thus viewed in a general light, is, by
the law of nations, deemed lawful in war, and consistent with propriety, although he
who unnecessarily adopts it when he might attain his end by gentler methods, is not
innocent before God and his own conscience. In this, lies the difference between what
is just, equitable, irreprehensible in war, and what is only allowed between nations,
and suffered to pass with impunity. The sovereign who would preserve a pure
conscience, and punctually discharge the duties of humanity, ought never to lose sight

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 357 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

of what we already have more than once observed,—that nature gives him no right to
make war on his fellow-men, except in cases of necessity, and as a remedy, ever
disagreeable, though often necessary, against obstinate injustice or violence. If his
mind is duly impressed with this great truth, he will never extend the application of
the remedy beyond its due limits, and will be very careful not to render it more harsh
in its operation, and more fatal to mankind, than is requisite for his own security and
the defence of his rights.

Since the object of a just war is to repress injustice and violence, §138. The right to
and forcibly to compel him who is deaf to the voice of justice, weaken an enemy by
we have a right to put in practice, against the enemy, every every justifiable
measure that is necessary in order to weaken him, and disable method.
him from resisting us and supporting his injustice: and we may
choose such methods as are the most efficacious and best calculated to attain the end
in view, provided they be not of an odious kind, nor unjustifiable in themselves, and
prohibited by the law of nature.

The enemy who attacks me unjustly, gives me an undoubted §139. The right over
right to repel his violence; and he who takes up arms to oppose the enemy’s person.
me when I demand only my right, becomes himself the real
aggressor by his unjust resistance: he is the first author of the violence, and obliges
me to employ forcible means in order to secure myself against the wrong which he
intends to do me either in my person or my property. If the forcible means I employ
produce such effect as even to take away his life, he alone must bear the whole blame
of that misfortune: for if I were obliged to submit to the wrong rather than hurt him,
good men would soon become the prey of the wicked. Such is the origin of the right
to kill our enemies in a just war. When we find gentler methods insufficient to
conquer their resistance and bring them to terms, we have a right to put them to death.
Under the name of enemies, as we have already shewn, are to be comprehended, not
only the first author of the war, but likewise all those who join him, and who fight in
support of his cause.

But the very manner in which the right to kill our enemies is §140. Limits of this
proved, points out the limits of that right. On an enemy’s right. An enemy not
submitting and laying down his arms, we cannot with justice take to be killed after
away his life. Thus, in a battle, quarter is to be given to those ceasing to resist.
who lay down their arms; and, in a siege, a garrison offering to
capitulate are never to be refused their lives. The humanity with which most nations
in Europe carry on their wars at present, cannot be too much commended. If
sometimes in the heat of action the soldier refuses to give quarter, it is always
contrary to the inclination of the officers, who eagerly interpose to save the lives of
such enemies as have laid down their arms.*

There is, however, one case, in which we may refuse to spare the §141. A particular
life of an enemy who surrenders, or to allow any capitulation to a case, in which quarter
town reduced to the last extremity. It is when that enemy has may be refused.
been guilty of some enormous breach of the law of nations, and
particularly when he has violated the laws of war. This refusal of quarter is no natural

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 358 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

consequence of the war, but a punishment for his crime,—a punishment which the
injured party has a right to inflict. But in order that it be justly inflicted, it must fall on
the guilty. When we are at war with a savage nation, who observe no rules, and never
give quarter, we may punish them in the persons of any of their people whom we take
(these belonging to the number of the guilty), and endeavour, by this rigorous
proceeding, to force them to respect the laws of humanity. But wherever severity is
not absolutely necessary, clemency becomes a duty. Corinth was utterly destroyed24
for having violated the law of nations in the person of the Roman embassadors. That
severity, however, was reprobated by Cicero and other great men. He who has even
the most just cause to punish a sovereign with whom he is in enmity, will ever incur
the reproach of cruelty, if he causes the punishment to fall on his innocent subjects.
There are other methods of chastising the sovereign,—such as, depriving him of some
of his rights, taking from him towns and provinces. The evil which thence results to
the nation at large, is the consequence of that participation which cannot possibly be
avoided by those who unite in political society.

This leads us to speak of a kind of retaliation sometimes §142. Reprisals.
practised in war, under the name of reprisals. If the hostile
general has, without any just reason, caused some prisoners to be hanged, we hang an
equal number of his people, and of the same rank,—notifying to him that we will
continue thus to retaliate, for the purpose of obliging him to observe the laws of war.
It is a dreadful extremity thus to condemn a prisoner to atone, by a miserable death,
for his general’s crime: and if we had previously promised to spare the life of that
prisoner, we cannot, without injustice, make him the subject of our reprisals.*
Nevertheless, as a prince or his general has a right to sacrifice his enemies’ lives to his
own safety and that of his men,—it appears, that, if he has to do with an inhuman
enemy who frequently commits such enormities, he is authorised to refuse quarter to
some of the prisoners he takes, and to treat them as his people have been treated.† But
Scipio’s generosity is rather to be imitated:—that great man, having reduced some
Spanish princes who had revolted against the Romans, declared to them that, on a
breach of their faith, he would not call the innocent hostages to an account, but
themselves; and that he would not avenge it on an unarmed enemy, but on those who
should be found in arms.‡ Alexander the Great, having cause of complaint against
Darius for some malpractices, sent him word, that if he continued to make war in such
a manner, he would proceed to every extremity against him, and give him no quarter.§
It is thus an enemy who violates the laws of war is to be checked, and not by causing
the penalty due to his crime to fall on innocent victims.

How could it be conceived in an enlightened age, that it is lawful §143. Whether a
to punish with death a governor who has defended his town to governor of a town
the last extremity, or who, in a weak place, has had the courage can be punished with
to hold out against a royal army? In the last century, this notion death for an obstinate
still prevailed; it was looked upon as one of the laws of war, and defence.

is not, even at present, totally exploded. What an idea! to punish
a brave man for having performed his duty! Very different were the principles of
Alexander the Great, when he gave orders for sparing some Milesians, on account of
their courage and fidelity.* “As Phyton was led to execution by order of Dionysius
the tyrant for having obstinately defended the town of Rhegium of which he was

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 359 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

governor, he cried out that he was unjustly condemned to die for having refused to
betray the town, and that heaven would soon avenge his death.” Diodorus Siculus
terms this “an unjust punishment.”† It is in vain to object, that an obstinate defence,
especially in a weak place, against a royal army, only causes a fruitless effusion of
blood. Such a defence may save the state, by delaying the enemy some days longer;
and besides, courage supplies the de-fects of the fortifications.‡ The chevalier Bayard
having thrown himself into Mezieres,25 defended it with his usual intrepidity,* and
proved that a brave man is sometimes capable of saving a place which another would
not think tenable. The history of the famous siege of Malta26 is another instance how
far men of spirit may defend themselves, when thoroughly determined. How many
places have surrendered, which might still have arrested the enemy’s progress for a
considerable time, obliged him to consume his strength and waste the remainder of
the campaign, and even finally saved themselves, by a better-supported and more
vigorous defence? In the last war, whilst the strongest places in the Netherlands
opened their gates in a few days, the valiant general Leutrum was seen to defend
Coni27 against the utmost efforts of two powerful armies,—to hold out, in so
indifferent a post, forty days from the opening of the trenches,—and finally to save
the town, and, together with it, all Piémont. If it be urged, that, by threatening a
commandant with death, you may shorten a bloody siege, spare your troops, and make
a valuable saving of time,—my answer is, that a brave man will despise your menace,
or, incensed by such ignominious treatment, will sell his life as dearly as he
can,—will bury himself under the ruins of his fort, and make you pay for your
injustice. But whatever advantage you might promise yourself from an unlawful
proceeding, that will not warrant you in the use of it. The menace of an unjust
punishment is unjust in itself: it is an insult and an injury. But, above all, it would be
horrible and barbarous to put it in execution: and if you allow that the threatened
consequences must not be realised, the threat is vain and ridiculous. Just and
honourable means may be employed to dissuade a governor from ineffectually
persevering to the last extremity: and such is the present practice of all prudent and
humane generals. At a proper stage of the business, they summon a governor to
surrender; they offer him honourable and advantageous terms of
capitulation,—accompanied by a threat, that, if he delays too long, he will only be
admitted to surrender as a prisoner of war, and at discretion. If he persists, and is at
length forced to surrender at discretion,— they may then treat both himself and his
troops with all the severity of the law of war. But that law can never extend so far as
to give a right to take away the life of an enemy who lays down his arms (§140),
unless he has been guilty of some crime against the conqueror (§141).

Resistance carried to extremity does not become punishable in a subaltern, except on
those occasions only when it is evidently fruitless. It is then obstinacy, and not
firmness or valour:—true valour has always a reasonable object in view. Let us, for
instance, suppose that a state has entirely submitted to the conqueror’s arms, except
one single fortress,— that no succour is to be expected from without,—no neighbour,
no ally, concerns himself about saving the remainder of that conquered state:— on
such an occasion, the governor is to be made acquainted with the situation of affairs,
and summoned to surrender; and he may be threatened with death in case of his
persisting in a defence which is absolutely fruitless, and which can only tend to the
effusion of human blood.* Should this make no impression on him, he deserves to

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 360 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

suffer the punishment with which he has been justly threatened. I suppose the justice
of the war to be problematical, and that it is not an insupportable oppression which he
opposes: for if this governor maintains a cause that is evidently just,—if he fights to
save his country from slavery,—his misfortune will be pitied; and every man of spirit
will applaud him for gallantly persevering to the last extremity, and determining to die
free.

Fugitives and deserters, found by the victor among his enemies, §144. Fugitives and
are guilty of a crime against him; and he has undoubtedly a right deserters.
to put them to death. But they are not properly considered as
enemies: they are rather perfidious citizens, traitors to their country; and their
enlistment with the enemy cannot obliterate that character, or exempt them from the
punishment they have deserved. At present, however, desertion being unhappily too
common, the number of the delinquents renders it in some measure necessary to shew
clemency; and, in capitulations, it is usual to indulge the evacuating garrison with a
certain number of covered waggons, in which they save the deserters.

Women, children, feeble old men, and sick persons, come under §145. Women,
the description of enemies (§§70, 72); and we have certain rights children, the aged,
over them, inasmuch as they belong to the nation with whom we and sick.
are at war, and as, between nation and nation, all rights and
pretensions affect the body of the society, together with all its members (Book II.
§§81, 82, 344). But these are enemies who make no resistance; and consequently we
have no right to maltreat their persons, or use any violence against them, much less to
take away their lives (§140). This is so plain a maxim of justice and humanity, that at
present every nation, in the least degree civilised, acquiesces in it. If sometimes the
furious and ungovernable soldier carries his brutality so far as to violate female
chastity, or to massacre women, children, and old men, the officers lament those
excesses: they exert their utmost efforts to put a stop to them; and a prudent and
humane general even punishes them whenever he can. But if the women wish to be
spared altogether, they must confine themselves to the occupations peculiar to their
own sex, and not meddle with those of men by taking up arms. Accordingly the
military law of the Switzers, which forbids the soldier to maltreat women, formally
excepts those females who have committed any acts of hostility.*

The like may be said of the public ministers of religion, of men §146. Clergy, men of
of letters, and other persons whose mode of life is very remote letters, &c.
from military affairs:—not that these people, nor even the
ministers of the altar, are, necessarily and by virtue of their functions, invested with
any character of inviolability, or that the civil law can confer it on them with respect
to the enemy: but as they do not use force or violence to oppose him, they do not give
him a right to use it against them. Among the ancient Romans the priests carried arms:
Julius Caesar himself was sovereign pontiff:—and, among the christians, it has been
no rare thing to see prelates, bishops, and cardinals, buckle on their armour, and take
the command of armies. From the instant of their doing so, they subjected themselves
to the common fate of military men. While dealing out their blows in the field of
battle, they did not, it is to be presumed, lay claim to inviolability.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 361 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Formerly, every one capable of carrying arms became a soldier §147. Peasants, and,
when his nation was at war, and especially when it was attacked. in general, all who do
Grotius however* produces instances of several nations and not carry arms.
eminent commanders† who spared the peasantry in consideration
of the immediate usefulness of their labours.‡ At present war is carried on by regular
troops: the people, the peasants, the citizens, take no part in it, and generally have
nothing to fear from the sword of the enemy. Provided the inhabitants submit to him
who is master of the country, pay the contributions im-posed, and refrain from all
hostilities, they live in as perfect safety as if they were friends: they even continue in
possession of what belongs to them: the country people come freely to the camp to
sell their provisions, and are protected, as far as possible, from the calamities of war.
A laudable custom, truly worthy of those nations who value themselves on their
humanity, and advantageous even to the enemy who acts with such moderation. By
protecting the unarmed inhabitants, keeping the soldiery under strict discipline, and
preserving the country, a general procures an easy subsistence for his army, and
avoids many evils and dangers. If he has any reason to mistrust the peasantry and the
inhabitants of the towns, he has a right to disarm them, and to require hostages from
them: and those who wish to avoid the calamities of war, must submit to the laws
which the enemy thinks proper to impose on them.

But all those enemies thus subdued or disarmed, whom the §148. The right of
principles of humanity oblige him to spare,—all those persons making prisoners of
belonging to the opposite party (even the women and children), war.
he may lawfully secure and make prisoners, either with a view to
prevent them from taking up arms again, or for the purpose of weakening the enemy
(§138), or, finally, in hopes that, by getting into his power some woman or child for
whom the sovereign has an affection, he may induce him to accede to equitable
conditions of peace, for the sake of redeeming those valuable pledges. At present,
indeed, this last-mentioned expedient is seldom put in practice by the polished nations
of Europe: women and children are suffered to enjoy perfect security, and allowed
permission to withdraw wherever they please. But this moderation, this politeness,
though undoubtedly commendable, is not in itself absolutely obligatory; and if a
general thinks fit to supersede it, he cannot be justly accused of violating the laws of
war. He is at liberty to adopt such measures in this respect as he thinks most
conducive to the success of his affairs. If, without reason, and from mere caprice, he
refuses to indulge women with this liberty, he will be taxed with harshness and
brutality,—he will be censured for not conforming to a custom established by
humanity: but he may have good reasons for disregarding, in this particular, the rules
of politeness, and even the suggestions of pity. If there are hopes of reducing by
famine a strong place of which it is very important to gain possession, the useless
mouths are not permitted to come out. And in this there is nothing which is not
authorised by the laws of war. Some great men, however, have, on occasions of this
nature, carried their compassion so far as to postpone their interests to the motions of
humanity. We have already mentioned in another place how Henry the Great acted
during the siege of Paris. To such a noble example let us add that of Titus at the siege
of Jerusalem:28 at first he was inclined to drive back into the city great numbers of
starving wretches, who came out of it: but he could not withstand the compassion

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 362 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

which such a sight raised in him; and he suffered the sentiments of humanity and
generosity to prevail over the maxims of war.

As soon as your enemy has laid down his arms and surrendered §149. A prisoner of
his person, you have no longer any right over his life (§140), war not to be put to
unless he should give you such right by some new attempt, or death.
had before committed against you a crime deserving death
(§141). It was therefore a dreadful error of antiquity, a most unjust and savage claim,
to assume a right of putting prisoners of war to death, and even by the hand of the
executioner. More just and humane principles, however, have long since been
adopted. Charles I. king of Naples,29 having defeated and taken prisoner Conradin30
his competitor, caused him to be publicly beheaded at Naples, together with Frederic
of Austria, his fellow-prisoner. This barbarity raised a universal horror; and Peter the
Third, king of Arragon,31 reproached Charles with it as a detestable crime, and till
then unheard of among christian princes.* The case, however, was that of a dangerous
rival who contended with him for the throne. But supposing even the claims of that
rival were unjust, Charles might have kept him in prison till he had renounced them,
and given security for his future behaviour.

Prisoners may be secured; and, for this purpose, they may be put §150. How prisoners
into confinement, and even fettered if there be reason to of war are to be
apprehend that they will rise on their captors, or make their treated.
escape. But they are not to be treated harshly, unless personally
guilty of some crime against him who has them in his power. In this case he is at
liberty to punish them: otherwise he should remember that they are men, and
unfortunate.* A man of exalted soul no longer feels any emotions but those of
compassion towards a conquered enemy who has submitted to his arms. Let us in this
particular bestow on the European nations the praise to which they are justly entitled.
Prisoners of war are seldom ill treated among them. We extol the English and French,
we feel our bosoms glow with love for them, when we hear the accounts of the
treatment which prisoners of war, on both sides, have experienced from those
generous nations. And what is more, by a custom which equally displays the honour
and humanity of the Europeans, an officer, taken prisoner in war, is released on his
parole, and enjoys the comfort of passing the time of his captivity in his own country,
in the midst of his family; and the party who have thus released him, rest as perfectly
sure of him, as if they had him confined in irons.

Formerly a question of an embarrassing nature might have been §151. Whether
proposed. When we have so great a number of prisoners that we prisoners, who cannot
find it impossible to feed them, or to keep them with safety, have be kept or fed, may be
we a right to put them to death? or shall we send them back to put to death.
the enemy,—thus increasing his strength, and exposing ourselves
to the hazard of being overpowered by him on a subsequent occasion? At present the
case is attended with no difficulty. Such prisoners are dismissed on their
parole,—bound by promise not to carry arms for a certain time or during the
continuance of the war. And as every commander necessarily has a power of agreeing
to the conditions on which the enemy admits his surrender, the engagements entered
into by him for saving his life or his liberty with that of his men, are valid, as being

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 363 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

made within the limits of his powers (§§19, &c.); and his sovereign cannot annul
them. Of this many instances occurred during the last war:32 —several Dutch
garrisons submitted to the condition of not serving against France or her allies, for one
or two years: a body of French troops being invested in Lintz, were by capitulation
sent back across the Rhine, under a restriction not to carry arms against the queen of
Hungary for a stated time: and the sovereigns of those troops respected the
engagements formed by them. But conventions of this kind have their limits, which
consist in not infringing the rights of the sovereign over his subjects. Thus the enemy,
in releasing prisoners, may impose on them the condition of not carrying arms against
him till the conclusion of the war; since he might justly keep them in confinement till
that period: but he cannot require that they shall for ever renounce the liberty of
fighting for their country; because, on the termination of the war, he has no longer any
reason for detaining them; and they, on their part, cannot enter into an engagement
absolutely inconsistent with their character of citizens or subjects. If their country
abandons them, they become free in that respect, and have in their turn a right to
renounce their country.

But if we have to do with a nation that is at once savage, perfidious, and formidable,
shall we send her back a number of soldiers who will perhaps enable her to destroy
us?—When our own safety is incompatible with that of an enemy—even of an enemy
who has submitted,—the question admits not of a doubt. But to justify us in coolly
and deliberately putting to death a great number of prisoners, the following conditions
are indispensably necessary:—1. that no promise have been made to spare their lives;
and, 2. that we be perfectly assured that our own safety demands such a sacrifice. If it
is at all consistent with prudence either to trust to their parole or to disregard their
perfidy, a generous enemy will rather listen to the voice of huma-nity than to that of a
timid circumspection. Charles the Twelfth, being incumbered with his prisoners after
the battle of Narva,33 only disarmed them and set them at liberty: but his enemy, still
impressed with the apprehensions which his warlike and formidable opponents had
excited in his mind, sent into Siberia all the prisoners he took at Pultowa. The
Swedish hero confided too much in his own generosity: the sagacious monarch of
Russia united perhaps too great a degree of severity with his prudence: but necessity
furnishes an apology for severity, or rather throws a veil over it altogether. When
admiral Anson took the rich Acapulco galleon near Manilla, he found that the
prisoners outnumbered his whole ship’s company: he was therefore under a necessity
of confining them in the hold, where they suffered cruel distress.* But, had he
exposed himself to the risk of being carried away a prisoner, with his prize and his
own ship together, would the humanity of his conduct have justified the imprudence
of it? Henry V. king of England, after his victory in the battle of Agincourt, was
reduced, or thought himself reduced, to the cruel necessity of sacrificing the prisoners
to his own safety. “In this universal route,” says Father Daniel, “a fresh misfortune
happened, which cost the lives of a great number of French. A remainder of their van
was retreating in some order, and many of the stragglers rallied and joined it. The
king of England, observing their motions from an eminence, supposed it was their
intention to return to the charge. At the same moment he received information of an
attack being made on his camp where the baggage was deposited. In fact, some
noblemen of Picardy, having armed about six hundred peasants, had fallen upon the
English camp. Thus circumstanced, that prince, apprehensive of some disastrous

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 364 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

reverse, dispatched his aides-de-camp to the different divisions of the army, with
orders for putting all the prisoners to the sword, lest, in case of a renewal of the battle,
the care of guarding them should prove an impediment to his soldiers, or the prisoners
should escape, and join their countrymen. The order was immediately carried into
execution, and all the prisoners were put to the sword.”* Nothing short of the greatest
necessity can justify so terrible an execution; and the general whose situation requires
it, is greatly to be pitied.

Is it lawful to condemn prisoners of war to slavery? Yes, in cases §152. Whether
which give a right to kill them,—when they have rendered prisoners of war may
themselves personally guilty of some crime deserving of death. be made slaves.
The ancients used to sell their prisoners of war for slaves. They
indeed thought they had a right to put them to death. In every circumstance, when I
cannot innocently take away my prisoner’s life, I have no right to make him a slave. If
I spare his life and condemn him to a state so contrary to the nature of man, I still
continue with him the state of war. He lies under no obligation to me: for, what is life
without freedom? If any one counts life a favour when the grant of it is attended with
chains,—be it so: let him accept the kindness, submit to the destiny which awaits him,
and fulfil the duties annexed to it. But he must apply to some other writer to teach him
those duties: there have been authors enough who have amply treated of them. I shall
dwell no longer on the subject: and indeed that disgrace to humanity is happily
banished from Europe.

Prisoners of war, then, are detained, either to prevent their §153. Exchange and
returning to join the enemy again, or with a view to obtain from ransom of prisoners.
their sovereign a just satisfaction, as the price of their liberty.
There is no obligation to release those who are detained with the latter view, till after
satisfaction is obtained. As to the former, whoever makes a just war, has a right, if he
thinks proper, to detain his prisoners till the end of the war: and whenever he releases
them, he may justly require a ransom, either as a compensation at the conclusion of a
peace, or, if during the continuance of the war, for the purpose of at least weakening
his enemy’s finances at the same time that he restores him a number of soldiers. The
European nations, who are ever to be commended for their care in alleviating the evils
of war, have, with regard to prisoners, introduced humane and salutary customs. They
are exchanged or ransomed, even during the war; and this point is generally settled
beforehand by cartel. However, if a nation finds a considerable advantage in leaving
her soldiers prisoners with the enemy during the war rather than exchanging them, she
may certainly, unless bound by cartel, act in that respect as is most conducive to her
interest. Such would be the case of a state abounding in men, and at war with a nation
more formidable by the courage than the number of her soldiers. It would have ill
suited the interests of the czar Peter the Great, to restore his prisoners to the Swedes
for an equal number of Russians.

But the state is bound to procure, at her own expense, the release §154. The state is
of her citizens and soldiers who are prisoners of war, as soon as bound to procure their
she has the means of accomplishing it, and can do it without release.
danger. It was only by acting in her service and supporting her
cause, that they were involved in their present misfortune. For the same reason, it is

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 365 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

her duty to provide for their support during the time of their captivity. Formerly
prisoners of war were obliged to redeem themselves: but then the ransom of all those
whom the officers or soldiers might take, was the perquisite of the individual captors.
The modern custom is more agreeable to reason and justice. If prisoners cannot be
delivered during the course of the war, at least their liberty must, if possible, make an
article in the treaty of peace. This is a care which the state owes to those who have
exposed themselves in her defence. It must, nevertheless, be allowed, that a nation
may, after the example of the Romans, and for the purpose of stimulating her soldiers
to the most vigorous resistance, enact a law to prohibit prisoners of war from ever
being ransomed. When this is agreed to by the whole society, nobody can complain.
But such a law is very severe, and could scarce suit any but those ambitious heroes
who were determined on sacrificing every thing in order to make themselves masters
of the world.

Since the present chapter treats of the rights which war gives us §155. Whether an
over the person of the enemy, this is the proper place to discuss a enemy may lawfully
celebrated question on which authors have been much be assassinated or
divided,—and that is, whether we may lawfully employ all sorts poisoned.
of means to take away an enemy’s life? whether we be justifiable
in procuring his death by assassination or poison? Some writers have asserted, that,
where we have a right to take away life, the manner is indifferent. A strange maxim!
but happily exploded by the bare ideas of honour, confused and indefinite as they are.
In civil society, I have a right to punish a slanderer,—to cause my property to be
restored by him who unjustly detains it: but shall the manner be indifferent? Nations
may do themselves justice sword in hand, when otherwise refused to them: shall it be
indifferent to human society that they employ odious means, capable of spreading
desolation over the whole face of the earth, and against which, the most just and
equitable of sovereigns, even though supported by the majority of other princes,
cannot guard himself?

But in order to discuss this question on solid grounds, assassination is by all means to
be distinguished from surprises, which are, doubtless, very allowable in war. Should a
resolute soldier steal into the enemy’s camp by night,—should he penetrate to the
general’s tent, and stab him,—in such conduct there is nothing contrary to the natural
laws of war,— nothing even but what is perfectly commendable in a just and
necessary war. Mutius Scaevola34 has been praised by all the great men of antiquity;
and Porsenna himself, whom he intended to kill, could not but commend his
courage.* Pepin,35 father of Charlemagne, having crossed the Rhine with one of his
guards, went and killed his enemy in his chamber.† If any one has absolutely
condemned such bold strokes, his censure only proceeded from a desire to flatter
those among the great, who would wish to leave all the dangerous part of war to the
soldiery and inferior officers. It is true indeed that the agents in such attempts are
usually punished with some painful death. But that is because the prince or general
who is thus attacked, exercises his own rights in turn,— has an eye to his own safety,
and endeavours, by the dread of a cruel punishment, to deter his enemies from
attacking him otherwise than by open force. He may proportion his severity towards
an enemy according as his own safety requires. Indeed it would be more
commendable on both sides to renounce every kind of hos-tility which lays the enemy

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 366 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

under a necessity of employing cruel punishments in order to secure himself against
it. This might be made an established custom,—a conventional law of war. The
generous warriors of the present age dislike such attempts, and would never willingly
undertake them, except on those extraordinary occasions when they become necessary
to the very safety and being of their country. As to the six hundred Lacedaemonians,
who, under the conduct of Leonidas,36 broke into the enemy’s camp, and made their
way directly to the Persian monarch’s37 tent,* their expedition was justifiable by the
common rules of war, and did not authorise the king to treat them more rigorously
than any other enemies. In order to defeat all such attempts, it is sufficient to keep a
strict watch; and it would be unjust to have recourse to cruel punishments for that
purpose: accordingly such punishments are reserved for those only who gain
admittance by stealth, alone or in very small number, and especially if under cover of
a disguise.

I give, then, the name of assassination to a treacherous murder, whether the
perpetrators of the deed be subjects of the party whom we cause to be assassinated, or
of our own sovereign,—or that it be executed by the hand of any other emissary,
introducing himself as a supplicant, a refugee, a deserter, or, in fine, as a stranger; and
such an attempt, I say, is infamous and execrable, both in him who executes and in
him who commands it. Why do we judge an act to be criminal, and contrary to the
law of nature, but because such act is pernicious to human society, and that the
practice of it would be destructive to mankind? Now what could be more terrible than
the custom of hiring a traitor to assassinate our enemy? Besides, were such a liberty
once introduced, the purest virtue, the friendship of the majority of the reigning
sovereigns, would no longer be sufficient to ensure a prince’s safety. Had Titus lived
in the time of the old man of the mountain,38 —though the happiness of mankind
centred in him,—though, punctual in the observance of peace and equity, he was
respected and adored by all potentates,—yet, the very first time that the prince of the
Assassins might have thought proper to quarrel with him, that universal affection
would have proved insufficient to save him; and mankind would have lost their
“darling.” Let it not here be replied that it is only in favour of the cause of justice that
such extraordinary measures are allowable: for all parties, in their wars, maintain that
they have justice on their side. Whoever, by setting the example, contributes to the
introduction of so destructive a practice, declares himself the enemy of mankind, and
deserves the execration of all ages.* The assassination of William prince of Orange
was regarded with universal detestation, though the Spaniards had declared that prince
a rebel. And the same nation denied, as an atrocious calumny, the charge of having
had the least concern in that of Henry the Great, who was preparing for a war against
them, which might have shaken their monarchy to its very foundations.

In treacherously administering poison there is something still more odious than in
assassination: it would be more difficult to guard against the consequences of such an
attempt; and the practice would be more dreadful; accordingly it has been more
generally detested. Of this Grotius has accumulated many instances.† The consuls
Caius Fabricius and Quintus Aemilius rejected with horror the proposal of
Pyrrhus’s39 physician who made an offer of poisoning his master: they even
cautioned that prince to be on his guard against the traitor,—haughtily adding, “It is
not to ingratiate ourselves with you that we give this information, but to avoid the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 367 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

obloquy to which your death would expose us.”* And they justly observe in the same
letter, that it is for the common interest of all nations not to set such examples.† It was
a maxim of the Roman senate, that war was to be carried on with arms, and not with
poison.‡ Even under Tiberius,40 the proposal of the prince of the Catti was rejected,
who offered to destroy Arminius41 if poison were sent him for that purpose: and he
received for answer, that “it was the practice of the Romans to take vengeance on
their enemies by open force, and not by treachery and secret machinations”;§ Tiberius
thus making it his glory to imitate the virtue of the ancient Roman commanders. This
instance is the more remarkable, as Arminius had treacherously cut off Varus,42
together with three Roman legions. The senate, and even Tiberius himself, thought it
unlawful to adopt the use of poison, even against a perfidious enemy, and as a kind of
retaliation or reprisals.

Assassination and poisoning are therefore contrary to the laws of war, and equally
condemned by the law of nature, and the consent of all civilised nations. The
sovereign who has recourse to such execrable means, should be regarded as the
enemy of the human race; and the common safety of mankind calls on all nations to
unite against him, and join their forces to punish him. His conduct particularly
authorises the enemy whom he has attacked by such odious means, to refuse him any
quarter. Alexander declared that “he was determined to proceed to the utmost
extremities against Darius, and no longer to consider him as a fair enemy, but as a
poisoner and an assassin.”*

The interest and safety of men in high command require, that, so far from
countenancing the introduction of such practices, they should use all possible care to
prevent it. It was wisely said by Eumenes,43 that “he did not think any general wished
to obtain a victory in such manner as should set a pernicious example which might
recoil on himself.”† And it was on the same principle that Alexander formed his
judgment of Bessus,44 who had assassinated Darius.‡45

The use of poisoned weapons may be excused or defended with a §156. Whether
little more plausibility. At least there is no treachery in the case, poisoned weapons
no clandestine machination. But the practice is nevertheless may be used in war.
prohibited by the law of nature, which does not allow us to
multiply the evils of war beyond all bounds. You must of course strike your enemy in
order to get the better of his efforts: but if he is once disabled, is it necessary that he
should inevitably die of his wounds? Besides, if you poison your weapons, the enemy
will follow your example; and thus, without gaining any advantage on your side for
the decision of the contest, you have only added to the cruelty and calamities of war.
It is necessity alone that can at all justify nations in making war: they ought
universally to abstain from every thing that has a tendency to render it more
destructive: it is even a duty incumbent on them, to oppose such practices. It is
therefore with good reason, and in conformity to their duty, that civilised nations have
classed among the laws of war the maxim which prohibits the poisoning of weapons;*
and they are all warranted by their common safety to repress and punish the first who
should offer to break through that law.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 368 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

A still more general unanimity prevails in condemning the §157. Whether
practice of poisoning waters, wells, and springs, because (say springs may be
some authors) we may thereby destroy innocent persons,—we poisoned.
may destroy other people as well as our enemies. This is indeed
an additional reason: but it is not the only nor even the true one; for we do not scruple
to fire on an enemy’s ship, although there be neutral passengers on board. But though
poison is not to be used, it is very allowable to divert the water,—to cut off the
springs,—or by any other means to render them useless, that the enemy may be
reduced to surrender.† This is a milder way than that of arms.

I cannot conclude this subject, of what we have a right to do §158. Dispositions to
against the person of the enemy, without speaking a few words be preserved towards
concerning the dispositions we ought to preserve towards him. an enemy.
They may already be deduced from what I have hitherto said,
and especially in the first chapter of the second book. Let us never forget that our
enemies are men. Though reduced to the disagreeable necessity of prosecuting our
right by force of arms, let us not divest ourselves of that charity which connects us
with all mankind. Thus shall we courageously defend our country’s rights without
violating those of human nature.‡ Let our valour preserve itself from every stain of
cruelty, and the lustre of victory will not be tarnished by inhuman and brutal actions.
Marius46 and Attila47 are now detested; whereas we cannot forbear admiring and
loving Caesar; his generosity and clemency almost tempt us to overlook the injustice
of his undertaking. Moderation and generosity redound more to the glory of a victor,
than his courage; they are more certain marks of an exalted soul. Besides the honour
which infallibly accompanies those virtues, humanity towards an enemy has been
often attended with immediate and real advantages. Leopold, duke of Austria,
besieging Soleure in the year 1318, threw a bridge over the Aar, and posted on it a
large body of troops. Soon after, the river having, by an extraordinary swell of its
waters, carried away the bridge together with those who were stationed on it,—the
besieged hastened to the relief of those unfortunate men, and saved the greatest part of
them. Leopold, relenting at this act of generosity, raised the siege and made peace
with the city.* The duke of Cumberland, after his victory at Dettingen,† appears to me
still greater than in the heat of battle. As he was under the surgeon’s hands, a French
officer, much more dangerously wounded than himself, being brought that way, the
duke immediately ordered his surgeon to quit him, and assist that wounded enemy. If
men in exalted stations did but conceive how great a degree of affection and respect
attends such actions, they would study to imitate them, even when not prompted to the
practice by native elevation of sentiment. At present the European nations generally
carry on their wars with great moderation and generosity. These dispositions have
given rise to several customs which are highly commendable, and frequently carried
to the extreme of politeness.* Sometimes refreshments are sent to the governor of a
besieged town; and it is usual to avoid firing on the king’s or the general’s quarters.
We are sure to gain by this moderation when we have to do with a generous enemy;
but we are not bound to observe it any farther than can be done without injuring the
cause we defend; and it is clear that a prudent general will, in this respect, regulate his
conduct by the circumstances of the case, by an attention to the safety of the army and
of the state, by the magnitude of the danger, and by the character and behaviour of the
enemy. Should a weak nation or town be attacked by a furious conqueror who

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 369 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

threatens to destroy it, are the defenders to forbear firing on his quarters? Far from it:
that is the very place to which, if possible, every shot should be directed.

Formerly, he who killed the king or general of the enemy was §159. Tenderness for
commended, and greatly rewarded: the honours annexed to the the person of a king
spolia opima are well known. Nothing was more natural: in who is in arms against
former times, the belligerent nations had, almost in every us.
instance, their safety and very existence at stake; and the death of
the leader often put an end to the war. In our days, a soldier would not dare to boast of
having killed the enemy’s king. Thus sovereigns tacitly agree to secure their own
persons. It must be owned, that, in a war which is carried on with no great animosity,
and where the safety and existence of the state are not involved in the issue, this
regard for regal majesty is perfectly commendable, and even consonant to the
reciprocal duties of nations. In such a war, to take away the life of the enemy’s
sovereign when it might be spared, is perhaps doing that nation a greater degree of
harm than is necessary for bringing the contest to a happy issue. But it is not one of
the laws of war that we should on every occasion spare the person of the hostile king:
we are not bound to observe that moderation except where we have a fair opportunity
of making him prisoner.*

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 370 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER IX

Of The Right Of War, With Regard To Things Belonging To
The Enemy.
A state taking up arms in a just cause has a double right against §160. Principles of
her enemy,—1. a right to obtain possession of her property with- the right over things
held by the enemy; to which must be added the expenses belonging to the
incurred in the pursuit of that object, the charges of the war, and enemy.
the reparation of damages: for, were she obliged to bear those
expenses and losses, she would not fully recover her property, or obtain her due. 2.
She has a right to weaken her enemy, in order to render him incapable of supporting
his unjust violence (§138)—a right to deprive him of the means of resistance. Hence,
as from their source, originate all the rights which war gives us over things belonging
to the enemy. I speak of ordinary cases, and of what particularly relates to the
enemy’s property. On certain occasions, the right of punishing him produces new
rights over the things which belong to him, as it also does over his person. These we
shall presently consider.

We have a right to deprive our enemy of his possessions, of §161. The right of
every thing which may augment his strength and enable him to seizing on them.
make war. This every one endeavours to accomplish in the
manner most suitable to him. Whenever we have an opportunity, we seize on the
enemy’s property, and convert it to our own use: and thus, besides diminishing the
enemy’s power, we augment our own, and obtain at least a partial indemnification or
equivalent, either for what constitutes the subject of the war, or for the expenses and
losses incurred in its prosecution:—in a word, we do ourselves justice.

The right to security often authorises us to punish injustice or §162. What is taken
violence. It is an additional plea for depriving an enemy of some from the enemy by
part of his possessions. This manner of chastising a nation is way of penalty.
more humane than making the penalty to fall on the persons of
the citizens. With that view, things of value may be taken from her, such as rights,
cities, provinces. But all wars do not afford just grounds for inflicting punishment. A
nation that has with upright intentions supported a bad cause, and observed
moderation in the prosecution of it, is entitled rather to compassion than resentment
from a generous conqueror: and in a doubtful cause we are to suppose that the enemy
sincerely thinks himself in the right (Prelim. §21; Book III. §40). The only
circumstance, therefore, which gives an enemy the right to punish his adversaries, is
their evident injustice unsupported even by any plausible pretext, or some heinous
outrage in their proceedings: and, on every occasion, he ought to confine the
punishment to what his own security and the safety of nations require. As far as
consistent with prudence, it is glorious to obey the voice of clemency: that amiable
virtue seldom fails of being more useful to the party who exerts it, than inflexible
rigor. The clemency of Henry the Great48 was of singular advantage in co-operating

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 371 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

with his valour, when that good prince found himself compelled to conquer his own
kingdom. Those who would have continued his enemies if only subdued by arms,
were won by his goodness, and became affectionate subjects.

In fine, we seize on the enemy’s property, his towns, his §163. What is with-
provinces, in order to bring him to reasonable conditions, and held from him, in
compel him to accept of an equitable and solid peace. Thus, order to oblige him to
much more is taken from him than he owes, more than is claimed give just satisfaction.
of him: but this is done with a design of restoring the surplus by
a treaty of peace. The king of France was, in the last war, known to declare that he
aimed at nothing for himself: and by the treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle49 he actually
restored all his conquests.*

As the towns and lands taken from the enemy are called §164. Booty.
conquests, all movable property taken from him comes under the
denomination of booty. This booty naturally belongs to the sovereign making war, no
less than the conquests; for he alone has such claims against the hostile nation, as
warrant him to seize on her property and convert it to his own use. His soldiers, and
even his auxiliaries, are only instruments which he employs in asserting his right. He
maintains and pays them. Whatever they do is in his name, and for him. Thus there is
no difficulty, even with regard to the auxiliaries. If they are not associates in the war,
it is not carried on for their benefit; and they have no more right to the booty than to
the conquests. But the sovereign may grant the troops what share of the booty he
pleases. At present most nations allow them whatever they can make on certain
occasions when the general allows of plundering,—such as the spoil of enemies fallen
in the field of battle, the pillage of a camp which has been forced, and sometimes that
of a town taken by assault. In several services, the soldier has also the property of
what he can take from the enemy’s troops when he is out on a party or in a
detachment, excepting artillery, military stores, magazines and convoys of provision
and forage, which are applied to the wants and use of the army. This custom being
once admitted in an army, it would be injustice to exclude the auxiliaries from the
right allowed to the national troops. Among the Romans, the soldier was obliged to
bring in to the public stock all the booty he had taken. This the general caused to be
sold; and after distributing a part of the produce among the soldiers, according to
rank, he consigned the residue to the public treasury.

Instead of the custom of pillaging the open country and §165. Contributions.
defenceless places, another mode has been substituted, which is
at once more humane, and more advantageous to the belligerent sovereign—I mean
that of contributions. Whoever carries on a just war has a right to make the enemy’s
country contribute to the support of his army, and towards defraying all the charges of
the war. Thus he obtains a part of what is due to him; and the enemy’s subjects, by
consenting to pay the sum demanded, have their property secured from pillage, and
the country is preserved. But a general who wishes to enjoy an unsullied reputation,
must be moderate in his demand of contributions, and proportion them to the abilities
of those on whom they are imposed. An excess in this point does not escape the
reproach of cruelty and inhumanity: although there is not so great an appearance of
ferocity in it as in ravage and destruction, it displays a greater degree of avarice or

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 372 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

greediness. Instances of humanity and moderation cannot be too often quoted. A very
commendable one occurred during those long wars which France carried on in the
reign of Louis XIV. The sovereigns seeing it was their mutual interest as well as duty
to prevent ravage, made it a practice, on the commencement of hostilities, to enter
into treaties for regulating the contributions on a supportable footing: they determined
the extent of hostile territory in which each might demand contributions, the amount
of them, and the manner in which the parties sent to levy them were to behave. In
these treaties it was expressed, that no body of men under a certain number should
advance into the enemy’s country beyond the limits agreed on, under the penalty of
being treated as free-booters. By such steps they prevented a multitude of disorders
and enormities, which entail ruin on the people, and generally without the least
advantage to the belligerent sovereigns. Whence comes it that so noble an example is
not universally imitated?

If it is lawful to take away the property of an unjust enemy in §166. Waste and
order to weaken or punish him (§§161, 162), the same motives destruction.
justify us in destroying what we cannot conveniently carry away.
Thus, we waste a country, and destroy the provisions and forage, that the enemy may
not find a subsistence there: we sink his ships when we cannot take them or bring
them off. All this tends to promote the main object of the war: but such measures are
only to be pursued with moderation, and according to the exigency of the case. Those
who tear up the vines and cut down the fruit-trees, are looked upon as savage
barbarians, unless when they do it with a view to punish the enemy for some gross
violation of the law of nations. They desolate a country for many years to come, and
beyond what their own safety requires. Such a conduct is not dictated by prudence,
but by hatred and fury.

On certain occasions, however, matters are carried still farther: a §167. Ravaging and
country is totally ravaged, towns and villages are sacked, and burning.
delivered up a prey to fire and sword. Dreadful extremities, even
when we are forced into them! Savage and monstrous excesses, when committed
without necessity! There are two reasons, however, which may authorise them,—1.
the necessity of chastising an unjust and barbarous nation, of checking her brutality,
and preserving ourselves from her depredations. Who can doubt that the king of Spain
and the powers of Italy have a very good right utterly to destroy those maritime towns
of Africa, those nests of pirates, that are continually molesting their commerce and
ruining their subjects? But what nation will proceed to such extremities, merely for
the sake of punishing the hostile sovereign? It is but indirectly that he will feel the
punishment: and how great the cruelty, to ruin an innocent people in order to reach
him! The same prince whose firmness and just resentment was commended in the
bombardment of Algiers, was, after that of Genoa, accused of pride and
inhumanity.50 2. We ravage a country and render it un-inhabitable, in order to make it
serve us as a barrier, and to cover our frontier against an enemy whose incursions we
are unable to check by any other means. A cruel expedient, it is true: but why should
we not be allowed to adopt it at the expense of the enemy, since, with the same view,
we readily submit to lay waste our own provinces? The czar Peter the Great,51 in his
flight before the formidable Charles the Twelfth,52 ravaged an extent of above
fourscore leagues of his own empire, in order to check the impetuosity of a torrent

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 373 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

which he was unable to withstand. Thus the Swedes were worn down with want and
fatigue; and the Russian monarch reaped at Pultowa53 the fruits of his circumspection
and sacrifices. But violent remedies are to be sparingly applied: there must be reasons
of suitable importance to justify the use of them. A prince who should without
necessity imitate the czar’s conduct, would be guilty of a crime against his people:
and he who does the like in an enemy’s country when impelled to it by no necessity or
induced by feeble reasons, becomes the scourge of mankind. In the last century, the
French ravaged and burnt the Palatinate.* All Europe resounded with invectives
against such a mode of waging war. It was in vain that the court attempted to palliate
their conduct, by alleging that this was done only with a view to cover their own
frontier:—that was an end to which the ravaging of the Palatinate contributed but
little: and the whole proceeding exhibited nothing to the eyes of mankind but the
revenge and cruelty of a haughty and unfeeling minister.

For whatever cause a country is ravaged, we ought to spare those §168. What things are
edifices which do honour to human society, and do not to be spared.
contribute to increase the enemy’s strength,—such as temples,
tombs, public buildings, and all works of remarkable beauty. What advantage is
obtained by destroying them? It is declaring one’s self an enemy to mankind, thus
wantonly to deprive them of these monuments of art and models of taste; and in that
light Belisarius represented the matter to Tottila, king of the Goths.* We still detest
those barbarians who destroyed so many wonders of art, when they over-ran the
Roman empire. However just the resentment with which the great Gustavus was
animated against Maximilian duke of Bavaria, he rejected with indignation the advice
of those who wished him to demolish the stately palace of Munich,54 and took
particular care to preserve that admirable structure.

Nevertheless, if we find it necessary to destroy edifices of that nature in order to carry
on the operations of war or to advance the works in a siege, we have an undoubted
right to take such a step. The sovereign of the country, or his general, makes no
scruple to destroy them, when necessity or the maxims of war require it. The governor
of a besieged town sets fire to the suburbs, that they may not afford a lodgement to the
besiegers. Nobody presumes to blame a general who lays waste gardens, vineyards, or
orchards, for the purpose of encamping on the ground, and throwing up an
intrenchment. If any beautiful production of art be thereby destroyed, it is an accident,
an unhappy consequence of the war; and the general will not be blamed, except in
those cases when he might have pitched his camp elsewhere without the smallest
inconvenience to himself.

In bombarding towns, it is difficult to spare the finest edifices. At §169. Bombarding
present we generally content ourselves with battering the towns.
ramparts and defences of a place. To destroy a town with bombs
and red-hot balls, is an extremity to which we do not proceed without cogent reasons.
But it is nevertheless warranted by the laws of war, when we are unable by any other
mode to reduce an important post, on which the success of the war may depend, or
which enables the enemy to annoy us in a dangerous manner. It is also sometimes
practised when we have no other means of forcing an enemy to make war with
humanity, or punishing him for some instance of outrageous conduct. But it is only in

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 374 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

cases of the last extremity, and with reluctance, that good princes exert a right of so
rigorous a nature. In the year 1694, the English bombarded several maritime towns of
France, on account of the great injury done to the British trade by their privateers. But
the virtuous and noble-minded consort of William the Third did not receive the news
of these exploits with real satisfaction. She expressed a sensible concern that war
should render such acts of hostility necessary,—adding, that she hoped such
operations would be viewed in so odious a light, as to induce both parties to desist
from them in future.*

Fortresses, ramparts, and every kind of fortification, are solely §170. Demolition of
appropriated to the purposes of war: and in a just war, nothing is fortresses.
more natural, nothing more justifiable, than to demolish those
which we do not intend to retain in our own possession. We so far weaken the enemy,
and do not involve an innocent multitude in the losses which we cause him. This was
the grand advantage that France derived from her victories in a war in which she did
not aim at making conquests.55

Safe-guards are granted to lands and houses intended to be §171. Safeguards.
spared, whether from pure favour, or with the proviso of a
contribution. These consist of soldiers who protect them against parties, by producing
the general’s orders. The persons of these soldiers must be considered by the enemy
as sacred: he cannot commit any hostilities against them, since they have taken their
station there as benefactors, and for the safety of his subjects. They are to be respected
in the same manner as an escort appointed to a garrison, or to prisoners of war, on
their return to their own country.

What we have advanced is sufficient to give an idea of the §172. General rule of
moderation which we ought to observe, even in the most just moderation,
war, in exerting our right to pillage and ravage the enemy’s respecting the evil
country. Except the single case in which there is question of which may be done to
punishing an enemy, the whole is reducible to this general an enemy.

rule—All damage done to the enemy unnecessarily, every act of
hostility which does not tend to procure victory and bring the war to a conclusion, is a
licentiousness condemned by the law of nature.

But this licentiousness is unavoidably suffered to pass with §173. Rule of the
impunity, and, to a certain degree, tolerated, between nation and voluntary law of
nation. How then shall we, in particular cases, determine with nations on the same
precision, to what lengths it was necessary to carry hostilities in subject.
order to bring the war to a happy conclusion? And even if the
point could be exactly ascertained, nations acknowledge no common judge: each
forms her own judgment of the conduct she is to pursue in fulfilling her duties. If you
once open a door for continual accusations of outrageous excess in hostilities, you
will only augment the number of complaints, and inflame the minds of the contending
parties with increasing animosity: fresh injuries will be perpetually springing up; and
the sword will never be sheathed till one of the parties be utterly destroyed. The
whole, therefore, should, between nation and nation, be confined to general rules,
independent of circumstances, and sure and easy in the application. Now the rules

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 375 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

cannot answer this description, unless they teach us to view things in an absolute
sense,—to consider them in themselves and in their own nature. As, therefore, with
respect to hostilities against the enemy’s person, the voluntary law of nations only
prohibits those measures which are in themselves unlawful and odious, such as
poisoning, assassination, treachery, the massacre of an enemy who has surrendered,
and from whom we have nothing to fear,—so the same law, in the question now
before us, condemns every act of hostility which, of its own nature, and independently
of circumstances, contributes nothing to the success of our arms, and does not
increase our strength, or weaken that of the enemy: and, on the other hand, it permits
or tolerates every act which in itself is naturally adapted to promote the object of the
war, without considering whether such act of hostility was unnecessary, useless, or
superfluous, in that particular instance, unless there be the clearest evidence to prove
that an exception ought to have been made in the case in question: for where there is
positive evidence, the freedom of judgment no longer exists. Hence, the pillaging of a
country, or ravaging it with fire, is not, in a general view of the matter, a violation of
the laws of war: but if an enemy of much superior strength treats in this manner a
town or province which he might easily keep in his possession as a means of
obtaining an equitable and advantageous peace, he is universally accused of making
war like a furious barbarian. Thus the wanton destruction of public monuments,
temples, tombs, statues, paintings, &c. is absolutely condemned, even by the
voluntary law of nations, as never being conducive to the lawful object of war. The
pillage and destruction of towns, the devastation of the open country, ravaging, setting
fire to houses, are measures no less odious and detestable on every occasion when
they are evidently put in practice without absolute necessity or at least very cogent
reasons. But as the perpetrators of such outrageous deeds might attempt to palliate
them under pretext of deservedly punishing the enemy,—be it here observed, that the
natural and voluntary law of nations does not allow us to inflict such punishments,
except for enormous offences against the law of nations: and even then, it is glorious
to listen to the voice of humanity and clemency, when rigour is not absolutely
necessary. Cicero condemns the conduct of his countrymen in destroying Corinth to
avenge the unworthy treatment offered to the Roman embassadors, because Rome
was able to assert the dignity of her ministers, without proceeding to such extreme
rigour.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 376 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER X

Of Faith Between Enemies,—Of Stratagems, Artifices In War,
Spies, And Some Other Practices.
The faith of promises and treaties is the basis of the peace of §174. Faith to be
nations, as we have shewn in an express chapter (Book II. Ch. sacred between
XV.). It is sacred among men, and absolutely essential to their enemies.
common safety. Are we then dispensed from it towards an
enemy? To imagine that between two nations at war every duty ceases, every tie of
humanity is broken, would be an error equally gross and destructive. Men, although
reduced to the necessity of taking up arms for their own defence and in support of
their rights, do not therefore cease to be men. They are still subject to the same laws
of nature:—otherwise there would be no laws of war. Even he who wages an unjust
war against us is still a man: we still owe him whatever that quality requires of us. But
a conflict arises between our duties towards ourselves, and those which connect us
with other men. The right to security authorises us to put in practice, against this
unjust enemy, every thing necessary for repelling him, or bringing him to reason. But
all those duties, the exercise of which is not necessarily suspended by this conflict,
subsist in their full force: they are still obligatory on us, both with respect to the
enemy and to all the rest of mankind. Now, the obligation of keeping faith is so far
from ceasing in time of war by virtue of the preference which the duties towards
ourselves are entitled to, that it then becomes more necessary than ever. There are a
thousand occasions, even in the course of the war, when, in order to check its rage,
and alleviate the calamities which follow in its train, the mutual interest and safety of
both the contending parties requires that they should agree on certain points. What
would become of prisoners of war, capitulating garrisons, and towns that surrender, if
the word of an enemy were not to be relied on? War would degenerate into an
unbridled and cruel licentiousness: its evils would be restrained by no bounds; and
how could we ever bring it to a conclusion, and re-establish peace? If faith be
banished from among enemies, a war can never be terminated with any degree of
safety, otherwise than by the total destruction of one of the parties. The slightest
difference, the least quarrel, would produce a war similar to that of Hannibal against
the Romans, in which the parties fought, not for this or that province, not for
sovereignty or for glory, but for the very existence of their respective nations.* Thus it
is certain that the faith of promises and treaties is to be held sacred in war as well as in
peace, between enemies as well as between friends.

The conventions, the treaties made with a nation, are broken or §175. What treaties
annulled by a war arising between the contracting parties, either are to be observed
because those compacts are grounded on a tacit supposition of between enemies.
the continuance of peace, or because each of the parties, being
authorised to deprive his enemy of what belongs to him, takes from him those rights
which he had conferred on him by treaty. Yet here we must except those treaties by
which certain things are stipulated in case of a rupture,—as, for instance, the length of

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 377 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

time to be allowed on each side for the subjects of the other nation to quit the
country,—the neutrality of a town or province, insured by mutual consent, &c. Since,
by treaties of this nature, we mean to provide for what shall be observed in case of a
rupture, we renounce the right of cancelling them by a declaration of war.

For the same reason, all promises made to an enemy in the course of a war are
obligatory. For when once we treat with him whilst the sword is unsheathed, we
tacitly but necessarily renounce all power of breaking the compact by way of
compensation or on account of the war, as we cancel antecedent treaties: otherwise it
would be doing nothing, and there would be an absurdity in treating with the enemy at
all.

But conventions made during a war are like all other compacts §176. On what
and treaties, of which the reciprocal observance is a tacit occasions they may
condition (Book II. §202): we are no longer bound to observe be broken.
them towards an enemy who has himself been the first to violate
them. And even where there is question of two separate conventions which are wholly
unconnected with each other,—although we are never justifiable in using perfidy on
the plea of our having to do with an enemy who has broken his word on a former
occasion, we may nevertheless suspend the effect of a promise in order to compel him
to repair his breach of faith; and what we have promised him may be detained by way
of security, till he has given satisfaction for his perfidy. Thus, at the taking of Namur
in 1695, the king of England caused marshal Boufflers56 to be put under arrest, and,
notwithstanding the capitulation, detained him prisoner, for the purpose of obliging
France to make reparation for the infractions of the capitulations of Dixmude and
Deinse.*

Good-faith consists not only in the observance of our promises, §177. Of lies.
but also in not deceiving on such occasions as lay us under any
sort of obligation to speak the truth. From this subject arises a question which has
been warmly debated in former days, and which appeared not a little intricate at a
time when people did not entertain just or accurate ideas respecting the nature of a lie.
Several writers, and especially divines, have made truth a kind of deity, to which, for
its own sake, and independently of its consequences, we owe a certain inviolable
respect. They have absolutely condemned every speech that is contrary to the
speaker’s thoughts: they have pronounced it to be our duty, on every occasion when
we cannot be silent, to speak the truth according to the best of our knowledge, and to
sacrifice to their divinity our dearest interests, rather than be deficient in respect to
her. But philosophers of more accurate ideas and more profound penetration have
cleared up that notion, so confused, and so false in its consequences. They have
acknowledged that truth in general is to be respected, as being the soul of human
society, the basis of all confidence in the mutual intercourse of men,— and,
consequently, that a man ought not to speak an untruth, even in matters of
indifference, lest he weaken the respect due to truth in general, and injure himself by
rendering his veracity questionable even when he speaks seriously. But in thus
grounding the respect due to truth on its effects, they took the right road, and soon
found it easy to distinguish between the occasions when we are obliged to speak the
truth, or declare our thoughts, and those when there exists no such obligation. The

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 378 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

appellation of lies is given only to the words of a man who speaks contrary to his
thoughts, on occasions when he is under an obligation to speak the truth. Another
name (in Latin, falsiloquium)* is applied to any false discourse to persons who have
no right to insist on our telling them the truth in the particular case in question.

These principles being laid down, it is not difficult to ascertain the lawful use of truth
or falsehood towards an enemy on particular occasions. Whenever we have expressly
or tacitly engaged to speak truth, we are indispensably obliged to it by that faith of
which we have proved the inviolability. Such is the case of conventions and
treaties:—it is indispensably necessary that they should imply a tacit engagement to
speak the truth: for it would be absurd to allege that we do not enter into any
obligation of not deceiving the enemy under colour of treating with him:—it would be
downright mockery,—it would be doing nothing. We are also bound to speak the truth
to an enemy on all occasions when we are naturally obliged to it by the laws of
humanity,—that is to say, whenever the success of our arms, and the duties we owe to
ourselves, do not clash with the common duties of humanity, so as to suspend their
force in the present case, and dispense with our performance of them. Thus, when we
dismiss prisoners either on ransom or exchange, it would be infamous to point out the
worst road for their march, or to put them in a dangerous one: and should the hostile
prince or general inquire after a woman or child who is dear to him, it would be
scandalous to deceive him.

But when, by leading the enemy into an error, either by words in §178. Stratagems and
which we are not obliged to speak truth, or by some feint, we can artifices in war.
gain an advantage in the war, which it would be lawful to seek
by open force, it cannot be doubted that such a proceeding is perfectly justifiable.
Nay, since humanity obliges us to prefer the gentlest methods in the prosecution of
our rights,—if, by a stratagem, by a feint void of perfidy, we can make ourselves
masters of a strong place, surprise the enemy, and overcome him, it is much better, it
is really more commendable, to succeed in this manner, than by a bloody siege or the
carnage of a battle.* But, the desire to spare the effusion of blood will by no means
authorise us to employ perfidy, the introduction of which would be attended with
consequences of too dreadful a nature, and would deprive sovereigns, once embarked
in war, of all means of treating together, or restoring peace (§174).

Deceptions practised on an enemy either by words or actions, but without
perfidy,—snares laid for him consistent with the rights of war,—are stratagems, the
use of which has always been acknowledged as lawful, and had often a great share in
the glory of celebrated commanders. The king of England, William III, having
discovered that one of his secretaries regularly sent intelligence of every thing to the
hostile general, caused the traitor to be secretly put under arrest, and made him write
to the duke of Luxembourg, that the next day the allies would make a general forage,
supported by a large body of infantry with cannon: and this artifice he employed for
the purpose of surprising the French army at Steinkirk. But, through the activity of the
French general, and the courage of his troops, though the measures were so artfully
contrived, the success was not answerable.*

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 379 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

In the use of stratagems, we should respect not only the faith due to an enemy, but
also the rights of humanity, and carefully avoid doing things the introduction of which
would be pernicious to mankind. Since the commencement of hostilities between
France and England,57 an English frigate is said to have appeared off Calais, and
made signals of distress, with a view of decoying out some vessel, and actually seized
a boat and some sailors who generously came to her assistance. If the fact be true, that
unworthy stratagem deserves a severe punishment. It tends to damp a benevolent
charity which should be held so sacred in the eyes of mankind, and which is so
laudable even between enemies. Besides, making signals of distress is asking
assistance, and, by that very action, promising perfect security to those who give the
friendly succour. Therefore the action attributed to that frigate implies an odious
perfidy.

Some nations, even the Romans, for a long time professed to despise every kind of
artifice, surprise, or stratagem, in war; and others went so far as to send notice of the
time and place they had chosen for giving battle.* In this conduct there was more
generosity than prudence. Such behaviour would indeed be very laudable, if, as in the
frenzy of duels, the only business was to display personal courage. But in war the
object is to defend our country, and by force to prosecute our rights which are unjustly
with-held from us: and the surest means of obtaining our end are also the most
commendable, provided they be not unlawful and odious in themselves.† The
contempt of artifice, stratagem, and surprise, proceeds often, as in the case of
Achilles, from a noble confidence in personal valour and strength: and it must be
owned that when we can defeat an enemy by open force in a pitched battle, we may
entertain a better-grounded belief that we have subdued him and compelled him to sue
for peace, than if we had gained the advantage over him by surprise,—as Livy‡ makes
those generous senators say, who did not approve of the insincere mode of proceeding
which had been adopted towards Perseus.58 Therefore, when plain and open courage
can secure the victory, there are occasions when it is preferable to artifice, because it
procures to the state a greater and more permanent advantage.

The employment of spies is a kind of clandestine practice or §179. Spies.
deceit in war. These find means to insinuate themselves among
the enemy, in order to discover the state of his affairs, to pry into his designs, and then
give intelligence to their employer. Spies are generally condemned to capital
punishment, and with great justice, since we have scarcely any other means of
guarding against the mischief they may do us (§155). For this reason, a man of
honour, who is unwilling to expose himself to an ignominious death from the hand of
a common executioner, ever declines serving as a spy: and moreover he looks upon
the office as unworthy of him, because it cannot be performed without some degree of
treachery. The sovereign, therefore, has no right to require such a service of his
subjects, unless perhaps in some singular case, and that of the highest importance. It
remains for him to hold out the temptation of a reward, as an inducement to
mercenary souls to engage in the business. If those whom he employs make a
voluntary tender of their services, or if they be neither subject to nor in any wise
connected with the enemy, he may unquestionably take advantage of their exertions,
without any violation of justice or honour. But is it lawful, is it honourable, to solicit

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 380 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

the enemy’s subjects to act as spies, and betray him? To this question the following
section will furnish an answer.

It is asked in general whether it be lawful to seduce the enemy’s §180. Clandestine
men, for the purpose of engaging them to transgress their duty by seduction of the
an infamous treachery? Here a distinction must be made between enemy’s people.
what is due to the enemy notwithstanding the state of warfare,
and what is required by the internal laws of conscience, and the rules of propriety. We
may lawfully endeavour to weaken the enemy by all possible means (§138), provided
they do not affect the common safety of human society, as do poison and
assassination (§155). Now, in seducing a subject to turn spy, or the governor of a
town to deliver it up to us, we do not strike at the foundation of the common safety
and welfare of mankind. Subjects acting as spies to an enemy do not cause a fatal and
unavoidable evil: it is possible to guard against them to a certain degree; and as to the
security of fortresses, it is the sovereign’s business to be careful in the choice of the
governors to whom he intrusts them. Those measures, therefore, are not contrary to
the external law of nations; nor can the enemy complain of them as odious
proceedings. Accordingly they are practised in all wars. But are they honourable, and
compatible with the laws of a pure conscience? Certainly no: and of this the generals
themselves are sensible, as they are never heard to boast of having practised them.
Seducing a subject to betray his country, engaging a traitor to set fire to a magazine,
tampering with the fidelity of a governor, enticing him, persuading him to deliver up
the town intrusted to his charge, is prompting such persons to commit detestable
crimes. Is it honourable to corrupt our most inveterate enemy, and tempt him to the
commission of a crime? If such practices are at all excusable, it can be only in a very
just war, and when the immediate object is to save our country when threatened with
ruin by a lawless conqueror. On such an occasion (as it should seem) the guilt of the
subject or general who should betray his sovereign when engaged in an evidently
unjust cause, would not be of so very odious a nature. He who himself tramples upon
justice and probity, deserves in his turn to feel the effects of wickedness and perfidy.*
And if ever it is excusable to depart from the strict rules of honour, it is against such
an enemy, and in such an extremity. The Romans, whose ideas concerning the rights
of war were in general so pure and elevated, did not approve of such clandestine
practices. They made no account of the consul Caepio’s victory over Viriatus, because
it had been obtained by means of bribery.59 Valerius Maximus asserts that it was
stained with a double perfidy;* and another historian says that the senate did not
approve of it.†

It is a different thing merely to accept of the offers of a traitor. §181. Whether the
We do not seduce him: and we may take advantage of his crime, offers of a traitor may
while at the same time we detest it. Fugitives and deserters be accepted.
commit a crime against their sovereign; yet we receive and
harbour them by the rights of war, as the civil law expresses it.‡ If a governor sells
himself, and offers for a sum of money to deliver up his town, shall we scruple to take
advantage of his crime, and to obtain without danger what we have a right to take by
force? But when we feel ourselves able to succeed without the assistance of traitors, it
is noble to reject their offers with detestation. The Romans, in their heroic ages, in
those times when they used to display such illustrious examples of magnanimity and

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 381 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

virtue, constantly rejected with indignation every advantage presented to them by the
treachery of any of the enemy’s subjects. They not only acquainted Pyrrhus with the
atrocious design of his physician, but also refused to take advantage of a less heinous
crime, and sent back to the Falisci, bound and fettered, a traitor who had offered to
deliver up the king’s children.§

But when intestine divisions prevail among the enemy, we may without scruple hold a
correspondence with one of the parties, and avail ourselves of the right which they
think they have to injure the opposite party. Thus we promote our own interests,
without seducing any person or being in anywise partakers of his guilt. If we take
advantage of his error, this is doubtless allowable against an enemy.

Deceitful intelligence is that of a man who feigns to betray his §182. Deceitful
own party, with a view of drawing the enemy into a snare. If he intelligence.
does this deliberately, and has himself made the first overtures, it
is treachery, and an infamous procedure: but an officer, or the governor of a town,
when tampered with by the enemy, may, on certain occasions, lawfully feign
acquiescence to the proposal with a view to deceive the seducer: an insult is offered to
him in tempting his fidelity; and to draw the tempter into the snare, is no more than a
just vengeance. By this conduct he neither violates the faith of promises, nor impairs
the happiness of mankind: for criminal engagements are absolutely void, and ought
never to be fulfilled; and it would be a fortunate circumstance if the promises of
traitors could never be relied on, but were on all sides surrounded with uncertainties
and dangers. Therefore a superior, on information that the enemy is tempting the
fidelity of an officer or soldier, makes no scruple of ordering that subaltern to feign
himself gained over, and to arrange his pretended treachery so as to draw the enemy
into an ambuscade. The subaltern is obliged to obey. But when a direct attempt is
made to seduce the commander in chief, a man of honour generally prefers, and ought
to prefer, the alternative of explicitly and indignantly rejecting so disgraceful a
proposal.*

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 382 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER XI

Of The Sovereign Who Wages An Unjust War.
He who is engaged in war derives all his right from the justice of §183. An unjust war
his cause. The unjust adversary who attacks or threatens gives no right
him,—who with-holds what belongs to him,—in a word, who whatever.
does him an injury,—lays him under the necessity of defending
himself, or of doing himself justice, by force of arms: he authorises him in all the acts
of hostility necessary for obtaining complete satisfaction. Whoever therefore takes up
arms without a lawful cause, can absolutely have no right whatever: every act of
hostility that he commits is an act of injustice.

He is chargeable with all the evils, all the horrors of the war: all §184. Great guilt of
the effusion of blood, the desolation of families, the rapine, the the sovereign who
acts of violence, the ravages, the conflagrations, are his works undertakes it.
and his crimes. He is guilty of a crime against the ene-my, whom
he attacks, oppresses, and massacres, without cause: he is guilty of a crime against his
people, whom he forces into acts of injustice, and exposes to danger, without reason
or necessity,—against those of his subjects who are ruined or distressed by the
war,—who lose their lives, their property, or their health, in consequence of it: finally,
he is guilty of a crime against mankind in general, whose peace he disturbs, and to
whom he sets a pernicious example. Shocking catalogue of miseries and crimes!
dreadful account to be given to the king of kings, to the common father of men! May
this slight sketch strike the eyes of the rulers of nations,—of princes, and their
ministers! Why may not we expect some benefit from it? Are we to suppose that the
great are wholly lost to all sentiments of honour, of humanity, of duty, and of
religion? And should our weak voice, throughout the whole succession of ages,
prevent even one single war, how gloriously would our studies and our labour be
rewarded!

He who does an injury is bound to repair the damage, or to make §185. His obligations.
adequate satisfaction if the evil be irreparable, and even to
submit to punishment, if the punishment be necessary, either as an example, or for the
safety of the party offended, and for that of human society. In this predicament stands
a prince who is the author of an unjust war. He is under an obligation to restore
whatever he has taken,—to send back the prisoners at his own expense,—to make
compensation to the enemy for the calamities and losses he has brought on him,—to
reinstate ruined families,—to repair, if it were possible, the loss of a father, a son, a
husband.

But how can he repair so many evils? Many are in their own §186. Difficulty of
nature irreparable. And as to those which may be compensated repairing the injury he
by an equivalent, where shall the unjust warrior find means to has done.
furnish an indemnification for all his acts of violence? The

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 383 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

prince’s private property will not be sufficient to answer the demands. Shall he give
away that of his subjects?— It does not belong to him. Shall he sacrifice the national
lands, a part of the state?—But the state is not his patrimony (Book I. §91): he cannot
dispose of it at will. And although the nation be, to a certain degree, responsible for
the acts of her ruler,—yet (exclusive of the injustice of punishing her directly for
faults of which she is not guilty) if she is responsible for her sovereign’s acts, that
responsibility only regards other nations, who look to her for redress (Book I. §40,
Book II. §§81, 82): but the sovereign cannot throw upon her the punishment due to
his unjust deeds, nor despoil her in order to make reparation for them. And, were it
even in his power, would this wash away his guilt, and leave him a clear conscience?
Though acquitted in the eyes of the enemy, would he be so in the eyes of his people?
It is a strange kind of justice which prompts a man to make reparation for his own
misdeeds at the expense of a third person: this is no more than changing the object of
his injustice. Weigh all these things, ye rulers of nations! and when clearly convinced
that an unjust war draws you into a multitude of iniquities which all your power
cannot repair, perhaps you will be less hasty to engage in it.

The restitution of conquests, of prisoners, and of all property that §187. Whether the
still exists in a recoverable state, admits of no doubt when the nation and the
injustice of the war is acknowledged. The nation in her aggregate military are bound to
capacity, and each individual particularly concerned, being any thing.
convinced of the injustice of their possession, are bound to
relinquish it, and to restore every thing which they have wrongfully acquired. But as
to the reparation of any damage, are the military, the generals, officers, and soldiers,
obliged in conscience to repair the injuries which they have done, not of their own
will, but as instruments in the hands of their sovereign? I am surprised that the
judicious Grotius should, without distinction, hold the affirmative.* It is a decision
which cannot be supported except in the case of a war so palpably and indisputably
unjust, as not to admit a presumption of any secret reason of state that is capable of
justifying it,— a case in politics, which is nearly impossible. On all occasions
susceptible of doubt, the whole nation, the individuals, and especially the military, are
to submit their judgment to those who hold the reins of government,—to the
sovereign: this they are bound to do, by the essential principles of political society and
of government. What would be the consequence, if, at every step of the sovereign, the
subjects were at liberty to weigh the justice of his reasons, and refuse to march to a
war which might to them appear unjust? It often happens that prudence will not
permit a sovereign to disclose all his reasons. It is the duty of subjects to suppose
them just and wise, until clear and absolute evidence tells them the contrary. When,
therefore, under the impression of such an idea, they have lent their assistance in a
war which is afterwards found to be unjust, the sovereign alone is guilty: he alone is
bound to repair the injuries. The subjects, and in particular the military, are innocent:
they have acted only from a necessary obedience. They are bound, however, to deliver
up what they have acquired in such a war, because they have no lawful title to possess
it. This I believe to be the almost unanimous opinion of all honest men, and of those
officers who are most distinguished for honour and probity. Their case, in the present
instance, is the same as that of all those who are the executors of the sovereign’s
orders. Government would be impracticable if every one of its instruments was to
weigh its commands, and thoroughly canvass their justice before he obeyed them. But

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 384 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

if they are bound by a regard for the welfare of the state to suppose the sovereign’s
orders just, they are not responsible for them.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 385 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER XII

Of The Voluntary Law Of Nations, As It Regards The Effects
Of Regular Warfare, Independently Of The Justice Of The
Cause.
All the doctrines we have laid down in the preceding chapter, are §188. Nations not
evidently deduced from sound principles,—from the eternal rules rigidly to enforce the
of justice: they are so many separate articles of that sacred law law of nature against
which nature, or the divine author of nature, has prescribed to each other.
nations. He alone whom justice and necessity have armed, has a
right to make war; he alone is empowered to attack his enemy, to deprive him of life,
and wrest from him his goods and possessions. Such is the decision of the necessary
law of nations, or of the law of nature, which nations are strictly bound to observe
(Prelim. §7): it is the inviolable rule that each ought conscientiously to follow. But in
the contests of nations and sovereigns who live together in a state of nature, how can
this rule be enforced? They acknowledge no superior. Who then shall be judge
between them, to assign to each his rights and obligations,—to say to the one, “You
have a right to take up arms, to attack your enemy, and subdue him by force,”—and to
the other, “Every act of hostility that you commit will be an act of injustice; your
victories will be so many murders, your conquests rapines and robberies?” Every free
and sovereign state has a right to determine, according to the dictates of her own
conscience, what her duties require of her, and what she can or cannot do with justice
(Prelim. §16). If other nations take upon themselves to judge of her conduct, they
invade her liberty, and infringe her most valuable rights (Prelim. §15): and, moreover,
each party asserting that they have justice on their own side, will arrogate to
themselves all the rights of war, and maintain that their enemy has none, that his
hostilities are so many acts of robbery, so many infractions of the law of nations, in
the punishment of which all states should unite. The decision of the controversy, and
of the justice of the cause, is so far from being forwarded by it, that the quarrel will
become more bloody, more calamitous in its effects, and also more difficult to
terminate. Nor is this all: the neutral nations themselves will be drawn into the
dispute, and involved in the quarrel. If an unjust war cannot, in its effect, confer any
right, no certain possession can be obtained of any thing taken in war, until some
acknowledged judge (and there is none such between nations) shall have definitively
pronounced concerning the justice of the cause: and things so acquired will ever
remain liable to be claimed, as property carried off by robbers.

Let us then leave the strictness of the necessary law of nature to §189. Why they ought
the conscience of sovereigns; undoubtedly they are never to admit the voluntary
allowed to deviate from it. But as to the external effects of the law of nations.
law among men, we must necessarily have recourse to rules that
shall be more certain and easy in the application, and this for the very safety and
advantage of the great society of mankind. These are the rules of the voluntary law of

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 386 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

nations (Prelim. §21). The law of nature, whose object it is to promote the welfare of
human society, and to protect the liberties of all nations,— which requires that the
affairs of sovereigns should be brought to an issue, and their quarrels determined and
carried to a speedy conclusion,—that law, I say, recommends the observance of the
voluntary law of nations, for the common advantage of states, in the same manner as
it approves of the alterations which the civil law makes in the rules of the law of
nature, with a view to render them more suitable to the state of political society, and
more easy and certain in their application. Let us therefore apply to the particular
subject of war the general observation made in our Preliminaries (§28)—a nation, a
sovereign, when deliberating on the measures he is to pursue in order to fulfil his
duty, ought never to lose sight of the necessary law, whose obligation on the
conscience is inviolable: but in examining what he may require of other states, he
ought to pay a deference to the voluntary law of nations, and restrict even his just
claims by the rules of that law, whose maxims have for their object the happiness and
advantage of the universal society of nations. Though the necessary law be the rule
which he invariably observes in his own conduct, he should allow others to avail
themselves of the voluntary law of nations.

The first rule of that law, respecting the subject under §190. Regular war, as
consideration, is, that regular war, as to its effects, is to be to its effects, is to be
accounted just on both sides. This is absolutely necessary, as we accounted just on
have just shewn, if people wish to introduce any order, any both sides.
regularity, into so violent an operation as that of arms, or to set
any bounds to the calamities of which it is productive, and leave a door constantly
open for the return of peace. It is even impossible to point out any other rule of
conduct to be observed between nations, since they acknowledge no superior judge.

Thus the rights founded on the state of war, the lawfulness of its effects, the validity
of the acquisitions made by arms, do not, externally and between mankind, depend on
the justice of the cause, but on the legality of the means in themselves,—that is, on
every thing requisite to constitute a regular war. If the enemy observes all the rules of
regular warfare (see Chap. III. of this Book), we are not entitled to complain of him as
a violator of the law of nations. He has the same pretensions to justice as we ourselves
have; and all our resource lies in victory or an accommodation.

Second rule. The justice of the cause being reputed equal §191. Whatever is
between two enemies, whatever is permitted to the one in virtue permitted to one
of the state of war, is also permitted to the other. Accordingly, party, is so to the
no nation, under pretence of having justice on her side, ever other.
complains of the hostilities of her enemy, while he confines them
within the limits prescribed by the common laws of war. We have, in the preceding
chapters, treated of what is allowable in a just war. It is precisely that, and no more,
which the voluntary law equally authorises in both parties. That law puts things
between both on a parity, but allows to neither what is in itself unlawful: it can never
countenance unbridled licentiousness. If therefore nations transgress those
bounds,—if they carry hostilities beyond what the internal and necessary law permits
in general for the support of a just cause,—far be it from us to attribute these excesses
to the voluntary law of nations: they are solely imputable to a depravation of manners,

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 387 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

which produces an unjust and barbarous custom. Such are those horrid enormities
sometimes committed by the soldiery in a town taken by storm.

3. We must never forget that this voluntary law of nations, which §192. The voluntary
is admitted only through necessity, and with a view to avoid law gives no more
greater evils (§§188, 189), does not, to him who takes up arms in than impunity to him
an unjust cause, give any real right that is capable of justifying who wages an unjust
his conduct and acquitting his conscience, but merely entitles war.

him to the benefit of the external effect of the law, and to
impunity among mankind. This sufficiently appears from what we have said in
establishing the voluntary law of nations. The sovereign, therefore, whose arms are
not sanctioned by justice, is not the less unjust, or less guilty of violating the sacred
law of nature, although that law itself (with a view to avoid aggravating the evils of
human society by an attempt to prevent them) requires that he be allowed to enjoy the
same external rights as justly belong to his enemy. In the same manner, the civil law
authorises a debtor to refuse payment of his debts in a case of prescription: but he then
violates his duty: he takes advantage of a law which was enacted with a view to
prevent the endless increase of law-suits: but his conduct is not justifiable upon any
grounds of genuine right.

From the unanimity that in fact prevails between states in observing the rules which
we refer to the voluntary law of nations, Grotius assumes for their foundation an
actual consent on the part of mankind, and refers them to the arbitrary law of nations.
But, exclusive of the difficulty which would often occur in proving such agreement, it
would be of no validity except against those who had formally entered into it. If such
an engagement existed, it would belong to the conventional law of nations, which
must be proved by history, not by argument, and is founded on facts, not on
principles. In this work we lay down the natural principles of the law of nations. We
deduce them from nature itself; and what we call the voluntary law of nations,
consists in rules of conduct and of external right, to which nations are, by the law of
nature, bound to consent; so that we are authorised to presume their consent, without
seeking for a record of it in the annals of the world; because, even if they had not
given it, the law of nature supplies their omission, and gives it for them. In this
particular, nations have not the option of giving or with-holding their consent at
pleasure: the refusal to give it would be an infringement of the common rights of
nations (Prelim. §21).

This voluntary law of nations, thus established, is of very extensive use, and is far
from being a chimera, an arbitrary or groundless fiction. It flows from the same
source, and is founded on the same principles, with the natural and necessary law.
For what other reason does nature prescribe such and such rules of conduct to men,
except because those rules are necessary to the safety and welfare of mankind? But
the maxims of the necessary law of nations are founded immediately on the nature of
things, and particularly on that of man, and of political society. The voluntary law of
nations supposes an additional principle,—the nature of the great society of nations,
and of their mutual intercourse. The necessary law enjoins to nations what is
absolutely indispensable, and what naturally tends to their perfection and common

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 388 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

happiness. The voluntary law tolerates what cannot be avoided without introducing
greater evils.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 389 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER XIII

Of Acquisitions By War, And Particularly Of Conquests.
If it be lawful to carry off things belonging to an enemy, with a §193. How war is a
view of weakening him (§160), and sometimes of punishing him method of acquisition.
(§162), it is no less lawful in a just war to appropriate them to
our own use, by way of compensation, which the civilians term expletio juris (§161).
They are retained as an equivalent for what is due by the enemy, for the expenses and
damages which he has occasioned, and even (when there is cause to punish him) as a
commutation for the punishment he has deserved. For when I cannot obtain the
individual thing which belongs or is due to me, I have a right to an equivalent, which,
by the rules of expletive justice, and in moral estimation, is considered as the thing
itself. Thus, according to the law of nature, which constitutes the necessary law of
nations, war founded on justice is a lawful mode of acquisition.

But that sacred law does not authorise even the acquisitions §194. Measure of the
made in a just war, any farther than as they are approved by right it gives.
justice,—that is to say, no farther than is requisite to obtain
complete satisfaction in the degree necessary for accomplishing the lawful ends we
have just mentioned. An equitable conqueror, deaf to the suggestions of ambition and
avarice, will make a just estimate of what is due to him,—that is to say, of the thing
which has been the subject of the war (if the thing itself is no longer reco-verable),
and of the damages and expenses of the war,—and will retain no more of the enemy’s
property than what is precisely sufficient to furnish the equivalent. But if he has to do
with a perfidious, restless, and dangerous enemy, he will, by way of punishment,
deprive him of some of his towns or provinces, and keep them to serve as a barrier to
his own dominions. Nothing is more allowable than to weaken an enemy who has
rendered himself suspected and formidable. The lawful end of punishment is future
security. The conditions necessary for rendering an acquisition, made by arms, just
and irreproachable before God and our own conscience, are these—justice in the
cause, and equity in the measure of the satisfaction.

But nations cannot, in their dealings with each other, insist on §195. Rules of the
this rigid justice. By the rules of the voluntary law of nations, voluntary law of
every regular war is on both sides accounted just, as to its effects nations.
(§190); and no one has a right to judge a nation, respecting the
unreasonableness of her claims, or what she thinks necessary for her own safety
(Prelim. §21). Every acquisition, therefore, which has been made in regular warfare,
is valid according to the voluntary law of nations, independently of the justice of the
cause, and the reasons which may have induced the conqueror to assume the property
of what he has taken. Accordingly, nations have ever esteemed conquest a lawful title;
and that title has seldom been disputed, unless where it was derived from a war not
only unjust in itself, but even destitute of any plausible pretext.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 390 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

The property of movable effects is vested in the enemy from the §196. Acquisition of
moment they come into his power; and if he sells them to neutral movable property.
nations, the former proprietor is not entitled to claim them. But
such things must be actually and truly in the enemy’s power, and carried to a place of
safety. Suppose a foreigner coming into our country buys a portion of the booty which
a party of enemies have just taken from us: our men who are in pursuit of this party
may very justly seize on the booty which that foreigner was over precipitate in
buying. On this head Grotius quotes from De Thou the instance of the town of Lierre
in Brabant, which having been captured and recaptured on the same day, the booty
taken from the inhabitants was restored to them because it had not been twenty-four
hours in the enemy’s hands.* This space of twenty-four hours, together with the
practice observed at sea,† is an institution of the law of nations established by
agreement or custom, and is even a civil law in some states. The natural reason of the
conduct adopted towards the inhabitants of Lierre is, that the enemy being taken as it
were in the fact, and before they had carried off the booty, it was not looked upon as
having absolutely become their property, or been lost to the inhabitants. Thus, at sea,
a ship taken by the enemy, may be retaken and delivered by other ships of her own
party, as long as she has not been carried into some port, or into the midst of a fleet:
her fate is not decided, nor is the owner’s property irrecoverably lost, until the ship be
in a place of safety with regard to the enemy who has taken her, and entirely in his
power. But the ordinances of every state may make different regulations on this head
between the citizens,‡ with a view either to prevent disputes or to encourage armed
vessels to retake merchant ships that have fallen into the enemy’s hands.

The justice or injustice of the cause does not here become an object of consideration.
There would be no stability in the affairs of mankind, no safety in trading with nations
engaged in war, if we were allowed to draw a distinction between a just and an unjust
war, so as to attribute lawful effects to the one, which we denied to the other. It would
be opening a door to endless discussions and quarrels. This reason is of such weight,
that, on account of it, the effects of a public war, at least with regard to movables,
have been allowed to expeditions which deserved no other name than that of
predatory enterprises, though carried on by regular armies. When, after the wars of the
English in France, the grandes compagnies ranged about Europe, sacking and
pillaging wherever they came, none of the sufferers was ever known to claim the
booty which those plunderers had carried off and sold. At present it would be in vain
to claim a ship taken by the Barbary corsairs, and sold to a third party, or retaken from
the captors; though it is very improperly that the piracies of those barbarians can be
considered as acts of regular war. We here speak of the external right: the internal
right and the obligations of conscience undoubtedly require that we should restore to a
third party the property we recover from an enemy who had despoiled him of it in an
unjust war,—provided he can recognise that property, and will defray the expenses we
have incurred in recovering it. Grotius quotes many instances of sovereigns and
commanders who have generously restored such booty, even without requiring any
thing for their trouble or expense.* But such conduct is pursued only in cases where
the booty has been recently taken. It would be an impracticable task, scrupulously to
seek out the proprietors of what has been captured a long time back: and moreover
they have, no doubt, relinquished all their right to things which they had no longer

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 391 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

any hope of recovering. Such is the usual mode of thinking with respect to captures in
war, which are soon given up as irrecoverably lost.

Immovable possessions, lands, towns, provinces, &c. become the §197. Acquisition of
property of the enemy who makes himself master of them: but it immoveables,— or
is only by the treaty of peace, or the entire submission and conquest.
extinction of the state to which those towns and provinces
belonged, that the acquisition is completed, and the property becomes stable and
perfect.

Thus a third party cannot safely purchase a conquered town or §198. How to transfer
province, till the sovereign from whom it was taken has them validly.
renounced it by a treaty of peace, or has been irretrievably
subdued, and has lost his sovereignty: for, while the war continues,—while the
sovereign has still hopes of recovering his possessions by arms,—is a neutral prince to
come and deprive him of the opportunity by purchasing that town or province from
the conqueror? The original proprietor cannot forfeit his rights by the act of a third
person; and if the purchaser be determined to maintain his purchase, he will find
himself involved in the war. Thus the king of Prussia became a party with the enemies
of Sweden, by receiving Stettin from the hands of the king of Poland and the czar,
under the title of sequestration.* But when a sovereign has, by a definitive treaty of
peace, ceded a country to the conqueror, he has relinquished all the right he had to it;
and it were absurd that he should be allowed to demand the restitution of that country
by a subsequent conqueror who wrests it from the former, or by any other prince, who
has purchased it, or received it in exchange, or acquired it by any title whatever.

The conqueror who takes a town or province from his enemy, §199. Conditions on
cannot justly acquire over it any other rights than such as which a conquered
belonged to the sovereign against whom he has taken up arms. town is acquired.
War authorises him to possess himself of what belongs to his
enemy: if he deprives him of the sovereignty of that town or province, he acquires it
such as it is, with all its limitations and modifications. Accordingly, care is usually
taken to stipulate, both in particular capitulations and in treaties of peace, that the
towns and countries ceded shall retain all their liberties, privileges, and immunities.
And why should they be deprived of them by the conqueror, on account of his quarrel
with their sovereign? Nevertheless, if the inhabitants have been personally guilty of
any crime against him, he may, by way of punishment, deprive them of their rights
and privileges. This he may also do if the inhabitants have taken up arms against him,
and have thus directly become his enemies. In that case, he owes them no more than
what is due from a humane and equitable conqueror to his vanquished foes. Should he
purely and simply incorporate them with his former states, they will have no cause of
complaint.

Hitherto I evidently speak of a city or a country which is not simply an integrant part
of a nation, or which does not fully belong to a sovereign, but over which that nation
or that sovereign has certain rights. If the conquered town or province fully and
perfectly constituted a part of the domain of a nation or sovereign, it passes on the
same footing into the power of the conqueror. Thenceforward united with the new

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 392 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

state to which it belongs,—if it be a loser by the change, that is a misfortune which it
must wholly impute to the chance of war. Thus, if a town which made part of a
republic or a limited monarchy, and enjoyed a right of sending deputies to the
supreme council or the general assembly of the states, be justly conquered by an
absolute monarch, she must never more think of such privileges: they are what the
constitution of the new state to which she is annexed does not permit.

In the conquests of ancient times, even individuals lost their §200. Lands of
lands. Nor is it matter of surprise that in the first ages of Rome private persons.
such a custom should have prevailed. The wars of that aera were
carried on between popular republics and communities. The state possessed very
little, and the quarrel was in reality the common cause of all the citizens. But at
present war is less dreadful in its consequences to the subject: matters are conducted
with more humanity: one sovereign makes war against another sovereign, and not
against the unarmed citizens. The conqueror seizes on the possessions of the state, the
public property, while private individuals are permitted to retain theirs. They suffer
but indirectly by the war; and the conquest only subjects them to a new master.

But if the entire state be conquered, if the nation be subdued, in §201. Conquest of the
what manner can the victor treat it, without transgressing the whole state.
bounds of justice? What are his rights over the conquered
country? Some have dared to advance this monstrous principle, that the conqueror is
absolute master of his conquest,—that he may dispose of it as his property,—that he
may treat it as he pleases, according to the common expression of treating a state as a
conquered country; and hence they derive one of the sources of despotic government.
But, disregarding such writers, who reduce men to the state of transferable goods, or
beasts of burthen,—who deliver them up as the property or patrimony of another
man,—let us argue on principles countenanced by reason, and conformable to
humanity.

The whole right of the conqueror is derived from justifiable self-defence (§§3, 26,
28), which comprehends the support and prosecution of his rights. When, therefore,
he has totally subdued a hostile nation, he undoubtedly may, in the first place, do
himself justice respecting the object which had given rise to the war, and indemnify
himself for the expenses and damages he has sustained by it: he may, according to the
exigency of the case, subject the nation to punishment, by way of example: he may
even, if prudence so require, render her incapable of doing mischief with the same
ease in future. But, for the attainment of these different objects, he is to prefer the
gentlest methods,—still bearing in mind, that the doing of harm to an enemy is no
farther authorised by the law of nature, than in the precise degree which is necessary
for justifiable self-defence, and reasonable security for the time to come. Some
princes have contented themselves with imposing a tribute on the conquered
nation,—others, with depriving her of some of her rights, taking from her a province,
or erecting fortresses to keep her in awe: others, again, confining their quarrel to the
sovereign alone, have left the nation in the full enjoyment of all her rights,—only
setting over her a new sovereign, of their own appointment.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 393 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

But if the conqueror thinks proper to retain the sovereignty of the conquered state, and
has a right to retain it, the same principles must also determine the manner in which
he is to treat that state. If it is against the sovereign alone that he has just cause of
complaint, reason plainly evinces that he acquires no other rights by his conquest than
such as belonged to the sovereign whom he has dispossessed: and, on the submission
of the people, he is bound to govern them according to the laws of the state. If the
people do not voluntarily submit, the state of war still subsists.

A conqueror who has taken up arms, not only against the sovereign, but against the
nation herself, and whose intention it was to subdue a fierce and savage people, and
once for all to reduce an obstinate enemy,— such a conqueror may with justice lay
burthens on the conquered nation, both as a compensation for the expenses of the war,
and as a punishment. He may, according to the degree of indocility apparent in their
disposition, govern them with a tighter rein, so as to curb and subdue their impetuous
spirit: he may even, if necessary, keep them for some time in a kind of slavery. But
this forced condition ought to cease from the moment the danger is over,—the
moment the conquered people are become citizens: for then the right of conquest is at
an end, so far as relates to the pursuit of those rigorous measures, since the conqueror
no longer finds it necessary to use extraordinary precautions for his own defence and
safety. Then at length every thing is to be rendered conformable to the rules of a wise
government, and the duties of a good prince.

When a sovereign, arrogating to himself the absolute disposal of a people whom he
has conquered, attempts to reduce them to slavery, he perpetuates the state of warfare
between that nation and himself. The Scythians said to Alexander the Great, “There is
never any friendship between the master and slave: in the midst of peace the rights of
war still subsist.”* Should it be said, that in such a case there may be peace, and a
kind of compact by which the conqueror consents to spare the lives of the vanquished,
on condition that they acknowledge themselves his slaves,—he who makes such an
assertion is ignorant that war gives no right to take away the life of an enemy who has
laid down his arms, and submitted (§140). But let us not dispute the point: let the man
who holds such principles of jurisprudence, keep them for his own use and benefit: he
well deserves to be subject to such a law. But men of spirit, to whom life is nothing,
less than nothing, unless sweetened with liberty, will always conceive themselves at
war with that oppressor, though actual hostilities are suspended on their part through
want of ability. We may therefore safely venture to add, that if the conquered country
is to be really subject to the conqueror as to its lawful sovereign, he must rule it
according to the ends for which civil government has been established. It is generally
the prince alone who occasions the war, and consequently the conquest. Surely it is
enough that an innocent people suffer the calamities of war: must even peace itself
become fatal to them? A generous conqueror will study to relieve his new subjects,
and mitigate their condition: he will think it his indispensable duty. “Conquest (says
an excellent man) ever leaves behind it an immense debt, the discharge of which is
absolutely necessary to acquit the conqueror, in the eye of humanity.”†

It fortunately happens that, in this particular as in every thing else, sound policy and
humanity are in perfect accord. What fidelity, what assistance, can you expect from an
oppressed people? Do you wish that your conquest may prove a real addition to your

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 394 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

strength, and be well affected to you?—treat it as a father, as a true sovereign. I am
charmed with the generous answer recorded of an embassador from Privernum. Being
introduced to the Roman senate, he was asked by the consul— “If we shew you
clemency, what dependence can we have on the peace you are come to sue for?” “If”
(replied the embassador) “you grant it on reasonable conditions, it will be safe and
permanent: otherwise, it will not last long.” Some took offence at the boldness of this
speech; but the more sensible part of the senate approved of the Privernian’s answer,
deeming it the proper language of a man, and a freeman. “Can it be imagined (said
those wise senators) that any nation, or even any individual, will longer continue in an
irksome and disagreeable condition, than while compelled to submit to it? If those to
whom you give peace receive it voluntarily, it may be relied on: what fidelity can you
expect from those whom you wish to reduce to slavery?”* —“The most secure
dominion,” said Camillus,60 “is that which is acceptable to those over whom it is
exercised.”†

Such are the rights which the law of nature gives to the conqueror, and the duties
which it imposes on him. The manner of exerting the one, and fulfilling the other,
varies according to circumstances. In general, he ought to consult the true interests of
his own state, and by sound policy to reconcile them, as far as possible, with those of
the conquered country. He may, in imitation of the kings of France, unite and
incorporate it with his own dominions. Such was the practice of the Romans: but they
did this in different modes according to cases and conjunctures. At a time when Rome
stood in need of an increase of population, she destroyed the town of Alba, which she
feared to have as a rival: but she received all its inhabitants within her walls, and
thereby gained so many new citizens. In after times the conquered cities were left
standing, and the freedom of Rome was given to the vanquished inhabitants. Victory
could not have proved so advantageous to those people as their defeat.

The conqueror may likewise simply put himself in the place of the sovereign whom
he has dispossessed. Thus the Tartars have acted in China: the empire was suffered to
subsist in its former condition, except that it fell under the dominion of a new race of
sovereigns.

Lastly, the conqueror may rule his conquest as a separate state, and permit it to retain
its own form of government. But this method is dangerous: it produces no real union
of strength; it weakens the conquered country, without making any considerable
addition to the power of the victorious state.

It is asked to whom the conquest belongs,—to the prince who §202. To whom the
has made it, or to the state? This question ought never to have conquest belongs.
been heard of. Can the prince, in his character of sovereign, act
for any other end than the good of the state? Whose are the forces which he employs
in his wars? Even if he made the conquest at his own expense, out of his own revenue,
or his private and patrimonial estates, does he not make use of the personal exertions
of his subjects in achieving it? does he not shed their blood in the contest? But
supposing even that he were to employ foreign or mercenary troops, does he not
expose his nation to the enemy’s resentment? does he not involve her in the war? And
shall he alone reap all the advantages of it? Is it not for the cause of the state, and of

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 395 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

the nation, that he takes up arms? The nation therefore has a just claim to all the rights
to which such war gives birth.

If the sovereign embarks in a war, of which his own personal interests are the sole
ground,—as, for instance, to assert his right of succession to a foreign
sovereignty,—the question then assumes a new face. In this affair the state is wholly
unconcerned: but then the nation should be at liberty either to refuse engaging in it, or
to assist her prince, at her own option. If he is empowered to employ the national
force in support of his personal rights, he should, in such case, make no distinction
between these rights and those of the state. The French law, which annexes to the
crown all acquisitions made by the king, should be the law of all nations.

It has been observed (§196) that we may be obliged, if not §203. Whether we are
externally, yet in conscience, and by the laws of equity, to re- to set at liberty a
store to a third party the booty we have recovered out of the people whom the
hands of an enemy who had taken it from him in an unjust war. enemy had unjustly
The obligation is more certain and more extensive, with regard to conquered.

a people whom our enemy had unjustly oppressed. For a people
thus spoiled of their liberty never renounce the hope of recovering it. If they have not
voluntarily incorporated themselves with the state by which they have been
subdued,— if they have not freely aided her in the war against us,—we certainly
ought so to use our victory, as not merely to give them a new master, but to break
their chains. To deliver an oppressed people is a noble fruit of victory: it is a valuable
advantage gained, thus to acquire a faithful friend. The canton of Schweitz having
wrested the country of Glaris from the house of Austria, restored the inhabitants to
their former liberties; and Glaris, admitted into the Helvetic confederacy, formed the
sixth canton.*

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 396 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER XIV

Of The Right Of Postliminium.
The right of postliminium is that, in virtue of which, persons and §204. Definition of
things taken by the enemy are restored to their former state, now the right of
coming again into the power of the nation to which they postliminium.
belonged.

The sovereign is bound to protect the persons and property of his §205. Foundation of
subjects, and to defend them against the enemy. When, therefore, this right.
a subject, or any part of his property, has fallen into the enemy’s
possession, should any fortunate event bring them again into the sovereign’s power, it
is undoubtedly his duty to restore them to their former condition,— to re-establish the
persons in all their rights and obligations, to give back the effects to the owners,—in a
word, to replace every thing on the same footing on which it stood previous to the
enemy’s capture.

The justice or injustice of the war makes no difference in this case,— not only,
because, according to the voluntary law of nations, the war, as to its effects, is reputed
just on both sides, but likewise because war, whether just or not, is a national concern;
and if the subjects who fight or suffer in the national cause, should—after they have,
either in their persons or their property, fallen into the enemy’s power—be, by some
fortunate incident, restored to the hands of their own people,—there is no reason why
they should not be restored to their former condition. It is the same as if they had
never been taken. If the war be just on the part of their nation, they were unjustly
captured by the enemy; and thus nothing is more natural than to restore them as soon
as it becomes possible. If the war be unjust, they are under no greater obligation to
suffer in atonement for its injustice, than the rest of the nation. Fortune brings down
the evil on their heads, when they are taken: she delivers them from it, when they
escape. Here again it is the same as if they never had been captured. Neither their own
sovereign nor the enemy has any particular right over them. The enemy has lost by
one accident what he had gained by another.

Persons return, and things are recovered, by the right of §206. How it takes
postliminium, when, after having been taken by the enemy, they effect.
come again into the power of their own nation (§204). This right,
therefore, takes effect as soon as such persons or things captured by the enemy fall
into the hands of soldiers belonging to their own nation, or are brought back to the
army, the camp, the territories of their sovereign, or the places under his command.

Those who unite with us to carry on a war, are joint parties with §207. Whether it
us: we are engaged in a common cause; our right is one and the takes effect among
same; and they are considered as making but one body with us. the allies.
Therefore when persons or things captured by the enemy are

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 397 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

retaken by our allies or auxiliaries, or in any other manner fall into their hands, this,
so far as relates to the effect of the right, is precisely the same thing as if they were
come again into our own power; since, in the cause in which we are jointly embarked,
our power and that of our allies is but one and the same. The right of postliminium
therefore takes effect among those who carry on the war in conjunction with us; and
the persons and things recovered by them from the enemy, are to be restored to their
former condition.

But does this right take place in the territories of our allies? Here a distinction arises.
If those allies make a common cause with us,—if they are associates in the war,—we
are necessarily entitled to the right of postliminium in their territories as well as in our
own: for their state is united with ours, and, together with it, constitutes but one party
in the war we carry on. But if, as in our times is frequently the practice, an ally only
gives us a stated succour stipulated by treaty, and does not himself come to a rupture
with our enemy, between whose state and his own, in their immediate relations, peace
continues to be observed,—in this case, only the auxiliaries whom he sends to our
assistance are partakers and associates in the war; and his dominions remain in a state
of neutrality.

Now the right of postliminium does not take effect in neutral §208. Of no validity
countries: for when a nation chooses to remain neuter in a war, in neutral nations.
she is bound to consider it as equally just on both sides, so far as
relates to its effects,— and, consequently, to look upon every capture made by either
party, as a lawful acquisition. To allow one of the parties, in prejudice to the other, to
enjoy in her dominions the right of claiming things taken by the latter, or the right of
postliminium, would be declaring in favour of the former, and departing from the line
of neutrality.

Naturally, every kind of property might be recovered by the right §209. What things are
of postliminium; and there is no intrinsic reason why moveables recoverable by this
should be excepted in this case, provided they can be certainly right.
recognised and identified. Accordingly, the ancients, on
recovering such things from the enemy, frequently restored them to their former
owners.* But the difficulty of recognising things of this nature, and the endless
disputes which would arise from the prosecution of the owners’ claims to them, have
been deemed motives of sufficient weight for the general establishment of a contrary
practice. To these considerations we may add, that, from the little hope entertained of
recovering effects taken by the enemy and once carried to a place of safety, a
reasonable presumption arises, that the former owners have relinquished their
property. It is therefore with reason, that moveables or booty are excepted from the
right of postliminium, unless retaken from the enemy immediately after his capture of
them; in which case, the proprietor neither finds a difficulty in recognising his effects,
nor is presumed to have relinquished them. And as the custom has once been
admitted, and is now well established, there would be an injustice in violating it
(Prelim. §26). Among the Romans, indeed, slaves were not treated like other movable
property; they, by the right of postliminium, were restored to their masters, even when
the rest of the booty was detained. The reason of this is evident: for, as it was at all

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 398 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

times easy to recognise a slave, and ascertain to whom he belonged, the owner, still
entertaining hopes of recovering him, was not supposed to have relinquished his right.

Prisoners of war, who have given their parole,—territories and §210. Of those who
towns, which have submitted to the enemy, and have sworn or cannot return by the
promised allegiance to him,—cannot of themselves return to right of postliminium.
their former condition by the right of postliminium: for faith is to
be kept even with enemies (§174).

But if the sovereign retakes those towns, countries, or prisoners, §211. They enjoy this
who had surrendered to the enemy, he recovers all his former right when retaken.
rights over them, and is bound to re-establish them in their
pristine condition (§205). In this case they enjoy the right of postliminium without
any breach of their word, any violation of their plighted faith. The enemy loses by the
chance of war a right which the chance of war had before given him. But concerning
prisoners of war, a distinction is to be made. If they were entirely free on their parole,
the single circumstance of their coming again into the power of their own nation does
not release them,—since, even if they had returned home, they would still have
continued prisoners. The consent of the enemy who had captured them, or his total
subjugation, can alone dis-charge them. But if they have only promised not to effect
their escape,—a promise which prisoners frequently make in order to avoid the
inconveniences of a jail,—the only obligation incumbent on them, is, that they shall
not, of themselves, quit the enemy’s country, or the place assigned for their residence.
And if the troops of their party should gain possession of the place where they reside,
the consequence is, that, by the right of war, they recover their liberty, are restored to
their own nation, and reinstated in their former condition.

When a town, reduced by the enemy’s arms, is retaken by those §212. Whether this
of her own sovereign, she is, as we have above seen, restored to right extends to their
her former condition, and reinstated in the possession of all her property alienated by
rights. It is asked whether she thus recovers such part of her the enemy.
property as had been alienated by the enemy while he kept her in
subjection. In the first place we are to make a distinction between movable property
not recoverable by the right of postliminium (§202), and immovables. The former
belongs to the enemy who gets it into his hands, and he may irrecoverably alienate it.
As to immovables, let it be remembered that the acquisition of a town taken in war is
not fully consummated, till confirmed by a treaty of peace, or by the entire submission
or destruction of the state to which it belonged (§197). Till then, the sovereign of that
town has hopes of retaking it, or of recovering it by a peace. And from the moment it
returns into his power, he restores it to all its rights (§205), and consequently it
recovers all its possessions, as far as in their nature they are recoverable. It therefore
resumes its immovable possessions from the hands of those persons who have been so
prematurely forward to purchase them. In buying them of one who had not an
absolute right to dispose of them, the purchasers made a hazardous bargain; and if
they prove losers by the transaction, it is a consequence to which they deliberately
exposed themselves. But if that town had been ceded to the enemy by a treaty of
peace, or was completely fallen into his power by the submission of the whole state,
she has no longer any claim to the right of postliminium; and the alienation of any of

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 399 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

her possessions by the conqueror is valid and irreversible; nor can she lay claim to
them, if, in the sequel, some fortunate revolution should liberate her from the yoke of
the conqueror. When Alexander made a present to the Thessalians of the sum due
from them to the Thebans (see §77), he was so absolutely master of the republic of
Thebes, that he destroyed the city, and sold the inhabitants.

The same decisions hold good with regard to the immovable property of individuals,
prisoners or not, which has been alienated by the enemy while he was master of the
country. Grotius proposes the question with respect to immovable property possessed
in a neutral country by a prisoner of war.* But, according to the principles we have
laid down, this question is groundless: for the sovereign who makes a prisoner in war,
has no other right over him than that of detaining his person until the conclusion of
the war, or until he be ransomed (§§148, &c.); but he acquires no right to the
prisoner’s property, unless he can seize on it. It is impossible to produce any natural
reason why the captor should have a right to dispose of his prisoner’s property, unless
the prisoner has it about him.

When a nation, a people, a state, has been entirely subdued, it is §213. Whether a
asked whether a revolution can entitle them to the right of nation that has been
postliminium. In order justly to answer this question, there must entirely subdued can
again be a distinction of cases. If that conquered state has not yet enjoy the right of
acquiesced in her new subjection, has not voluntarily submitted, postliminium.

and has only ceased to resist from inability,—if her victor has not
laid aside the sword of conquest and taken up the sceptre of peace and equity,—such a
people are not really subdued: they are only defeated and oppressed; and, on being
delivered by the arms of an ally, they doubtless return to their former situation (§207).
Their ally cannot become their conqueror; he is their deliverer; and all the obligation
of the party delivered is to reward him. If the subsequent conqueror, not being an ally
to the state of which we speak, intends to keep it under his own jurisdiction as the
reward of his victory, he puts himself in the place of the former conqueror, and
becomes the enemy of the state which the other had oppressed: that state may lawfully
resist him, and avail herself of a favourable opportunity to recover her liberty. If she
had been unjustly oppressed, he who rescues her from the yoke of the oppressor ought
generously to reinstate her in the possession of all her rights (§203).

The question changes with regard to a state which has voluntarily submitted to the
conqueror. If the people, no longer treated as enemies but as actual subjects, have
submitted to a lawful government, they are thenceforward dependent on a new
sovereign; or, being incorporated with the victorious nation, they become a part of it,
and share its fate. Their former state is absolutely destroyed; all its relations, all its
alliances, are extinguished (Book II. §203). Whoever then the new conqueror may be,
that afterwards subdues the state to which these people are united, they share the
destiny of that state, as a part shares the fate of the whole. This has been the practice
of nations in all ages,—I say, even of just and equitable nations,—especially with
regard to an ancient conquest. The most moderate conqueror confines his generosity
in this particular to the restoration of the liberties of a people who have been but
recently subdued, and whom he does not consider as perfectly incorporated, or well
cemented by inclination, with the state which he has conquered.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 400 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

If the people in question shake off the yoke and recover their liberty by their own
exertions, they regain all their rights; they return to their former situation; and foreign
nations have no right to determine whether they have shaken off the yoke of lawful
authority, or burst the chains of slavery. Thus, the kingdom of Portugal,—which had
been seized on by Philip II.61 king of Spain, under pretence of an hereditary right, but
in reality by force and the terror of his arms,—re-established the independency of her
crown, and recovered her former rights, when she drove out the Spaniards, and placed
the duke of Braganza62 on the throne.

Provinces, towns, and lands, which the enemy restores by the §214. Right of
treaty of peace, are certainly entitled to the right of postliminium: postliminium for what
for the sovereign, in whatever manner he recovers them, is bound is restored at the
to restore them to their former condition, as soon as he regains peace;
possession of them (§205). The enemy, in giving back a town at
the peace, renounces the right he had acquired by arms. It is just the same as if he had
never taken it; and the transaction furnishes no reason which can justify the sovereign
in refusing to reinstate such town in the possession of all her rights, and restore her to
her former condition.

But whatever is ceded to the enemy by a treaty of peace, is truly §215. and for things
and completely alienated. It has no longer any claim to the right ceded to the enemy.
of postliminium, unless the treaty of peace be broken and
cancelled.

And as things not mentioned in the treaty of peace remain in the §216. The right of
condition in which they happen to be at the time when the treaty postliminium does not
is concluded, and are, on both sides, tacitly ceded to the present exist after a peace.
possessor, it may be said in general, that the right of
postliminium no longer exists after the conclusion of the peace. That right entirely
relates to the state of war.

Nevertheless, and for this very reason, there is an exception to be §217. Why always in
made here in favour of prisoners of war. Their sovereign is force for prisoners.
bound to release them at the peace (§154). But if he cannot
accomplish this,—if the fate of war compels him to accept of hard and unjust
conditions,—the enemy, who ought to set the prisoners at liberty when the war is
terminated and he has no longer any thing to fear from them (§§150, 153), continues
the state of war with respect to them, if he still detains them in captivity, and
especially if he reduces them to slavery (§152). They have therefore a right to effect
their escape from him if they have an opportunity, and to return to their own country,
equally as in war time; since, with regard to them, the war still continues. And in that
case, the sovereign, from his obligation to protect them, is bound to restore them to
their former condition (§205).

Further, those prisoners who are, without any lawful reason, §218. They are free
detained after the conclusion of peace, become immediately free, even by escaping into
when, once escaped from captivity, they have even reached a a neutral country.
neutral country: for enemies are not to be pursued and seized on

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 401 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

neutral ground (§132); and whoever detains an innocent prisoner after the peace,
continues to be his enemy. This rule should and actually does obtain among nations
who do not admit and authorise the practice of enslaving prisoners of war.

It is sufficiently evident from the premisses, that prisoners are to §219. How the rights
be considered as citizens who may one day return to their and obligations of
country: and, when they do return, it is the duty of the sovereign prisoners subsist.
to re-establish them in their former condition. Hence it clearly
follows, that the rights of every one of those prisoners, together with his obligations
(or the rights of others over him), still subsist undiminished,—only the exertion of
them is, for the most part, suspended during the time of his captivity.

The prisoner of war therefore retains a right to dispose of his §220. Testament of a
property, particularly in case of death: and as there is nothing in prisoner of war.
the state of captivity which can in this latter respect deprive him
of the exercise of his right, the testament of a prisoner of war ought to be valid in his
own country, unless rendered void by some inherent defect.

With nations which have established the indissolubility of the §221. Marriage.
marriage ties, or have ordained that they should continue for life
unless dissolved by the judgment of a court, those ties still subsist, notwithstanding
the captivity of one of the parties, who, on his return home, is, by postliminium, again
entitled to all his matrimonial rights.

We do not here enter into a detail of what the civil laws of §222. Regulations
particular nations have ordained with respect to the right of respecting
postliminium: we content ourselves with observing that such postliminium,
local regulations are obligatory on the subjects of the state alone, established by treaty
and do not affect foreigners. Neither do we here examine what or custom.

has been settled on that head by treaties: those particular
compacts establish merely a conventional right, which relates only to the contracting
parties. Customs confirmed by long and constant use are obligatory on those nations
who have given a tacit consent to them; and they are to be respected, when not
contrary to the law of nature: but those which involve an infringement of that sacred
law are faulty and invalid; and, instead of conforming to such customs, every nation is
bound to use her endeavours to effect their abolition. Among the Romans the right of
postliminium was in force, even in times of profound peace, with respect to nations
with which Rome had neither connections of friendship, rights of hospitality, nor
alliance.* This was because those nations were, as we have already observed,
considered in some measure as enemies. The prevalence of milder manners has
almost every-where abolished that remnant of barbarism.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 402 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER XV

Of The Right Of Private Persons In War.
The right of making war, as we have shewn in the first chapter of §223. Subjects cannot
this book, solely belongs to the sovereign power, which not only commit hostilities
decides whether it be proper to undertake the war, and to declare without the
it, but likewise directs all its operations, as circumstances of the sovereign’s order.
utmost importance to the safety of the state. Subjects, therefore,
cannot, of themselves, take any steps in this affair; nor are they allowed to commit
any act of hostility without orders from their sovereign. Be it understood, however,
that, under the head of “hostilities,” we do not here mean to include self-defence. A
subject may repel the violence of a fellow-citizen when the magistrate’s assistance is
not at hand; and with much greater reason may he defend himself against the
unexpected attacks of foreigners.

The sovereign’s order, which commands acts of hostility and §224. That order may
gives a right to commit them, is either general or particular. The be general or
declaration of war, which enjoins the subjects at large to attack particular.
the enemy’s subjects, implies a general order. The generals,
officers, soldiers, privateersmen, and partisans, being all commissioned by the
sovereign, make war by virtue of a particular order.

But, though an order from the sovereign be necessary to §225. Source of the
authorise the subjects to make war, that necessity wholly results necessity of such an
from the laws essential to every political society, and not from order.
any obligation relative to the enemy. For, when one nation takes
up arms against another, she from that moment declares herself an enemy to all the
individuals of the latter, and authorises them to treat her as such. What right could she
have in that case to complain of any acts of hostility committed against her by private
persons without orders from their superiors? The rule, therefore, of which we here
speak, relates rather to public law in general, than to the law of nations properly so
called, or to the principles of the reciprocal obligations of nations.

If we confine our view to the law of nations, considered in §226. Why the law of
itself,— when once two nations are engaged in war, all the nations should have
subjects of the one may commit hostilities against those of the adopted this rule.
other, and do them all the mischief authorised by the state of war.
But should two nations thus encounter each other with the collective weight of their
whole force, the war would become much more bloody and destructive, and could
hardly be terminated otherwise than by the utter extinction of one of the parties. The
examples of ancient wars abundantly prove the truth of this assertion to any man who
will for a moment recall to mind the first wars waged by Rome against the popular
republics by which she was surrounded. It is therefore with good reason that the
contrary practice has grown into a custom with the nations of Europe,—at least with

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 403 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

those that keep up regular standing armies or bodies of militia. The troops alone carry
on the war, while the rest of the nation remain in peace. And the necessity of a special
order to act is so thoroughly established, that, even after a declaration of war between
two nations, if the peasants of themselves commit any hostilities, the enemy shews
them no mercy, but hangs them up as he would so many robbers or banditti. The
crews of private ships of war stand in the same predicament: a commission from their
sovereign or admiral can alone, in case they are captured, insure them such treatment
as is given to prisoners taken in regular warfare.

In declarations of war, however, the ancient form is still retained, §227. Precise
by which the subjects in general are ordered, not only to break meaning of the order.
off all intercourse with the enemy, but also to attack him.
Custom interprets this general order. It authorises, indeed, and even obliges every
subject, of whatever rank, to secure the persons and things belonging to the enemy,
when they fall into his hands; but it does not invite the subjects to undertake any
offensive expedition without a commission or particular order.

There are occasions, however, when the subjects may reasonably §228. What private
suppose the sovereign’s will, and act in consequence of his tacit persons may
command. Thus, although the operations of war are by custom undertake, presuming
generally confined to the troops, if the inhabitants of a strong on the sovereign’s
place, taken by the enemy, have not promised or sworn will.

submission to him, and should find a favourable opportunity of
surprising the garrison and recovering the place for their sovereign, they may
confidently presume that the prince will approve of this spirited enterprise. And where
is the man that shall dare to censure it? It is true, indeed, that, if the townsmen
miscarry in the attempt, they will experience very severe treatment from the enemy.
But this does not prove the enterprise to be unjust, or contrary to the laws of war. The
enemy makes use of his right, of the right of arms, which authorises him to call in the
aid of terror to a certain degree, in order that the subjects of the sovereign with whom
he is at war may not be willing to venture on such bold undertakings, the success of
which might prove fatal to him. During the last war, the inhabitants of Genoa
suddenly took up arms of their own accord, and drove the Austrians from the city:63
and the republic celebrates an annual commemoration of that event by which she
recovered her liberty.

Persons fitting out private ships to cruise against the enemy §229. Privateers.
acquire the property of whatever captures they make, as a
compensation for their disbursements, and for the risques they run: but they acquire it
by grant from the sovereign, who issues out commissions to them. The sovereign
allows them either the whole or a part of the capture: this entirely depends on the
nature of the contract he has made with them.

As the subjects are not under an obligation of scrupulously weighing the justice of the
war, which indeed they have not always an opportunity of being thoroughly
acquainted with, and respecting which, they are bound, in case of doubt, to rely on the
sovereign’s judgment (§187),— they unquestionably may with a safe conscience
serve their country by fitting out privateers, unless the war be evidently unjust. But,

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 404 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

on the other hand, it is an infamous proceeding on the part of foreigners, to take out
commissions from a prince, in order to commit piratical depredations on a nation
which is perfectly innocent with respect to them. The thirst of gold is their only
inducement; nor can the commission they have received efface the infamy of their
conduct, though it screens them from punishment. Those alone are excusable, who
thus assist a nation whose cause is undoubtedly just, and that has taken up arms with
no other view than that of defending herself from oppression. They would even
deserve praise for their exertions in such a cause, if the hatred of oppression, and the
love of justice, rather than the desire of riches, stimulated them to generous efforts,
and induced them to expose their lives or fortunes to the hazards of war.

The noble view of gaining instruction in the art of war, and thus §230. Volunteers.
acquiring a greater degree of ability to render useful services to
their country, has introduced the custom of serving as volunteers even in foreign
armies; and the practice is undoubtedly justified by the sublimity of the motive. At
present, volunteers, when taken by the enemy, are treated as if they belonged to the
army in which they fight. Nothing can be more reasonable: they in fact join that army,
and unite with it in supporting the same cause; and it makes little difference in the
case, whether they do this in compliance with any obligation, or at the spontaneous
impulse of their own free choice.

Soldiers can undertake nothing without the express or tacit §231. What soldiers
command of their officers. To obey and execute, is their and subalterns may
province,—not to act at their own discretion: they are only do.
instruments in the hands of their commanders. Let it be
remembered here, that, by a tacit order, I mean one which is necessarily included in
an express order, or in the functions with which a person is intrusted by his superior.
What is said of soldiers must also in a proper degree be understood of officers, and of
all who have any subordinate command. Wherefore, with respect to things which are
not intrusted to their charge, they may both be considered as private individuals, who
are not to undertake any thing without orders. The obligation of the military is even
more strict, as the martial law expressly forbids acting without orders; and this
discipline is so necessary that it scarcely leaves any room for presumption. In war, an
enterprise which wears a very advantageous appearance, and promises almost certain
success, may nevertheless be attended with fatal consequences. It would be
dangerous, in such a case, to leave the decision to the judgment of men in subordinate
stations, who are not acquainted with all the views of their general, and who do not
possess an equal degree of knowledge and experience: it is therefore not to be
presumed that he intends to let them act at their own discretion. Fighting without
orders is almost always considered, in a military man, as fighting contrary to orders,
or contrary to prohibition. There is, therefore, hardly any case except that of self-
defence, in which the soldiers and inferior officers may act without orders. In that one
case, the orders may safely be presumed; or rather, the right of self-defence naturally
belongs to every one, and requires no permission. During the siege of Prague, in the
last war,64 a party of French grenadiers made a sally without orders and without
officers,—possessed themselves of a battery, spiked a part of the cannon, and brought
away the remainder into the city. The Roman severity would have punished those men
with death. The famous example of the consul Manlius is well known, who,

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 405 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

notwithstanding the victory gained by his son, caused capital punishment to be
inflicted on him for having engaged the enemy without orders.* But the difference of
times and manners obliges a general to moderate such severity. The mareschal
Bellisle65 publicly reprimanded those brave grenadiers, but secretly caused money to
be distributed among them, as a reward of their courage and alacrity. At another
famous siege in the same war, that of Coni,66 the private men of some batallions that
were stationed in the fossés, made, of their own accord, during the absence of their
officers, a vigorous sortie which was attended with success. Baron Leutrum67 was
obliged to pardon their transgression, lest he should damp an ardour on which the
safety of the place entirely depended. Such inordinate impetuosity should nevertheless
be checked as far as possible; since it may eventually be productive of fatal
consequences. Avidius Cassius inflicted capital punishment on some officers of his
army, who had, without orders, marched forth at the head of a handful of men, to
surprise a body of three thousand enemies, and had succeeded in cutting them to
pieces. This rigour he justified by saying that there might have been an
ambuscade,—dicens evenire potuisse ut essent insidiae, &c.†

Is the state bound to indemnify individuals for the damages they §232. Whether the
have sustained in war? We may learn from Grotius that authors state is bound to
are divided on this question.* The damages under consideration indemnify the
are to be distinguished into two kinds,—those done by the state subjects for damages
itself or the sovereign, and those done by the enemy. Of the first sustained in war.

kind, some are done deliberately and by way of precaution, as
when a field, a house, or a garden, belonging to a private person, is taken for the
purpose of erecting on the spot a town rampart, or any other piece of fortification,—or
when his standing corn or his store-houses are destroyed, to prevent their being of use
to the enemy. Such damages are to be made good to the individual, who should bear
only his quota of the loss. But there are other damages, caused by inevitable necessity,
as, for instance, the destruction caused by the artillery in retaking a town from the
enemy. These are merely accidents,—they are misfortunes which chance deals out to
the proprietors on whom they happen to fall. The sovereign, indeed, ought to shew an
equitable regard for the sufferers, if the situation of his affairs will admit of it: but no
action lies against the state for misfortunes of this nature,—for losses which she has
occasioned, not wilfully, but through necessity and by mere accident, in the exertion
of her rights. The same may be said of damages caused by the enemy. All the subjects
are exposed to such damages: and woe to him on whom they fall! The members of a
society may well encounter such risk of property, since they encounter a similar risk
of life itself. Were the state strictly to indemnify all those whose property is injured in
this manner, the public finances would soon be exhausted; and every individual in the
state would be obliged to contribute his share in due proportion,—a thing utterly
impracticable. Besides, these indemnifications would be liable to a thousand abuses,
and there would be no end of the particulars. It is therefore to be presumed that no
such thing was ever intended by those who united to form a society.

But it is perfectly consonant to the duties of the state and the sovereign, and, of
course, perfectly equitable, and even strictly just, to relieve, as far as possible, those
unhappy sufferers who have been ruined by the ravages of war, as likewise to take
care of a family whose head and support has lost his life in the service of the state.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 406 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

There are many debts which are considered as sacred by the man who knows his duty,
although they do not afford any ground of action against him.*

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 407 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER XVI

Of Various Conventions Made During The Course Of The
War.
War would become too cruel and destructive, were all §233. Truce and
intercourse between enemies absolutely broken off. According to suspension of arms.
the observation of Grotius,† there still subsists a friendly
intercourse in war, as Virgil‡ and Tacitus§ have expressed it. The occurrences and
events of war lay enemies under the necessity of entering into various conventions. As
we have already treated in general of the observance of faith between enemies, it is
unnecessary for us in this place to prove the obligation of faithfully acting up to those
conventions made in war: it therefore only remains to explain the nature of them.
Sometimes it is agreed to suspend hostilities for a certain time; and if this convention
be made but for a very short period, or only regards some particular place, it is called
a cessation or suspension of arms. Such are those conventions made for the purpose of
burying the dead after an assault or a battle, and for a parley, or a conference between
the generals of the hostile armies. If the agreement be for a more considerable length
of time, and especially if general, it is more particularly distinguished by the
appellation of a truce. Many people use both expressions indiscriminately.

The truce or suspension of arms does not terminate the war; it §234. Does not
only suspends its operations. terminate the war.

A truce is either partial or general. By the former, hostilities are §235. A truce is either
suspended only in certain places, as between a town and the partial or general.
army besieging it. By the latter, they are to cease generally, and
in all places, between the belligerent powers. Partial truces may also admit of a
distinction with respect to acts of hostility, or to persons; that is to say, the parties may
agree to abstain from certain acts of hostility during a limited time, or two armies may
mutually conclude a truce or suspension of arms without regard to any particular
place.

A general truce, made for many years, differs from a peace in §236. General truce
little else than in leaving the question which was the original for many years.
ground of the war, still undecided. When two nations are weary
of hostilities, and yet cannot agree on the point which constitutes the subject of their
dispute, they generally have recourse to this kind of agreement. Thus, instead of
peace, long truces only have usually been made between the Christians and the
Turks,—sometimes from a false spirit of religion, at other times because neither party
were willing to acknowledge the other as lawful owners of their respective
possessions.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 408 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

It is necessary to the validity of an agreement, that it be made by §237. By whom these
one who possesses competent powers. Every thing done in war is agreements may be
done by the authority of the sovereign, who alone has the right concluded.
both of undertaking the war, and directing its operations (§4).
But from the impossibility of executing every thing by himself, he must necessarily
communicate part of his power to his ministers and officers. The question, therefore,
is, to determine what are the things of which the sovereign reserves the management
in his own hands, and what those are which he is naturally presumed to intrust to the
ministers of his will, to the generals and other officers employed in military
operations. We have above (Book II. §207) laid down and explained the principle
which is to serve as a general rule on this subject. If the sovereign has not given any
special mandate, the person commanding in his name is held to be invested with all
the powers necessary for the reasonable and salutary exercise of his functions,—for
every thing which naturally follows from his commission. Every thing beyond that is
reserved to the sovereign, who is not supposed to have delegated a greater portion of
his power than is necessary for the good of his affairs. According to this rule, a
general truce can only be concluded by the sovereign himself, or by some person on
whom he has expressly conferred a power for that purpose. For it is by no means
necessary to the success of the war, that a general should be invested with such an
extensive authority: it would exceed the limits of his functions, which consist in
directing the military operations in the place where he has the command, and not in
regulating the general interests of the state. The conclusion of a general truce is a
matter of so high importance, that the sovereign is always presumed to have reserved
it in his own hands. So extensive a power suits only the viceroy or governor of a
distant country, for the territories under him: and even in this case, if the truce be for a
number of years, it is natural to suppose the sovereign’s ratification necessary. The
Roman consuls and other commanders had a power to grant general truces for the
term of their commission; but if that term was considerable, or the truce made for a
longer time, it required the ratification of the senate and people. Even a partial truce,
when for a long time, seems also to exceed the ordinary powers of a general; and he
can only conclude it under a reservation of its being ratified by the sovereign
authority.

But, as to partial truces for a short period, it is often necessary, and almost always
proper, that the general should have a power to conclude them:—it is necessary, when
he cannot wait for the sovereign’s consent: it is proper, on those occasions when the
truce can only tend to spare the effusion of blood, and to promote the mutual
advantage of the contracting parties. With such a power, therefore, the general or
commander in chief is naturally supposed to be invested. Thus, the governor of a
town, and the general besieging it, may agree on a cessation of arms, for the purpose
of burying the dead, or of coming to a parley: they may even settle a truce for some
months, on condition that the town, if not relieved within that time, shall surrender,
&c. Conventions of this kind only tend to mitigate the evils of war, and are not likely
to prove detrimental to any one.

All these truces and suspensions of arms are concluded by the §238. The sovereign’s
authority of the sovereign, who consents to some of them in his faith engaged in them.
own person, and to others through the ministry of his generals

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 409 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

and officers. His faith is pledged by such agreements, and he is bound to enforce their
observance.

The truce binds the contracting parties from the moment of its §239. When the truce
being concluded, but cannot have the force of a law with regard begins to be
to the subjects on both sides, till it has been solemnly obligatory.
proclaimed: and as an unknown law imposes no obligation, the
truce does not become binding on the subjects, until duly notified to them. Hence, if,
before they can have obtained certain information of its being concluded, they commit
any act contrary to it,—any act of hostility,—they are not punishable. But as the
sovereign is bound to fulfil his promises, it is incumbent on him to cause restitution to
be made of all prizes taken subsequent to the period when the truce should have
commenced. The subjects who through ignorance of its existence have failed to
observe it, are not obliged to offer an indemnification, any more than their sovereign
who was unable to notify it to them sooner: the non-observance of the truce in this
case is merely an accident, not imputable to any fault on his part or on theirs. A ship
being out at sea at the time when the truce is published, meets with a ship belonging
to the enemy, and sinks her: as there is no guilt in this case, she is not liable to pay
any damage. If she has made a capture of the vessel, all the obligation she lies under
is to restore the prize, as she must not retain it in violation of the truce. But those who
should, through their own fault, remain ignorant of the publication of the truce, would
be bound to repair any damage they had caused contrary to its tenor. The simple
commission of a fault, and especially of a slight one, may to a certain degree be
suffered to pass with impunity; and it certainly does not deserve to be punished with
equal severity as a premeditated transgression: but it furnishes no plea against the
obligation to repair the damages accruing. In order, as far as possible, to obviate every
difficulty, it is usual with sovereigns, in their truces as well as in their treaties of
peace, to assign different periods for the cessation of hostilities, according to the
situation and distance of places.

Since a truce cannot be obligatory on the subjects unless known §240. Publication of
to them, it must be solemnly published in all the places where it the truce.
is intended that it should be observed.

If any of the subjects, whether military men or private citizens, §241. Subjects
offend against the truce, this is no violation of the public faith; contravening the
nor is the truce thereby broken. But the delinquents should be truce.
compelled to make ample compensation for the damage, and
severely punished. Should their sovereign refuse to do justice on the complaints of the
party injured, he thereby becomes accessory to the trespass, and violates the truce.

Now, if one of the contracting parties, or any person by his order, §242. Violation of the
or even with his simple consent, commits any act contrary to the truce.
truce, it is an injury to the other contracting party: the truce is
dissolved; and the injured party is entitled immediately to take up arms, not only for
the purpose of renewing the operations of the war, but also of avenging the recent
injury offered to him.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 410 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Sometimes a penalty on the infractor of the truce is reciprocally §243. Stipulation of a
stipulated: and then the truce is not immediately broken on the penalty against the
first infraction. If the party offending submits to the penalty, and infractor.
repairs the damage, the truce still subsists, and the offended party
has nothing farther to claim. But if an alternative has been agreed on, viz. that in case
of an infraction the delinquent shall suffer a certain penalty, or the truce shall be
broken, it is the injured party who has the choice of insisting on the penalty or taking
advantage of his right to recommence hostilities: for if this were left at the option of
the infractor, the stipulation of the alternative would be nugatory, since, by refusing to
submit to the penalty simply stipulated, he would break the compact, and thereby give
the injured party a right to take up arms again. Besides, in cautionary clauses of this
kind, the alternative is not supposed to be introduced in favour of him who fails in his
engagements; and it would be absurd to suppose that he reserves to himself the
advantage of breaking them by his infraction rather than undergo the penalty. He
might as well break them at once openly. The only object of the penal clause is to
secure the truce from being so easily broken; and there can be no other reason for
introducing it with an alternative, than that of leaving to the injured party a right, if he
thinks fit, to dissolve a compact from which the behaviour of the enemy shews him he
has little security to expect.

It is necessary that the time of the truce be accurately specified, §244. Time of the
in order to prevent all doubt or dispute respecting the period of truce.
its commencement, and that of its expiration. The French
language, extremely clear and precise for those who know how to use it with
propriety, furnishes expressions which bid defiance to the most subtle chicanery. The
words “inclusively” and “exclusively” banish all ambiguity which may happen to be
in the convention, with regard to the two terms of the truce, its beginning and end. For
instance, if it be said that “the truce shall last from the first of March inclusively, until
the fifteenth of April, also inclusively,” there can remain no doubt; whereas, if the
words had simply been, “from the first of March until the fifteenth of April,” it might
be disputed whether those two days, mentioned as the initial and final terms of the
truce, were com-prehended in the treaty, or not: and indeed authors are divided on this
question. As to the former of those two days, it seems beyond all question to be
comprised in the truce: for if it be agreed that there shall be a truce from the first of
March, this naturally means that hostilities shall cease on the first of March. As to the
latter day, there is something more of doubt,—the expression “until” seeming to
separate it from the time of the armistice. However, as we often say “until such a day
inclusively,” the word “until” is not necessarily exclusive, according to the genius of
the language, And as a truce, which spares the effusion of human blood, is no doubt a
thing of a favourable nature, perhaps the safest way is to include in it the very day of
the term. Circumstances may also help to ascertain the meaning: but it is very wrong
not to remove all ambiguity, when it may be done by the addition of a single word.

In national compacts, the word “day” is to be understood of a natural day, since it is
in this meaning that a day is the common measure of time among nations. The
computation by civil days owes its origin to the civil law of each nation, and varies in
different countries. The natural day begins at sun-rise, and lasts twenty-four hours, or
one diurnal revolution of the sun. If, therefore, a truce of a hundred days be agreed on,

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 411 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

to begin on the first of March, the truce begins at sun-rise on the first of March, and is
to continue a hundred days of twenty-four hours each. But as the sun does not rise at
the same hour throughout the whole year, the parties, in order to avoid an overstrained
nicety, and a degree of chicane unbecoming that candour which should prevail in
conventions of this kind, ought certainly to understand that the truce expires, as it
began, at the rising of the sun. The term of a day is meant from one sun to the other,
without quibbling or disputing about the difference of a few minutes in the time of his
rising. He who, having made a truce for a hundred days, beginning on the twenty-first
of June, when the sun rises about four o’clock, should, on the day the truce is to end,
take up arms at the same hour, and surprise his enemy before sun-rise, would certainly
be considered as guilty of a mean and perfidious chicanery.

If no term has been specified for the commencement of the truce, the contracting
parties, being bound by it immediately on its conclusion (§239), ought to have it
published without delay, in order that it may be punctually observed: for it becomes
binding on the subjects only from the time when it is duly published with respect to
them (ibid.); and it begins to take effect only from the moment of the first publication,
unless otherwise settled by the terms of the agreement.

The general effect of a truce is that every act of hostility shall §245. Effects of a
absolutely cease. And in order to obviate all dispute respecting truce; what is
the acts which may be termed hostile, the general rule is, that, allowed, or not,
during the truce, each party may, within his own territories, and during its
in the places where he is master, continuance.

do whatever he would have a right to do in time of profound 1st Rule. Each party
peace. Thus a truce does not deprive a sovereign of the liberty of may do at home what
levying soldiers, assembling an army in his own dominions, they have a right to do
marching troops within the country, and even calling in in time of peace.
auxiliaries, or repairing the fortifications of a town which is not
actually besieged. As he has a right to do all these things in time of peace, the truce
does not tie up his hands. Can it be supposed that by such a compact he meant to
debar himself from executing things which the continuation of hostilities could not
prevent him from doing?

But to take advantage of the cessation of arms in order to execute §246. 2d. Rule. Not to
without danger certain things which are prejudicial to the enemy, take advantage of the
and which could not have been safely undertaken during the truce in doing what
continuance of hostilities, is circumventing and deceiving the hostilities would have
enemy with whom the compact has been made: it is a breach of prevented.

the truce. By this second general rule we may solve several
particular cases.

The truce concluded between the governor of a town and the §247. For instance,
general besieging it, deprives both of the liberty of continuing continuing the works
their works. With regard to the latter, this is manifest,—his of a siege, or
works being acts of hostility. But neither can the governor, on his repairing breaches;
part, avail himself of the armistice, for the purpose of repairing
the breaches or erecting new fortifications. The artillery of the besiegers does not

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 412 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

allow him to carry on such works with impunity during the continuance of hostilities:
it would therefore be detrimental to them that he should employ the truce in this
manner; and they are under no obligation of submitting to be so far imposed upon:
they will with good reason consider such an attempt as an infraction of the truce. But
the suspension of arms does not hinder the governor from continuing within his town
such works as were not liable to be impeded by the attacks or fire of the enemy. At
the last siege of Tournay,68 after the surrender of the town, an armistice was agreed
on; during the continuance of which, the governor permitted the French to make all
the necessary preparations for attacking the citadel, to carry on their works, and erect
their batteries,—because the governor, on his part, was in the mean time busily
employed within, in clearing away the rubbish with which the blowing up of a
magazine had filled the citadel, and was erecting batteries on the ramparts. But all this
he might have performed with little or no danger, even if the operations of the siege
had commenced; whereas the French could not have carried on their works with such
expedition, or made their approaches and erected their batteries, without losing a great
number of men. There was therefore no equality in the case; and, on that footing, the
truce was entirely in favour of the besiegers: and, in consequence of it, the capture of
the citadel took place sooner, probably, by a fortnight, than it would otherwise have
happened.

If the truce be concluded either for the purpose of settling the §248. or introducing
terms of the capitulation or of waiting for the orders of the succours.
respective sovereigns, the besieged governor cannot make use of
it as a convenient opportunity to introduce succours or ammunition into the town: for
this would be taking an undue advantage of the armistice for the purpose of deceiving
the enemy;—a conduct which is inconsistent with candour and honesty. The spirit of
such a compact evidently imports that all things shall remain as they were at the
moment of its conclusion.

But this is not to be extended to a suspension of arms agreed on §249. Distinction of a
for some particular circumstance, as, for instance, burying the particular case.
dead. In this case, the truce is to be interpreted with a view to its
immediate object. Accordingly the firing ceases, either in all quarters, or only in a
single point of attack, pursuant to agreement, that each party may freely carry off their
dead: and during this intermission of the cannonade, it is not allowable to carry on any
works which the firing would have impeded. This would be taking an undue
advantage of the armistice, and consequently a violation of it. But it is perfectly
justifiable in the governor, during such a cessation of hostilities, silently to introduce a
reinforcement in some quarter remote from the point of attack. If the besieger, lulled
by such an armistice, abates in his vigilance, he must abide the consequences. The
armistice of itself does not facilitate the entrance of that reinforcement.

Likewise if an army in a bad position proposes and concludes an §250. Retreat of an
armistice for the purpose of burying the dead after a battle, it army during a
cannot pretend, during the suspension of arms, to extricate itself suspension of
from its disadvantageous situation, and to march off unmolested, hostilities.
in sight of the enemy. This would be availing itself of the
compact in order to effect a purpose which it could not otherwise have accomplished.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 413 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

This would be laying a snare: and conventions must not be converted into snares. The
enemy, therefore, may justly obstruct the motions of that army the moment it attempts
to quit its station: but if it silently files off in the rear, and thus reaches a safer
position, it will not be guilty of a breach of faith; since nothing more is implied by a
suspension of arms for the burial of the dead, than that neither party shall attack the
other whilst this office of humanity is performing. The enemy, therefore, can only
blame his own remissness:—he ought to have stipulated, that, during the cessation of
hostilities, neither party should quit their post: or it was his business vigilantly to
watch the motions of the hostile army: and on perceiving their design, he was at
liberty to oppose it. It is a very justifiable stratagem to propose a cessation of arms for
a particular object, with a view of lulling the enemy’s vigilance, and covering a design
of retreating.

But if the truce be not made for any particular object alone, we cannot honourably
avail ourselves of it in order to gain an advantage, as, for instance, to secure an
important post, or to advance into the enemy’s country. The latter step would indeed
be a violation of the truce; for every advance into the enemy’s country is an act of
hostility.

Now, as a truce suspends hostilities without putting an end to the §251. 3d. Rule
war, every thing must, during the continuance of the truce, be Nothing to be
suffered to remain in its existing state, in all places of which the attempted in contested
possession is contested: nor is it lawful, in such places, to places, but every
attempt any thing to the prejudice of the enemy. This is a third thing to be left as it

was.
general rule.

When the enemy withdraws his troops from a place, and §252. Places quitted
absolutely quits it, his conduct sufficiently shews that he does or neglected by the
not intend to occupy it any longer: and in this case we may enemy.
lawfully take possession of it during the truce. But if by any
indication it appears that a post, an open town, or a village, is not relinquished by the
enemy, and that, though he neglects to keep it guarded, he still maintains his rights
and claims to it, the truce forbids us to seize upon it. To take away from the enemy
what he is disposed to retain, is an act of hostility.

It is also an undoubted act of hostility to receive towns or §253. Subjects
provinces inclined to withdraw from the sovereignty of the inclined to revolt
enemy, and give themselves up to us. We therefore cannot against their prince
receive them during the continuance of the truce, which wholly not to be received
suspends all hostile proceedings. during the truce;

Far more unlawful it is, during that period, to instigate the §254. much less to be
subjects of the enemy to revolt, or to tamper with the fidelity of solicited to treason.
his governors and garrisons. These are not only hostile
proceedings, but odious acts of hostility (§180). As to deserters and fugitives, they
may be received during the truce, since they are received even in time of peace, when
there is no treaty to the contrary. And even if such a treaty did exist, its effect is
annulled, or at least suspended, by the war which has since taken place.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 414 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

To seize persons or things belonging to the enemy, when he has §255. Persons or
not, by any particular fault on his side, afforded us grounds for effects of enemies not
such seizure, is an act of hostility, and consequently not to be seized during
allowable during a truce. the truce.

Since the right of postliminium is founded only on the state of §256. Right of
war (Chap. XIV. of this Book), it cannot take effect during the postliminium during
truce, which suspends all the acts of war, and leaves every thing the truce.
in its existing state (§251). Even prisoners cannot during that
season withdraw from the power of the enemy, in order to recover their former
condition: for the enemy has a right to detain them while the war continues; and it is
only on its conclusion that his right over their liberty expires (§148).

During the truce, especially if made for a long period, it is §257. Intercourse
naturally allowable for enemies to pass and repass to and from allowed during a
each other’s country, in the same manner as it is allowed in time truce.
of peace; since all hostilities are now suspended. But each of the
sovereigns is at liberty, as he would be in time of peace, to adopt every precaution
which may be necessary to prevent this intercourse from becoming prejudicial to him.
He has just grounds of suspicion against people with whom he is soon to recommence
hostilities. He may even declare, at the time of making the truce, that he will admit
none of the enemy into any place under his jurisdiction.

Those who, having entered the enemy’s territories during the §258. Persons
truce, are detained there by sickness or any other unsurmountable detained by
obstacle, and thus happen to remain in the country after the unsurmountable
expiration of the armistice, may in strict justice be kept obstacles, after the
prisoners: it is an accident which they might have foreseen, and expiration of the

truce.
to which they have of their own accord exposed themselves; but
humanity and generosity commonly require that they should be allowed a sufficient
term for their departure.

If the articles of truce contain any conditions either more §259. Particular
extensive or more narrowly restrictive than what we have here conditions added to
laid down, the transaction becomes a particular convention. It is truces.
obligatory on the contracting parties, who are bound to observe
what they have promised in due form: and the obligations thence resulting constitute a
conventional right, the detail of which is foreign to the plan of this work.

As the truce only suspends the effects of war (§233), the moment §260. At the
it expires, hostilities may be renewed without any fresh expiration of the
declaration of war: for every one previously knows that from that truce, the war is
instant the war will resume its course; and the reasons for the renewed without any
necessity of a declaration are not applicable to this case (§51). fresh declaration.

But a truce of many years very much resembles a peace, and only differs from it in
leaving the subject of the war still undecided. Now as a considerable lapse of time
may have effected a material alteration in the circumstances and dispositions of both

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 415 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

the parties,—the love of peace, so becoming in sovereigns, the care they should take
to spare their subjects’ blood, and even that of their enemies,—these dispositions, I
say, seem to require that princes should not take up arms again at the expiration of a
truce in which all military preparatives had been totally laid aside and forgotten,
without making some declaration which may invite the enemy to prevent the effusion
of blood. The Romans have given us an example of this commendable moderation.
They had only made a truce with the city of Veii;69 and the enemy even renewed
hostilities before the stipulated time was elapsed. Nevertheless, at the expiration of the
term, the college of the feciales gave it as their opinion that the Romans should send
to make a formal demand of satisfaction, previous to their taking up arms again.*

The capitulations on the surrender of towns are among the §261. Capitulations
principal conventions made between enemies during the course and by whom they
of war. They are usually settled between the general of the may be concluded.
besieging army and the governor of the besieged town, both
acting in virtue of the authority annexed to their respective posts or commissions.

We have elsewhere (Book II. Chap. XIV.) laid down the principles of that authority
which is vested in the subordinate powers, together with general rules to aid in
forming a decision respecting it. All this has recently been recapitulated in a few
words, and particularly applied to generals and other military commanders in chief
(§237). Since the general of an army, and the governor of a town, must naturally be
invested with all the powers necessary for the exercise of their respective functions,
we have a right to presume that they possess those powers: and that of concluding a
capitulation is certainly one of the number, especially when they cannot wait for the
sovereign’s order. A treaty made by them on that subject is therefore valid, and binds
the sovereigns, in whose name and by whose authority the respective commanders
have acted.

But let it be observed, that, if those officers do not mean to §262. Clauses
exceed their powers, they should scrupulously confine contained in them.
themselves within the limits of their functions, and forbear to
meddle with things which have not been committed to their charge. In the attack and
the defence, in the capture or the surrender of a town, the possession alone is the point
in question, and not the property and right: the fate of the garrison is also involved in
the transaction. Accordingly, the commanders may come to an agreement respecting
the manner in which the capitulating town shall be possessed: the besieging general
may promise that the inhabitants shall be spared, and permitted to enjoy their religion,
franchises, and privileges: and as to the garrison, he may allow them to march out
with their arms and baggage, with all the honours of war,—to be escorted and
conducted to a place of safety, &c. The governor of the town may deliver it up at
discretion, if reduced to that extremity by the situation of affairs: he may surrender
himself and his garrison prisoners of war, or engage, that, for a stipulated time, or
even to the end of the war, they shall not carry arms against the same enemy, or
against his allies: and the governor’s promise is valid and obligatory on all under his
command, who are bound to obey him while he keeps within the limits of his
functions (§23).

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 416 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

But should the besieging general take on him to promise that his sovereign shall never
annex the conquered town to his own dominions, or shall, after a certain time, be
obliged to restore it, he would exceed the bounds of his authority, in entering into a
contract respecting matters which are not intrusted to his management. And the like
may be said of a governor who in the capitulation should proceed to such lengths as
for ever to alienate the town which he commands, and to deprive his sovereign of the
right to retake it,—or who should promise that his garrison shall never carry arms, not
even in another war. His functions do not give him so extensive a power. If, therefore,
in the conferences for a capitulation, either of the hostile commanders should insist on
conditions which the other does not think himself empowered to grant, they have still
one expedient left, which is to agree to an armistice, during which every thing shall
continue in its present state, until they have received orders from higher authority.

At the beginning of this chapter we have given the reasons why §263. Observance of
we thought it unnecessary to prove in this place that all these capitulations, and its
conventions made during the course of the war, are to be utility.
inviolably adhered to. We shall therefore only observe, with
respect to capitulations in particular, that, as it is unjust and scandalous to violate
them, so the consequences of such an act of perfidy often prove detrimental to the
party who has been guilty of it. What confidence can thenceforward be placed in him?
The towns which he attacks will endure the most dreadful extremities, rather than
place any dependence on his word. He strengthens his enemies by compelling them to
make a desperate defence; and every siege that he is obliged to undertake, will
become terrible. On the contrary, fidelity attracts confidence and affection; it
facilitates enterprises, removes obstacles, and paves the way to glorious successes. Of
this history furnishes us a fine example in the conduct of George Baste, general of the
imperialists in 1602, against Battory and the Turks. The insurgents of Battory’s party
having gained possession of Bistrith, otherwise called Nissa, Baste recovered the
town by a capitulation, which in his absence was violated by some German soldiers:
but being informed of the transaction on his return, he immediately hanged up all the
soldiers concerned, and out of his own purse paid the inhabitants all the damages they
had sustained. This action had so powerful an influence on the minds of the rebels,
that they all submitted to the emperor, without demanding any other surety than the
word of general Baste.*

Individuals, whether belonging to the army or not, who happen §264. Promises made
singly to fall in with the enemy, are, by the urgent necessity of to the enemy by
the circumstance, left to their own discretion, and may, so far as individuals.
concerns their own persons, do every thing which a commander
might do with respect to himself and the troops under his command. If, therefore, in
consequence of the situation in which they are involved, they make any promise, such
promise (provided it do not extend to matters which can never lie within the sphere of
a private individual) is valid and obligatory, as being made with competent powers.
For when a subject can neither receive his sovereign’s orders nor enjoy his protection,
he resumes his natural rights, and is to provide for his own safety by any just and
honourable means in his power. Hence, if that individual has promised a sum for his
ransom, the sovereign, so far from having a power to discharge him from his promise,
should oblige him to fulfil it. The good of the state requires that faith should be kept

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 417 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

on such occasions, and that subjects should have this mode of saving their lives or
recovering their liberty.

Thus a prisoner who is released on his parole, is bound to observe it with scrupulous
punctuality; nor has the sovereign a right to oppose such observance of his
engagement: for, had not the prisoner thus given his parole, he would not have been
released.

Thus also the country people, the inhabitants of villages or defenceless towns, are
bound to pay the contributions which they have promised in order to save themselves
from pillage.

Nay more, a subject would even have a right to renounce his country, if the enemy,
being master of his person, refused to spare his life on any other condition: for, when
once the society to which he belongs is unable to protect and defend him, he resumes
his natural rights. And besides, should he obstinately refuse compliance, what
advantage would the state derive from his death? Undoubtedly, while any hope
remains, while we have yet any means of serving our country, it is our duty to expose
ourselves and to brave every danger for her sake. I here suppose that we have no
alternative but that of renouncing our country or perishing without any advantage to
her. If by our death we can serve her, it is noble to imitate the heroic generosity of the
Decii. But an engagement to serve against our country, were it even the only means of
saving our life, is dishonourable; and a man of spirit would submit to a thousand
deaths, rather than make so disgraceful a promise.

If a soldier, meeting an enemy in a by-place, makes him prisoner, but promises him
his life or liberty on condition of his paying a certain ransom, this agreement is to be
respected by the superiors: for it does not appear that the soldier, left entirely to
himself on that occasion, has in any particular exceeded his powers. He might, on the
other hand, have thought it imprudent to attack that enemy, and, under that idea, have
suffered him to escape. Under the direction of his superiors, he is bound to obey:
when alone, he is left to his own discretion. Procopius70 relates the adventure of two
soldiers, the one a Goth and the other a Roman, who, being fallen together into a pit,
mutually promised each other that their lives should be spared: and this agreement
was approved by the Goths.*

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 418 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER XVII

Of Safe-conducts And Passports,—With Questions On The
Ransom Of Prisoners Of War.
Safe-conducts and passports are a kind of privilege insuring §265. Nature of safe-
safety to persons in passing and repassing, or to certain things conducts and
during their conveyance from one place to another. From the passports.
usage and genius of the [French] language, it appears that the
term “passport” is used, on ordinary occasions, when speaking of persons who lie
under no particular exception as to passing and repassing in safety, and to whom it is
only granted for greater security, and in order to prevent all debate, or to exempt them
from some general prohibition. A safe-conduct is given to those who otherwise could
not safely pass through the places where he who grants it is master,—as, for instance,
to a person charged with some misdemeanor, or to an enemy. It is of the latter that we
are here to treat.

All safe-conducts, like every other act of supreme command, §266. From what
emanate from the sovereign authority: but the prince may authority they
delegate to his officers the power of granting safe-conducts; and emanate.
they are invested with that power, either by an express
commission, or by a natural consequence of the nature of their functions. A general of
an army, from the very nature of his post, can grant safe-conducts: and as they are
derived, though mediately, from the sovereign authority, the other generals or officers
of the same prince are bound to respect them.

The person named in the safe-conduct cannot transfer his §267. Not transferable
privilege to another: for he does not know whether it be a matter from one person to
of indifference to the granter of the safe-conduct that another another.
person should use it in his stead: and so far from presuming that
to be the case, he is even bound to presume the contrary, on account of the abuses
which might thence result; and he cannot assume to himself any farther privilege than
was intended for him. If the safe-conduct is granted, not for persons, but for certain
effects, those effects may be removed by others besides the owner. The choice of
those who remove them is indifferent, provided there do not lie against them any
personal exception sufficient to render them objects of just suspicion in the eye of him
who grants the safe-conduct, or to exclude them from the privilege of entering his
territories.

He who promises security by a safe-conduct, promises to afford §268. Extent of the
it wherever he has the command,—not only in his own promised security.
territories, but likewise in every place where any of his troops
may happen to be: and he is bound, not only to forbear violating that security either
by himself or his people, but also to protect and defend the person to whom he has

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 419 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

promised it, to punish any of his subjects who have offered him violence, and oblige
them to make good the damage.*

As the right arising from a safe-conduct proceeds entirely from §269. How to judge
the will of him who grants it, that will is the standard by which of the right derived
the extent of the right is to be measured; and the will is from a safe-conduct.
discoverable in the object for which the safe-conduct was
granted. Consequently a person who has barely obtained permission to go away, does
not thence derive a right to come back again; and a safe-conduct granted for the
simple passage through a country does not entitle the bearer to repass through it on his
return. When the safe-conduct is granted for a particular business, it must continue in
force until that business is concluded, and the person has had time to depart: if it is
specified to be granted for a journey, it will also serve for the person’s return, since
both passage and return are included in a journey. As this privilege consists in the
liberty of going and coming in safety, it differs from a permission to settle in any
particular place, and consequently cannot give a right to stop any-where for a length
of time, unless on some special business, in consideration of which the safe-conduct
was asked and granted.

A safe-conduct given to a traveller naturally includes his §270. Whether it
baggage, or his clothes and other things necessary for his includes baggage and
journey, with even one or two domestics, or more, according to domestics.
the rank of the person. But in all these respects, as well as in the
others which we have just noticed above, the safest mode, especially when we have to
do with enemies or other suspected persons, is to specify and distinctly enumerate the
particulars, in order to obviate every difficulty. Accordingly, such is the practice
which at present prevails; and, in granting safe-conducts, it is the custom expressly to
include the baggage and domestics.

Though a permission to settle any-where, granted to the father of §271. Safe-conduct
a family, naturally includes his wife and children, it is otherwise granted to the father
with a safe-conduct; because it seldom happens that a man settles does not include his
in a place without having his family with him; whereas, on a family.
journey, it is more usual to travel without them.

A safe-conduct granted to a person for himself and his retinue, §272. Safe-conduct
cannot give him a right of bringing with him persons justly given in general to
suspected by the state, or who have been banished, or have fled any one and his
from the country on account of any crime; nor can it serve as a retinue.
protection to such men: for the sovereign who grants a safe-
conduct in those general terms, does not suppose that it will be presumptuously
abused for the purpose of bringing persons into his territories who have been guilty of
crimes or have particularly offended him.

A safe-conduct given for a stated term, expires at the end of the §273. Term of the
term specified therein: and the bearer, if he does not retire before safe-conduct.
that time, may be arrested, and even punished, according to
circumstances, especially if he has given room for suspicion by an affected delay.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 420 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

But if forcibly detained, as by sickness, so as to be unable to §274. A person
depart in time, a proper respite should be allowed him: for a forcibly detained
promise of security has been made to him; and though it was beyond the term.
made only for a limited time, it is not by any fault of his own that
he has been prevented from departing within the term. The case is different from that
of an enemy coming into our country during a truce: to the latter we have made no
particular promise: he at his own peril takes advantage of a general liberty allowed by
the suspension of hostilities. All we have promised to the enemy is, to forbear
hostilities for a certain time: and, at the expiration of that term, it is a matter of
importance to us that we be at liberty to let the war freely take its course, without
being impeded by a variety of excuses and pretexts.

The safe-conduct does not expire at the decease or deposition of §275. The safe-
him who granted it; for it was given in virtue of the sovereign conduct does not
authority, which never dies, and whose efficacy exists expire at the death of
independent of the person intrusted with the exercise of it. It is him who gave it.
with this act as with other ordinances of the public power: their
validity or duration does not depend on the life of him who enacted them, unless, by
their very nature, or by express declaration, they are personally confined to him.

The successor, nevertheless, may revoke a safe-conduct, if he has §276. How it may be
good reasons for the revocation. Even he who has granted it, may revoked.
in like case revoke it: nor is he always obliged to make known
his reasons. Every privilege, when it becomes detrimental to the state, may be
revoked,— a gratuitous privilege, purely and simply,—a purchased privilege, on
giving an indemnification to the parties concerned. Suppose a prince or his general is
preparing for a secret expedition,—must he suffer any person, under cover of a safe-
conduct antecedently obtained, to come and pry into his preparatives, and give the
enemy intelligence of them? But a safe-conduct is not to be converted into a snare: if
it be revoked, the bearer must be allowed time and liberty to depart in safety. If he,
like any other traveller, be detained for some time in order to prevent his carrying
intelligence to the enemy, no ill treatment is to be offered him; nor is he to be kept
longer than while the reasons for his detainder subsist.

If a safe-conduct contains this clause, “For such time as we shall §277. Safe-conduct
think fit,” it gives only a precarious right, and is revocable every with the clause, for
moment: but, until it has been expressly revoked, it remains such time as we shall
valid. It expires on the death of him who gave it, who from that think fit.
moment ceases to will the continuation of the privilege. But it
must always be understood that when a safe-conduct expires in this manner, the
bearer is to be allowed a proper time for his safe departure.

After having discussed the right of making prisoners of §278. Conventions
war,—the obligation of the captor to release them at the peace by relating to the ransom
exchange or ransom,—and that of their sovereign to obtain their of prisoners.
liberty,—it remains to consider the nature of those conventions
whose object is the deliverance of these unfortunate sufferers. If the belligerent
sovereigns have agreed on a cartel for the exchange or ransom of prisoners, they are

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 421 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

bound to observe it with equal fidelity as any other convention. But if (as was
frequently the practice in former times) the state leaves to each prisoner, at least
during the continuance of the war, the care of redeeming himself,—such private
conventions present a number of questions, of which we shall only touch on the
principal ones.

He who has acquired a lawful right to demand a ransom from his §279. The right of
prisoner may transfer his right to a third person. This was demanding a ransom
practised in the last ages. It was frequent for military men to may be transferred.
resign their prisoners, and transfer all the rights they had over
them, into other hands. But, as the person who takes a prisoner is bound to treat him
with justice and humanity (§150), he must not, if he wishes that his conduct should be
free from censure, transfer his right, in an unlimited manner, to one who might make
an improper use of it: when he has agreed with his prisoner concerning the price of his
ransom, he may transfer to whom he pleases the right to demand the stipulated sum.

When once the agreement is made with a prisoner for the price of §280. What may
his ransom, it becomes a perfect contract, and cannot be annul the convention
rescinded under pretence that the prisoner is discovered to be made for the rate of
richer than was imagined: for it is by no means necessary that the the ransom.
rate should be proportioned to the wealth of the prisoner, since
that is not the scale by which we measure the right to detain a prisoner of war (§§148,
153). But it is natural to proportion the price of the ransom to the prisoner’s rank in
the hostile army, because the liberty of an officer of distinction is of greater
consequence than that of a private soldier or an inferior officer. If the prisoner has not
only concealed but disguised his rank, it is a fraud on his part, which gives the captor
a right to annul the compact.

If a prisoner, having agreed on the price of his ransom, dies §281. A prisoner
before payment, it is asked whether the stipulated sum be due, dying before payment
and whether the heirs are bound to pay it? They undoubtedly are, of ransom.
if the prisoner died in the possession of his liberty: for, from the
moment of his release, in consideration of which he had promised a sum, that sum
becomes due, and does not at all belong to his heirs. But if he had not yet obtained his
liberty, the price which was to have been paid for it, is not a debt on him or his heirs,
unless he had made his agreement in a different manner: and he is not reputed to have
received his liberty until the moment when he is perfectly free to depart at
pleasure,—when neither the person who held him prisoner, nor that person’s
sovereign, opposes his release and departure.

If he has only been permitted to take a journey for the purpose of prevailing on his
friends or his sovereign to furnish him with the means of ransoming himself, and dies
before he is possessed of his full liberty, before he is finally discharged from his
parole,—nothing is due for his ransom.

If, after having agreed on the price, he is detained in prison till the time of payment,
and there dies in the interim, his heirs are not bound to pay the ransom,—such an
agreement being, on the part of the person who held him prisoner, no more than a

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 422 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

promise of giving him his liberty on the actual payment of a certain sum. A promise
of buying and selling does not bind the supposed purchaser to pay the price of the
article in question, if it happens to perish before the completion of the purchase. But if
the contract of sale be perfect, the purchaser must pay the price of the thing sold,
though it should happen to perish before delivery, provided there was no fault or
delay on the part of the vender. For this reason, if the prisoner has absolutely
concluded the agreement for his ransom, acknowledging himself, from that moment,
debtor for the stipulated sum,—and is nevertheless still detained, no longer indeed as
a prisoner, but as surety for the payment,—the price of the ransom is due,
notwithstanding the circumstance of his dying in the interim.

If the agreement says that the ransom shall be paid on a certain day, and the prisoner
happens to die before that day, the heirs are bound to pay the sum agreed on: for the
ransom was due; and the appointed day was assigned merely as the term of payment.

From a rigid application of the same principles, it follows, that a §282. Prisoner
prisoner, who has been released on condition of procuring the released on condition
release of another, should return to prison, in case the latter of procuring the
happens to die before he has been able to procure him his liberty. release of another.
But certainly such an unfortunate case is entitled to lenity; and
equity seems to require that this prisoner should be allowed to continue in the
enjoyment of that liberty which has been granted to him, provided he pays a fair
equivalent for it, since he is now unable to purchase it precisely at the price agreed on.

If a prisoner, who has been fully set at liberty after having §283. Prisoner
promised but not paid his ransom, happens to be taken a second retaken before he has
time, it is evident, that, without being exempted from the paid his former
payment of his former ransom, he will have to pay a second, if ransom.
he wishes to recover his liberty.

On the other hand, though the prisoner has agreed for the price of §284. Prisoner
his ransom, if, before the execution of the compact,—before he rescued before he has
is set at liberty in virtue of it,—he be retaken and delivered by received his liberty.
his own party, he owes nothing. I here evidently suppose that the
contract for his ransom was not completed, and that the prisoner had not
acknowledged himself debtor for the sum agreed on. The person who held him
prisoner, had, as it were, only made him a promise of selling, and he had promised to
purchase: but the purchase and sale had not actually passed into effect; the property
was not actually transferred.

The property of a prisoner’s effects is not vested in the captor, §285. Whether the
except so far as he seizes on those effects at the time of his things which a
capture. Of this there is no doubt, in these modern times when prisoner has found
prisoners of war are not reduced to slavery. And even by the law means to conceal,
of nature, the property of a slave’s goods does not, without some belong to him.

other reason, pass to the master of the slave. There is nothing in
the nature of slavery, which can of itself produce that effect. Though a man obtains
certain rights over the liberty of another, does it thence follow that he shall have a

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 423 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

right over his property also? When, therefore, the enemy has not plundered his
prisoner, or when the latter has found means to conceal something from the captor’s
search, whatever he has thus saved still continues to be his own property, and he may
employ it towards the payment of his ransom. At present, even the plundering of
prisoners is not always practised: the greedy soldier sometimes proceeds to such
lengths; but an officer would think it an indelible stain on his character, to have
deprived them of the smallest article. A party of private French troopers, who had
captured a British general at the battle of Rocoux,71 claimed no right to any thing
belonging to their prisoner, except his arms alone.

The death of the prisoner extinguishes the captor’s right. §286. Hostage given
Wherefore, if any person is given as a hostage in order to procure for the release of a
a prisoner’s enlargement, he ought to be released the moment the prisoner.
prisoner dies; and, on the other hand, if the hostage dies, his
death does not reinstate the prisoner in the possession of his liberty. The reverse of
this is true, if the one, instead of being simply a hostage for the other, had been
substituted in his stead.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 424 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER XVIII

Of Civil War.
It is a question very much debated, whether a sovereign is bound §287. Foundation of
to observe the common laws of war towards rebellious subjects the sovereign’s rights
who have openly taken up arms against him? A flatterer, or a against the rebels.
prince of a cruel and arbitrary disposition, will immediately
pronounce that the laws of war were not made for rebels, for whom no punishment
can be too severe. Let us proceed more soberly, and reason from the incontestable
principles above laid down. In order clearly to discover what conduct the sove-reign
ought to pursue towards revolted subjects, we must, in the first place, recollect that all
the sovereign’s rights are derived from those of the state or of civil society, from the
trust reposed in him, from the obligation he lies under of watching over the welfare of
the nation, of procuring her greatest happiness, of maintaining order, justice, and
peace within her boundaries (Book I. Chap. IV.). Secondly, we must distinguish the
nature and degree of the different disorders which may disturb the state, and oblige
the sovereign to take up arms, or substitute forcible measures instead of the milder
influence of authority.

The name of rebels is given to all subjects who unjustly take up §288. Who are rebels.
arms against the ruler of the society, whether their view be to
deprive him of the supreme authority, or to resist his commands in some particular
instance, and to impose conditions on him.

A popular commotion is a concourse of people who assemble in §289. Popular
a tumultuous manner, and refuse to listen to the voice of their commotion,
superiors, whether the design of the assembled multitude be insurrection, sedition.
levelled against the superiors themselves, or only against some
private individuals. Violent commotions of this kind take place when the people think
themselves aggrieved; and there is no order of men who so frequently give rise to
them, as the tax-gatherers. If the rage of the malcontents be particularly levelled at the
magistrates, or others vested with the public authority, and they proceed to a formal
disobedience or acts of open violence, this is called a sedition. When the evil
spreads,—when it infects the majority of the inhabitants of a city or province, and
gains such strength that even the sovereign himself is no longer obeyed,—it is usual
more particularly to distinguish such a disorder by the name of insurrection.

All these violences disturb the public order, and are state crimes, §290. How the
even when arising from just causes of complaint. For violent sovereign is to
measures are forbidden in civil society: the injured individuals suppress them.
should apply to the magistrate for redress; and if they do not
obtain justice from that quarter, they may lay their complaints at the foot of the
throne. Every citizen should even patiently endure evils which are not insupportable,
rather than disturb the public peace. A denial of justice on the part of the sovereign, or

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 425 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

affected delays, can alone excuse the furious transports of a people whose patience
has been exhausted,—and even justify them, if the evils be intolerable, and the
oppression great and manifest. But what conduct shall the sovereign observe towards
the insurgents? I answer, in general,—such conduct as shall at the same time be the
most consonant to justice, and the most salutary to the state. Although it be his duty to
repress those who unnecessarily disturb the public peace, he is bound to shew
clemency towards unfortunate persons, to whom just causes of complaint have been
given, and whose sole crime consists in the attempt to do themselves justice: they
have been deficient in patience ra-ther than fidelity. Subjects who rise against their
prince without cause, deserve severe punishment: yet, even in this case, on account of
the number of the delinquents, clemency becomes a duty in the sovereign. Shall he
depopulate a city, or desolate a province, in order to punish her rebellion? Any
punishment, however just in itself, which embraces too great a number of persons,
becomes an act of downright cruelty. Had the insurrection of the Netherlands against
Spain been totally unwarrantable, universal detestation would still attend the memory
of the duke of Alva,72 who made it his boast that he had caused twenty thousand
heads to be struck off by the hands of the common executioner. Let not his sanguinary
imitators expect to justify their enormities by the plea of necessity. What prince ever
suffered more outrageous indignities from his subjects than Henry the Great of
France? Yet his victories were ever accompanied by an uniform clemency; and that
excellent prince at length obtained the success he deserved: he gained a nation of
faithful subjects; whereas the duke of Alva caused his master to lose the United
Provinces. Crimes in which a number of persons are involved, are to be punished by
penalties which shall equally fall on all the parties concerned: the sovereign may
deprive a town of her privileges, at least till she has fully acknowledged her fault: as
to corporal punishment, let that be reserved for the authors of the disturbances,—for
those incendiaries who incite the people to revolt. But tyrants alone will treat, as
seditious, those brave and resolute citizens who exhort the people to preserve
themselves from oppression, and to vindicate their rights and privileges: a good prince
will commend such virtuous patriots, provided their zeal be tempered with moderation
and prudence. If he has justice and his duty at heart,—if he aspires to that immortal
and unsullied glory of being the father of his people, let him mistrust the selfish
suggestions of that minister who represents to him as rebels all those citizens who do
not stretch out their necks to the yoke of slavery,—who refuse tamely to crouch under
the rod of arbitrary power.

In many cases, the safest and at the same time the most just §291. He is bound to
method of appeasing seditions is to give the people satisfaction. perform the promises
And if there existed no reasons to justify the insurrection (a he has made to the
circumstance which perhaps never happens), even in such case, it rebels.
becomes necessary, as we have above observed, to grant an
amnesty where the offenders are numerous. When the amnesty is once published and
accepted, all the past must be buried in oblivion; nor must any one be called to
account for what has been done during the disturbances: and in general, the sovereign,
whose word ought ever to be sacred, is bound to the faithful observance of every
promise he has made even to rebels,—I mean, to such of his subjects as have revolted
without reason or necessity. If his promises are not inviolable, the rebels will have no
security in treating with him: when they have once drawn the sword, they must throw

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 426 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

away the scabbard, as one of the ancients expresses it; and the prince, destitute of the
more gentle and salutary means of appeasing the revolt, will have no other remaining
expedient than that of utterly exterminating the insurgents. These will become
formidable through despair; compassion will bestow succours on them; their party
will increase, and the state will be in danger. What would have become of France, if
the leaguers had thought it unsafe to rely on the promises of Henry the Great?73 The
same reasons which should render the faith of promises inviolable and sacred between
individual and individual, between sovereign and sovereign, between enemy and
enemy (Book II. §§163, 218, &c. and Book III. §174), subsist in all their force
between the sovereign and his insurgent or rebellious subjects. However, if they have
extorted from him odious conditions, which are inimical to the happiness of the nation
or the welfare of the state,— as he has no right to do or grant any thing contrary to
that grand rule of his conduct, which is at the same time the measure of his power, he
may justly revoke any pernicious concessions which he has been obliged to make,
provided the revocation be sanctioned by the consent of the nation, whose opinion he
must take on the subject, in the manner and forms pointed out to him by the
constitution of the state. But this remedy is to be used with great reserve, and only in
matters of high importance, lest the faith of promises should be weakened and brought
it into disrepute.*

When a party is formed in a state, who no longer obey the §292. Civil war.
sovereign, and are possessed of sufficient strength to oppose
him,—or when, in a republic, the nation is divided into two opposite factions, and
both sides take up arms,—this is called a civil war. Some writers confine this term to
a just insurrection of the subjects against their sovereign, to distinguish that lawful
resistance from rebellion, which is an open and unjust resistance. But what
appellation will they give to a war which arises in a republic torn by two factions,—or
in a monarchy, between two competitors for the crown? Custom appropriates the term
of “civil war” to every war between the members of one and the same political
society. If it be between part of the citizens on the one side, and the sovereign with
those who continue in obedience to him on the other,—provided the malcontents have
any reason for taking up arms, nothing further is required to entitle such disturbance
to the name of civil war, and not that of rebellion. This latter term is applied only to
such an insurrection against lawful authority, as is void of all appearance of justice.
The sovereign indeed never fails to bestow the appellation of rebels on all such of his
subjects as openly resist him: but when the latter have acquired sufficient strength to
give him effectual opposition, and to oblige him to carry on the war against them
according to the established rules, he must necessarily submit to the use of the term
“civil war.”

It is foreign to our purpose in this place to weigh the reasons §293. A civil war
which may authorise and justify a civil war: we have elsewhere produces two
treated of the cases wherein subjects may resist the sovereign independent parties.
(Book I. Chap. IV.). Setting therefore, the justice of the cause
wholly out of the question, it only remains for us to consider the maxims which ought
to be observed in a civil war, and to examine whether the sovereign in particular is, on
such an occasion, bound to conform to the established laws of war.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 427 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

A civil war breaks the bands of society and government, or at least suspends their
force and effect: it produces in the nation two independent parties, who consider each
other as enemies, and acknowledge no common judge. Those two parties, therefore,
must necessarily be considered as thenceforward constituting, at least for a time, two
separate bodies, two distinct societies. Though one of the parties may have been to
blame in breaking the unity of the state and resisting the lawful authority, they are not
the less divided in fact. Besides, who shall judge them? who shall pronounce on
which side the right or the wrong lies? On earth they have no common superior. They
stand therefore in precisely the same predicament as two nations, who engage in a
contest, and, being unable to come to an agreement, have recourse to arms.

This being the case, it is very evident that the common laws of §294. They are to
war,— those maxims of humanity, moderation, and honour, observe the common
which we have already detailed in the course of this laws of war.
work,—ought to be observed by both parties in every civil war.
For the same reasons which render the observance of those maxims a matter of
obligation between state and state, it becomes equally and even more necessary in the
unhappy circumstance of two incensed parties lacerating their common country.
Should the sovereign conceive he has a right to hang up his prisoners as rebels, the
opposite party will make reprisals:* —if he does not religiously observe the
capitulations, and all other conventions made with his enemies, they will no longer
rely on his word:—should he burn and ravage, they will follow his example; the war
will become cruel, horrible, and every day more destructive to the nation. The duke de
Montpensier’s74 infamous and barbarous excesses against the reformed party in
France are too well known: the men were delivered up to the executioner, and the
women to the brutality of the soldiers. What was the consequence? the protestants
became exasperated; they took vengeance of such inhuman practices; and the war,
before sufficiently cruel as a civil and religious war, became more bloody and
destructive. Who could without horror read of the savage cruelties committed by the
baron Des Adrets?75 By turns a catholic and a protestant, he distinguished himself by
his barbarity on both sides. At length it became necessary to relinquish those
pretensions to judicial authority over men who proved themselves capable of
supporting their cause by force of arms, and to treat them, not as criminals, but as
enemies. Even the troops have often refused to serve in a war wherein the prince
exposed them to cruel reprisals. Officers who had the highest sense of honour, though
ready to shed their blood in the field of battle for his service, have not thought it any
part of their duty to run the hazard of an ignominious death. Whenever, therefore, a
numerous body of men think they have a right to resist the sovereign, and feel
themselves in a condition to appeal to the sword, the war ought to be carried on by the
contending parties in the same manner as by two different nations; and they ought to
leave open the same means for preventing its being carried to outrageous extremities,
and for the restoration of peace.

When the sovereign has subdued the opposite party, and reduced them to submit and
sue for peace, he may except from the amnesty the authors of the disturbances,—the
heads of the party: he may bring them to a legal trial, and punish them, if they be
found guilty. He may act in this manner particularly on occasion of those disturbances
in which the interests of the people are not so much the object in view as the private

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 428 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

aims of some powerful individuals, and which rather deserve the appellation of revolt
than of civil war. Such was the case of the unfortunate duke of Montmorency:—he
took up arms against the king,76 in support of the duke of Orléans; and being defeated
and taken prisoner at the battle of Castelnaudari,77 he lost his life on a scaffold, by
the sentence of the parliament of Toulouse. If he was generally pitied by all men of
worth and sentiment, it was because they viewed him rather as an opponent to the
exorbitant power of an imperious minister, than as a rebel against his sovereign,—and
that his heroic virtues seemed to warrant the purity of his intentions.*

When subjects take up arms without ceasing to acknowledge the §295. The effects of
sovereign, and only for the purpose of obtaining a redress of their civil war
grievances, there are two reasons for observing the common laws distinguished
of war towards them:—First, an apprehension lest the civil war according to cases.
should become more cruel and destructive by the insurgents
making retaliation, which, as we have already observed, they will not fail to do, in
return for the severities exercised by the sovereign. 2. The danger of committing great
injustice by hastily punishing those who are accounted rebels. The flames of discord
and civil war are not favourable to the proceedings of pure and sacred justice: more
quiet times are to be waited for. It will be wise in the prince to keep his prisoners till,
having restored tranquillity, he is able to bring them to a legal trial.

As to the other effects which the law of nations attributes to public war (See Chap.
XII. of this Book), and particularly the acquisition of things taken in war,—subjects
who take up arms against their sovereign without ceasing to acknowledge him, cannot
lay claim to the benefit of those effects. The booty alone, the movable property
carried off by the enemy, is considered as lost to the owners; but this is only on
account of the difficulty of recognising it, and the numberless inconveniences which
would arise from the attempt to recover it. All this is usually settled in the edict of
pacification or the act of amnesty.

But when a nation becomes divided into two parties absolutely independent, and no
longer acknowledging a common superior, the state is dissolved, and the war between
the two parties stands on the same ground, in every respect, as a public war between
two different nations. Whether a republic be split into two factions, each maintaining
that it alone constitutes the body of the state,—or a kingdom be divided between two
competitors for the crown,—the nation is severed into two parties who will mutually
term each other rebels. Thus there exist in the state two separate bodies, who pretend
to absolute independence, and between whom there is no judge (§293). They decide
their quarrel by arms, as two different nations would do. The obligation to observe the
common laws of war towards each other is therefore absolute,—indispensably
binding on both parties, and the same which the law of nature imposes on all nations
in transactions between state and state.

Foreign nations are not to interfere in the internal government of §296. Conduct to be
an independent state (Book II. §54, &c.). It belongs not to them observed by foreign
to judge between the citizens whom discord has roused to arms, nations.
nor between the prince and his subjects: both parties are equally
foreigners to them, and equally independent of their authority. They may however

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 429 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

interpose their good offices for the restoration of peace; and this the law of nature
prescribes to them (Book II. Ch. I.). But if their mediation proves fruitless, such of
them as are not bound by any treaty, may, with the view of regulating their own
conduct, take the merits of the cause into consideration, and assist the party which
they shall judge to have right on its side, in case that party requests their assistance or
accepts the offer of it: they are equally at liberty, I say, to do this, as to espouse the
quarrel of one nation embarking in a war against another. As to the allies of the state
thus distracted by civil war, they will find a rule for their conduct in the nature of their
engagements, combined with the existing circumstances. Of this we have treated
elsewhere. (See Book II. Chap. XII. and particularly §§196 and 197.)

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 430 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

BOOK IV

Of The Restoration Of Peace; And Of Embassies

CHAPTER I

Of Peace, And The Obligation To Cultivate It.
Peace is the reverse of war: it is that desirable state in which §1. What peace is.
every one quietly enjoys his rights, or, if controverted, amicably
discusses them by force of argument. Hobbs has had the boldness to assert that war is
the natural state of man. But if, by “the natural state of man,” we understand (as
reason requires that we should) that state to which he is destined and called by his
nature, peace should rather be termed his natural state. For it is the part of a rational
being to terminate his differences by rational methods; whereas it is the characteristic
of the brute creation to decide theirs by force.* Man, as we have already observed
(Prelim. §10), alone and destitute of succours, would necessarily be a very wretched
creature. He stands in need of the intercourse and assistance of his species, in order to
enjoy the sweets of life, to develop his faculties, and live in a manner suitable to his
nature. Now, it is in peace alone that all these advantages are to be found: it is in
peace that men respect, assist, and love each other: nor would they ever depart from
that happy state, if they were not hurried on by the impetuosity of their passions, and
blinded by the gross deceptions of self-love. What little we have said of the effects of
war will be sufficient to give some idea of its various calamities; and it is an
unfortunate circumstance for the human race, that the injustice of unprincipled men
should so often render it inevitable.

Nations who are really impressed with sentiments of §2. Obligation of
humanity,—who seriously attend to their duty, and are cultivating it.
acquainted with their true and substantial interests,—will never
seek to promote their own advantage at the expense and detriment of other nations:
however intent they may be on their own happiness, they will ever be careful to
combine it with that of others, and with justice and equity. Thus disposed, they will
necessarily cultivate peace. If they do not live together in peace, how can they
perform those mutual and sacred duties which nature enjoins them? And this state is
found to be no less necessary to their happiness than to the discharge of their duties.
Thus the law of nature every way obliges them to seek and cultivate peace. That
divine law has no other end in view than the welfare of mankind: to that object all its
rules and all its precepts tend: they are all deducible from this principle, that men
should seek their own felicity; and morality is no more than the art of acquiring
happiness. As this is true of individuals, it is equally so of nations, as must appear
evident to any one who will but take the trouble of reflecting on what we have said of
their common and reciprocal duties in the first chapter of the second book.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 431 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

This obligation of cultivating peace binds the sovereign by a §3. The sovereign’s
double tie. He owes this attention to his people, on whom war obligation to it.
would pour a torrent of evils; and he owes it in the most strict
and indispensable manner, since it is solely for the advantage and welfare of the
nation that he is intrusted with the government (Book I. §39). He owes the same
attention to foreign nations, whose happiness likewise is disturbed by war. The
nation’s duty in this respect has been shewn in the preceding chapter; and the
sovereign, being invested with the public authority, is at the same time charged with
all the duties of the society, or body of the nation (Book I. §41).

The nation or the sovereign ought not only to refrain, on their §4. Extent of this
own part, from disturbing that peace which is so salutary to duty.
mankind: they are moreover bound to promote it as far as lies in
their power,—to prevent others from breaking it without necessity, and to inspire
them with the love of justice, equity, and public tranquillity,—in a word, with the love
of peace. It is one of the best offices a sovereign can render to nations, and to the
whole universe. What a glorious and amiable character is that of peace-maker! Were a
powerful prince thoroughly acquainted with the advantages attending it,—were he to
conceive what pure and effulgent glory he may derive from that endearing character,
together with the gratitude, the love, the venera-tion, and the confidence of
nations,—did he know what it is to reign over the hearts of men,—he would wish thus
to become the benefactor, the friend, the father of mankind; and in being so, he would
find infinitely more delight than in the most splendid conquests. Augustus,1 shutting
the temple of Janus, giving peace to the universe, and adjusting the disputes of kings
and nations,—Augustus, at that moment, appears the greatest of mortals, and, as it
were, a god upon earth.

But those disturbers of the public peace,—those scourges of the §5. Of the disturbers
earth, who, fired by a lawless thirst of power, or impelled by the of the public peace.
pride and ferocity of their disposition, snatch up arms without
justice or reason, and sport with the quiet of mankind and the blood of their
subjects,—those monstrous heroes, though almost deified by the foolish admiration of
the vulgar, are in effect the most cruel enemies of the human race, and ought to be
treated as such. Experience shews what a train of calamities war entails even upon
nations that are not immediately engaged in it. War disturbs commerce, destroys the
subsistence of mankind, raises the price of all the most necessary articles, spreads just
alarms, and obliges all nations to be upon their guard, and to keep up an armed force.
He, therefore, who without just cause breaks the general peace, unavoidably does an
injury even to those nations which are not the objects of his arms; and by his
pernicious example he essentially attacks the happiness and safety of every nation
upon earth. He gives them a right to join in a general confederacy for the purpose of
repressing and chastising him, and depriving him of a power which he so enormously
abuses. What evils does he not bring on his own nation, lavishing her blood to gratify
his inordinate passions, and exposing her to the resentment of a host of enemies! A
famous minister of the last century2 has justly merited the indignation of his country,
by involving her in unjust or unnecessary wars. If by his abilities and indefatigable
application he procured her distinguished successes in the field of battle, he drew on
her, at least for a time, the execration of all Europe.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 432 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

The love of peace should equally prevent us from embarking in a §6. How far war may
war without necessity, and from persevering in it after the be continued.
necessity has ceased to exist. When a sovereign has been
compelled to take up arms for just and important reasons, he may carry on the
operations of war till he has attained its lawful end, which is, to procure justice and
safety (Book III. §28).

If the cause be dubious, the just end of war can only be to bring the enemy to an
equitable compromise (Book III. §38); and consequently the war must not be
continued beyond that point. The moment our enemy proposes or consents to such
compromise, it is our duty to desist from hostilities.

But if we have to do with a perfidious enemy, it would be imprudent to trust either his
words or his oaths. In such case, justice allows and prudence requires that we should
avail ourselves of a successful war, and follow up our advantages, till we have
humbled a dangerous and excessive power, or compelled the enemy to give us
sufficient security for the time to come.

Finally, if the enemy obstinately rejects equitable conditions, he himself forces us to
continue our progress till we have obtained a complete and decisive victory, by which
he is absolutely reduced and subjected. The use to be made of victory has been shewn
above (Book III. Chap. VIII. IX. XIII.).

When one of the parties is reduced to sue for peace, or both are §7. Peace the end of
weary of the war, then thoughts of an accommodation are war.
entertained, and the conditions are agreed on. Thus peace steps
in, and puts a period to the war.

The general and necessary effects of peace are the reconciliation §8. General effects of
of enemies, and the cessation of hostilities on both sides. It peace.
restores the two nations to their natural state.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 433 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER II

Treaties Of Peace.
When the belligerent powers have agreed to lay down their arms, §9. Definition of a
the agreement or contract in which they stipulate the conditions treaty of peace.
of peace, and regulate the manner in which it is to be restored
and supported, is called the treaty of peace.

The same power who has the right of making war, of §10. By whom it may
determining on it, of declaring it, and of directing its operations, be concluded.
has naturally that likewise of making and concluding the treaty
of peace. These two powers are connected together, and the latter naturally follows
from the former. If the ruler of the state is empowered to judge of the causes and
reasons for which war is to be undertaken,—of the time and circumstances proper for
commencing it,—of the manner in which it is to be supported and carried on,—it is
therefore his province also to set bounds to its progress, to point out the time when it
shall be discontinued, and to conclude a peace. But this power does not necessarily
include that of granting or accepting whatever conditions he pleases, with a view to
peace. Though the state has intrusted to the prudence of her ruler the general care of
determining on war and peace, yet she may have limited his power in many
particulars by the fundamental laws. Thus Francis the First, king of France, had the
absolute disposal of war and peace: and yet the assembly of Cognac declared that he
had no authority to alienate any part of the kingdom by a treaty of peace. (See Book I.
§265.)

A nation that has the free disposal of her domestic affairs, and of the form of her
government, may intrust a single person or an assembly with the power of making
peace, although she has not given them that of making war. Of this we have an
instance in Sweden, where, since the death of Charles XII.3 the king cannot declare
war without the consent of the states assembled in diet; but he may make peace in
conjunction with the senate. It is less dangerous for a nation to intrust her rulers with
this latter power, than with the former. She may reasonably expect that they will not
make peace till it suits with the interest of the state. But their passions, their own
interest, their private views, too often influence their resolutions when there is
question of undertaking a war. Besides, it must be a very disadvantageous peace
indeed, that is not preferable to war; whereas, on the other hand, to exchange peace
for war, is always very hazardous.

When a prince who is possessed only of limited authority has a power to make peace,
as he cannot of himself grant whatever conditions he pleases, it is incumbent on those
who wish to treat with him on sure grounds, to require that the treaty of peace be
ratified by the nation, or by those who are empowered to perform the stipulations
contained in it. If, for instance, any potentate, in negotiating a treaty of peace with
Sweden, requires a defensive alliance or guaranty as the condition, this stipulation

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 434 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

will not be valid, unless approved and accepted by the diet, who alone have the power
of carrying it into effect. The kings of England are authorised to conclude treaties of
peace and alliance; but they cannot, by those treaties, alienate any of the possessions
of the crown without the consent of parliament. Neither can they, without the
concurrence of that body, raise any money in the kingdom: wherefore, whenever they
conclude any subsidiary treaty, it is their constant rule to lay it before the parliament,
in order that they may be certain of the concurrence of that assembly to enable them
to make good their engagements. When the emperor Charles V. required of Francis
the First, his prisoner, such conditions as that king could not grant without the consent
of the nation, he should have detained him till the states-general of France had ratified
the treaty of Madrid,4 and Burgundy had acquiesced in it: thus he would not have lost
the fruits of his victory by an oversight which appears very surprising in a prince of
his abilities.

We shall not here repeat what we have said on a former occasion §11. Alienations
concerning the alienation of a part of the state (Book I. §§263, made by a treaty of
&c.), or of the whole state (ibid. §§68, &c.). We shall therefore peace.
content ourselves with observing, that, in case of a pressing
necessity, such as is produced by the events of an unfortunate war, the alienations
made by the prince in order to save the remainder of the state, are considered as
approved and ratified by the mere silence of the nation, when she has not, in the form
of her government, retained some easy and ordinary method of giving her express
consent, and has lodged an absolute power in the prince’s hands. The states-general
are abolished in France by disuse and by the tacit consent of the nation. Whenever,
therefore, that kingdom is reduced to any calamitous exigency, it belongs to the king
alone to determine by what sacrifices he may purchase peace: and his enemies will
treat with him on a sure footing. It would be a vain plea on the part of the people, to
say that it was only through fear they acquiesced in the abolition of the states-general.
The fact is that they did acquiesce, and thereby suffered the king to acquire all the
powers necessary for contracting with foreign states in the name of the nation. In
every state there must necessarily be some power with which other nations may treat
on secure grounds. A certain historian* says, that, “by the fundamental laws, the kings
of France cannot, to the prejudice of their successors, renounce any of their rights, by
any treaty, whether voluntary or compulsory.” The fundamental laws may indeed
with-hold from the king the power of alienating, without the nation’s consent, what
belongs to the state; but they cannot invalidate an alienation or renunciation made
with that consent.* And if the nation has permitted matters to proceed to such lengths
that she now has no longer any means of expressly declaring her consent, her silence
alone, on such occasions, is in reality a tacit consent. Otherwise there would be no
possibility of treating on sure grounds with such a state: and her pretending thus
beforehand to invalidate all future treaties, would be an infringement of the law of
nations, which ordains that all states should retain the means of treating with each
other (Book I. §262), and should observe their treaties (Book II. §§163, 269, &c.).

It is to be observed, however, that, in our examination whether the consent of the
nation be requisite for alienating any part of the state, we mean such parts as are still
in the nation’s possession, and not those which have fallen into the enemy’s hands
during the course of the war: for, as these latter are no longer possessed by the nation,

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 435 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

it is the sovereign alone, if invested with the full and absolute administration of the
government, and with the power of making war and peace,—it is he alone, I say, who
is to judge whether it be expedient to relinquish those parts of the state, or to continue
the war for the recovery of them. And even though it should be pretended that he
cannot by his own single authority make any valid alienation of them,—he has,
nevertheless, according to our supposition, that is, if invested with full and absolute
power,—he has, I say, a right to promise that the nation shall never again take up
arms for the recovery of those lands, towns, or provinces, which he relinquishes: and
this suffices for securing the quiet possession of them to the enemy into whose hands
they are fallen.

The necessity of making peace authorises the sovereign to §12. How the
dispose of the property of individuals; and the eminent domain sovereign may in a
gives him a right to do it (Book I. §244). He may even, to a treaty dispose of what
certain degree, dispose of their persons, by virtue of the power concerns individuals.
which he has over all his subjects. But as it is for the public
advantage that he thus disposes of them, the state is bound to indemnify the citizens
who are sufferers by the transaction (ibid.).

Every impediment by which the prince is disabled from §13. Whether a king,
administering the affairs of government, undoubtedly deprives being a prisoner of
him of the power of making peace. Thus a king cannot make a war, can make peace.
treaty of peace during his minority, or while in a state of mental
derangement: this assertion does not stand in need of any proof: but the question is,
whether a king can conclude a peace while he is a prisoner of war, and whether the
treaty thus made be valid? Some celebrated authors* here draw a distinction between
a monarch whose kingdom is patrimonial, and another who has only the usufructus of
his dominions. We think we have over-thrown that false and dangerous idea of a
patrimonial kingdom (Book I. §§68, &c.), and evidently shewn that the notion ought
not to be extended beyond the bare power with which a sovereign is sometimes
intrusted, of nominating his successor, of appointing a new prince to rule over the
state, and dismembering some parts of it, if he thinks it expedient;—the whole,
however, to be uniformly done for the good of the nation, and with a view to her
greater advantage. Every legitimate government, whatever it be, is established solely
for the good and welfare of the state. This incontestable principle being once laid
down, the making of peace is no longer the peculiar province of the king; it belongs to
the nation. Now it is certain that a captive prince cannot administer the government,
or attend to the management of public affairs. How shall he who is not free command
a nation? How can he govern it in such manner as best to promote the advantage of
the people, and the public welfare? He does not indeed forfeit his rights; but his
captivity deprives him of the power of exercising them, as he is not in a condition to
direct the use of them to its proper and legitimate end. He stands in the same
predicament as a king in his minority, or labouring under a derangement of his mental
faculties. In such circumstances, it is necessary that the person or persons whom the
laws of the state designate for the regency, should assume the reins of government. To
them it belongs to treat of peace, to settle the terms on which it shall be made, and to
bring it to a conclusion, in conformity to the laws.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 436 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

The captive sovereign may himself negotiate the peace, and promise what personally
depends on him: but the treaty does not become obligatory on the nation till ratified
by herself, or by those who are invested with the public authority during the prince’s
captivity, or, finally, by the sovereign himself after his release.

But, if it is a duty incumbent on the state to use her best efforts for procuring the
release of the most inconsiderable of her citizens who has lost his liberty in the public
cause, the obligation is much stronger in the case of her sovereign, whose cares,
attention, and labours, are devoted to the common safety and welfare. It was in
fighting for his people, that the prince who has been made prisoner, fell into that
situation, which, to a person of his exalted rank, must be wretched in the extreme: and
shall that very people hesitate to deliver him at the expense of the greatest sacrifices?
On so melancholy an occasion, they should not demur at any thing short of the very
existence of the state. But, in every exigency, the safety of the people is the supreme
law; and, in so severe an extremity, a generous prince will imitate the example of
Regulus. That heroic citizen, being sent back to Rome on his parole, dissuaded the
Romans from purchasing his release by an inglorious treaty, though he was not
ignorant of the tortures prepared for him by the cruelty of the Carthaginians.*

When an unjust conqueror, or any other usurper, has invaded the §14. Whether peace
kingdom, he becomes possessed of all the powers of government can be made with a
when once the people have submitted to him, and, by a voluntary usurper.
homage, acknowledged him as their sovereign. Other states, as
having no right to intermeddle with the domestic concerns of that nation, or to
interfere in her government, are bound to abide by her decision, and to look no farther
than the circumstance of actual possession. They may therefore broach and conclude a
treaty of peace with the usurper. They do not thereby infringe the right of the lawful
sovereign:—it is not their business to examine and judge of that right: they leave it as
it is, and only look to the possession, in all the affairs they have to transact with that
kingdom, pursuant to their own rights and those of the nation whose sovereignty is
contested. But this rule does not preclude them from espousing the quarrel of the
dethroned monarch, and assisting him, if he appears to have justice on his side: they
then declare themselves enemies of the nation which has acknowledged his rival, as,
when two different states are at war, they are at liberty to assist either party whose
pretensions appear to be best founded.

The principal in the war, the sovereign in whose name it has §15. Allies included
been carried on, cannot justly make a peace without including his in the treaty of peace.
allies,—I mean those who have given him assistance without
directly taking part in the war. This precaution is necessary in order to secure them
from the resentment of the enemy: for though the latter has no right to take of fence
against his adversary’s allies, whose engagements were purely of a defensive nature,
and who have done nothing more than faithfully execute their treaties (Book III.
§101)—yet it too frequently happens that the conduct of men is influenced by their
passions rather than by justice and reason. If the alliance was not of prior date to the
commencement of the war, and was formed with a view to that very war,—although
these new allies do not engage in the contest with all their force, nor directly as
principals, they nevertheless give to the prince against whom they have joined, just

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 437 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

cause to treat them as enemies. The sovereign, therefore, whom they have assisted,
must not omit including them in the peace.

But the treaty concluded by the principal is no farther obligatory on his allies than as
they are willing to accede to it, unless they have given him full power to treat for
them. By including them in his treaty, he only acquires a right, with respect to his
reconciled enemy, of insisting that he shall not attack those allies on account of the
succours they have furnished against him,—that he shall not molest them, but shall
live in peace with them as if nothing had happened.

Sovereigns who have associated in a war,—all those who have §16. Associates to
directly taken part in it,—are respectively to make their treaties treat, each for
of peace, each for himself. Such was the mode adopted at himself.
Nimeguen, at Ryswick, and at Utrecht.5 But the alliance obliges
them to treat in concert. To determine in what cases an associate may detach himself
from the alliance, and make a separate peace, is a question which we have examined
in treating of associations in war (Book III. Chap. VI.), and of alliances in general
(Book II. Chap. XII. and XV.).

It frequently happens that two nations, though equally tired of §17. Mediation.
the war, do nevertheless continue it merely from a fear of making
the first advances to an accommodation, as these might be imputed to weakness; or
they persist in it from animosity, and contrary to their real interests. On such
occasions, some common friends of the parties effectually interpose by offering
themselves as mediators. There cannot be a more beneficent office, and more
becoming a great prince, than that of reconciling two nations at war, and thus putting
a stop to the effusion of human blood: it is the indispensable duty of those who have
the means of performing it with success. This is the only reflection we shall here
make on a subject we have already discussed (Book II. §328).

A treaty of peace can be no more than a compromise. Were the §18. On what footing
rules of strict and rigid justice to be observed in it, so that each peace may be
party should precisely receive every thing to which he has a just concluded.
title, it would be impossible ever to make a peace. First, with
regard to the very subject which occasioned the war, one of the parties would be
under a necessity of acknowledging himself in the wrong, and condemning his own
unjust pretensions; which he will hardly do, unless reduced to the last extremity. But
if he owns the injustice of his cause, he must at the same time condemn every
measure he has pursued in support of it: he must restore what he has unjustly taken,
must reimburse the expenses of the war, and repair the damages. And how can a just
estimate of all the damages be formed? What price can be set on all the blood that has
been shed, the loss of such a number of citizens, and the ruin of families? Nor is this
all. Strict justice would further demand, that the author of an unjust war should suffer
a penalty proportioned to the injuries for which he owes satisfaction, and such as
might ensure the future safety of him whom he has attacked. How shall the nature of
that penalty be determined, and the degree of it be precisely regulated? In fine, even
he who had justice on his side, may have transgressed the bounds of justifiable self-
defence, and been guilty of improper excesses in the prosecution of a war whose

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 438 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

object was originally lawful: here then are so many wrongs, of which strict justice
would demand reparation. He may have made conquests and taken booty beyond the
value of his claim. Who shall make an exact calculation, a just estimate of this? Since,
therefore, it would be dreadful to perpetuate the war, or to pursue it to the utter ruin of
one of the parties,—and since, however just the cause in which we are engaged, we
must at length turn our thoughts towards the restoration of peace, and ought to direct
all our measures to the attainment of that salutary object,—no other expedient remains
than that of coming to a compromise respecting all claims and grievances on both
sides, and putting an end to all disputes, by a convention as fair and equitable as
circumstances will admit of. In such convention no decision is pronounced on the
original cause of the war, or on those controversies to which the various acts of
hostility might give rise; nor is either of the parties condemned as unjust,—a
condemnation to which few princes would submit;—but, a simple agreement is
formed, which determines what equivalent each party shall receive in extinction of all
his pretensions.

The effect of the treaty of peace is to put an end to the war, and §19. General effect of
to abolish the subject of it. It leaves the contracting parties no the treaty of peace.
right to commit any acts of hostility on account either of the
subject itself which had given rise to the war, or of any thing that was done during its
continuance: wherefore they cannot lawfully take up arms again for the same subject.
Accordingly, in such treaties, the contracting parties reciprocally engage to preserve
perpetual peace: which is not to be understood as if they promised never to make war
on each other for any cause whatever. The peace in question relates to the war which
it terminates: and it is in reality perpetual, inasmuch as it does not allow them to
revive the same war by taking up arms again for the same subject which had
originally given birth to it.

A special compromise, however, only extinguishes the particular means to which it
relates, and does not preclude any subsequent pretensions to the object itself, on other
grounds. Care is therefore usually taken to require a general compromise, which shall
embrace not only the existing controversy, but the very thing itself which is the
subject of that controversy: stipulation is made for a general renunciation of all
pretensions what-ever to the thing in question: and thus, although the party
renouncing might in the sequel be able to demonstrate by new reasons that the thing
did really belong to him, his claim would not be admitted.

An amnesty is a perfect oblivion of the past; and the end of peace §20. Amnesty.
being to extinguish all subjects of discord, this should be the
leading article of the treaty: and accordingly, such is at present the constant practice.
But though the treaty should be wholly silent on this head, the amnesty, by the very
nature of peace, is necessarily implied in it.

As each of the belligerent powers maintains that he has justice on §21. Things not
his side,—and as their pretensions are not liable to be judged by mentioned in the
others (Book III. §188)—whatever state things happen to be in at treaty.
the time of the treaty, is to be considered as their legitimate state;
and if the parties intend to make any change in it, they must expressly specify it in the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 439 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

treaty. Consequently all things not mentioned in the treaty are to remain on the same
footing on which they stand at the period when it is concluded. This is also a
consequence of the promised amnesty. All damages caused during the war are
likewise buried in oblivion; and no action can be brought for those of which the treaty
does not stipulate the reparation: they are considered as having never happened.

But the effect of the compromise or amnesty cannot be extended §22. Things not
to things which have no relation to the war that is terminated by included in the
the treaty. Thus, claims founded on a debt, or on an injury which compromise or
had been done prior to the war, but which made no part of the amnesty.
reasons for undertaking it, still stand on their former footing, and
are not abolished by the treaty, unless it be expressly extended to the extinction of
every claim whatever. The case is the same with debts contracted during the war, but
for causes which have no relation to it,—or with injuries done during its continuance,
but which have no connection with the state of warfare.

Debts contracted with individuals, or injuries which they may have received from any
other quarter, without relation to the war, are likewise not abolished by the
compromise and amnesty, as these solely relate to their own particular object,—that is
to say, to the war, its causes, and its effects. Thus, if two subjects of the belligerent
powers make a contract together in a neutral country,—or if the one there receives an
injury from the other,—the performance of the contract, or the reparation of the injury
and damage, may be prosecuted after the conclusion of the treaty of peace.

Finally, if the treaty expresses that all things shall be restored to the state in which
they were before the war, this clause is understood to relate only to immovable
possessions, and cannot be extended to movables, or booty, which immediately
becomes the property of the captors, and is looked on as relinquished by the former
owners on account of the difficulty of recognising it, and the little hope they entertain
of ever recovering it.

When the last-made treaty mentions and confirms other treaties §23. Former treaties,
of prior date, these constitute a part of the new one, no less than mentioned and
if they were literally transcribed and included in it: and any new confirmed in the new,
articles relating to former conventions are to be interpreted are a part of it.
according to the rules which we have laid down in a preceding
part of this work (Book II. Chap. XVII. and particularly §286).

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 440 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER III

Of The Execution Of The Treaty Of Peace.
A treaty of peace becomes obligatory on the contracting parties §24. When the
from the moment of its conclusion,—the moment it has passed obligation of the
through all the necessary forms; and they are bound to have it treaty commences.
carried into execution without delay.* From that instant all
hostilities must cease, unless a particular day has been specified for the
commencement of the peace. But this treaty does not bind the subjects until it is duly
notified to them. The case is the same in this instance, as in that of a truce (Book II.
§239). If it should happen that military men, acting within the extent of their functions
and pursuant to the rules of their duty, commit any acts of hostility before they have
authentic information of the treaty of peace, it is a misfortune, for which they are not
punishable: but the sovereign, on whom the treaty of peace is already obligatory, is
bound to order and enforce the restitution of all captures made subsequent to its
conclusion: he has no right whatever to retain them.

And in order to prevent those unhappy accidents, by which many §25. Publication of
innocent persons may lose their lives, public notice of the peace the peace.
is to be given without delay, at least to the troops. But at present,
as the body of the people cannot of themselves undertake any act of hostility, and do
not personally engage in the war, the solemn proclamation of the peace may be
deferred, provided that care be taken to put a stop to all hostilities; which is easily
done by means of the generals who direct the operations, or by proclaiming an
armistice at the head of the armies. The peace of 1735, between the emperor and
France,6 was not proclaimed till long after. The proclamation was postponed till the
treaty was digested at leisure,—the most important points having been already
adjusted in the preliminaries. The publication of the peace replaces the two nations in
the state they were in before the war. It again opens a free intercourse between them,
and reinstates the subjects on both sides in the enjoyment of those mutual privileges
which the state of war had suspended. On the publication, the treaty becomes a law to
the subjects; and they are thenceforward bound to conform to the regulations
stipulated therein. If, for instance, the treaty imports that one of the two nations shall
abstain from a particular branch of commerce, every subject of that nation, from the
time of the treaty’s being made public, is obliged to renounce that commerce.

When no particular time has been assigned for the execution of §26. Time of the
the treaty, and the performance of the several articles, common execution.
sense dictates that every point should be carried into effect as
soon as possible: and it was, no doubt, in this light that the contracting parties
understood the matter. The faith of treaties equally forbids all neglect, tardiness, and
studied delays, in the execution of them.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 441 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

But in this affair, as in every other, a legitimate excuse, founded §27. A lawful excuse
on a real and insurmountable obstacle, is to be admitted; for to be admitted.
nobody is bound to perform impossibilities. The obstacle, when
it does not arise from any fault on the side of the promising party, vacates a promise
which cannot be made good by an equivalent, and of which the performance cannot
be deferred to another time. If the promise can be fulfilled on another occasion, a
suitable prolongation of the term must be allowed. Suppose one of the contracting
nations has, by the treaty of peace, promised the other a body of auxiliary troops: she
will not be bound to furnish them, if she happen to stand in urgent need of them for
her own defence. Suppose she has promised a certain yearly quantity of corn: it
cannot be demanded at a time when she herself labours under a scarcity of provisions:
but, on the return of plenty, she is bound to make good the quantity in arrear, if
required.

It is further held as a maxim, that the promiser is absolved from §28. The promise is
his promise, when, after he has made his preparations for void when the party to
performing it according to the tenor of his engagement, he is whom it was made,
prevented from fulfilling it, by the party himself to whom it was has himself hindered
made. The promisee is deemed to dispense with the fulfilment of the performance of it.

a promise, of which he himself obstructs the execution. Let us
therefore add, that if he who had promised a thing by a treaty of peace, was ready to
perform it at the time agreed on, or immediately and at a proper time if there was no
fixed term,—and the other party would not admit of it, the promiser is discharged
from his promise: for the promisee, not having reserved to himself a right to regulate
the performance of it at his own pleasure, is accounted to renounce it by not accepting
of it in proper season and at the time for which the promise was made. Should he
desire that the performance be deferred till another time, the promiser is in honour
bound to consent to the prolongation, unless he can shew, by very good reasons, that
the promise would then become more inconvenient to him.

To levy contributions is an act of hostility which ought to cease §29. Cessationof
as soon as peace is concluded (§24). Those which are already contributions.
promised, but not yet paid, are a debt actually due; and, as such,
the payment may be insisted on. But, in order to obviate all difficulty, it is proper that
the contracting parties should clearly and minutely explain their intentions respecting
matters of this nature: and they are generally careful to do so.

The fruits and profits of those things which are restored by a §30. Products of the
treaty of peace are due from the instant appointed for carrying it thing restored or
into execution: and if no particular period has been assigned, ceded.
they are due from the moment when the restitution of the things
themselves was agreed to: but those which were already received or become payable
before the conclusion of the peace, are not comprised in the restitution; for the fruits
and profits belong to the owner of the soil; and, in the case in question, possession is
accounted a lawful title. For the same reason, in making a cession of the soil, we do
not include in that cession the rents and profits antecedently due. This Augustus justly
maintained against Sextus Pompey,7 who, on receiving a grant of the Peloponnesus,
claimed the imposts of the preceding years.*

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 442 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Those things, of which the restitution is, without further §31. In what
explanation, simply stipulated in the treaty of peace, are to be condition things are to
restored in the same state in which they were when taken: for the be restored.
word “restitution” naturally implies that every thing should be
replaced in its former condition. Thus, the restitution of a thing is to be accompanied
with that of all the rights which were annexed to it when taken. But this rule must not
be extended to comprise those changes which may have been the natural
consequences and effects of the war itself, and of its operations. A town is to be
restored in the condition it was in when taken, as far as it still remains in that
condition, at the conclusion of the peace. But if the town has been rased or dismantled
during the war, that damage was done by the right of arms, and is buried in oblivion
by the act of amnesty. We are under no obligation to repair the ravages that have been
committed in a country which we restore at the peace: we restore it in its existing
state. But, as it would be a flagrant perfidy to ravage that country after the conclusion
of the peace, the case is the same with respect to a town whose fortifications have
escaped the devastation of war: to dismantle it previous to the restoration, would be a
violation of good-faith and honour. If the captor has repaired the breaches, and put the
place in the same state it was in before the siege, he is bound to restore it in that state.
If he has added any new works, he may indeed demolish these: but if he has razed the
ancient fortifications, and constructed others on a new plan, it will be necessary to
come to a particular agreement respecting this improvement, or accurately to define in
what condition the place shall be restored. Indeed this last precaution should in every
case be adopted, in order to obviate all dispute and difficulty. In drawing up an
instrument solely intended for the restoration of peace, it should be the object of the
parties to leave, if possible, no ambiguity whatever,—nothing which may have a
tendency to rekindle the flames of war. I am well aware, however, that this is not the
practice of those who value themselves now-a-days on their superior abilities in
negotiation: on the contrary, they study to introduce obscure or ambiguous clauses
into a treaty of peace, in order to furnish their sovereign with a pretext for broaching a
new quarrel, and taking up arms again on the first favourable opportunity. How
contrary such pitiful finesse is to the faith of treaties, we have already observed (Book
II. §231): it is a disparagement of that candour and magnanimity which should beam
forth in all the actions of a great prince.

But, as it is extremely difficult wholly to avoid ambiguity in a §32. The
treaty, though worded with the greatest care and the most interpretation of a
honourable intentions,—and to obviate every doubt which may treaty of peace is to
arise in the application of its several clauses to particular be against the
cases,—recourse must often be had to the rules of interpretation. superior party.

We have already devoted an entire chapter to the exposition of
those important rules:* wherefore, instead of entering at present into tedious
repetitions, we shall confine ourselves to a few rules more particularly adapted to the
special case before us,—the interpretation of treaties of peace. 1. In case of doubt, the
interpretation goes against him who prescribed the terms of the treaty: for as it was in
some measure dictated by him, it was his own fault if he neglected to express himself
more clearly: and by extending or restricting the signification of the expressions to
that meaning which is least favourable to him, we either do him no injury, or we only
do him that to which he has wilfully exposed himself; whereas, by adopting a contrary

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 443 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

mode of interpretation, we would incur the risk of converting vague or ambiguous
terms into so many snares to entrap the weaker party in the contract, who has been
obliged to subscribe to what the stronger had dictated.

2. The names of countries ceded by treaty are to be understood §33. Names of ceded
according to the usage prevailing at the time among skilful and countries.
intelligent men: for it is not to be presumed that weak or ignorant
persons should be intrusted with so important a concern as that of concluding a treaty
of peace; and the articles of a contract are to be understood of what the contracting
parties most probably had in contemplation, since the object in contemplation is the
motive and ground of every contract.

3. The treaty of peace naturally and of itself relates only to the §34. Restoration not
war which it terminates. It is, therefore, in such relation only, to be understood of
that its vague clauses are to be understood. Thus the simple those who have
stipulation of restoring things to their former condition does not voluntarily given
relate to changes which have not been occasioned by the war themselves up.

itself: consequently this general clause cannot oblige either of the
parties to set at liberty a free people who have voluntarily given themselves up to him
during the war. And as a people, when abandoned by their sovereign, become free,
and may provide for their own safety in whatever manner they think most advisable
(Book I. §202)—if such people, during the course of the war, have voluntarily, and
without military compulsion, submitted and given themselves up to the enemy of their
former sovereign, the general promise of restoring conquests shall not extend to them.
It were an unavailing plea, to allege that the party who requires all things to be
replaced on their former footing, may have an interest in the independence of the
former of those people, and that he evidently has a very great one in the restoration of
the latter. If he wished to obtain things which the general clause does not of itself
comprise, he should have clearly and specifically expressed his intentions relative to
them. Stipulations of every kind may be inserted in a treaty of peace: but if they bear
no relation to the war which it is the view of the contracting parties to bring to a
conclusion, they must be very expressly specified; for the treaty is naturally
understood to relate only to its own particular object.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 444 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER IV

Of The Observance And Breach Of The Treaty Of Peace.
The treaty of peace concluded by a lawful power is undoubtedly §35. The treaty of
a public treaty, and obligatory on the whole nation (Book II. peace binds the nation
§154). It is likewise, by its nature, a real treaty; for if its duration and successors.
had been limited to the life of the sovereign, it would be only a
truce, and not a treaty of peace. Besides, every treaty which, like this, is made with a
view to the public good, is a real treaty (Book II. §198). It is therefore as strongly
binding on the successors as on the prince himself who signed it, since it binds the
state itself, and the successors can never have, in this respect, any other rights than
those of the state.

After all we have said on the faith of treaties and the §36. It is to be
indispensable obligation which they impose, it would be faithfully observed.
superfluous to use many words in shewing how religiously
treaties of peace in particular should be observed both by sovereigns and people.
These treaties concern and bind whole nations; they are of the highest importance; the
breach of them infallibly rekindles the flames of war;—all which considerations give
additional force to the obligation of keeping our faith, and punctually fulfilling our
promises.

We cannot claim a dispensation from the observance of a treaty §37. The plea of fear
of peace, by alleging that it was extorted from us by fear, or or force does not
wrested from us by force. In the first place, were this plea dispense with the
admitted, it would destroy, from the very foundations, all the observance.
security of treaties of peace; for there are few treaties of that
kind, which might not be made to afford such a pretext, as a cloak for the faithless
violation of them. To authorise such an evasion, would be a direct attack on the
common safety and welfare of nations:—the maxim would be detestable, for the same
reasons which have universally established the sacredness of treaties (Book II. §220).
Besides it would generally be disgraceful and ridiculous to advance such a plea. At
the present day, it seldom happens that either of the belligerent parties perseveres to
the last extremity before he will consent to a peace. Though a nation may have lost
several battles, she can still defend herself: as long as she has men and arms
remaining, she is not destitute of all resource. If she thinks fit, by a disadvantageous
treaty, to procure a necessary peace,—if by great sacrifices she delivers herself from
imminent danger or total ruin,—the residue which remains in her possession is still an
advantage for which she is indebted to the peace: it was her own free choice to prefer
a certain and immediate loss, but of limited extent, to an evil of a more dreadful
nature, which, though yet at some distance, she had but too great reason to apprehend.

If ever the plea of constraint may be alleged, it is against an act which does not
deserve the name of a treaty of peace,—against a forced submission to conditions

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 445 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

which are equally offensive to justice and to all the duties of humanity. If an unjust
and rapacious conqueror subdues a nation, and forces her to accept of hard,
ignominious, and insupportable conditions, necessity obliges her to submit: but this
apparent tranquillity is not a peace; it is an oppression which she endures only so long
as she wants the means of shaking it off, and against which men of spirit rise on the
first favourable opportunity. When Ferdinand Cortes8 attacked the empire of Mexico
without any shadow of reason, without even a plausible pretext,—if the unfortunate
Montezuma9 could have recovered his liberty by submitting to the iniquitous and
cruel conditions of receiving Spanish garrisons into his towns and his capital, of
paying an immense tribute, and obeying the commands of the king of Spain,—will
any man pretend to assert that he would not have been justifiable in seizing a
convenient opportunity to recover his rights, to emancipate his people, and to expel or
exterminate the Spanish horde of greedy, insolent, and cruel usurpers? No! such a
monstrous absurdity can never be seriously maintained. Although the law of nature
aims at protecting the safety and peace of nations by enjoining the faithful observance
of promises, it does not favour oppressors. All its maxims tend to promote the
advantage of mankind: that is the great end of all laws and rights. Shall he, who with
his own hand tears asunder all the bonds of human society, be afterwards allowed to
claim the benefit of them? Even though it were to happen that this maxim should be
abused, and that a nation should, on the strength of it, unjustly rise in arms and
recommence hostilities,—still it is better to risk that inconvenience than to furnish
usurpers with an easy mode of perpetuating their injustice, and establishing their
usurpation on a permanent basis. Besides, were you to preach up the contrary doctrine
which is so repugnant to all the feelings and suggestions of nature, where could you
expect to make proselytes?

Equitable agreements, therefore, or at least such as are §38. How many ways
supportable, are alone entitled to the appellation of treaties of a treaty of peace may
peace: these are the treaties which bind the public faith, and be broken.
which are punctually to be observed, though in some respects
harsh and burthensome. Since the nation consented to them, she must have considered
them as in some measure advantageous under the then existing circumstances; and she
is bound to respect her promise. Were men allowed to rescind at a subsequent period
those agreements to which they were glad to subscribe on a former occasion, there
would be an end to all stability in human affairs.

The breach of a treaty of peace consists in violating the engagements annexed to it,
either by doing what it prohibits, or by not doing what it prescribes. Now the
engagements contracted by treaty may be violated in three different ways,—either by
a conduct that is repugnant to the nature and essence of every treaty of peace in
general,—by proceedings which are incompatible with the particular nature of the
treaty in question,—or, finally, by the violation of any article expressly contained in
it.

First, a nation acts in a manner that is repugnant to the nature and §39. By a conduct
essence of every treaty of peace, and to peace itself, when she contrary to the nature
disturbs it without cause, either by taking up arms and of every treaty of
recommencing hostilities without so much as a plausible pretext, peace.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 446 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

or by deliberately and wantonly offending the party with whom she has concluded a
peace, and offering such treatment to him or his subjects, as is incompatible with the
state of peace, and such as he cannot submit to, without being deficient in the duty
which he owes to himself. It is likewise acting contrary to the nature of all treaties of
peace to take up arms a second time for the same subject that had given rise to the war
which has been brought to a conclusion, or through resentment of any transaction that
had taken place during the continuance of hostilities. If she cannot allege at least some
plausible pretext borrowed from a fresh cause, which may serve to palliate her
conduct, she evidently revives the old war that was extinct, and breaks the treaty of
peace.

But to take up arms for a fresh cause is no breach of the treaty of §40. To take up arms
peace: for, though a nation has promised to live in peace, she has for a fresh cause is no
not therefore promised to submit to injuries and wrongs of every breach of the treaty of
kind, rather than procure justice by force of arms. The rupture peace.
proceeds from him who, by his obstinate injustice, renders this
method necessary.

But here it is proper to recall to mind what we have more than once
observed,—namely, that nations acknowledge no common judge on earth,—that they
cannot mutually condemn each other without appeal,—and, finally, that they are
bound to act in their quarrels as if each was equally in the right. On this footing,
whether the new cause which gives birth to hostilities be just or not, neither he who
makes it a handle for taking up arms, nor he who refuses satisfaction, is reputed to
break the treaty of peace, provided the cause of complaint on the one hand, and the
refusal of satisfaction on the other, have at least some colour of reason, so as to render
the question doubtful. When nations cannot come to any agreement on questions of
this kind, their only remaining resource is an appeal to the sword. In such case the war
is absolutely a new one, and does not involve any infraction of the existing treaty.

And as a nation, in making a peace, does not thereby give up her §41. A subsequent
right of contracting alliances and assisting her friends, it is alliance with an
likewise no breach of the treaty of peace, to form a subsequent enemy is likewise no
alliance with the enemies of the party with whom she has breach of the treaty.
concluded such treaty,—to join them, to espouse their quarrel,
and unite her arms with theirs,—unless the treaty expressly prohibits such
connections. At most she can only be said to embark in a fresh war in defence of
another people’s cause.

But I here suppose these new allies to have some plausible grounds for taking up
arms, and that the nation in question has just and substantial reasons for supporting
them in the contest. Otherwise, to unite with them just as they are entering on the war
or when they have already commenced hostilities, would be evidently seeking a
pretext to elude the treaty of peace, and no better, in fact, than an artful and perfidious
violation of it.

It is of great importance to draw a proper distinction between a §42. Why a
new war and the breach of an existing treaty of peace, because distinction is to be

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 447 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

the rights acquired by such treaty still subsist notwithstanding the made between a new
new war; whereas they are annulled by the rupture of the treaty war and a breach of
on which they were founded. It is true, indeed, that the party who the treaty.
had granted those rights, does not fail to obstruct the exercise of
them during the course of the war, as far as lies in his power,—and even may, by the
right of arms, wholly deprive his enemy of them, as well as he may wrest from him
his other possessions. But in that case he with-holds those rights as things taken from
the enemy, who, on a new treaty of peace, may urge the restitution of them. In
negotiations of that kind, there is a material difference between demanding the
restitution of what we were possessed of before the war, and requiring new
concessions: a little equality in our successes entitles us to insist on the former,
whereas nothing less than a decided superiority can give us a claim to the latter. It
often happens, when nearly equal success has attended the arms of both parties, that
the belligerent powers agree mutually to restore their conquests, and to replace every
thing in its former state. When this is the case, if the war in which they were engaged
was a new one, the former treaties still subsist: but if those treaties were broken by
taking up arms a second time for the same subject, and an old war was revived, they
remain void; so that, if the parties wish they should again take effect, they must
expressly specify and confirm them in their new treaty.

The question before us is highly important in another view also,—that is, in its
relation to other nations who may be interested in the treaty, inasmuch as their own
affairs require them to maintain and enforce the observance of it. It is of the utmost
consequence to the guarantees of the treaty, if there are any,—and also to the allies,
who have to discover and ascertain the cases in which they are bound to furnish
assistance. Finally, he who breaks a solemn treaty is much more odious than the other
who, after making an illgrounded demand, supports it by arms. The former adds
perfidy to injustice: he strikes at the foundation of public tranquillity; and as he
thereby injures all nations, he affords them just grounds for entering into a
confederacy in order to curb and repress him. Wherefore, as we ought to be cautious
of imputing the more odious charge, Grotius justly observes, that, in a case of doubt,
and where the recurrence to arms may be vindicated by some specious pretext resting
on a new ground, “it is better that we should, in the conduct of him who takes up arms
anew, presume simple injustice, unaccompanied by perfidy, than account him at once
guilty both of perfidy and injustice.”*

Justifiable self-defence is no breach of the treaty of peace. It is a §43. Justifiable self-
natural right which we cannot renounce: and in promising to live defence is no breach
in peace, we only promise not to attack without cause, and to of the treaty.
abstain from injuries and violence. But there are two modes of
defending our persons or our property: sometimes the violence offered to us will
admit of no other remedy than the exertion of open force; and under such
circumstances we may lawfully have recourse to it. On other occasions we may obtain
redress for the damage and injury by gentler methods; and to these we ought of course
to give the preference. Such is the rule of conduct which ought to be observed by two
nations that are desirous of maintaining peace, whenever the subjects of either have
happened to break out into any act of violence. Present force is checked and repelled
by force. But if there is question of obtaining reparation of the damage done, together

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 448 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

with adequate satisfaction for the offence, we must apply to the sovereign of the
delinquents; we must not pursue them into his dominions, or have recourse to arms,
unless he has refused to do us justice. If we have reason to fear that the offenders will
escape,—as, for instance, if a band of unknown per-sons from a neighbouring country
have made an irruption into our territory,—we are authorised to pursue them with an
armed force into their own country, until they be seized: and their sovereign cannot
consider our conduct in any other light than that of just and lawful self-defence,
provided we commit no hostilities against innocent persons.

When the principal contracting party has included his allies in §44. Causes of
the treaty, their cause becomes, in this respect, inseparable from rupture on account of
his; and they are entitled, equally with him, to enjoy all the allies.
conditions essential to a treaty of peace; so that any act, which, if
committed against himself, would be a breach of the treaty, is no less a breach of it, if
committed against the allies whom he has caused to be included in his treaty. If the
injury be done to a new ally, or to one who is not included in the treaty, it may indeed
furnish a new ground for war, but is no infringement of the treaty of peace.

The second way of breaking a treaty of peace is by doing any §45.2. The treaty is
thing contrary to what the particular nature of the treaty requires. broken by what is
Thus every procedure that is inconsistent with the rules of contrary to its
friendship, is a violation of a treaty of peace which has been particular nature.
concluded under the express condition of thenceforward living in
amity and good understanding. To favour a nation’s enemies,—to give harsh
treatment to her subjects,—to lay unnecessary restrictions on her commerce, or give
another nation a preference over her without reason,—to refuse assisting her with
provisions, which she is willing to pay for, and we ourselves can well spare,—to
protect her factious or rebellious subjects,—to afford them an asylum,—all such
proceedings are evidently inconsistent with the laws of friendship. To this list, may,
according to circumstances, be also added—the building of fortresses on the frontiers
of a state,—expressing distrust against her,—levying troops, and refusing to acquaint
her with the motives for such step, &c. But, in affording a retreat to exiles,—in
harbouring subjects who chuse to quit their country, without any intention of injuring
it by their departure, and solely for the advantage of their private affairs,—in
charitably receiving emigrants who depart from their country with a view to enjoy
liberty of conscience elsewhere,—there is nothing inconsistent with the character of a
friend. The private laws of friendship do not, according to the caprice of our friends,
dispense with our observance of the common duties of humanity which we owe to the
rest of our species.

Lastly, the peace is broken by the violation of any of the express §46.3. By the
articles of the treaty. This third way of breaking it is the most violation of any
decisive, the least susceptible of quibble or evasion. Whoever article.
fails in his engagements annuls the contract, as far as depends on
him:—this cannot admit of a doubt.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 449 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

But it is asked, whether the violation of a single article of the §47. The violation of
treaty can operate a total rupture of it? Some writers,* here a single article breaks
drawing a distinction between the articles that are connected the whole treaty.
together (connexi), and those that stand detached and separate
(diversi), maintain, that, although the treaty be violated in the detached articles, the
peace nevertheless still subsists with respect to the others. But, to me, the opinion of
Grotius appears evidently founded on the nature and spirit of treaties of peace. That
great man says that all the articles of one and the same treaty are conditionally
included in each other, as if each of the contracting parties had formally said, “I will
do such or such thing, provided that, on your part, you do so and so”:† and he justly
adds, that, when it is designed that the engagement shall not be thereby rendered
ineffectual, this express clause is inserted,—that, “though any one of the articles of
the treaty may happen to be violated, the others shall nevertheless subsist in full
force.” Such an agreement may unquestionably be made. It may likewise be agreed
that the violation of one article shall only annul those corresponding to it, and which,
as it were, constitute the equivalent to it. But if this clause be not expressly inserted in
the treaty of peace, the violation of a single article overthrows the whole treaty, as we
have proved above, in speaking of treaties in general (Book II. §202).

It is equally nugatory to attempt making a distinction in this §48. Whether a
instance between the articles of greater and those of lesser distinction may here
importance. According to strict justice, the violation of the most be made between the
trifling article dispenses the injured party from the observance of more and the less
the others, since they are all, as we have seen above, connected important articles.

with each other, as so many conditions. Besides, what a source of
disputes will such a distinction lay open!—Who shall determine the importance of the
article violated?—We may, however, assert with truth, that, to be ever ready to annul
a treaty on the slightest cause of complaint, is by no means consonant to the reciprocal
duties of nations, to that mutual charity, that love of peace, which should always
influence their conduct.

In order to prevent so serious an inconvenience, it is prudent to §49. Penalty annexed
agree on a penalty to be suffered by the party who violates any of to the violation of an
the less important articles: and then, on his submitting to the article.
penalty, the treaty still subsists in full force. In like manner, there
may, to the violation of each individual article, be annexed a penalty proportionate to
its importance. We have treated of this subject in our remarks on truces (Book III.
§243), to which we refer the reader.

Studied delays are equivalent to an express denial, and differ §50. Studied delays.
from it only by the artifice with which he who practises them
seeks to palliate his want of faith: he adds fraud to perfidy, and actually violates the
article which he should fulfil.

But if a real impediment stand in the way, time must be allowed; §51. Unsurmountable
for no one is bound to perform impossibilities. And for the same impediments.
reason, if any unsurmountable obstacle should render the
execution of an article not only impracticable for the present, but forever impossible,

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 450 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

no blame is imputable to him who had engaged for the performance of it; nor can his
inability furnish the other party with a handle for annulling the treaty: but the latter
should accept of an indemnification, if the case will admit of it, and the
indemnification be practicable. However, if the thing which was to have been
performed in pursuance of the article in question be of such a nature, that the treaty
evidently appears to have been concluded with a sole view to that particular thing, and
not to any equivalent,—the intervening impossibility undoubtedly cancels the treaty.
Thus, a treaty of protection becomes void when the protector is unable to afford the
promised protection, although his inability does not arise from any fault on his part. In
the same manner also, whatever promises a sovereign may have made on condition
that the other party should procure him the restoration of an important town, he is
released from the performance of every thing which he had promised as the purchase
of the recovery, if he cannot be put in possession. Such is the invariable rule of
justice. But rigid justice is not always to be insisted on:—peace is so essential to the
welfare of mankind, and nations are so strictly bound to cultivate it, to procure it, and
to re-establish it when interrupted,—that, whenever any such obstacles impede the
execution of a treaty of peace, we ought ingenuously to accede to every reasonable
expedient, and accept of equivalents or indemnifications, rather than cancel a treaty of
peace already concluded, and again have recourse to arms.

We have already in an express chapter (Book II. Chap. VI.) §52. Infractions of the
examined how and on what occasions the actions of subjects may treaty of peace by the
be imputed to the sovereign and the nation. It is by that subjects;
circumstance we must be guided in determining how far the
proceedings of the subjects may be capable of annulling a treaty of peace. They
cannot produce such effect unless so far as they are imputable to the sovereign. He
who is injured by the subjects of another nation, takes satisfaction for the offence,
himself, when he meets with the delinquents in his own territories, or in a free place,
as, for instance, on the open sea; or, if more agreeable to him, he demands justice of
their sovereign. If the offenders are refractory subjects, no demand can be made on
their sovereign; but whoever can seize them, even in a free place, executes summary
justice on them himself. Such is the mode observed towards pirates: and, in order to
obviate all misunderstandings, it is generally agreed that the same treatment be given
to all private individuals who commit acts of hostility without being able to produce a
commission from their sovereign.

The actions of our allies are still less imputable to us than those §53.or by allies.
of our subjects. The infractions of a treaty of peace by allies,
even by those who have been included in it, or who joined in it as principals, can
therefore produce no rupture of it except with regard to themselves, and do not affect
it in what concerns their ally, who, on his part, religiously observes his engagements.
With respect to him, the treaty subsists in full force, provided he do not undertake to
support the cause of those perfidious allies. If he furnishes them with such assistance
as he cannot be bound to give them on an occasion of this nature, he espouses their
quarrel, and becomes an accomplice in their breach of faith. But if he has an interest
in preventing their ruin, he may interpose, and, by obliging them to make every
suitable reparation, save them from an oppression of which he would himself
collaterally feel the effects. It even becomes an act of justice to undertake their

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 451 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

defence against an implacable enemy who will not be contented with an adequate
satisfaction.

When the treaty of peace is violated by one of the contracting §54. Right of the
parties, the other has the option of either declaring the treaty null offended party against
and void, or allowing it still to subsist: for a contract which him who has violated
contains reciprocal engagements, cannot be binding on him with the treaty.
respect to the party who on his side pays no regard to the same
contract. But if he chuses not to come to a rupture, the treaty remains valid and
obligatory. It would be absurd that he who had been guilty of the violation should
pretend that the agreement was annulled by his own breach of faith: this would indeed
be an easy way of shaking off engagements, and would reduce all treaties to empty
formalities. If the injured party be willing to let the treaty subsist, he may either
pardon the infringement,—insist on an indemnification or adequate satisfaction,—or
discharge himself, on his part, from those engagements corresponding with the
violated article,—those promises he had made in consideration of a thing which has
not been performed. But if he determines on demanding a just indemnification, and
the party in fault refuses it, then the treaty is necessarily broken, and the injured party
has a very just cause for taking up arms again. And indeed this is generally the case;
for it seldom happens that the infractor will submit to make reparation, and thereby
acknowledge himself in fault.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 452 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER V

Of The Right Of Embassy, Or The Right Of Sending And
Receiving Public Ministers.
It is necessary that nations should treat and hold intercourse §55. It is necessary
together, in order to promote their interests,—to avoid injuring that nations be
each other,—and to adjust and terminate their disputes. And as enabled to treat and
they all lie under the indispensable obligation of giving their communicate
consent and concurrence to whatever conduces to the general together.

advantage and welfare (Prelim. §13)—of procuring the means of
accommodating and terminating their differences (Book II. §323, &c.)—and as each
has a right to every thing which her preservation requires (Book I. §§18)—to every
thing which can promote her perfection without injuring others (ibid. §23), as also to
the necessary means of fulfilling her duties,—it results from the premisses, that each
nation is at once possessed of the right to treat and communicate with others, and
bound by reciprocal obligation to consent to such communication as far as the
situation of her affairs will permit her.

But nations or sovereign states do not treat together immediately; §56. They do this by
and their rulers or sovereigns cannot well come to a personal the agency of public
conference in order to treat of their affairs. Such interviews ministers.
would often be impracticable: and, exclusive of delays, trouble,
expense, and so many other inconveniences, it is rarely, according to the observation
of Philip de Commines,10 that any good effect could be expected from them. The
only expedient, therefore, which remains for nations and sovereigns, is to
communicate and treat with each other by the agency of procurators or
mandatories,—of delegates charged with their commands, and vested with their
powers,—that is to say, public ministers. This term, in its more extensive and general
sense, denotes any person intrusted with the management of public affairs, but is more
particularly understood to designate one who acts in such capacity at a foreign court.

At present there are several orders of public ministers, and in the sequel we shall
speak of them; but whatever difference custom has introduced between them, the
essential character is common to them all; I mean that of minister, and, in some sort,
representative of a foreign power,—a person charged with the commands of that
power, and delegated to manage his affairs: and that quality is sufficient for our
present purpose.

Every sovereign state then has a right to send and to receive §57. Every sovereign
public ministers; for they are necessary instruments in the state has a right to
management of those affairs which sovereigns have to transact send and receive
with each other, and the channels of that correspondence which public ministers.
they have a right to carry on. In the first chapter of this work may
be seen who are those sovereigns, and what those independent states, that are entitled

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 453 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

to rank in the great society of nations. They are the powers to whom belongs the right
of embassy.

An unequal alliance, or even a treaty of protection, not being §58. An unequal
incompatible with sovereignty (Book I. §§5, 6)—such treaties do alliance, or a treaty of
not of themselves deprive a state of the right of sending and protection, does not
receiving public ministers. If the inferior ally or the party take away this right.
protected has not expressly renounced the right of entertaining
connections and treating with other powers, he necessarily retains that of sending
ministers to them, and of receiving their ministers in turn. The same rule applies to
such vassals and tributaries as are not subjects (Book I. §§7, 8).

Nay more, this right may even belong to princes or communities §59. Right of the
not possessed of sovereign power: for, the rights whose princes and states of
assemblage constitutes the plenitude of sovereignty, are not the empire in this
indivi-sible: and if, by the constitution of the state, by the respect.
concession of the sovereign, or by reservations which the
subjects have made with him, a prince or community remains possessed of any one of
those rights which usually belong to the sovereign alone, such prince or community
may exercise it, and avail themselves of it in all its effects and all its natural or
necessary consequences, unless they have been formally excepted. Though the princes
and states of the empire are dependent on the emperor and the empire, yet they are
sovereign in many respects: and as the constitutions of the empire secure to them the
right of treating with foreign powers and contracting alliances with them, they
incontestably have also that of sending and receiving public ministers. The emperors,
indeed, when they felt themselves able to carry their pretensions very high, have
sometimes disputed that right, or at least attempted to render the exercise of it subject
to the controul of their supreme authority,—insisting that their permission was
necessary to give it a sanction. But since the peace of Westphalia,11 and by means of
the imperial capitulations, the princes and states of Germany have been able to
maintain themselves in the possession of that right; and they have secured to
themselves so many other rights, that the empire is now considered as a republic of
sovereigns.

There are even cities which are and which acknowledge §60. Cities that have
themselves to be in a state of subjection, that have nevertheless a the right of banner.
right to receive the ministers of foreign powers, and to send them
deputies, since they have a right to treat with them. This latter circumstance is the
main point upon which the whole question turns: for whosoever has a right to the end,
has a right to the means. It would be absurd to acknowledge the right of negotiating
and treating, and to contest the necessary means of doing it. Those cities of
Switzerland, such as Neufchatel and Bienne, which have the right of banner, have, by
natural consequence, a right to treat with foreign powers, although the cities in
question be subject to the dominion of a prince: for the right of banner, or of arms,
comprehends that of granting succours of troops,* provided such grants be not
inconsistent with the service of the prince. Now, if those cities are entitled to grant
troops, they must necessarily be at liberty to listen to the applications made to them on
the subject by a foreign power, and to treat respecting the conditions. Hence it follows

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 454 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

that they may also depute an agent to him for that purpose, or receive his ministers.
And as they are at the same time vested with the administration of their own internal
police, they have it in their power to insure respect to such foreign ministers as come
to them. What is here said of the rights of those cities is confirmed by ancient and
constant practice. However exalted and extraordinary such rights may appear, they
will not be thought strange, if it be considered that those very cities were already
possessed of extensive privileges at the time when their princes were themselves
dependent on the emperors, or on other liege lords who were immediate vassals of the
empire. When the princes shook off the yoke of vassalage, and established themselves
in a state of perfect independence, the considerable cities in their territories made their
own conditions; and, instead of rendering their situation worse, it was very natural
that they should take advantage of the existing circumstances, in order to secure to
themselves a greater portion of freedom and happiness. Their sovereigns cannot now
advance any plea in objection to the terms on which those cities consented to follow
their fortunes, and to acknowledge them as their only superiors.

Viceroys and chief governors of a sovereignty or remote §61. Ministers of
province have frequently the right of sending and receiving viceroys.
public ministers; but, in that particular, they act in the name and
by the authority of the sovereign whom they represent, and whose rights they
exercise. That entirely depends on the will of the master by whom they are delegated.
The viceroys of Naples, the governors ofMilan, and the governors-general of the
Netherlands for Spain, were invested with such power.

The right of embassy, like all the other rights of sovereignty, §62. Ministers of the
originally resides in the nation as its principal and primitive nation or of the
subject. During an interregnum, the exercise of that right reverts regents during an
to the nation, or devolves on those whom the laws have invested interregnum.
with the regency of the state. They may send ministers in the
same manner as the sovereign used to do; and these ministers possess the same rights
as were enjoyed by those of the sovereign. The republic of Poland sends embassadors
while her throne is vacant; nor would she suffer that they should be treated with less
respect and consideration than those who are sent while she has a king. Cromwell
effectually maintained the embassadors of England in the same rank and
respectability which they possessed under the regal authority.

Such being the rights of nations, a sovereign who attempts to §63. Of him who
hinder another from sending and receiving public ministers, does molests another in the
him an injury, and offends against the law of nations. It is exercise of the right
attacking a nation in one of her most valuable rights, and of embassy.
disputing her title to that which nature herself gives to every
independent society: it is offering an insult to nations in general, and tearing asunder
the ties by which they are united.

But this is to be understood only of a time of peace: war §64. What is
introduces other rights. It allows us to cut off from an enemy all allowable in this
his resources, and to hinder him from sending ministers to solicit respect in time of war.
assistance. There are even occasions when we may refuse a

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 455 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

passage to the ministers of neutral nations, who are going to our enemy. We are under
no obligation to allow them an opportunity of perhaps conveying him intelligence of a
momentous nature, and concerting with him the means of giving him assistance, &c.
This admits of no doubt, for instance, in the case of a besieged town. No right can
authorise the minister of a neutral power, or any other person whatsoever, to enter the
place without the besieger’s consent. But, in order to avoid giving offence to
sovereigns, good reasons must be alleged for refusing to let their ministers pass: and
with such reasons they must rest satisfied, if they are disposed to remain neuter.
Sometimes even a passage is refused to suspected ministers in critical and dubious
junctures, although there do not exist any open war. But this is a delicate proceeding,
which, if not justified by reasons that are perfectly satisfactory, produces an acrimony
that easily degenerates into an open rupture.

As nations are obliged to correspond together, to attend to the §65. The minister of a
proposals and demands made to them, to keep open a free and friendly power is to
safe channel of communication for the purpose of mutually be received.
understanding each other’s views and bringing their disputes to
an accommodation,—a sovereign cannot, without very particular reasons, refuse
admitting and hearing the minister of a friendly power, or of one with whom he is at
peace. But in case there be reasons for not admitting him into the heart of the country,
he may notify to him that he will send proper persons to meet him at an appointed
place on the frontier, there to hear his proposals. It then becomes the foreign
minister’s duty to stop at the place assigned: it is sufficient that he obtains a hearing;
that being the utmost that he has a right to expect.

The obligation, however, does not extend so far as to include that §66. Of resident
of suffering at all times the residence of perpetual ministers, who ministers.
are desirous of remaining at the sovereign’s court, although they
have no business to transact with him. It is natural, indeed, and perfectly conformable
to the sentiments which nations ought mutually to entertain for each other, that a
friendly reception should be given to those resident ministers, when there is no
inconvenience to be apprehended from their stay. But if there exist any substantial
reason to the contrary, the advantage of the state undoubtedly claims a preference; and
the foreign sovereign cannot take it amiss if his minister be requested to withdraw,
when he has fulfilled the object of his commission, or when he has not any business to
transact. The custom of keeping every-where ministers constantly resident is now so
firmly established, that whoever should refuse to conform to it, must allege very good
reasons for his conduct, if he wishes to avoid giving offence. These reasons may arise
from particular conjunctures; but there are also ordinary reasons ever subsisting, and
such as relate to the constitution of a government and the state of a nation. Republics
would often have very good reasons of the latter kind, to excuse themselves from
continually suffering the residence of foreign ministers, who corrupt the
citizens,—gain them over to their masters, to the great detriment of the republic,—and
excite and foment parties in the state, &c. And even though no other evil should arise
from their presence than that of inspiring a nation, originally plain, frugal, and
virtuous, with a taste for luxury, the thirst of gain, and the manners of courts,—that
alone would be more than sufficient to justify the conduct of wise and provident rulers
in dis-missing them. The Polish government is not fond of resident ministers; and

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 456 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

indeed their intrigues with the members of the diet have furnished but too many
reasons for keeping them at a distance. In the war of 1666, a nuncio publicly
complained in the open diet, of the French embassador’s unnecessarily prolonging his
stay in Poland, and declared that he ought to be considered as a spy. In 1668, other
members of that body moved for a law to regulate the length of time that an
embassador should be allowed to remain in the kingdom.*

The greater the calamities of war are, the more it is incumbent on §67. How the
nations to preserve means for putting an end to it. Hence it ministers of an enemy
becomes necessary, that, even in the midst of hostilities, they be are to be admitted.
at liberty to send ministers to each other, for the purpose of
making overtures of peace, or proposals tending to moderate the transports of hostile
rage. It is true, indeed, that the minister of an enemy cannot come without permission;
accordingly a passport or safe-conduct is asked for him, either through the
intervention of some common friend, or by one of those messengers who are
protected by the laws of war, and of whom we shall speak in the sequel,—I mean a
trumpeter, or drummer. It is true also, that, for substantial reasons, the safe-conduct
may be refused, and admission denied to the minister. But this liberty, which is
authorised by the care that every nation is bound to bestow on her own safety, is no
bar to our laying it down as a general maxim, that we are not to refuse admitting and
hearing an enemy’s minister; that is to say, that war alone, and of itself, is not a
sufficient reason for refusing to hear any proposal coming from an enemy; but that, to
warrant such refusal, there must exist some reason of a particular nature, and which
rests upon very good grounds,—as, for instance, when an artful and designing enemy
has by his own conduct given us just cause to apprehend that his only intention, in
sending his ministers and making proposals, is to disunite the members of a
confederacy, to lull them into security by holding out false appearances of peace, and
then to overpower them by surprise.

Before we conclude this chapter, it will be proper to discuss a §68. Whether
celebrated question, which has been often debated. It is asked ministers may be
whether foreign nations may receive the embassadors and other received from or sent
ministers of a usurper, and send their ministers to him. In this to a usurper.
particular, foreign powers take for their rule the circumstance of
actual possession, if the interest of their affairs so require: and indeed there cannot be
a more certain rule, or one that is more agreeable to the law of nations and the
independency of states. As foreigners have no right to interfere in the domestic
concerns of a nation, they are not obliged to canvas and scrutinise her conduct in the
management of them, in order to determine how far it is either just or unjust. They
may, if they think proper, suppose the right to be annexed to the posses-sion. When a
nation has expelled her sovereign, other powers, who do not chuse to declare against
her and to risk the consequences of her enmity or open hostility, consider her
thenceforward as a free and sovereign state, without taking on themselves to
determine whether she has acted justly in withdrawing from her allegiance to the
prince by whom she was governed. Cardinal Mazarin12 received Lockhart,13 whom
Cromwell had sent as embassador from the republic of England, and refused to see
either king Charles the Second, or his ministers. If a people, after having expelled
their prince, submit to another,—if they change the order of succession, and

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 457 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

acknowledge a sovereign to the prejudice of the natural and appointed heir,—foreign
powers may, in this instance also, consider what has been done as lawful: it is no
quarrel or business of theirs. At the beginning of the last century, Charles duke of
Sudermania, having obtained the crown of Sweden to the prejudice of his nephew
Sigismund king of Poland, was soon acknowledged by most sovereigns. Villeroy,
minister of the French monarch Henry the Fourth, in his dispatches of the 8th of April
1608, plainly said to the president Jeannin, “All these reasons and considerations shall
not prevent the king from treating with Charles, if he finds it to be his interest, and
that of his kingdom.” This remark was sensible and judicious. The king of France was
neither the judge nor the guardian of the Swedish nation, that he should, contrary to
the interest of his own kingdom, refuse to acknowledge the king whom Sweden had
chosen, under pretence that a competitor termed Charles a usurper. Had the charge
been even founded in justice, it was an affair which did not fall under the cognisance
of foreigners.

Therefore, when foreign powers have received the ministers of a usurper, and sent
theirs to him, the lawful prince, on recovering the throne, cannot complain of these
measures as an injury, nor justly make them the ground of a war, provided those
powers have not proceeded to greater lengths, nor furnished any assistance against
him. But to acknowledge the dethroned prince or his heir after the state has solemnly
acknowledged the person to whom the sceptre has been transferred, is an injury done
to the latter, and a profession of enmity to the nation that has chosen him. Such a step,
hazarded in favour of James the Second’s son, was, by William the Third and the
British nation, alleged as one of the principal reasons of the war which England soon
after declared against France. Notwithstanding all the caution and all the protestations
of Louis the Fourteenth, his acknowledgement of young Stuart as king of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, under the title of James the Third, was considered by the
English as an injury done both to the king and to the nation.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 458 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER VI

Of The Several Orders Of Public Ministers,—Of The
Representative Character,—And Of The Honours Due To
Ministers.
In former days, people were scarcely acquainted with more than §69. Origin of the
one order of public ministers, in Latin termed legati, which several orders of
appellation has been rendered by that of “embassadors.” But public ministers.
when courts were become more proud, and at the same time
more punctilious in the article of ceremony, and especially when they had introduced
the idea of extending the minister’s representation even to that of his master’s dignity,
it was thought expedient to employ commissioners of less exalted rank on certain
occasions, in order to avoid trouble, expense, and disputes. Louis the Eleventh of
France14 was perhaps the first who set the example. Thus several orders of ministers
being established, more or less dignity was annexed to their character, and
proportionate honours were required for them.

Every minister in some measure represents his master, as every §70. Representative
agent or delegate represents his constituent. But this character.
representation relates to the affairs of his office: the minister
represents the subject in whom reside the rights which he is to exercise, preserve, and
assert,—the rights respecting which he is to treat in his master’s stead. Although such
representation is admitted in a general view, and so far as respects the essence of
affairs, it is with an abstraction of the dignity of the constituent. In process of time,
however, princes would have ministers to represent them, not only in their rights and
in the transaction of their affairs, but also in their dignity, their greatness, and their
pre-eminence. It was, no doubt, to those signal occasions of state, those ceremonies
for which embassadors are sent, as, for instance, marriages, that this custom owes its
origin. But so exalted a degree of dignity in the minister is attended with considerable
inconvenience in conducting business, and, besides occasioning trouble and
embarrassment, is often productive of difficulties and disputes. This circumstance has
given birth to different orders of public ministers, and various degrees of
representation. Custom has established three principal degrees. What is, by way of
pre-eminence, called the representative character, is the faculty possessed by the
minister, of representing his master even in his very person and dignity.

The representative character, so termed by way of pre-eminence, §71. Embassadors.
or in contradistinction to other kinds of representation,
constitutes the minister of the first rank, the embassador. It places him above all other
ministers who are not invested with the same character, and precludes their entering
into competition with the embassador. At present there are embassadors ordinary and
extraordinary: but this is no more than an accidental distinction, merely relative to the
subject of their mission. Yet almost every-where some difference is made in the
treatment of these different embassadors. That, however, is purely matter of custom.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 459 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Envoys are not invested with the representative character, §72. Envoys.
properly so called, or in the first degree. They are ministers of
the second rank, on whom their master was willing to confer a degree of dignity and
respectability, which, without being on a level with the character of an embassador,
immediately follows it, and yields the pre-eminence to it alone. There are also envoys
ordinary and extraordinary; and it appears to be the intention of princes that the latter
should be held in greater consideration. This likewise depends on custom.

The word Resident formerly related only to the continuance of §73. Residents.
the minister’s stay; and it is frequent in history for embassadors
in ordinary to be designated by the simple title of residents. But since the practice of
employing different orders of ministers has been generally established, the name of
resident has been confined to ministers of a third order, to whose character general
custom has annexed a lesser degree of respectability. The resident does not represent
the prince’s person in his dignity, but only in his affairs. His representation is in
reality of the same nature as that of the envoy: wherefore we often term him, as well
as the envoy, a minister of the second order,—thus distinguishing only two classes of
public ministers, the former consisting of embassadors who are invested with the
representative character in pre-eminence, the latter comprising all other ministers who
do not possess that exalted character. This is the most necessary distinction, and
indeed the only essential one.

Lastly, a custom of still more recent origin has introduced a new §74. Ministers.
kind of ministers without any particular determination of
character. These are called simply ministers, to indicate that they are invested with the
general quality of a sovereign’s mandatories, without any particular assignment of
rank and character. It was likewise the punctilio of ceremony which gave rise to this
innovation. Use had established particular modes of treatment for the embassador, the
envoy, and the resident. Disputes between ministers of the several princes often arose
on this head, and especially about rank. In order to avoid all contest on certain
occasions when there might be room to apprehend it, the expedient was adopted of
sending ministers not invested with any one of the three known characters. Hence
they are not subjected to any settled ceremonial, and can pretend to no particular
treatment. The minister represents his master in a vague and indeterminate manner,
which cannot be equal to the first degree; consequently he makes no demur in
yielding pre-eminence to the embassador. He is entitled to the general regard due to a
confidential person intrusted by a sovereign with the management of his affairs; and
he possesses all the rights essential to the character of a public minister. This
indeterminate quality is such that the sovereign may confer it on one of his servants
whom he would not choose to invest with the character of embassador: and, on the
other hand, it may be accepted by a man of rank, who would be unwilling to
undertake the office of resident, and to acquiesce in the treatment at present allotted to
men in that station. There are also ministers plenipotentiary, and of much greater
distinction than simple ministers. These also are without any particular attribution of
rank and character, but by custom are now placed immediately after the embassador,
or on a level with the envoy extraordinary.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 460 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

We have spoken of consuls in treating of commerce (Book II. §75. Consuls, agents,
§34). Formerly agents were a kind of public ministers; but in the deputies,
present increase and profusion of titles, this is given to persons commissioners, &c.
simply appointed by princes to transact their private affairs, and
who not unfrequently are subjects of the country where they reside. They are not
public ministers, and consequently not under the protection of the law of nations. But
a more particular protection is due to them than to other foreigners or citizens, and
likewise some attentions in consideration of the prince whom they serve. If that prince
sends an agent with credentials and on public business, the agent thenceforward
becomes a public minister; his title making no difference in the case. The same
remark is also applicable to deputies, commissioners, and others intrusted with the
management of public affairs.

Among the several characters established by custom, it rests with §76. Credentials.
the sovereign to determine with what particular one he chooses
to invest his minister; and he makes known the minister’s character in the credentials
which he gives him for the sovereign to whom he sends him. Credentials are the
instrument which authorises and establishes the minister in his character with the
prince to whom they are addressed. If that prince receives the minister, he can receive
him only in the quality attributed to him in his credentials. They are, as it were, his
general letter of attorney, his mandate patent, mandatum manifestum.

The instructions given to the minister contain his master’s secret §77. Instructions.
mandate, the orders to which the minister must carefully
conform, and which limit his powers. Here we might apply all the rules of the law of
nature respecting procurations and mandates, whether open or secret. But exclusive of
their being more particularly applicable to the subject of treaties, we may with the less
impropriety dispense with such details in this work, as the custom has wisely been
established, that no engagements into which a minister may enter, shall have any
validity between sovereigns, unless ratified by his principal.

We have seen above that every sovereign, every community, and §78. Right of sending
even every individual, who has a right to treat with foreign embassadors.
powers, has also that of sending embassadors. (See the preceding
chapter.) The question admits of no difficulty, so far as respects simple ministers or
mandatories, considered in general as persons intrusted with the affairs, and vested
with the powers, of those who have a right to treat. Further, the ministers of every
sovereign are, without hesitation, allowed to enjoy all the rights and prerogatives
belonging to ministers of the second order. Powerful monarchs indeed deny to some
petty states the right of sending embassadors: but let us see with what reason.
According to the generally established custom, the embassador is a public minister
representing the person and dignity of a sovereign; and, as this representative
character procures him particular honours, great princes are therefore unwilling to
admit the embassador of an inconsiderable state, from a repugnance to paying him
honours of so distinguished a kind. But it is manifest that every sovereign has an
equal right of causing himself to be represented in the first as well as in the second or
the third degree: and the sovereign dignity is entitled to distinguished respect in the
great society of nations. We have shewn (Book II. Ch. III.) that the dignity of

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 461 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

independent nations is essentially the same; that a sovereign prince, however low he
may rank in the scale of power, is as completely sovereign and independent as the
greatest monarch, in the same manner as a dwarf is a man equally with a giant;
although indeed the political giant makes a more conspicuous figure in the general
society than the dwarf, and has, on that account, a greater portion of respect and more
signal honours paid to him. It is evident then that every prince, every state, truly
possessed of sovereignty, has a right to send embassadors, and that to contest their
right in this instance is doing them a very great injury; it is, in fact, contesting their
sovereign dignity. And if they have that right, their embassadors cannot be refused
those regards and honours which custom particularly assigns to the representative of a
sovereign. The king of France admits no embassadors from the princes of Germany,
as refusing to their ministers the honours annexed to the first degree of representation;
yet he receives embassadors from the princes of Italy. The reason alleged for this
conduct is that he considers the latter to be more perfectly sovereign princes than the
former, because, though equally vassals of the emperor and the empire, they are not
equally dependent on the imperial authority. The emperors, nevertheless, claim the
same rights over the princes of Italy, as over those of Germany. But France, seeing
that the former do not actually constitute a part of the Germanic body, nor assist at the
diets, countenances their absolute independence, in order as much as possible to
detach them from the empire.

I shall not here enter into a detail of the honours due and actually §79. Honours due to
paid to embassadors: these are matters which altogether depend embassadors.
on institution and custom: I shall only observe, in general, that
they are entitled to those civilities and distinctions which usage and the prevailing
manners of the time have pointed out as proper expressions of the respect due to the
representative of a sovereign. And it must be observed here, with regard to things of
institution and custom, that, when a practice is so established, as to impart, according
to the usages and manners of the age, a real value and a settled signification to things
which are in their own nature indifferent, the natural and necessary law of nations
requires that we should pay deference to such institution, and act, with respect to such
things, in the same manner as if they really possessed all that value which the opinion
of mankind has annexed to them. For instance, according to the general usage of all
Europe it is the peculiar prerogative of an embassador to wear his hat in presence of
the prince to whom he is sent. This right expresses that he is acknowledged as the
representative of a sovereign: to refuse it therefore to the embassador of a state which
is truly independent, would be doing an injury to that state, and, in some measure,
degrading it. The Switzers, who formerly were much deeper adepts in the art of war
than in the etiquette of courts, and far from being punctilious on the score of mere
ceremony, have, on some occasions, submitted to be treated in a manner unbecoming
the dignity of their nation. In 1663, their embassadors suffered the king of France, and
the nobles of his court, to refuse them those honours which custom has rendered
essential to the embassadors of sovereigns, and particularly that of being covered
before the king at their audience.* Some of their number, who knew better what they
owed to the glory of their republic, strongly insisted on that essential and distinctive
honour: but the opinion of the majority prevailed, and at length they all yielded, on
being assured that the embassadors of their nation had not worn their hats in presence
of Henry the Fourth. Allowing the fact to have been true, the argument was not

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 462 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

unanswerable. The Switzers might have replied, that in Henry’s time their nation was
not yet solemnly acknowledged free and independent of the empire, as it had lately
been by the treaty of Westphalia in 1648. They might have said, that, although their
predecessors had not been duly attentive to support the dignity of their sovereigns,
that gross error could not impose on their successors any obligation to commit a
similar one. At present, as the nation is more enlightened, and more attentive to points
of that nature, she will not fail to support her dignity in a more becoming manner.
Whatever extraordinary honours may in other respects be paid to her embassadors,
she will not in future suffer herself to be so far blinded by those empty marks of
distinction, as to overlook that peculiar prerogative which custom has rendered
essential. When Louis the Fifteenth visited Alsace in 1744, the Helvetic body declined
sending embassadors to compliment him according to custom, until informed whether
they would be allowed to wear their hats: and on the refusal of that just demand, none
were sent. Switzerland may reasonably hope that his most christian majesty will no
longer insist on a claim which does not enhance the lustre of his crown, and can only
serve to degrade an ancient and faithful ally.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 463 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER VII

Of The Rights, Privileges, And Immunities Of Embassadors
And Other Public Ministers.
The respect which is due to sovereigns should redound to their §80. Respect due to
representatives, and especially their embassadors, as representing public ministers.
their master’s person in the first degree. Whoever offends and
insults a public minister, commits a crime the more deserving of severe punishment,
as he might thereby involve his country and his sovereign in very serious difficulties
and trouble. It is just that he should be punished for his fault, and that the state should,
at the expense of the delinquent, give full satisfaction to the sovereign who has been
offended in the person of his minister. If the foreign minister is himself the aggressor,
and offends a citizen, the latter may oppose him without departing from the respect
due to the character which the offender bears, and give him a lesson which shall both
efface the stain of the outrage, and make the author of it blush for his misconduct. The
person offended may further prefer a complaint to his own sovereign, who will
demand for him an adequate satisfaction from the minister’s master. The great
concerns of the state forbid a citizen, on such occasions, to entertain those thoughts of
revenge which the point of honour might suggest, although they should in other
respects be deemed allowable. Even according to the maxims of the world, a
gentleman is not disgraced by an affront for which it is not in his own power to
procure satisfaction.

The necessity and right of embassies being established (see §81. Their persons
Chap. V. of this Book), the perfect security and inviolability of sacred and inviolable.
embassadors and other ministers is a certain consequence of it:
for if their persons be not protected from violence of every kind, the right of embassy
becomes precarious, and the success very uncertain. A right to the end inseparably
involves a right to the necessary means. Embassies then being of such great
importance in the universal society of nations, and so necessary to their common well-
being, the persons of ministers charged with those embassies are to be held sacred
and inviolable among all nations (see Book II. §218). Whoever offers violence to an
embassador, or to any other public minister, not only injures the sovereign whom that
minister represents, but also attacks the common safety and well-being of nations: he
becomes guilty of an atrocious crime against mankind in general.*

This safety is particularly due to the minister, from the sovereign §82. Particular
to whom he is sent. To admit a minister, to acknowledge him in protection due to
such character, is engaging to grant him the most particular them.
protection, and that he shall enjoy all possible safety. It is true,
indeed, that the sovereign is bound to protect every person within his dominions,
whether native or foreigner, and to shelter him from violence: but this attention is in a
higher degree due to a foreign minister. An act of violence done to a private person is
an ordinary transgression, which, according to circumstances, the prince may pardon:

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 464 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

but if done to a public minister, it is a crime of state, an offence against the law of
nations; and the power of pardoning, in such case, does not rest with the prince in
whose dominions the crime has been committed, but with him who has been offended
in the person of his representative. However, if the minister has been insulted by
persons who were ignorant of his character, the offence is wholly unconnected with
the law of nations, and falls within the class of ordinary transgressions. A company of
young rakes, in a town of Switzerland, having, in the night-time, insulted the British
minister’s house without knowing who lived in it, the magistracy sent a message to
the minister, to know what satisfaction he required. He prudently answered, that it
was the magistrates’ concern to provide for the public safety by such means as they
thought best; but that, as to his own part, he required nothing, not thinking himself
affronted by persons who could have had no design against him, as not knowing his
house. Another particular circumstance in the protection due to foreign ministers, is
this:—according to the destructive maxims introduced by a false point of honour, a
sovereign is under a necessity of shewing indulgence to a person wearing a sword,
who instantly revenges an affront done to him by a private individual: but violent
proceedings against a public minister can never be allowed or ex-cused, unless where
the latter has himself been the aggressor, and, by using violence in the first instance,
has reduced his opponent to the necessity of self-defence.

Though the minister’s character is not displayed in its full extent, §83. When it
and does not thus ensure him the enjoyment of all his rights, till commences.
he is acknowledged and admitted by the sovereign, to whom he
delivers his credentials,—yet, on his entering the country to which he is sent, and
making himself known, he is under the protection of the law of nations; otherwise it
would not be safe for him to come. Until he has had his audience of the prince, he is,
on his own word, to be considered as a minister; and besides, exclusive of the notice
of his mission usually given by letter, the minister has, in case of doubt, his passports
to produce, which will sufficiently certify his character.

These passports sometimes become necessary to him in the §84. What is due to
countries through which he passes on his way to the place of his them in countries
destination; and, in case of need, he shews them, in order to through which they
obtain the privileges to which he is entitled. It is true, indeed, pass.
that the prince alone to whom the minister is sent, is under any
obligation or particular engagement to ensure him the enjoyment of all the rights
annexed to his character. Yet the others through whose dominions he passes, are not
to deny him those regards to which the minister of a sovereign is entitled, and which
nations reciprocally owe to each other. In particular they are bound to afford him
perfect security. To insult him, would be injuring his master, and the whole nation to
which he belongs: to arrest him and offer him violence, would be infringing the right
of embassy, which belongs to all sovereigns (§§57, 63). The French monarch, Francis
the First, had therefore very good reason to complain of the murder of his
embassadors Rincon and Fregose, as an atrocious violation of public faith and of the
law of nations. Those two ministers, the one destined for Constantinople, the other for
Venice, having embarked on the Po, were stopped and murdered; and, according to all
appearances, the deed had been perpetrated by order of the governor of Milan.* The
emperor Charles the Fifth having taken no pains to discover the persons concerned in

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 465 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

the murder, authorised a belief that he had himself ordered it, or at least that he tacitly
approved of the act after its commission. And as he did not give any suitable
satisfaction for it, Francis had a very just cause for declaring war against him, and
even calling for the assistance of all other nations: for an affair of this nature is not a
private dispute, a doubtful question in which each party pretends to have justice on his
side: it is a quarrel which involves the concern of all nations, since they are all equally
interested in maintaining the sacred inviolability of that right and of those means
which enable them to hold communication with each other, and to treat of their
affairs. If an in-nocent passage, and even perfect security, are due to a private
individual, much more are they due to the minister of a sovereign, who is going to
execute his master’s orders, and who travels on the affairs of a nation. I say, “an
innocent passage”: for the minister’s journey is justly suspected, if a sovereign has
reason to apprehend that he will make an improper use of the liberty granted him of
entering his territories, by plotting against his interests while in the country, or that he
is going to convey intelligence to his enemies, or to stir up others against him. We
have already said (§64) that he may in such case refuse him a passage: but he is not to
maltreat him, nor suffer any violence to be offered to his person. If he has not reason
sufficient for denying him a passage, he may take precautions against the abuse which
the minister might make of it. These maxims the Spaniards found established in
Mexico, and the neighbouring provinces. In those countries, embassadors were
respected throughout their whole journey; but they could not deviate from the high
road without forfeiting their rights:† —a prudent and judicious reservation, introduced
as a guard against the admission of spies under the name of embassadors. Thus, while
the negotiations for peace were carried on at the famous congress of Westphalia
amidst the dangers of war and the din of arms, the several couriers sent or received by
the plenipotentiaries had each his particular route designated; and out of the
prescribed tract, his passport could afford him no protection.*

What we have here observed, relates to nations that are at peace §85. Embassadors
with each other. On the breaking out of a war, we cease to be going to an enemy’s
under any obligation of leaving the enemy in the free enjoyment country.
of his rights: on the contrary, we are justifiable in depriving him
of them, for the purpose of weakening him, and reducing him to accept of equitable
conditions. His people may also be attacked and seized wherever we have a right to
commit acts of hostility. Not only, therefore, may we justly refuse a passage to the
ministers whom our enemy sends to other sovereigns; we may even arrest them if they
attempt to pass privately, and without permission, through places belonging to our
jurisdiction. Of such proceeding the last war furnishes a signal instance. A French
embassador, on his route to Berlin, touched, through the imprudence of his guides, at
a village within the electorate of Hanover, whose sovereign, the king of England, was
at war with France. The minister was there arrested, and afterwards sent over to
England. As his Britannic majesty had in that instance only exerted the rights of war,
neither the court of France nor that of Prussia complained of his conduct.

The reasons which render embassies necessary, and embassadors §86. Embassies
sacred and inviolable, are not less cogent in time of war than in between enemies.
profound peace. On the contrary, the necessity and indispensable
duty of preserving some resource by which the minds of the belligerent parties may be

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 466 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

brought to a mutual understanding, and peace be restored, is a fresh reason why the
persons of ministers, as instruments in the preliminary conferences and final
reconciliation, should be still more sacred and inviolable. Nomen legati, says Cicero,
ejusmodi esse debet, quod, non modo inter sociorum jura, sed etiam inter hostium
tela, incolume versetur.† Accordingly, one of the most sacred laws of war is that
which ensures perfect security to persons who bring messages or proposals from the
enemy. It is true, indeed, that the embassador of an enemy must not approach without
permission: and as there does not always exist a convenient opportunity of obtaining
such permission through the medium of neutral persons, the defect has been supplied
by the establishment of certain privileged messengers for carrying proposals from
enemy to enemy, in perfect safety.

The privileged messengers I allude to are heralds, trumpeters, §87. Heralds,
and drummers, who, from the moment they make themselves trumpeters, and
known, and as long as they confine themselves within the terms drummers.
of their commission, are, by the laws of war and those of nations,
considered as sacred and inviolable. This regulation is absolutely necessary: for,
exclusive of the duty incumbent on us to reserve the means of restoring peace (as
above mentioned), there occur, even during the course of the war, a thousand
occasions, when the common safety and advantage of both parties require that they
should be able to send messages and proposals to each other. The institution of
heralds succeeded that of the Roman feciales: at present, however, they are seldom
employed: drummers or trumpeters are sent, and, after them, according to the
exigence of the occasion, ministers, or officers furnished with powers. Those
drummers and trumpeters are held sacred and inviolable; but they are to make
themselves known by the marks peculiar to them. Maurice, prince of Orange,15
highly resented the conduct of the garrison of Ysendick, who had fired at his
trumpeter:* on which occasion the prince observed that no punishment can be too
severe for those who violate the law of nations. Other instances may be seen in
Wicquefort, and particularly the reparation which the duke of Savoy, as general of
Charles the Fifth’s army, caused to be made to a French trumpeter, who had been
dismounted and despoiled by some German soldiers.†

In the wars of the Netherlands the duke of Alva hanged up a §88. Ministers,
trumpeter belonging to the prince of Orange, saying that he was trumpeters, &c. to be
not obliged to allow safety to a trumpeter sent him by the chief respected even in a
of the rebels.* On this as on many other occasions, that civil war.
sanguinary general was undoubtedly guilty of a flagrant violation
of the laws of war, which, as we have proved above (Book III. Chap. XVIII.), ought
to be observed even in civil wars: for, unless both parties can with perfect safety
interchange messages and reciprocally send confidential persons to each other, how
can they, on those unfortunate occasions, ever come to talk of peace? what channel
remains open for negotiating a salutary accommodation? The same duke of Alva, in
the war which the Spaniards afterwards made on the Portuguese16 whom they also
termed rebels, caused the governor of Cascais to be hanged for having given orders to
fire on a trumpeter sent to demand a surrender of the town.† In a civil war, or when a
prince takes up arms for the purpose of subduing a body of people who think
themselves absolved from their allegiance to him, an attempt to compel the enemies to

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 467 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

respect the laws of war while he himself does not observe them on his own part, is in
fact equal to a determined resolution of carrying those wars to the extreme of cruelty,
and converting them into a scene of inordinate and endless murder, by the long series
of mutual retaliations which will naturally ensue.

But, as a prince, when influenced by substantial reasons, may §89. Sometimes they
refuse to admit and listen to embassadors, in like manner the may be refused
general of an army, or any other commander, is not always admittance.
obliged to permit the approach of a trumpeter or drummer, and to
give him a hearing. If, for instance, the governor of a besieged town is apprehensive
that a summons to surrender may intimidate the garrison, and excite premature ideas
of capitulation, he undoubtedly may, on seeing the trumpeter advance, send him
orders to retire, informing him that if he comes a second time on the same errand and
without permission, he shall be fired upon. This conduct is no violation of the laws of
war: but such a mode of proceeding ought not to be adopted without very cogent
reasons, because, by irritating the besiegers, it exposes the garrison to be treated by
them with the extreme of rigour, untempered with mercy or moderation. To refuse to
hear a trumpeter’s message without alleging a substantial reason for the refusal, is
equivalent to a declaration that the party is determined to persevere in irreconcilable
hostility.

Whether we admit or refuse to hear a herald or a trumpeter, we §90. Every thing
ought carefully to avoid every thing which might wear the which has the
appearance of an insult offered to him. Not only does the law of appearance of insult
nations claim that respect, but prudence moreover recommends to them, must be
such caution and delicacy. In 1744, the Bailly de Givry sent a avoided.

trumpeter with an officer to summon the redoubt of Pierre-longe
in Piémont. The Savoyard officer who commanded in the redoubt, a brave man, but of
a blunt and fiery disposition, feeling his indignation roused by a summons to
surrender a post which he deemed tenable and secure, returned an insulting answer to
the French general. The officer to whom the answer was given, judiciously took
advantage of the circumstance, and delivered it to the Bailly de Givry in the hearing
of the French troops. It set them in a flame; and their native valour being stimulated
by the eager desire of avenging an affront, their impetuosity was irresistible: though
the attack was attended with considerable carnage, the losses they sustained only
added fresh fuel to their courage, till at length they carried the redoubt: and thus the
imprudent commandant was accessary to his own death, the slaughter of his men, and
the loss of his post.

The prince, the general of the army, and every commander in §91. By and to whom
chief within his department, have alone the right of sending a they may be sent.
trumpeter or drummer; and, on the other hand, it is only to the
commander in chief that they can send such messengers. Should a general, besieging
a town, attempt to send a trumpeter to any subaltern, to the magistracy, or the
townsmen, the governor might justly treat that trumpeter as a spy. The French
monarch, Francis the First, while engaged in war with Charles the Fifth, sent a
trumpeter to the diet of the empire, then assembled at Spires. The trumpeter was
seized by order of the emperor, who threatened to hang him because he was not sent

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 468 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

to him.* But he did not dare to put his threat in execution; for, loudly as he
complained on the subject, he was nevertheless convinced in his own mind that the
diet had a right, even without his consent, to listen to the proposals brought by a
trumpeter. On the other hand, a drummer or trumpeter from a subaltern is seldom
received, unless for some particular object depending on the present authority of that
subaltern acting in his function. At the siege of Rhynberg in 1598, a colonel of a
Spanish regiment having taken upon him to summon the town, the governor sent the
drummer orders to withdraw, informing him at the same time, that, if any other
drummer or trumpeter had the audacity to come on the same errand from a subaltern,
he would cause the messenger to be hanged.*

The inviolability of a public minister,—or the protection to §92. Independence of
which he has a more sacred and particular claim than any other foreign ministers.
person, whether native or foreigner,—is not the only privilege he
enjoys: the universal practice of nations allows him moreover an entire independence
on the jurisdiction and authority of the state in which he resides. Some authors†
maintain that this independence is merely a matter of institution between different
states, and will have it referred to the arbitrary law of nations, which owes its origin to
manners, customs, or particular conventions: in a word, they deny it to be grounded
on the natural law of nations. It is true, indeed, that the law of nature gives men a right
to punish those who injure them: consequently it empowers sovereigns to punish any
foreigner who disturbs the public tranquillity, who offends them, or maltreats their
subjects: it authorises them to compel such foreigner to conform to the laws, and to
behave properly towards the citizens. But it is no less true, that the natural law at the
same time imposes on all sovereigns the obligation of consenting to those things
without which it would be impossible for nations to cultivate the society that nature
has established among them,—to keep up a mutual correspondence,—to treat of their
affairs, or to adjust their differences. Now, embassadors and other public ministers are
necessary instruments for the maintenance of that general society, of that mutual
correspondence between nations. But their ministry cannot effect the intended
purpose, unless it be invested with all the prerogatives which are capable of ensuring
its legitimate success, and of enabling the minister freely and faithfully to discharge
his duty in perfect security. The law of nations, therefore, while it obliges us to grant
admission to foreign ministers, does also evidently oblige us to receive those
ministers in full possession of all the rights which necessarily attach to their
character,—all the privileges requisite for the due performance of their functions. It is
easy to conceive that independence must be one of those privileges; since, without it,
that security which is so necessary to a public minister, would be enjoyed on a very
precarious footing. He might be molested, persecuted, maltreated, under a thousand
pretences. A minister is often charged with commissions that are disagreeable to the
prince to whom he is sent. If that prince has any power over him, and especially a
sovereign authority, how is it to be expected that the minister can execute his master’s
orders with due fidelity, firmness, and freedom of mind? It is a matter of no small
importance that he have no snares to apprehend,—that he be not liable to be diverted
from his functions by any chicanery,—that he have nothing to hope, nothing to fear,
from the sovereign to whom he is sent. In order, therefore, to the success of his
ministry, he must be independent of the sovereign authority and of the jurisdiction of
the country, both in civil and criminal matters. To this it may be added, that the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 469 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

nobility and other persons of eminence would be averse to undertaking an embassy, if
such commission were to subject them to a foreign authority,—not unfrequently in
countries where they have little friendship to expect for their own nation, and where
they must support disagreeable claims, and enter into discussions naturally productive
of acrimony. In a word, if an embassador may be indicted for ordinary offences, be
criminally prosecuted, taken into custody, punished,—if he may be sued in civil
cases,—the consequence will often be, that he will neither possess the power, the
leisure, nor the freedom of mind, which his master’s affairs require. And how shall he
be able to support the dignity of representation in such a state of subjection?—On the
whole, therefore, it is impossible to conceive that the prince who sends an embassador
or any other minister, can have any intention of subjecting him to the authority of a
foreign power: and this consideration furnishes an additional argument which
completely establishes the independency of a public minister. If it cannot be
reasonably presumed that his sovereign means to subject him to the authority of the
prince to whom he is sent, the latter, in receiving the minister, consents to admit him
on the footing of independency: and thus there exists between the two princes a tacit
convention which gives a new force to the natural obligation.

The established practice is perfectly conformable to the principles here laid down. All
sovereigns claim a perfect independency for their embassadors and ministers. If it be
true that there was a king of Spain, who, from a desire of arrogating to himself a
jurisdiction over the foreign ministers resident at his court, wrote to all the christian
princes, informing them that if his embassadors should commit any crime in the
places of their respective residence, it was his pleasure that they should forfeit all their
privileges, and be tried according to the laws of the country,* —one solitary instance
is of no weight in an affair of this nature; nor have his successors on the Spanish
throne adopted a similar mode of thinking.

This independency of the foreign minister is not to be converted §93. How the foreign
into licentiousness: it does not excuse him from conforming to minister is to behave.
the customs and laws of the country in all his external actions, so
far as they are unconnected with the object of his mission and character:—he is
independent; but he has not a right to do whatever he pleases. Thus, for instance, if
there exist a general prohibition against passing in a carriage near a powder magazine,
or over a bridge,—against walking round and examining the fortifications of a town,
&c.—the embassador is bound to respect such prohibitions.† Should he forget his
duty,—should he grow insolent and be guilty of irregularities and crimes,—there are,
according to the nature and importance of his offences, various modes of repressing
him: and these we shall speak of, after we have said a few words concerning the line
of conduct to be pursued by a public minister in the place of his residence. He must
not avail himself of his independency for the purpose of violating the laws and
customs; he should rather punctually conform to them as far as they may concern him,
although the magistrate has no compulsive power over him; and he is especially
bound to a religious observance of the rules of justice towards all who have any
dealings with him. As to what concerns the prince to whom he is sent, the embassador
should remember that his ministry is a ministry of peace, and that it is on that footing
only he is received. This reason forbids his engaging in any evil machinations:—let
him serve his master without injuring the prince who receives him. It is a base

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 470 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

treachery to take advantage of the inviolability of the embassadorial character, for the
purpose of plotting in security the ruin of those who respect that character,—of laying
snares for them,—of clandestinely injuring them,—of embroiling and ruining their
affairs. What would be infamous and abominable in a private guest, shall that be
allowable and becoming in the representative of a sovereign?

Here arises an interesting question.—It is but too common for embassadors to tamper
with the fidelity of the ministers of the court to which they are sent, and of the
secretaries and other persons employed in the public offices. What ideas are we to
entertain of this practice? To corrupt a person,—to seduce him,—to engage him by
the powerful allurement of gold to betray his prince and violate his duty,—is,
according to all the established principles of morality, undoubtedly a wicked action.
How comes it then that so little scruple is made of it in public affairs? A wise and
virtuous politician* sufficiently gives us to understand that he absolutely condemns
that scandalous resource: but, fearful of provoking the whole tribe of politicians to
assail him at once like a nest of hornets, he proceeds no farther than barely advising
them not to practise such manoeuvres except when every other resource fails. As to
me, whose pen is employed in developing the sacred and immutable principles of
justice, I must, in duty to the moral world, openly aver that the mode of corruption is
directly repugnant to all the rules of virtue and probity, and a flagrant violation of the
law of nature. It is impossible to conceive an act of a more flagitious nature, or more
glaringly militant against the reciprocal duties of men, than that of inducing any one
to do evil. The corruptor is undoubtedly guilty of a crime against the wretch whom he
seduces: and as to the sovereign whose secrets are thus treacherously explored, is it
not both an offence and an injury committed against him, to abuse the friendly
reception given at his court, and to take advantage of it for the purpose of corrupting
the fidelity of his servants? He has a right to banish the corruptor from his dominions,
and to demand justice of his employer.

If ever bribery be excusable, it is when it happens to be the only possible mode by
which we can completely discover and defeat a heinous plot, capable of ruining or
materially endangering the state in whose service we are employed. In the conduct of
him who betrays such a secret, there may, according to circumstances, be no
criminality. The great and lawful advantage accruing from the action which we induce
him to perform, together with the urgent necessity of having recourse to it, may
dispense with our paying too scrupulous an attention to the questionable complexion
of the deed on his part. To gain him over, is no more than an act of simple and
justifiable self-defence. It every day happens, that, in order to foil the machinations of
wicked men, we find ourselves under a necessity of turning to our account the vicious
dispositions of men of similar stamp. On this footing it was, that Henry the Fourth
said to the Spanish minister that “it is justifiable conduct in an embassador to have
recourse to bribery for the purpose of detecting the intrigues that are carried on
against his sovereign’s interests”;* adding that the affair of Marseilles,17 that of
Metz,18 and several others, sufficiently shewed that he had good reason for
endeavouring to penetrate the schemes which his enemies were plotting at Brussels
against the tranquillity of his kingdom. That great prince, it is to be presumed, did not
consider bribery and seduction as on all occasions excusable in a foreign minister,
since he himself gave orders for the arrest of Bruneau, the Spanish embassador’s

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 471 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

secretary, who had tampered with Mairargues for the clandestine surrender of
Marseilles to the Spaniards.

In barely taking advantage of the offers made to us by a traitor whom we have not
seduced, our conduct is less inconsistent with justice and honour. But the examples of
the Romans, which we have already quoted (Book III. §§155, 181), and in which
there was question of declared enemies,—those examples, I say, sufficiently shew that
true greatness of soul disdains even that resource, lest the adoption of it should hold
out an encouragement to infamous treachery. A prince or a minister, whose ideas of
honour are not inferior to those of the ancient Romans above noticed, will never stoop
to embrace the proposals of a traitor, except when compelled by some dire
uncontroulable necessity: and even then he will regret the degrading circumstance of
owing his preservation to so unworthy an expedient.

But I do not here mean to condemn an embassador for employing civilities and polite
attentions, and even presents and promises, with a view to gain friends for his
sovereign. To conciliate men’s affection and good will, is not seducing them, or
impelling them to the perpetration of criminal deeds: and as to those new friends, it is
their business to keep a strict watch over their own hearts, lest their attachment to a
foreign prince should ever warp them from the fidelity which they owe to their lawful
sovereign.

Should an embassador forget the duties of his station,—should §94. How he may be
he render himself disagreeable and dangerous,—should he form punished,
cabals and schemes prejudicial to the peace of the citizens, or to
the state or prince to whom he is sent,—there are various modes of punishing him,
proportionate to the nature and degree of his offence. If he 1. for ordinary
maltreats the subjects of the state,—if he commits any acts of transgressions;
injustice or violence against them,—the injured subjects are not
to seek redress from the ordinary magistrates, since the embassador is wholly
independent of their jurisdiction: and for the same reason, those magistrates cannot
proceed directly against him. On such occasions, therefore, the plaintiffs are to make
application to their sovereign, who demands justice from the embassador’s master,
and, in case of a refusal, may order the insolent minister to quit his dominions.

Should a foreign minister offend the prince himself,—should he §95.2. for faults
fail in the respect which he owes him, or, by his intrigues, committed against the
embroil the state and the court,—the offended prince, from a prince.
wish to keep measures with the offender’s sovereign, sometimes
contents himself with simply requiring that the minister be recalled; or if the
transgression be of a more serious nature, he forbids his appearance at court in the
interval while his master’s answer is expected; and in cases of a heinous complexion,
he even proceeds so far as to expel him from his territories.

Every sovereign has an unquestionable right to proceed in this §96. Right of ordering
manner; for, being master in his own dominions, no foreigner away an embassador
can stay at his court or in his territories, without his permission. who is guilty, or
And though sovereigns are generally obliged to listen to the justly suspected.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 472 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

overtures of foreign powers, and to admit their ministers, this obligation entirely
ceases with regard to a minister, who, being himself deficient in the duties attached to
his station, becomes dangerous to or justly suspected by the sovereign, to whom he
can come in no other character than that of a minister of peace. Can a prince be
obliged to suffer that a secret enemy, who is raising disturbances in the state and
plotting its ruin, shall remain in his dominions, and appear at his court? Ridiculous
was the answer of Philip the Second to queen Elizabeth, on her request that he would
recall his embassador who was carrying on dangerous plots against her. The Spanish
monarch refused to recall him, saying, that “the condition of princes would be very
wretched indeed, if they were obliged to recall a minister whenever his conduct did
not suit the humour or the interest of those with whom he was negotiating.”* Much
more wretched would be the condition of princes, if they were bound to suffer in their
states, and at their court, a minister who was disagreeable or justly suspected, an
incendiary, an enemy disguised under the character of an embassador, who should
avail himself of his inviolability, for the purpose of boldly plotting schemes of a per-
nicious tendency. The queen, justly offended at Philip’s refusal, put a guard on the
embassador.†

But is a prince on every occasion bound to confine his §97. Right of
resentment to the simple expulsion of an embassador, however repressing him by
great the enormities of which the latter may have been force if he behaves as
guilty?—Such is the doctrine maintained by some authors, who an enemy.
ground their opinion on the absolute independency of a public
minister. I own he is independent of the jurisdiction of the country: and I have already
said, that, on this account, the common magistrate cannot proceed against him. I
further admit, that, in all cases of ordinary transgression, all instances of offensive or
disorderly behaviour, which, though injurious to individuals or to society, do not
endanger the safety of the state or of the sovereign, there is that degree of respect due
to the embassadorial character which is so necessary for the correspondence of
nations, and to the dignity of the prince represented, that a complaint be first made to
him of the conduct of his minister, together with a demand of reparation; and that, if
no satisfaction is obtained, the offended sovereign be then content with simply
ordering the embassador to quit his dominions, in case the serious nature of the
offences absolutely require that a stop be put to them. But shall an embassador be
suffered with impunity to cabal against the state where he resides, to plot its ruin, to
stir up the subjects to revolt, and boldly to foment the most dangerous conspiracies,
under the assurance of being supported by his master? If he behaves as an enemy,
shall it not be allowable to treat him as such? The question admits not of a doubt with
regard to an embassador who proceeds to overt acts, who takes up arms, and uses
violence. In such case, those whom he attacks may repel him; self-defence being
authorised by the law of nature. Those Roman embassadors, who, being sent to the
Gauls, fought against them with the people of Clusium, divested themselves of the
embassadorial character.* Can any one therefore imagine that the Gauls were bound
to spare them in the hour of battle?

The question is more difficult with respect to an embassador §98. Embassador
who, without proceeding to overt acts, broaches plots of a forming dangerous
dangerous tendency,—who, by his occult machinations, excites

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 473 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

the subjects to revolt, and who forms and encourages plots and
conspiracies against the sovereign or the state. Shall it be deemed conspiracies.
unlawful to repress and inflict exemplary punishment on a traitor
who abuses the sacred character with which he is invested, and who is himself the
first to set the example of violating the law of nations? that sacred law provides no
less for the safety of the prince who receives an embassador, than for that of the
embassador himself. But, on the other hand, if we allow the offended prince a right to
punish a foreign minister in such cases, the subjects of contest and rupture between
sovereigns will become very frequent; and it is much to be feared that the
embassadorial character will cease to enjoy that protection and inviolability which are
so essential to it. There are certain practices connived at in foreign ministers, though
not always strictly consistent with the rules of rectitude: there are others, again, which
are not to be corrected by actual punishment, but simply by ordering the minister to
depart. How shall we, in every case, be able to ascertain the precise boundaries of
those different degrees of transgression? When there exists a premeditated design of
persecuting a minister, an odious colouring will be given to his intrigues; his
intentions and proceedings will be calumniated by sinister constructions; even false
accusations will be raised against him. Finally, such plots as we here allude to are
generally conducted with caution: they are carried on so secretly, that to obtain full
proof of them is a matter of extreme difficulty, and indeed hardly possible without the
formalities of justice,—formalities to which we cannot subject a minister who is
independent of the jurisdiction of the country.

In laying down the grounds of the voluntary law of nations (Prelim. §21), we have
seen, that, in particular conjunctures, nations must, with a view to the general
advantage, necessarily recede from certain rights, which, taken in themselves and
abstracted from every other consideration, should naturally belong to them. Thus,
although the sovereign who has justice on his side, be alone really entitled to all the
rights of war (Book III. §188), he is nevertheless obliged to look upon his enemy as
enjoying equal rights with himself, and to treat him accordingly (ibid. §§190, 191).
The same principles must be our rule in the present case. We may therefore venture to
affirm, that, in consideration of the extensive utility, nay the absolute necessity of
embassies, sovereigns are bound to respect the inviolability of an embassador as long
as it is not incompatible with their own safety and the welfare of their state.
Consequently, when the intrigues of the embassador have transpired, and his plots are
discovered,—when the danger is past, so that there no longer exists a necessity of
laying hands on him in order to guard against it,—the offended sovereign ought, in
consideration of the embassadorial character, to renounce his general right of
punishing a traitor and a secret enemy who conspires against the safety of the
state,—and to content himself with dismissing the guilty minister, and requiring that
punishment be inflicted on him by the sovereign to whose authority he is subject.

Such in fact is the mode of proceeding established by common consent among the
generality of nations, especially those of Europe. Wicquefort* gives us several
instances of some of the principal European sovereigns, who, on discovering
embassadors to be guilty of odious machinations, have limited their resentment to the
expulsion of the offenders, without even making application to have them punished
by their masters, of whom they did not expect to obtain a compliance with such a

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 474 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

demand. To these instances let us add that of the duke of Orléans, regent of France.19
That prince having detected a dangerous conspiracy20 which had been formed against
him by the prince de Cellamare, embassador from Spain, behaved with great
moderation on the occasion,—not adopting any severer measures than those of setting
a guard over the guilty minister, seizing his papers, and causing him to be conducted
out of the kingdom. Another remarkable instance, of very ancient date, stands
recorded by the Roman historians,—that in which Tarquin’s21 embassadors were
concerned. Having repaired to Rome under pretence of claiming the private property
belonging to their master who had been expelled from his kingdom, they tampered
with the profligate young nobility, and engaged them in a black and infamous
conspiracy against the liberties of their country. Although such conduct would have
authorised the rulers of the Roman state to treat them as enemies, the consuls and
senate nevertheless respected the law of nations in the persons of those embassadors.*
The offenders were sent back to their employer, without having received any personal
injury: but, from Livy’s account of the transaction, it appears that the letters which
they had from the conspirators to Tarquin, were taken from them.

This example leads us to the true rule of the law of nations, in the §99. What may be
cases now in question. An embassador cannot be punished, done to him according
because he is independent: and for the reasons we have alleged, to the exigency of the
it is not proper to treat him as an enemy, till he himself proceeds case.
to overt acts of violence: but we are justifiable in adopting
against him every measure which the circumstances of the case may reasonably
require for the purpose of defeating his machinations, and averting the evil which he
has plotted. If, in order to disconcert and prevent a conspiracy, it were necessary to
arrest or even put to death an embassador who animates and conducts it, I do not see
why we should for a moment hesitate to take either of those steps,—not only because
the safety of the state is the supreme law, but also because, independent of that
maxim, the embassador’s own deeds give us a perfect and particular right to proceed
to such extremities. A public minister, I grant, is independent; and his person is
sacred: but it is unquestionably lawful to repel his attacks, whether of a secret or of an
open nature, and to defend ourselves against him, whenever he acts either as an
enemy or a traitor. And if we cannot accomplish our own preservation without harm
thence resulting to him, it is he himself who has laid us under a necessity of not
sparing him. On such an occasion, it may with great truth be asserted that the minister
has by his own act excluded himself from the protection of the law of nations.
Suppose the Venetian senate,—though apprised of the marquis of Bedamar’s
conspiracy,22 and impressed with a thorough conviction of that minister’s being the
prime mover and director of the whole business,—had nevertheless been, in other
particulars, destitute of sufficient information to enable them to crush the detestable
plot,—suppose they had been uncertain with respect to the number and rank of the
conspirators, the designs they had in agitation, and the particular quarter where the
meditated mischief was to burst forth,—whether an intention was entertained of
exciting a revolt among the marine or the land forces, or effecting the clandestine
capture of some important fortress,—would they, under such circumstances, have
been bound to suffer the embassador to depart unmolested, and thus afford him an
opportunity of joining and heading his accomplices, and of bringing his designs to a
successful issue?—No man will seriously answer in the affirmative:—the senate

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 475 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

therefore would have had a right to arrest the marquis and all his household, and even
to extort from them their detestable secret. But those prudent republicans, seeing the
danger was removed and the conspiracy totally suppressed, chose to keep measures
with Spain: wherefore they prohibited all accusation of the Spaniards as concerned in
the plot, and contented themselves with simply requesting the embassador to
withdraw, in order to screen himself from the rage of the populace.

In this case the same rule is to be followed, which we have §100. Embassador
already laid down (Book III. §136) in treating of what may attempting against the
lawfully be done to an enemy. Whenever an embassador acts as sovereign’s life.
an enemy, we are justifiable in adopting against him every
measure that is necessary for the purpose of defeating his evil designs, and ensuring
our own safety. It is on the same principle, and under the idea which represents the
embassador as a public enemy when he behaves as such, that we proceed to determine
the treatment he ought to receive in case he pursues his criminal career to the last
stage of enormity. If an embassador commit any of those atrocious crimes which sap
the very foundations of the general safety of mankind,—if he attempt to assassinate or
poison the prince who has received him at his court,—he unquestionably deserves to
be punished as a treacherous enemy guilty of poisoning or assassination (see Book III.
§155). The embassadorial character, which he has so basely prostituted, cannot shield
him from the sword of justice. Is the law of nations to protect such a criminal, when
the personal security of all sovereigns, and the general safety of mankind, loudly
demand that his crime should be expiated by the sacrifice of his forfeit life? It is true
indeed that we have little room to apprehend that a public minister will proceed to
such dreadful enormities: for it is generally men of honour who are invested with the
character of embassadors; and even if there should, among the number, be some
whose consciences are callous to every scruple, the difficulties, nevertheless, and the
magnitude of the danger, are sufficient to deter them from the attempt. Yet such
crimes are not wholly unexampled in history. Monsieur Barbeyrac* instances the
assassination of the lord of Sirmium by an embassador of Constantinus Diogenes,
governor of the neighbouring province for Basilius II. emperor of Constantinople; and
for his authority he quotes the historian Cedrenus. The following fact is likewise to
the purpose. In the year 1382, Charles III. king of Naples, having sent to his
competitor, Louis duke of Anjou, a knight named Matthew Sauvage, in the character
of a herald, to challenge him to single combat,—the herald was suspected of carrying
a demi-lance whose point was tinged with a poison of so subtle a nature, that whoever
should look stedfastly on it, or even suffer it to touch his clothes, would instantly drop
down dead. The duke, being apprised of the danger, refused to admit the herald into
his presence, and ordered him to be taken into custody. The culprit was interrogated,
and, upon his own confession, suffered the punishment of decapitation. Charles
complained of the execution of his herald, as an infraction of the laws and usages of
war: but Louis, in his reply, maintained that he had not violated those laws in his
treatment of Sauvage, who had been convicted by his own confession.* Had the crime
imputed to the herald been clearly substantiated, he was an assassin, whom no law
could protect. But the very nature of the accusation sufficiently proves that it was a
false and groundless charge.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 476 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

The question of which we have been treating has been debated in §101. Two
England and France, on two famous occasions. In the former of remarkable instances
those countries, the question arose in the case of John Leslie, respecting the
bishop of Ross, embassador from Mary queen of Scots.23 That immunities of public
minister was continually intriguing against queen Elizabeth, ministers.

plotting against the tranquillity of the state, forming conspiracies,
and exciting the subjects to rebellion. Five of the most able civilians, being consulted
by the privy council, gave it as their opinion, that “an embassador raising a rebellion
against the prince at whose court he resides, forfeits the privileges annexed to his
character, and is subject to the punishment of the law.” They should rather have said,
that he may be treated as an enemy. But the council contented themselves with
causing the bishop to be arrested, and after having detained him a prisoner in the
Tower for two years, set him at liberty when there was no longer any danger to be
apprehended from his intrigues, and obliged him to depart from the kingdom.† This
instance may serve to confirm the principles which we have laid down; and the like
may be said of the following. Bruneau, secretary to the Spanish embassador in France,
was detected in the very act of treating with Mairargues, in a time of profound peace,
for the surrender of Marseilles to the Spaniards. The secretary was thereupon
committed to prison, and was subjected to a judicial examination by the parliament
before whom Mairargues was tried. That body, however, did not pronounce sentence
of condemnation on Bruneau, but referred his case to the king, who restored him to
his master, on condition that the latter should order him to depart immediately from
the kingdom. The embassador warmly complained of the imprisonment of his
secretary: but Henry IV. very judiciously answered, that “the law of nations does not
forbid putting a public minister under an arrest, in order to hinder him from doing
mischief.” The king might have added, that a nation has even a right to adopt, against
a public minister, every measure which may be necessary for the purpose of warding
off the mischief he meditates against her,—of defeating his projects, and preventing
their evil consequences. It was on this principle that the parliament were authorised to
interrogate Bruneau, for the purpose of discovering all the parties concerned in so
dangerous a conspiracy. The question, whether foreign ministers who violate the law
of nations do thereby forfeit their privileges, was warmly debated at Paris: but,
without waiting to have the point decided, the king restored Bruneau to his master.*

It is not lawful to maltreat an embassador by way of retaliation: §102. Whether
for the prince who uses violence against a public minister, is reprisals may be made
guilty of a crime; and we are not to take vengeance for his on an embassador.
misconduct, by copying his example. We never can, under
pretence of retaliation, be authorised to commit actions which are in their own nature
unjustifiable: and such undoubtedly would be any instance of ill-treatment inflicted on
an unoffending minister as a punishment for his master’s faults. If it be an
indispensable duty to pay a general regard to this rule in cases of retaliation, it is more
particularly obligatory with regard to an embassador, on account of the respect due to
his character. The Carthaginians having violated the law of nations in the persons of
the Roman embassadors, the embassadors of that perfidious nation were brought to
Scipio, who, being asked how he would have them to be treated, replied, “Not in the
manner that the Carthaginians have treated ours.” Ac-cordingly he dismissed them in
safety:* but at the same time he made preparations for chastising by force of arms the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 477 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

state which had violated the law of nations.† There cannot be a better pattern for
sovereigns to follow on such an occasion. If the injury for which we would make
retaliation does not concern a public minister, there exists a still stronger certainty that
we must not retaliate on the embassador of the sovereign against whom our complaint
lies. The safety of public ministers would be very precarious, if it were liable to be
affected by every casual difference that might arise. But there is one particular case in
which it appears perfectly justifiable to arrest an embassador, provided no ill
treatment be given to him in other respects. When, for instance, a prince has, in open
violation of the law of nations, caused our embassador to be arrested, we may arrest
and detain his, as a pledge for the life and liberty of ours. But, should this expedient
prove unsuccessful, it would become our duty to liberate the unoffending minister,
and to seek redress by more efficacious measures. Charles the Fifth caused the French
embassador, who had made him a declaration of war, to be put under an arrest;
whereupon Francis the First caused Granvelle, the emperor’s embassador, to be
arrested in like manner. At length, however, it was agreed that both those ministers
should be conducted to the frontier, and released at the same time.*

We have derived the independence and inviolability of the §103. Agreement of
embassadorial character from the natural and necessary nations concerning
principles of the law of nations. These prerogatives are farther the privileges of
confirmed by the uniform practice and general consent of embassadors.
mankind. We have seen above (§84) that the Spaniards found the
right of embassies established and respected in Mexico. The same principle also
prevails even among the savage tribes of North America: and if we thence turn our
eye to the other extremity of the globe, we find that embassadors are highly respected
in China. In India also the same rule is observed, though with less scrupulous
punctuality:† —the king of Ceylon, for instance, has sometimes imprisoned the
embassadors of the Dutch East-India company. Being master of the places which
produce cinnamon, he knows that the Dutch, in consideration of a profitable
commerce, will over-look many irregularities in his conduct: and, with the true
disposition of a barbarian, he takes an undue advantage of that circumstance. The
Koran enjoins the moslems to respect public ministers: and if the Turks have not in all
in-stances uniformly observed that precept, their violations of it are rather imputable
to the ferocity of particular princes than to the principles of the nation at large. The
rights of embassadors were formerly very well known among the Arabs. A writer of
that nation‡ relates the following incident. Khaled, an Arabian chief, having come, in
the character of embassador, to the army of the emperor Heraclius, used insolent
language to the general: whereupon the latter observed to him, that “embassadors
were protected from all kind of violence by the law which universally prevailed
among nations: and it was probably that consideration which had emboldened the
Arab to speak to him in so indecent a manner.”* It would be quite unnecessary, in this
place, to accumulate the various examples with which the history of the European
nations presents us: the enumeration would be endless; and the established customs of
Europe on this subject are sufficiently known. Saint Louis, when at Acra in Palestine,
gave a remarkable instance of the protection due to public ministers:—an embassador
from the Old Man of the Mountain, or prince of the Assassins, speaking insolently to
the French monarch, the grand masters of the orders of the Temple and the Hospital
informed that minister, that, “were it not for the respect paid to the character with

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 478 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

which he was invested, they would cause him to be thrown into the sea.”† The king
however dismissed him without suffering the slightest injury to be done him.
Nevertheless, as the prince of the Assassins was on his own part guilty of grossly
violating the most sacred rights of nations, it would have been reasonable to suppose
that his embassador had no claim to protection, except indeed on this single
consideration, that, as the privilege of inviolability is founded on the necessity of
keeping open a safe channel of communication, through which sovereigns may
reciprocally make proposals to each other, and carry on negotiations both in peace and
in war, the protection should therefore extend even to the envoys of those princes,
who, guilty themselves of violating the law of nations, would otherwise have no title
to our respect.

There are rights of another nature, which, though not necessarily §104. Free exercise of
annexed to the character of a public minister, are nevertheless religion.
allowed to him by established custom in almost every country.
One of the principal of these is the free exercise of his religion. It is indeed highly
proper that a minister, and especially a resident minister, should enjoy the free
exercise of his religion within his own house, for himself and his retinue. But it
cannot be said, that this right, like those of independence and inviolability, is
absolutely necessary to the success of his commission, particularly in the case of a
non-resident minister, the only one whom nations are bound to admit (§66). The mi-
nister may, in this respect, do what he pleases in his own house, into which no body
has a right to pry, or to enter. But if the sovereign of the country where he resides,
should, for substantial reasons, refuse him permission to practise his religion in any
manner which might render it an object of public notice, we must not presume to
condemn the conduct of that sovereign, much less to accuse him of violating the law
of nations. At present embassadors are not debarred the free exercise of their religion
in any civilised country: for a privilege which is founded on reason, cannot be refused
when it is attended with no ill consequence.

Among those rights that are not necessary to the success of §105. Whether an
embassies, there are, on the other hand, some which are not embassador be
founded on a general consent of nations, but which are exempted from all
nevertheless, by the custom of several countries, annexed to the imposts.
embassadorial character. Of this number is the exemption of
things brought into or sent out of the country by a foreign minister, from the
customary duties on importation and exportation. There is no necessity that he should
be favoured with any distinction in that respect, since his payment of those duties will
not render him the less capable of discharging his functions. If the sovereign is
pleased to exempt him from them, it is an instance of civility which the minister could
not claim as matter of right, any more than that his baggage, or any chests or packages
which he imports from abroad, shall not be searched at the custom-house. Thomas
Chaloner, the English embassador in Spain, sent home a bitter complaint to queen
Elizabeth his mistress, that the custom-house officers had opened his trunks in order
to search them. But the queen returned him for answer, that it was “the duty of an
embassador to wink at every thing which did not directly offend the dignity of his
sovereign.”*

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 479 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

The independency of the embassador exempts him indeed from every personal
imposition, capitation, or other duty of that nature, and in general from every tax
relating to the character of a subject of the state. But as for duties laid on any kind of
goods or provisions, the most absolute independency does not exempt him from the
payment of them: even sovereigns themselves are subject to them. In Holland, the
following rule is observed:—embassadors are exempt from the taxes on
consumption,—doubtless, because those taxes are more directly of a personal nature:
but they pay the duties on importation and exportation.

However extensive their exemption may be, it is manifest that it solely relates to
things intended for their own use. Should they abuse and make a shameful traffic of it
by lending their name to merchants, the sovereign has unquestionably a right to put a
stop to the fraud, even by suppressing the privilege. Such things have been known in
several places; and the sordid avarice of some ministers, who made a trade of their
exemption, has oblig-ed the sovereign to deprive them of it. At present the foreign
ministers at Petersburgh are subject to the duties on importation: but the empress has
the generosity to indemnify them for the loss of a privilege which they had no right to
claim, and which, from the frequency of its abuse, she had been obliged to abolish.

But here it is asked, whether a nation may abolish what general §106. Obligation
custom has established with respect to foreign ministers? Let us founded on use and
then consider what obligation custom and received usage can custom.
impose on nations, not only in what concerns ministers, but also
in any other instance, in general. The usages and customs of other nations are no
farther obligatory on an independent state, than as she has expressly or tacitly given
her consent to them. But when once a custom, indifferent in itself, has been generally
established and received, it carries the force of an obligation on the states which have
tacitly or expressly adopted it. Nevertheless, if, in process of time, any nation
perceives that such custom is attended with inconveniences, she is at liberty to declare
that she no longer chuses to conform to it: and when once she has made this explicit
declaration, no cause of complaint lies against her for refusing thenceforward to
observe the custom in question. But such a declaration should be made beforehand,
and at a time when it does not affect any particular nation: it is too late to make it
when the case actually exists: for it is a maxim universally received, that a law must
never be changed at the moment of the actual existence of the particular case to which
we would apply it. Thus, on the subject before us, a sovereign who has previously
notified his intentions, and received an embassador only on that footing, is not obliged
to allow him the enjoyment of all the privileges, or to pay him all the honours, which
custom had before annexed to the embassadorial character,—provided that the
privileges and honours which are with-held be not essential to the nature of the
embassy, and necessary to ensure its legitimate success. To refuse privileges of this
latter kind, would be the same thing in effect as refusing the embassy itself, a conduct
which a state is not at liberty to pursue generally and on every occasion (§65), but in
those instances only where the refusal is founded on some very substantial reason. To
with-hold honours which are consecrated by custom and become in a manner
essential, is an expression of contempt, and an actual injury.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 480 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Here it must be further observed, that, when a sovereign intends to break through an
established custom, the rule should be general. To refuse certain customary honours
or privileges to the embassador of one nation, and to continue the enjoyment of them
to others, is an affront to that nation, a mark of contempt, or at least of ill-will.

Sometimes princes send to each other secret ministers, whose §107. A minister
character is not public. If a minister of this kind be insulted by a whose character is not
person unacquainted with his character, such insult is no public.
violation of the law of nations: but the prince who receives this
embassador, and knows him to be a public minister, is bound by the same ties of duty
towards him as towards a publicly acknowledged embassador, and under equal
obligation to protect him, and, as far as in his power, to ensure him the full enjoyment
of that inviolability and independence which the law of nations annexes to the
embassadorial character. No excuse, therefore, can be offered for the conduct of
Francis Sforza, duke of Milan,24 in putting to death Maraviglia, secret minister of
Francis the First. Sforza had often treated with that secret agent, and had
acknowledged him as the French monarch’s minister.*

We cannot introduce in any more proper place an important §108. A sovereign in
question of the law of nations, which is nearly allied to the right a foreign country.
of embassies. It is asked, what are the rights of a sovereign who
happens to be in a foreign country, and how the master of the country is to treat him?
If that prince be come to negotiate, or to treat about some public affair, he is doubtless
entitled in a more eminent degree to enjoy all the rights of embassadors. If he be come
as a traveller, his dignity alone, and the regard due to the nation which he represents
and governs, shelters him from all insult, gives him a claim to respect and attention of
every kind, and exempts him from all jurisdiction. On his making himself known, he
cannot be treated as subject to the common laws; for it is not to be presumed that he
has consented to such a subjection: and if a prince will not suffer him in his
dominions on that footing, he should give him notice of his intentions. But if the
foreign prince forms any plot against the safety and welfare of the state,—in a word,
if he acts as an enemy,—he may very justly be treated as such. In every other case he
is entitled to full security, since even a private individual of a foreign nation has a
right to expect it.

A ridiculous notion has possessed the minds even of persons who deem themselves
superior in understanding to the common herd of mankind. They think that a
sovereign who enters a foreign country without permission, may be arrested there.*
But on what reason can such an act of violence be grounded? The absurdity of the
doctrine carries its own refutation on the face of it. A foreign sovereign, it is true,
ought to give notice of his coming, if he wishes to receive such treatment as he is
entitled to expect. It would moreover be prudent in him to make application for
passports, in order that designing malevolence may not have any pretext, any hope of
finding specious reasons to pal-liate an act of injustice and violence. I further allow,
that,—as the presence of a foreign sovereign may on certain occasions be productive
of serious consequences,—if the times are in any-wise critical, and the motives of his
journey liable to suspicion, he ought not to undertake it without the consent and
approbation of the prince whose territories he means to enter. When Peter the Great

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 481 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

determined personally to visit foreign countries in quest of the arts and sciences to
enrich his empire, he travelled in the retinue of his own embassadors.

A foreign prince unquestionably retains all his rights over his own state and subjects,
and may exercise them in every instance that does not affect the sovereignty of the
country in which he is a sojourner. The king of France, therefore, appears to have
been too punctilious in refusing to permit the emperor Sigismund, when at Lyons, to
confer the dignity of duke on the count of Savoy, who was a vassal of the empire (see
Book II. §40). Less difficulty would have been made with any other prince: but the
court was scrupulously careful to guard against the old claims of the emperors. On the
other hand, it was with very good reason that the same court expressed considerable
displeasure at the conduct of queen Christina,25 who, whilst residing in France,
caused one of her domestics to be executed in her own house: for an execution of that
kind is an act of territorial jurisdiction: and besides, Christina had abdicated the
crown.26 Her reservations, her birth, her dignity, might indeed entitle her to great
honours, or, at most, to an entire independence,—but not to all the rights of an actual
sovereign. The famous instance of Mary queen of Scots, so often quoted in questions
on this subject, is not a very apposite example: for that princess was no longer in
possession of the crown at the time when she came to England, and was arrested,
tried, and condemned to death.

The deputies sent to the assembly of the states of a kingdom or a §109. Deputies to the
republic, are not public ministers like those of whom we have states.
spoken above, as they are not sent to foreign powers: but they are
public persons, and in that character are possessed of privileges which it is our duty to
establish before we take leave of this subject. The states which have a right to meet by
deputies for the purpose of deliberating on public affairs, are, from that very
circumstance, entitled to demand perfect security for their representatives, together
with every exemption and immunity that is necessary to the free discharge of their
functions. If the persons of the deputies be not inviolable, their constituents cannot be
assured of their fidelity in asserting the rights of the nation, and courageously
defending the public interests. And how could those representatives duly acquit
themselves of their functions, if people were allowed to molest them by arrests, either
for debt or for ordinary offences? Between the nation and the sovereign, in this case,
the same reasons hold good, on which, between state and state, the immunities of
embassadors are founded. We may therefore safely venture to assert that the rights of
the nation, and the public faith, secure those deputies from violence of every kind, and
even from any judicial prosecution, during the term of their ministry. Such indeed is
the rule observed in all countries, and particularly at the diets of the empire, the
parliaments of England, and the cortes of Spain. Henry the Third of France27 caused
the duke and the cardinal de Guise to be killed at the meeting of the states at Blois.28
Unquestionably the security of the assembly was violated by that action: but those
two princes were factious rebels, whose audacious views aimed at nothing less than
depriving their sovereign of his crown. And if it was equally certain that Henry was
no longer possessed of sufficient power to bring them to a formal trial, and punish
them according to the laws, the necessity of justifiable self-defence gave the king a
right to adopt the mode which he pursued, and furnishes a sufficient apology for his
conduct. It is the misfortune of weak and unskilful princes, that they suffer themselves

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 482 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

to be reduced to extremities, from which they cannot extricate themselves without a
violation of every established rule. It is said that Pope Sixtus the Fifth, on hearing of
the catastrophe of the duke de Guise, commended that resolute act, as a necessary
stroke of policy: but when he was told that the cardinal had likewise been killed, he
burst into a violent paroxysm of rage.* This, indeed, was carrying his haughty
pretensions to an excessive height. The pontiff readily allowed that urgent necessity
had authorised Henry to violate the security of the states, and to break through all the
forms of justice: and could he pretend that this prince, rather than be deficient in
respect for the Roman purple, should risk both his crown and his life?

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 483 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER VIII

Of The Judge Of Embassadors In Civil Cases.
Some authors will have an embassador to be subject, in civil §110. The
cases, to the jurisdiction of the country where he resides,—at embassador is exempt
least in such cases as have arisen during the time of his embassy; from the civil
and, in support of their opinion, they allege that this subjection is jurisdiction of the
by no means derogatory to the embassadorial character: “for,” country where he

resides.
say they, “however sacred a person may be, his inviolability is
not affected by suing him in a civil action.” But it is not on account of the sacredness
of their person that embassadors cannot be sued: it is because they are independent of
the jurisdiction of the country to which they are sent; and the substantial reasons on
which that independency is grounded, may be seen in a preceding part of this work
(§92). Let us here add that it is in every respect highly proper, and even necessary,
that an embassador should be exempt from judicial prosecution even in civil causes,
in order that he may be free from molestation in the exercise of his functions. For a
similar reason, it was not allowed among the Romans to summon a priest whilst he
was employed in his sacred offices:* but at other times he was open to the law. The
reason which we have here alleged for the exemption, is also assigned in the Roman
law: “Ideo enim non datur actio (adversus legatum) ne ab officio suscepto legationis
avocetur,†ne impediatur legatio.*29 But there was an exception as to those
transactions which had taken place during the embassy. This was reasonable with
regard to those legati or ministers of whom the Roman law here speaks, who, being
sent only by nations subject to the empire, could not lay claim to the independency
enjoyed by a foreign minister. As they were subjects of the state, the legislature was at
liberty to establish whatever regulations it thought most proper respecting them: but a
sovereign has not the like power of obliging the minister of another sovereign to
submit to his jurisdiction: and even if such power was vested in him by convention or
otherwise, the exercise of it would be highly improper: because, under that pretext,
the embassador might be often molested in his ministry, and the state involved in very
disagreeable quarrels, for the trifling concerns of some private individuals, who might
and ought to have taken better precautions for their own security. It is, therefore, only
in conformity to the mutual duties which states owe to each other, and in accord with
the grand principles of the law of nations, that an embassador or public minister is at
present, by the universal custom and consent of nations, independent of all
jurisdiction in the country where he resides, either in civil or criminal cases. I know
there have occurred some instances to the contrary: but a few facts do not establish a
custom: on the contrary, those to which I allude, only contribute, by the censure
passed on them, to prove the custom such as I have asserted it to be. In the year 1668,
the Portuguese resident at the Hague was, by an order of the court of justice, arrested
and imprisoned for debt. But an illustrious member of that same court† very justly
thinks that the procedure was unjustifiable, and contrary to the law of nations. In the
year 1657, a resident of the elector of Brandenburg was also arrested for debt in

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 484 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

England. But he was set at liberty, as having been illegally arrested; and even the
creditors and officers of justice who had offered him that insult were punished.*

But if an embassador chooses to renounce a part of his §111. How he may
independency, and to subject himself in civil affairs to the voluntarily subject
jurisdiction of the country, he is undoubtedly at liberty to do so, himself to it.
provided it be done with his master’s consent. Without such
consent, the embassador has no right to renounce privileges in which the dig-nity and
service of his sovereign are concerned,—which are founded on the master’s rights,
and instituted for his advantage, not for that of the minister. It is true, indeed, that the
embassador, without waiting for his sovereign’s permission, acknowledges the
jurisdiction of the country when he commences a suit as plaintiff in a court of justice.
But the consequence, in that case, is inevitable; and besides, in a civil cause, on a
point of private interest, no inconvenience attends it; since the embassador has it at all
times in his power to avoid commencing a suit, or may, if such a step be necessary,
intrust the prosecution of his cause to an attorney or lawyer.

Let us here add, by the way, that an embassador ought never to institute a prosecution
on a criminal charge. If he has been insulted, he should make his complaint to the
sovereign; and the delinquent is to be prosecuted by the public.

It may happen that the minister of a foreign power is at the same §112. A minister who
time a subject of the state where he is employed; and in this case, is a subject of the
as a subject, he is unquestionably under the jurisdiction of the state where he is
country in every thing which does not directly relate to his employed.
ministry. But the question is, to determine in what cases those
two characters, of subject and foreign minister, are united in the same person. To
produce such union, it is not sufficient that the minister was born a subject of the state
to which he is sent; for, unless the laws expressly prohibit every citizen to leave his
country, he may legally have renounced his country, and placed himself in subjection
to a new master. He may likewise, without renouncing his country for ever, become
independent of it during the whole time that he spends in the service of a foreign
prince; and the presumption is certainly in favour of such independency: for the state
and functions of a public minister naturally require that he should depend only on his
master (§92), on the prince who has intrusted him with the management of his affairs.
Whenever, therefore, there does not exist any circumstance which furnishes a proof or
indication to the contrary, a foreign minister, though antecedently a subject of the
state, is reputed to be absolutely independent of it during the whole time of his
commission. If his former sovereign does not choose to allow him such independency
in his dominions, he may refuse to admit him in the character of a foreign minister, as
is the practice in France, where, according to monsieur De Callieres, “the king no
longer receives any of his own subjects as ministers of foreign princes.”*

But a subject of the state may still continue its subject, notwithstanding his acceptance
of a commission from a foreign prince. His subjection is expressly established when
the sovereign acknowledges him as minister only with a reserve that he shall remain a
subject of thestate. The states-general of the United Provinces, in a decree of the 19th
of June 1681, declare, “That no subject of the state shall be received as embassador or

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 485 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

minister of another power, but on condition that he shall not divest himself of his
character of subject, even with regard to jurisdiction both in civil and criminal
affairs,—and that whoever, in making himself known as embassador or minister, has
not mentioned his quality of subject of the state, shall not enjoy those rights or
privileges which peculiarly belong to the ministers of foreign powers.”†

Such a minister may likewise retain his former subjection tacitly; and then, by a
natural consequence drawn from his actions, state, and whole behaviour, it is known
that he continues a subject. Thus, independent of the declaration abovementioned,
those Dutch merchants who obtain the title of residents of certain foreign princes, and
nevertheless continue to carry on their commerce, thereby sufficiently denote that
they remain subjects. Whatever inconveniences may attend the subjection of a
minister to the sovereign with whom he resides, if the foreign prince chooses to
acquiesce in such a state of things, and is content to have a minister on that footing, it
is his own concern; and should his minister on any ignominious occasion be treated as
a subject, he has no cause of complaint.

It may likewise happen that a foreign minister shall become a subject of the sovereign
to whom he is sent, by accepting of a post under him: and in this case he cannot lay
claim to independence except in such things alone as directly relate to his ministry.
The prince by whom he is delegated, in allowing of this voluntary subjection, agrees
to risk the inconveniences that attend it. Thus, in the last century, the baron De
Charnacé30 and the count D’Estrades31 were embassadors from France to the states-
general, and at the same times officers in their high mightinesses’ army.

The independency of a public minister is the true reason of his §113. Immunity of the
exemption from the jurisdiction of the country in which he minister extends to
resides. No legal process can be directly issued against him, his property.
because he is not subject to the authority of the prince or the
magistrates. But it is asked whether that exemption of his person extends
indiscriminately to all his property? In order to solve this question, we must consider
by what circumstances property may be subjected to, and by what others it may be
exempted from, the jurisdiction of a country. In general, whatever lies within the
extent of a country, is subject to the authority and jurisdiction of the sovereign (Book
I. §205, and Book II. §§83, 84). If any dispute arises concerning effects or goods
within or passing through the country, it is to be decided by the judge of the place. In
virtue of this dependence, the mode of stoppage or seizure has been established in
many countries, for the purpose of compelling a foreigner to repair to the spot where
the seizure has been made, and there to answer questions that are to be put to him,
though not directly relating to the effects seized. But a foreign minister, as we have
already shewn, is independent of the jurisdiction of the country: and his personal
independence in civil cases would be of little avail, unless it extended to every thing
which he finds necessary in order to enable him to live with dignity, and quietly to
attend to the discharge of his functions. Besides, whatever he has brought with him or
purchased for his own use as minister, is so connected with his person as to partake of
the same fate with it. Since the minister entered the territory on the footing of
independence, he could not have it in contemplation to subject his retinue, his
baggage, or his necessaries, to the jurisdiction of the country. Every thing, therefore,

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 486 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

which directly belongs to his person in the character of a public minister,—every
thing which is intended for his use, or which serves for his own maintenance and that
of his household,—every thing of that kind, I say, partakes of the minister’s
independency, and is absolutely exempt from all jurisdiction in the country. Those
things, together with the person to whom they belong, are considered as being out of
the country.

But this exemption cannot extend to such property as evidently §114. The exemption
belongs to the embassador under any other relation than that of cannot extend to
minister. What has no affinity with his functions and character, effects belonging to
cannot partake of the privileges which are solely derived from any trade the minister
his functions and character. Should a minister, therefore, (as it may carry on;

has often been the case) embark in any branch of commerce, all
the effects, goods, money, and debts, active and passive, which are connected with his
mercantile concerns,—and likewise all contests and law-suits to which they may give
rise,—fall under the jurisdiction of the country. And although, in consequence of the
minister’s independency, no legal process can, in those law-suits, be directly issued
against his person, he is nevertheless, by the seizure of the effects belonging to his
commerce, indirectly compelled to plead in his own defence. The abuses which would
arise from a contrary practice, are evident. What could be expected from a merchant
vested with a privilege to commit every kind of injustice in a foreign country? There
exists not a shadow of reason for extending the ministerial immunity to things of that
nature. If the sovereign who sends a minister is apprehensive of any inconvenience
from the indirect dependency in which his servant thus becomes involved, he has only
to lay on him his injunctions against engaging in commerce,—an occupation, indeed,
which ill accords with the dignity of the ministerial character.

To what we have said, let us add two illustrations: 1. In doubtful cases, the respect
due to the ministerial character requires that things should always be explained to the
advantage of that character. I mean that when there is room for doubt whether a thing
be really intended for the use of the minister and his household, or whether it belongs
to his commerce, the decision must be given in favour of the minister; otherwise there
would be a risk of violating his privileges. 2. When I say that we may seize such of
the minister’s effects as have no relation to his public character, particularly those that
belong to his commercial concerns, this is to be understood only on the supposition
that the seizure be not made for any cause arising from his transactions in quality of
minister, as for instance, articles supplied for the use of his family, houserent, &c.
because any claims which may lie against him in that relation, cannot be decided in
the country, and consequently cannot be subjected to its jurisdiction by the indirect
mode of seizure.

All landed estates, all immovable property, by whomsoever §115.nor to
possessed, are subject to the jurisdiction of the country (Book I. immovable property
§205, and Book II. §§83, 84). Are they to be exempted from it on which he possesses in
the single ground that their owner has been appointed the country.
embassador by a foreign power? There can exist no reason for
the exemption in such case. It is not in his public character that the embassador
possesses that property; nor is it attached to his person, so as, like himself, to be

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 487 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

reputed out of the territory. If the foreign prince apprehends any ill consequences
from that state of dependency in which his minister may stand on account of some of
his possessions, he may make choice of another person to fill the office. Let us
conclude, therefore, that immovable property possessed by a foreign minister does not
change its nature in consequence of the character conferred on the owner, but
continues subject to the jurisdiction of the state in which it lies. All contests and law-
suits concerning that property are to be carried before the tribunals of the country; and
those same tribunals may decree its seizure in order to satisfy any legal claim. It is,
however, easily conceived, that, if the embassador lives in a house of his own, that
house is excepted from the rule, as actually serving for his immediate use;—it is
excepted, I mean, in whatever may affect the present use which the embassador
makes of it.

It may be seen, in monsieur de Bynkershoek’s treatise,* that custom coincides with
the principles laid down in this and the preceding sections. In suing an embassador in
either of the two cases just mentioned,—that is to say, on the subject of any
immovable property lying in the country, or of movable effects which have no
connection with the embassy,—the embassador is to be summoned in the same
manner as an absent person, since he is reputed to be out of the country, and his
independency does not permit any immediate address to his person in an authoritative
manner, such as sending an officer of a court of justice to him.

By what mode, then, may satisfaction be obtained of an §116. How justice
embassador who refuses to do justice to those who have dealings may be obtained
with him? It is asserted by many that he must be sued before the against an
tribunal to whose jurisdiction he was subject antecedently to his embassador.
appointment as embassador. In this there appears to me an
impropriety. If the necessity and importance of his functions set him above all
prosecution in the foreign country where he resides, shall any man be allowed to
molest him in the performance of his ministerial duties by summoning him to appear
be-fore the tribunals of his own country? The interest of the public service forbids
such a procedure. It is absolutely necessary that the minister should solely depend on
his sovereign, to whom he belongs in a peculiar manner. He is an instrument in the
hand of the conductor of the nation; and no circumstance whatever ought to be
permitted to divert or obstruct his services. Neither would it be just that the absence of
a person who is intrusted with the interests of the sovereign and the nation, should
prove detrimental to him in his private concerns. In all countries, those who are absent
on the service of the state enjoy privileges which secure them from the
inconveniences attendant on the state of absentees. But these privileges of the
ministers of the state should, as far as possible, be so modelled and tempered, as not
to be unreasonably burthensome or injurious to private persons who have dealings
with them. How then are those different interests—the service of the state and the
administration of justice—to be reconciled? All private persons, whether citizens or
foreigners, who have any demands against a minister—if they cannot obtain
satisfaction from himself—should apply to his master, who is obliged to do them
justice in such manner as may be most consistent with the public service. It rests with
the prince to determine whether it be most proper to recall his minister, to appoint a
tribunal before which he may be sued, or to order an adjournment of the cause, &c. In

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 488 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

a word, the good of the state does not allow that any person whatever should have it in
his power to disturb the minister in his functions, or to divert his attention from them,
without the sovereign’s permission; and the sovereign, whose duty it is to distribute
impartial and universal justice, ought not to countenance his minister in refusing it, or
wearying out his adversaries by unjust delays.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 489 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER IX

Of The Embassador’S House And Domestics.
The independency of the embassador would be very imperfect, §117. The
and his security very precarious, if the house in which he lives embassador’s house.
were not to enjoy a perfect immunity, and to be inaccessible to
the ordinary officers of justice. The embassador might be molested under a thousand
pretexts; his secrets might be discovered by searching his papers, and his person
exposed to insults. Thus all the reasons which establish his independence and
inviolability, concur likewise in securing the freedom of his house. In all civilised
nations, this right is acknowledged as annexed to the embassadorial character: and an
embassador’s house, at least in all the ordinary affairs of life, is, equally with his
person, considered as being out of the country. Of this, a remarkable instance
occurred, not many years ago, at Petersburg. On the third of April, 1752, thirty
soldiers, with an officer at their head, entered the house of baron Greiffenheim the
Swedish minister, and carried off two of his domestics, whom they conducted to
prison, under a pretence that those two men had clandestinely sold liquors which the
imperial farm alone has the privilege of selling. The court, incensed at such a
proceeding, caused the authors of this act of violence to be immediately taken into
custody, and the empress ordered satisfaction to be made to the offended minister; she
likewise sent to him and to all the other foreign ministers, a declaration, in which she
expressed her concern and resentment at what had happened, and communicated the
orders which she had given to the senate to institute a prosecution against the
commissioner of the office established for the prevention of the clandestine sale of
liquors,—he being the chief delinquent.

The house of an embassador ought to be safe from all outrage, being under the
particular protection of the law of nations, and that of the country: to insult it, is a
crime both against the state and against all other nations.

But the immunity and freedom of the embassador’s house is §118. Right of
established only in favour of the minister and his household; as is asylum.
evident from the very reasons upon which it is grounded. Can he
take advantage of the privilege, in order to convert his house into an asylum, to afford
shelter and protection to the enemies of the prince, and to malefactors of every kind,
and thus screen them from the punishments which they have deserved? Such
proceedings would be contrary to all the duties of an embassador, to the spirit by
which he ought to be animated, and to the lawful purposes for which he has been
admitted into the country. This is what nobody will presume to deny. But I proceed
farther, and lay it down as a certain truth, that a sovereign is not obliged to tolerate an
abuse so pernicious to his state, and so detrimental to society. I grant, indeed, that
when there is question only of certain ordinary transgressions, and these committed
by persons who often prove to be rather unfortunate than criminal, or whose
punishment is of no great importance to the peace of society, the house of an

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 490 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

embassador may well serve as an asylum for such offenders; and it is better that the
sovereign should suffer them to escape, than expose the embassador to frequent
molestation under pretence of a search after them, and thus involve the state in any
difficulties which might arise from such proceedings. And as the house of an
embassador is independent of the ordinary jurisdiction, no magistrate, justice of the
peace, or other subordinate officer, is in any case entitled to enter it by his own
authority, or to send any of his people to enter it, unless on occasions of urgent
necessity, when the public welfare is threatened with imminent danger which admits
of no delay. Whatever concerns a point of such weight and delicacy,—whatever
affects the rights and the dignity of a foreign power,—whatever may embroil the state
with that power,—is to be laid immediately before the sovereign, and to be
determined either by himself in person, or, under his direction, by the privy council.
Thus, it belongs to the sovereign to decide, on occasion, how far the right of asylum,
which an embassador claims as belonging to his house, is to be respected: and if the
question relates to an offender whose arrest or punishment is of great importance to
the state, the prince is not to be with-held by the consideration of a privilege which
was never granted for the detriment and ruin of states. In the year 1726, the famous
duke de Ripperda having sheltered himself in the house of lord Harrington,
embassador from England, the council of Castille decided “that he might be taken out
of it, even by force; since, otherwise, those regulations which had been made for the
purpose of maintaining a more regular and intimate correspondence between
sovereigns, would on the contrary operate to the subversion and utter ruin of their
authority;—and that, if persons who had been intrusted with the finances, the power,
and the secrets of the state, were, when guilty of violating the duties of their office,
allowed to take shelter under a privilege which had been granted to the houses of
embassadors in favour only of ordinary offenders,—such an extension of the right of
asylum would be productive of consequences the most pernicious and detrimental to
all the powers on earth, who, if the practice once became established, would be
reduced to the necessity, not only of enduring the presence of every man who was
plotting their destruction, but even of seeing him supported in their own court.”*
—Nothing could be said on this head with greater truth and judgment.

The abuse of the privilege has no-where been carried to a greater extent than at Rome,
where the embassadors of crowned heads claim it for the whole ward in which their
house is situated. The popes, once so formidable to sovereigns, have for above two
centuries been in their turn under a necessity of observing the most delicate and
cautious circumspection in their conduct towards them. It is in vain that they have
endeavoured to suppress, or at least to reduce within proper bounds, an abusive
privilege, for which, prescription, however great its antiquity, ought not to be allowed
as a sufficient plea in opposition to justice and reason.

An embassador’s carriages and equipages are equally privileged §119. Exemption of
with his house, and for the same reasons: to insult them, is an an embassador’s
attack on the embassador himself, and on the sovereign whom he carriages;
represents. They are independent of all subordinate authority—of
guards, custom-house officers, magistrates and their agents,—and must not be
stopped or searched without a superior order. But in this instance, as in that of the
embassador’s house, the abuse is not to be confounded with the right. It would be

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 491 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

absurd that a foreign minister should have the power of conveying off in his coach a
criminal of consequence,—a man, in the seizure of whose person the state were
highly interested; and that he should do this under the very eyes of the sovereign, who
thus would see himself defied in his own kingdom and court. Where is the sovereign
who would suffer this? The marquis De Fontenay, the French embassador at Rome,
sheltered the Neapolitan exiles and rebels, and at last undertook to convey them out of
Rome in his own carriages: but the carriages were stopped at the city gates by some
Corsicans of the pope’s guard, and the Neapolitans committed to prison. The
embassador warmly complained of the procedure: but the pope answered “that his
motive had only been that of arresting men whom the embassador had assisted in
escaping from confinement; and that, since the embassador took the liberty of
harbouring villains, and affording protection to every criminal in the papal
territory,—at least he, who was sovereign of the state, ought to be allowed to have
them retaken wherever they could be found; as the rights and privileges of
embassadors were not to be carried to such lengths.” The embassador replied, “that it
would not appear, on examination, that he had granted an asylum to any subjects of
the pope, but solely to some Neapolitans, whom he might very lawfully shelter from
the persecutions of the Spaniards.”* By this answer, the minister tacitly conceded that
he would not have been authorised to complain of the stoppage of his carriages, if he
had employed them for the purpose of favouring the escape of any of the pope’s
subjects, and aiding criminals to elude the pursuit of justice.

The persons in an embassador’s retinue partake of his §120.of his retinue;
inviolability; his independency extends to every individual of his
household: so intimate a connection exists between him and all those persons, that
they share the same fate with him; they immediately depend on him alone, and are
exempt from the jurisdiction of the country, into which they would not have come
without such reservation in their favour. The embassador is bound to protect them;
and no insult can be offered to them, which is not at the same time an insult to
himself. If the domestics and household of a foreign minister were not solely
dependent on him, it is evident at first sight, how easily he might be harassed,
molested, and disturbed in the exercise of his functions. These maxims are at present
every-where adopted and confirmed by custom.

The embassador’s wife is intimately united with him, and more §121.of his wife and
particularly belongs to him than any other person of his family;
household. Accordingly she participates in his independence and
inviolability: she even receives distinguished honours, which, in a certain degree,
cannot be refused to her without affronting the embassador; and for which there
exists, in the generality of courts, an established ceremonial. The respect due to the
embassador extends likewise to his children, who also partake of his immunities.

The embassador’s secretary is one of his domestics: but the §122.of the secretary
secretary of the embassy holds his commission from the of the embassy;
sovereign himself; which makes him a kind of public minister,
enjoying in his own right the protection of the law of nations, and the immunities
annexed to his office, independently of the embassador, to whose orders he is indeed

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 492 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

but imperfectly subjected,—sometimes not at all, and always in such degree only, as
their common master has been pleased to ordain.

Couriers sent or received by an embassador, his papers, letters, §123.of the
and dispatches, all essentially belong to the embassy, and are embassador’s couriers
consequently to be held sacred; since, if they were not respected, and dispatches.
the legitimate objects of the embassy could not be attained, nor
would the embassador be able to discharge his functions with the necessary degree of
security. The states-general of the United Provinces decided, whilst the president
Jeannin resided with them as embassador from France, that to open the letters of a
public minister is a breach of the law of nations.* Other instances may be seen in
Wicquefort. That privilege, however, does not—on certain momentous occasions
when the embassador himself has violated the law of nations by forming or
countenancing plots or conspiracies against the state—deprive us of the liberty to
seize his papers for the purpose of discovering the whole secret, and detecting his
accomplices; since, in such an emergency, the embassador himself may lawfully be
arrested and interrogated (§99). An example is furnished us in the conduct of the
Roman government, who seized the letters which a treasonable junto had committed
to the hands of Tarquin’s embassadors (§98).

The persons in a foreign minister’s retinue being independent of §124. The
the jurisdiction of the country, cannot be taken into custody or embassador’s
punished without his consent. It would nevertheless be highly authority over his
improper that they should enjoy an absolute independence, and retinue.
be at liberty to indulge in every kind of licentious disorder,
without control or apprehension. The embassador must necessarily be supposed to
possess whatever degree of authority is requisite for keeping them in order:† and
some writers will have that authority to include even a power over life and death.
When the marquis De Rôny, afterwards duke De Sully, was in England as embassador
extraordinary from France, a gentleman of his retinue committed a murder, which
caused a great noise among the people of London. The embassador assembled some
French noblemen who had accompanied him on his mission, tried the murderer, and
sentenced him to lose his head. He then acquainted the lord mayor of London that he
had pronounced sentence on the criminal, desiring that magistrate to furnish him with
an executioner and proper attendants to have the punishment inflicted. But he
afterwards consented to deliver up the criminal to the English, in order that they might
execute justice on him as they thought proper: and Monsieur De Beaumont, the
French embassador in ordinary, prevailed on the British monarch to pardon the young
man, who was related to that minister by the ties of consanguinity.* It rests entirely at
the option of the sovereign to invest his embassador with such an extensive power
over the persons of his suite: and the marquis De Rôny was confidently certain of
having his conduct approved by his master, who did, in fact, express his approbation
of the whole transaction. In general, however, it is to be presumed that the
embassador is possessed only of a coercive power sufficient to restrain his dependents
by other punishments which are not of a capital or infamous nature. He may punish
the faults committed against himself and against his master’s service, or send the
delinquents to their sovereign, in order to their being punished. But should any of his
people commit crimes against society which deserve a severe punishment, the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 493 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

embassador ought to make a distinction between such of his domestics as belong to
his own nation, and others who are subjects of the country where he resides. The
shortest and most natural way with the latter is to dismiss them from his service, and
deliver them up to justice. As to those of his own nation, if they have offended the
sovereign of the country, or committed any of those atrocious crimes in whose
punishment all nations are interested, and whose perpetrators are, for that reason,
usually surrendered by one state when demanded by another,—why should he not
give them up to the nation which calls for their punishment? If the transgression be of
a different kind, he is to send them to his sovereign. Finally, if the case be of a
doubtful nature, it is the embassador’s duty to keep the offender in irons till he
receives orders from his court. But if he passes a capital sentence on the criminal, I do
not think he can have it executed in his own house; an execution of that nature being
an act of territorial superiority which belongs only to the sovereign of the country.
And although the embassador, together with his house and household, be reputed out
of the country, that is nothing more than a figurative mode of speech intended to
express his independency, and all the rights necessary to the lawful success of the
embassy: nor can that fiction involve privileges which are reserved to the sovereign
alone,—which are of too delicate and important a nature to be communicated to a
foreigner, and, moreover, not necessary to the embassador for the due discharge of his
functions. If the offence has been committed against the embassador or against the
service of his master, the embassador may send the delinquent to his sovereign. If the
crime concerns the state where the minister resides, he may try the criminal, and, if he
finds him worthy of death, deliver him up to the justice of the country, as did the
marquis De Rôny.

When the commission of an embassador is at an end,—when he §125. When the rights
has concluded the business for which he came into the of an embassador
country,—when he is recalled or dismissed,—in a word, when he expire.
is obliged to depart on any account whatever, his functions
cease: but his privileges and rights do not immediately expire: he retains them till his
return to his sovereign, to whom he is to make a report of his embassy.* His safety,
his independence, and his inviolability, are not less necessary to the success of the
embassy in his return, than at his coming. Accordingly, when an embassador departs
on account of a war arising between his master and the sovereign at whose court he
was employed, he is allowed a sufficient time to quit the country in perfect security:
and moreover, if he was returning home by sea, and happened to be taken on his
passage, he would be released without a moment’s hesitation, as not being subject to
lawful capture.

For the same reasons the embassador’s privileges still exist at §126. Cases when
those times when the activity of his ministry happens to be new credentials are
suspended, and he stands in need of fresh powers. Such a case necessary.
occurs in consequence of the death of the prince whom the
minister represents, or of the sovereign at whose court he resides. On either occasion
it becomes necessary that the minister should be furnished with new credentials. The
necessity, however, is less cogent in the latter than in the former case, especially if the
successor of the deceased prince be the natural and necessary successor; because,
while the authority whence the minister’s power emanated, still subsists, it is fairly

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 494 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

presumable that he retains his former character at the court of the new sovereign. But
if his own master is no more, the minister’s powers are at an end; and he must
necessarily receive fresh credentials from the new prince, before he can be authorised
to speak and act in his name. In the interim, however, he still continues to be the
minister of his nation, and, as such, is entitled to enjoy all the rights and honours
annexed to that character.

At length I have reached the end of my proposed career. I do not §127. Conclusion.
flatter myself with the idea of having given a perfect, full, and
complete treatise of the law of nations; nor was that, indeed, my design; for it would
have been too great a degree of confidence in my own abilities to have made such an
attempt on a subject so extensive and so copious. I shall think I have done a great
deal, if my principles are approved as solid, luminous, and sufficient to enable
intelligent persons to give a proper solution of any minute questions that may arise in
particular cases; and shall be happy if the result of my labours proves in any wise
serviceable to those men in power who love mankind and respect justice,—and
furnishes them with weapons for the purpose of defending the cause of right, and
compelling the unjust to observe at least some measures, and to keep within the
bounds of decency.

E N D.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 495 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

Addition Essays

Essay On The Foundation Of Natural Law And On The First
Principle Of The Obligation Men Find Themselves Under To
Observe Laws1
Translated by T. J. Hochstrasser

What is the goal of those who teach natural law and ethics? Is it not to bring men to
the observance of justice and the practice of virtue?

—The Author

I. Natural laws, natural jurisprudence, and moral science are three things that are often
confused in ordinary language because they all three have the same object: to know
how to order the customs and conduct of men. But in handling a topic clearly and
securely it is necessary to separate out carefully those issues that are in reality distinct.

II. A law is in general a rule by which we are obliged to determine our actions; and
natural laws, in particular, are those that we derive from nature, or whose rationale is
found in the essence and nature of man, and of things in general.

III.Natural jurisprudence is a general theory of the duties of man, considered simply
as man, or a science, which teaches us what is naturally good or bad in man, what he
must and must not do.

IV. Moral science or ethics is a practical science, which teaches us how we should
direct our faculties to practice what is good, and avoid what is bad. Often the term
moral science is employed to designate the study of behavior in general, and in this
sense it includes natural law and ethics. Sometimes moral science seems to mean the
theory of our duties, insofar as we are obliged to employ them, for ourselves, as
rational creatures; and natural law includes the theory of these same duties insofar as
we are bound to them in respect of other men, as members of human society, or as
others have the right to require that we observe them. But our distinction (§III) is
more tidy and convenient, and it contains everything, for natural law comprises also
our duties toward ourselves.

V. With that established, we look for the foundation of natural law, and the principle
which compels us to practice what it prescribes for us, and avoid what it forbids us.
On these two points there have been major disputes among the learned.

VI. If by the foundation of natural law we understand the source from which can be
derived the rules and precepts; the principle in which is found what can provide an
explanation for why these rules and precepts are as they are, then we would not wish
to look further than in the essence and nature of man and things in general. For, since

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 496 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

natural law is the science which tells us what is naturally good or bad in man (§III),
how shall we determine what is naturally good or bad for him, if not through his
essence and nature, and by the nature and essence of things, through considering the
degree of suitability between actions and this essence and this nature? This truth is
confirmed a posteriori or by experience. To determine whether someone has given an
accurate idea of the laws of nature, examine what there is in man and in other things
that is in accordance with their essence and nature, and you will see how you will
understand clearly from that why our free actions must be regulated and determined in
the manner that natural law prescribes.2 It would be easy to give examples of this. But
each person can put this to the test for himself.

VII. All the authors of different systems are obliged to agree with what we have just
established, whatever their sense may be of the principle of obligation, which we shall
speak of presently. Those who delude themselves that natural law was invented for
the benefit of human society, must agree that the source of this view can only be the
nature and essence of things and of man in particular. For, I ask you, where could
these would-be inventors have learned with such certainty that some actions are useful
to the human race and that others are harmful, if not by considering the harmony or
disharmony of these actions with the nature of man and the nature of things?
Therefore it is on this nature that they have had to base their whole theory of rules and
the laws of natural jurisprudence.

VIII. The same must be said of those who assign the instituting of natural law to the
arbitrary will of God. For, at the same time as they recognize God as a wise being,
who ordains nothing without wisdom, they must agree that God could only give laws
suitable to the nature of things, and particularly to the essence and nature of man,
whom he instructs to observe them; laws whose rationale is found in this essence and
nature. We can go further: how do these authors know that God has laid down such-
and-such laws rather than others quite contrary to them? Doubtless it is because
knowing that God is a wise being, they consider, rightly, that he could only give laws
that are the most appropriate to man, the most advantageous to the good of society in
general, and to that of each individual in particular. But how will they know these
most advantageous of laws? They will consider the nature of man and things, and they
will see which laws are most appropriate to them. They are required to draw on the
same source as us. This is sufficient to show that natural law is founded on the
essence and nature of things and of men in particular. Cicero recognized this when he
said that law is established by nature: natura ipsa constitutum est jus.

IX. We attain knowledge of these laws through reason. This faculty of the soul
teaches us what is the essence and nature of man and of things in general, and makes
us see the aptness or inappropriateness of actions in relation to this essence and
nature: from this we derive general rules or laws which constitute the body of natural
jurisprudence.

X. But it is not enough that these laws exist and that they are known: for men to be
obliged to obey them they must also be effective. Everyone agrees that they are so
bound, but authors disagree on the principle of this obligation. Some derive it from
the authority of a superior, which can only be God, the author of nature; others base it

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 497 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

on the very beauty of virtue, which, by its nature, is preferable to vice. Finally, others
say that man, being a rational and sociable creature, must act in conformity with this
character. Let us try to determine the true and first principle of this obligation and
reveal where all these authors agree and are right, and where their views err. To
succeed in this it is absolutely necessary to develop a clear and distinct idea of things,
and to provide good definitions. We shall see that it is as a result of having neglected
this rule that clever authors have caused themselves so much embarrassment in this
matter, and have seemed to fall into views that are so mutually opposed.

XI. To determine what obligation is requires first an examination of what is
commonly understood when this term is employed. Ask any man who says, “We are
obliged to do something,” and you will see that he means that we are under a kind of
necessity to do this very thing; that we are compelled, bound, tied—as if
forced—although not forced or constrained physically by an external cause that acts
violently upon us, but morally, and in a way that free beings can be engaged to do
something even against the urging of their passions. Now, what are the reasons which
bring free beings to act even against their inclination, without physical compulsion or
external causes? They can only be motives, which being immediate to the soul,
perceived and evaluated by reason, make us feel the necessity of acting in such a
fashion and resolve the will, often against the heart’s inclination and despite the
resistance of the passions. How therefore are we compelled to take a certain action? It
is through the linkage of a powerful motive with this action. Thus, there are two
issues to consider in respect of obligation: 1. The principle which gives birth to or
which constitutes it, which creates the obligation; 2. The condition in which we find
ourselves when we are so obligated.

XII. Hence it follows that obligation is characterized as active and passive.Active
obligation is the connection of the motive with the action. Passive obligation is a
moral necessity3 to act or not to act.4 The former is the principle which sways the
intelligent being, and the latter is the condition in which this being finds himself.

XIII. Passive obligation produces active obligation just as cause gives birth to effect.
For, if it is morally necessary to act, it is necessary to wish to act. Now, there is no
will in the soul without motivation; therefore to bring about the moral necessity to
undertake a particular action, some motivation must be linked to this action, which
you cannot separate from it.5

XIV. There is good reason why we pause to demonstrate this origin for passive
obligation. It proves the reality of our definition and shows that we are in agreement
with the most famous writers, though sometimes with this difference—that these
authors have restricted themselves to showing the effect of obligation, without
explaining clearly its content. Some have defined passive obligation and not active
obligation: “Obligation,” says Pufendorf, “is a moral quality by virtue of which we
are compelled, by a moral necessity, to accept or endure something.”6 But he does not
say in what this moral quality consists. Grotius also uses this expression, that an
action is morally necessary, to say that we are obliged to do it; but he does not in any
way define obligation.7

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 498 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

XV. Those who only have extremely confused ideas of all this will perhaps object that
it is duty which creates obligation, and that we are obliged to undertake certain
actions because they are in line with our duty, and abstain from others because they
conflict with it. Nothing is more common than this way of speaking; it is why it
matters to throw light on the problem, although, as we shall see, it consists only of
pure gibberish. Let us see therefore what is this duty on which obligation is based.

XVI. Our duty is no more than the way in which we must determine or direct our
actions so that they are good and right.8

XVII. Now, a free action is good or right when it has its justification in the essence
and attributes of the being that produces it,9 that is to say, when a reason or
explanation can be given through the essence and attributes of this being as to why his
action has had to be so and not otherwise.10 This recalls what we have said (§VI)
about the match or mismatch of actions with the essence of the nature of man and of
things, which creates the foundation of natural law and the source of the laws that
compose it. It still remains to find out the nature of the obligation we are under to live
according to our duty, and, in consequence, the objection we have just witnessed is
only empty verbiage. The same outcome will hold good if the term duty is considered
in another sense, according to which particular duty is an action decided on in
accordance with law, in such a way that we are compelled to resolve on it in this way.
For in this sense, it is obligation, which constitutes duty, and so, it does not stem from
duty.

XVIII. Mr. Barbeyrac in his notes on Grotius and Pufendorf provides no definition of
obligation at all; except that, while saying that there is no obligation without a
superior, he makes it appear that we are subject to the will of a superior, which
compels us to bring our conduct into conformity with this superior’s laws. But it is
plainly a confusion to interpret obligation as dependency or submission. We still have
to explain why this dependence binds us; why we must preserve this submission. If
we ask this learned man, “Why must we obey a superior?” he will not reply, “Because
we are obliged to.” This would be to say nothing and to explain like with like. Will he
say that it is because this obedience is just, in conformity with the rules of order, or
because this superior can punish us if we rebel against him? But in that case he is
citing to us the motives which are linked to this action of obedience, and he falls back
on our definition, according to which obligation is the connection or link of motive
with action.

XIX. Now this definition is adequately established if the first principle of obligation
can be found which binds us to the observance of natural law, to a principle which is
truly primary, which does not stem from any other. Then it is clear that we can only
find it in a general motive which moves us, without drawing its effectiveness from
any other, and which, in contrast, all the others relate to as branches or subsidiary
motives, which draw all their strength from this common source.

XX. Given that motives act on us in accordance with our desires, to discover what we
are looking for, we must see if there is in our soul an affection or essential and basic
desire, which does not derive from another, and on which all the others rely. We do

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 499 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

not need a long period of reflection to convince us that there is no inclination, desire,
or affection more essential to us, or more basic and general, than self-love, which
causes us to desire and seek for our happiness or the perfection of our condition,
whether internal or external, i.e., the perfection of our soul, the well-being of our
body, and the prosperity of our fortune.

XXI. That being so, the most general motive that influences us, this basic motive
which stems from no other, can only be what relies on this general and basic
inclination. Now, what is this motive, which stems fromself-love or our desire for
happiness? It is, for sure, our well-being, our expediency, our advantage. Experience
reveals this truth clearly to the eyes of whoever wishes to pay some attention to what
takes place inside his own mind. Let us investigate carefully, let us examine
attentively the way in which our wishes are formed, and we shall see that we never
determine on an action through the perception of some benefit that we think we
perceive in it, whether for perfection or peace and the pleasure of our soul, or for the
well-being of our body, or for the profit of our fortune. Every motive returns,
ultimately, to real or perceived expediency. But we must observe in passing that if our
greatest good comprises the perfection of our soul, then the motives that relate to
it—for example, those which derive from obedience owed to a being such as God,
independent of all fear, beauty, and virtue—these motives, I say, may be considered
as the noblest with good reason. After them, those that are concerned with the good of
the body are the most rational; finally, the motives that provide us with the condition
of our fortune take the third place.

XXII. If our expediency and our well-being are therefore the predominant motivation,
the most basic motive that drives us, we must conclude that this good, this
expediency, is the first principle of all obligation, and in particular of the obligation to
keep to natural law. There is no doubt that our expediency is linked to this
observance, for natural law is a science that teaches us what is naturally good or bad
in man (§III); and the natural laws that comprise this law only prescribe some actions
and forbid others as a result of the harmony or disharmony of these actions with our
nature and the nature of things (§VI).

XXIII. Man is a social animal; society is natural to him; indeed, it is even essential to
him if he is to pass his life happily. From this observation the judicious Grotius
adopted the sociability of man as the foundation of natural law; and that is very
reasonable provided that we do not take it as the first principle of obligation, but only
as the next principle from which the duty derives for all men to follow the laws which
must govern the natural society which exists among them, and without which they
cannot survive.

XXIV. Each individual has as a general and overriding motive his own self-interest,
and this motive creates the obligation to which he is liable: it is the unvarying
principle of his decisions, against which it would be absurd to claim that he could be
made to act. But if society is useful and even necessary to him, and this society is
unable to subsist without laws or general rules observed by all its members, he is
obliged, by virtue of his own expediency, to follow them. He ought not even consider

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 500 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

sacrificing them to an immediate advantage, because they are what guarantee him
peaceful enjoyment of all his other goods.

XXV. That is the foundation of civil laws and the principle of the submission that we
owe to them. Men, who are required by their needs to form individual societies, will
definitely not give up their own self-interest and expediency on entering them. On the
contrary, it was doubtless on account of this very benefit that they each decided to
make these commitments. But readily perceiving that such a host of evils and
disadvantages might arise among people so often blinded by or taken up with their
passions (if every individual had the freedom to decide, in particular instances, what
was the best course of action for him), they understood that they had to establish laws
that were sufficient to guarantee the happiness of society. They adjusted them, so far
as was possible for a majority, to the interest of each member. Everyone felt that these
laws, if they were to achieve the desired effect, must be observed religiously; that
exceptions could not be made from them without weakening or destroying them, and
that therefore on this occasion they had to sacrifice an immediate advantage to a
greater good, since laws are the basis of our peace and security. That is the true
principle of the obligation we have to observe them, a principle to which all men
subject themselves without difficulty.

XXVI. The view that I established (§XXI) on the principle of obligation is not new,
and I find in a note of Mr. Barbeyrac, on the great work of Pufendorf,11 a passage in
which I see with a particular pleasure, that a learned Englishman shared exactly the
same views: “According to him, duty or obligation, in respect of man, can only be a
reason or motive put forward in an appropriate manner, which makes him decide to
choose or to prefer one way of acting over another; and this reason or motive can only
be the avoidance or acquisition of a very high degree of unhappiness or happiness,
which cannot be avoided or gained by acting in another manner. He does not
acknowledge any other obligation—or if there be some other type, he believes that by
examining it carefully it will be seen to resolve itself into the same kind.” Thus Mr.
Bernard expresses the thoughts of Mr. Gastrell:12 which are precisely in line with
what I have tried to establish.

XXVII. But let us see what Mr. Barbeyrac puts forward in the same note: “The
motive for obligation, or what brings about most effective compliance with it, should
not be confused with the foundation of obligation or the reason why we are absolutely
required to do one thing or another. This reason is nothing other than the will of a
superior, whose power, in relation to our own good or evil, then stimulates our will to
determine our present duty.” The whole problem between this learned commentator
and ourselves derives from the fact that he does not define obligation as we have done
(§XVIII). Expediency, he says, is the motive for obligation, it is not the foundation:
we are required to obey a superior. But we may ask him: what, therefore, is the
foundation of obligation, and for what reason am I to obey a superior? You will tell
me that it is my duty to obey him because I am dependent on him. That still does not
enlighten me.

XXVIII. I continue: why must I respect this dependency? Why must I fulfill my duty?
And if I violate it, what will happen? You will punish me, you will say. And there we

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 501 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

have the motive that creates my obligation to this duty: by breaking with it, I bring
harm to myself. But if I could avoid the punishment, would this transgression still be
an offense? Yes, you say—and why? Because I must obey a superior who has a
legitimate authority over me: my disobedience would be a bad act. But why should I
not commit an evil act when it will draw down no punishment upon me? You cannot
respond with anything more rational than this: “In committing an evil act, an act
contrary to order and reason, you depart from the perfection of your being.” And that
brings us back to my view, which bases obligation on expediency, for it is without
doubt advantageous to me to be perfect. Let us not pursue any further a matter we
have already touched upon (§XVIII).

XXIX. I flatter myself that by developing ideas carefully and defining the meaning of
terms precisely, as I have tried to do, the reader will see a way of reconciling Mr.
Barbeyrac with us, and that this scholar will himself come to agree.13 The will of a
superior, as we have just seen, is not the first principle or the foundation of obligation.
But it is, doubtless, a proximate principle of real substance: firstly, because
disregarding the integrity inherent in the action that is prescribed for us, it is fine and
praiseworthy to obey a legitimate superior; and secondly, because this superior can
recompense or punish us, independently of the good or evil that our action naturally
entails. And when this superior is recognized as very wise, and all-powerful, his will
alone imposes on us a true obligation, even if we might not perceive the integrity of
the action that he prescribes to us, or the relation that it can have in itself with our
happiness. I would go further: even if we believed we saw something harmful to us in
the situation—in a word, when we do not know the reasons for the law that he gives
us. For we can relate to him; we rely on his wisdom for the integrity of the action and
on his goodness for the usefulness of this very action; and it is by virtue of this
legitimate trust that we can say when he prescribes a law that his will takes the place
of reasons.14 Moreover, while this act might be unimportant in itself, whether in
terms of its integrity or our self-interest, or even contrary to it, the act becomes good
and praiseworthy as soon as he prescribes it, and he is the master through his
omnipotence who can attach such a reward as he considers appropriate, and
compensate us a hundredfold for the harm that it will have caused us. To God alone,
as a wise and all-powerful superior, is this unlimited trust due. But as a result the
occasion for action can only exist when this sovereign legislator gives us revealed
laws. For natural laws, we only know them to be the laws of God, by the reasons for
these laws—by the reasons which show their justice and expediency; so, if we do not
see wise reasons for undertaking a particular action or abstaining from it, we cannot
know if it is the will of God that we should do it or avoid it. Let us recall here a
passage of Mr. Barbeyrac, even if it is a little long; the reader, on comparing it with
what we have just said, will see clearly the heart of the problem, how our principles
cause it to vanish, and how they may serve to reconcile opinions which at first sight
seem so opposed:15 “The author [Grotius] here imagines that there might be an
obligation to do or not do certain things, even if he did not have to answer to anybody
for his conduct. And there is no need to be astonished that his ideas on this point are
not quite in order, since we still see today, not only that the majority of philosophers
and scholastic theologians, but also some authors who elsewhere are very judicious
and in no way slaves to scholastic prejudice, are all obstinate in maintaining that the
rules of natural law and ethics, impose in themselves an absolute obligation,

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 502 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

independent of the will of God. Nevertheless, some argue in a way that suggests that
there is only a dispute over the meaning of words between the latter and others who
are not of the same opinion. I am going to try, albeit in a few words, to update
thoroughly the state of the debate, and the basis of the disagreement I have with the
author. It is not a matter here of arguing whether by disregarding the will of an
intelligent being or even the will of God our minds can discover the ideas and
relations from which the rules of natural law and ethics can be deduced. We must
agree in good faith with the supporters of the view that I am combating, that the rules
are effectively based on the very nature of things; that they are in conformity with the
order that we conceive as necessary to the beauty of the universe; that there is a
certain proportion or lack of proportion, aptitude or unsuitability between the majority
of actions and their objects, which makes sure that we find beauty in some and
ugliness in others. But from that alone it does not follow that anyone is properly
obliged to do or not do one thing or another. The fitness or unsuitability, which we
can call the natural morality of actions, is indeed a reason which can cause action or
its refusal, but it is not a reason which imposes an absolute requirement, such as the
idea of obligation implies. This necessity can only come from a superior, i.e., from an
intelligent being outside ourselves, who has the power to restrict our freedom and to
prescribe rules of conduct for us. For proof, here is my reasoning. If there were some
obligation, independent of the will of a superior, either the nature of things would
have to impose it or our own reason. The very nature of things could not impose any
obligation on us, in any real sense. That there may be a harmonious or disharmonious
relationship between our ideas, this alone does not require a recognition of this
relationship—something further is required to compel us to make our acts and life
conform. Nor can reason by itself place us under an indispensable necessity to follow
the ideas of harmony or disharmony that it sets before our eyes as based on the nature
of things.” (I do not copy the proof that the author gives of it, which is found word for
word in his reply to the Judgment of Mr. Leibniz, which I shall look at shortly.16 Let
us move on to his conclusion.) “From all these points I conclude that the maxims of
reason, however congruent they may be with the nature of things, and with the
makeup of our being, are in no way binding, until this very same reason has revealed
to us the Author of existence and of the nature of things, who gives the force of law to
these maxims by his will, and imposes on us an indispensable necessity of conforming
to them by virtue of the right he has to limit our liberty as he considers appropriate,
and to set such boundaries for the faculties he has given us as seem good to him. It is
true that God can ordain nothing contrary to the ideas of harmony or disharmony with
which reason furnishes us in certain acts; but that does not alter the fact that the
obligation to regulate ourselves according to those ideas stems uniquely from his will.
It matters not whether this will is arbitrary or not; it is always the will alone which
imposes the necessity. Finally, a proof that the will of God is the source of every duty
and obligation, lies in that fact that when those who have a religion, adopt the rules of
virtue and the maxims of natural law, they must do so, not chiefly because they
recognize that these rules are in conformity with the natural and unvarying ideas of
order, harmony, and justice, but rather because God, their sovereign master, wishes
them to follow the rules in their conduct.” A charming proof, which precisely defines
what is at issue. But perhaps there is a path of reconciliation between us. We reply to
all this reasoning that men would be obliged to follow natural laws even by setting
aside the will of God, because they are praiseworthy and useful. But this will

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 503 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

undoubtedly adds a great weight to this obligation: it is a very legitimate and solid
foundation although this foundation is not a basic principle since it derives itself from
another from whom it draws its strength—I mean, our self-interest. Will not the
learned commentator on Grotius be obliged to agree, and will he not admit that his
note is useless against a similar system? He adds, “that ultimately it would otherwise
be fairly purposeless that God prescribed anything (to men), since they would already
be held to it: the will and authority of God would only in this case be a kind of
accessory, which would not contribute anything further than to make the obligation
stronger.” That issue, I do not consider as a difficulty. In no way does it detract from
the authority of God to say that everything he ordains for us in natural laws is so fine
and useful in itself that we would be obliged to adopt it, even if God had not ordered
it.

XXX. Another few words about self-interest. There is something ambiguous about
this term: some define it unreasonably narrowly, and seem to mean by it a crude
expediency restricted to property. It is what gives rise to this note by Mr. Barbeyrac:
“There are here two extremes to avoid: one is the work of those who by confusing
integrity and expediency, and measuring this expediency according to their own
particular interest, destroy thereby every idea of virtue and vice, all natural law and
morality; the other, on the part of those who believing (with reason) that the practice
of all the virtues, and of all the rules of natural law, is truly and infallibly to the
advantage of all men in every respect, confuse this expediency with the natural
integrity of actions. The first is only an ineluctable consequence of the other, and a
feature from which we can discern what is truly honorable from what is only so in the
erroneous opinion of men. When I say, we should repay evil with good, but not good
with evil; and men must obey the will of their creator, God, there is in these
statements a congruence so clear and evident that, however little attention we pay to
them, we cannot refrain from acquiescing, and judging the views they contain both
fine and honorable, without needing to think at all about the advantage which flows
from following them. We are convinced from that point on that any action contrary to
these maxims is a sin against reason, and we are forced to blame ourselves. The
concept of duty derives from that recognition alone, as does the rational end to follow
duty. It is true that to give full force to all these like maxims where we reveal a natural
beauty and harmony, we must have been convinced of the truth of the second example
I gave. But even when everything is properly reduced to this basic rule, there is no
need at all to consider the unlimited expediency which flows from it as a way of
perceiving the obligation we are under to conform to it. More to the point: it is
precisely not on account of this self-interest that we must currently perform what is in
line with the will of God: it is solely because we admit we are his dependents and that
it is fine and honorable to obey him; and this would still be so even if (which would
be impossible) he demanded something absolutely without purpose. Whatever view
we take of self-interest, we must not view it simply in itself, but in terms of the
product of the natural and wonderful union that the Creator has established between
the duty and happiness of his creatures. In a word, to set up expediency itself as the
most real and universal foundation of moral integrity and of obligation as such, is to
muddle concepts and to make what is secondary into the principal. Let us also
recognize that those who have not known about or have imperfectly understood this
expediency have insufficiently acknowledged the intrinsic integrity of the majority of

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 504 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

actions that conform with natural law.”17 It is surely sufficient to respond that when
we say that self-interest provides the foundation or the principle of obligation, we are
speaking of a noble and agreed expediency, which is located mainly in the observance
and practice of virtue—because this observance and practice bring us closer to
perfection. I would argue that that point alone is enough to bring this reasoning
tumbling down, and to lighten the difficulties in which the author entangles himself,
from which he cannot extract himself with the help of his principles. When we have a
correct understanding of self-interest; when we have constituted it mainly in the
perfection of the soul, a perfection that already defines our happiness in itself, and
which reconciles us with the good will of the Creator, what danger is there in
confusing the meaning of integrity with expediency? Furthermore—the doctrine of
those who by distinguishing between integrity and expediency maintain that there are
honest things that are not useful and useful ones that are not honest—is it not, as the
ancients have observed, as pernicious as it is insecure? On this point let us consider
the fine words of Cicero: The usage of this word has been corrupted and perverted
and has gradually come to the point where, separating moral rectitude from
expediency, it is accepted that a thing may be morally right without being expedient,
and expedient without being morally right. No more pernicious doctrine than this
could be introduced into human life.18And so, we have heard, Socrates used to
pronounce a curse upon those who first drew a conceptual distinction between things
naturally inseparable.19 Now that we know what we must understand by the word
expediency, let us conclude with Horace: Self-interest itself is almost the mother of
justice and fairness.20

XXXI. Since we have begun to examine the reasoning that Mr. Barbeyrac develops to
support his hypothesis, let us add some reflections on what the same scholar, at the
end of his translation of the treatise On the Duties of Man and Citizen, sets up against
the judgment that Mr. Leibniz had delivered on this work of Pufendorf. This
discussion will conclude by highlighting the use that we can make of our principles.
We conclude this dissertation with these remarks not with the goal of criticizing an
able man, but so as to demonstrate the advantage of a precise method, and to show
how by defining ideas, by making them clear and defining terms, we can unravel
almost painlessly the debates in which many scholars have obstructed us.

XXXII. “The anonymous author,”21 says Mr. Barbeyrac,22 “manifestly confuses
duty with the effects or the motives for its observance; the strength that duty has in its
own right with the force it exercises over the minds of men in the way that most of
them are constituted.” He should say all men here rather than most. For Mr. Leibniz’s
statement that duties have no force without motives is true of all men without
exception; we have established this earlier by showing how obligation is nothing
other than the link between motive and action (§XI and XII); and this philosopher,
without any reference to another life, had grounded his view in the same fashion: “If
we are born with such dispositions, and if we have not been brought up in such a way
that we find a great pleasure in virtue and a great distaste for vices (it is fortunate that
everyone has not!), there will be nothing that can deter us from a major crime, when
we will be able, through committing it, to acquire great rewards with impunity.”23
And above all there will be nothing that can induce us to sacrifice our goods and our
lives for the sake of our country, or for the support of law and justice.24 For in the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 505 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

imaginary instance a man would have no motive to make this sacrifice, not even those
people who can argue for the beauty of virtue. However, Mr. Barbeyrac opposes a
doctrine which seems to us so self-evident: “We are obliged,” he says,25 “not only
not to do harm to anyone in the course of obtaining some advantage for ourselves, but
also to give up on occasion our goods, honors, and even our lives, quite independent
of any consideration of the life to come; and for this sole reason, that these are the
duties which the wise Author of natural law and sovereign leader of the universe has
imposed upon us.” What does the term obliged mean here? If Mr. Barbeyrac has the
same concept of obligation that we have (§XI and XII), then for sure what he
proposes is unsustainable: for there is no motive remaining to be linked to the action
in the case in question. If this scholar means that it is a rule of law, a maxim of the
virtue of sometimes sacrificing our property, etc., we would agree with him. But how
does this relate to a man who, as we imagine him here, has no taste for virtue and in
no way prefers it to vice? It is not a matter of determining the maxims of right or
virtue, but of knowing the outcomes to which men will be brought or obligated in one
case or another. How will we be able to impose on them a requirement for action,
without recourse to the constraints of physical force? They are bound to these actions,
says our author, by this single reason—that they are the duties which the wise Author
of natural law and sovereign Leader of the universe has imposed on them. But what
purchase has this reason on a man who has no expectation of this sovereign
Legislator, and who has no love for virtue, and supports as well the hypothesis against
which we are reasoning?

XXXIII. “Which of these two moral outlooks, I ask you,” adds Mr. Barbeyrac, “is the
most pure, noble, and conformable to the ideas of the wise pagan authors who have
distinguished so clearly between integrity and expediency?” Without getting into an
argument about the epithets pure and noble, let us ask in turn what is the goal of those
who teach natural law and ethics? Is it not to bring men to an observance of justice
and to the practice of virtue? Which moral system is therefore the most reasonable
and useful? The one that, based on the nature of man, bears him toward virtue through
considering his best interests? Or the one that is so pure and noble that it is outside
our reach and entirely useless as an influence on our will? As for the ideas of the wise
pagan authors, we have seen that the wisest had sharply turned away from a clear
separation of integrity and expediency.Socrates, says Cicero, execrated those who
were the first in their opinions to have separated things that nature had closely
united.

XXXIV. Mr. Barbeyrac continues: “But how does the reasoning of our anonymous
author match up with what he says here, that there is a level of natural law which can
exist even in the case of an atheist? And also with what he argues later (§XV) that
there would be some natural obligation, even if someone argued that there is no
Divinity?” The anonymous author, or Mr. Leibniz, has not contradicted himself. He
argues (p. 445)26that to neglect consideration of a life to come, which has an
inseparable link with divine Providence, is to destroy several duties of life. He does
not say that it would destroy all of them: on the contrary, he concedes that there
would still be a large number of duties for an atheist, because there are, in fact,
several where the reasons or motives which bind us, reside in their expediency, even
in respect of this life; and an atheist can also in several instances readily find

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 506 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

sufficient motives in the beauty of virtue alone. Mr. Barbeyrac, at the same time as he
accuses his adversary of a contradiction, cannot prevent himself stating in the two
following pages (446 & 447), what destroys this alleged contradiction. We can read
these pages, and I pass on to another passage.

XXXV. “There is no middle course: either the obligation of the rules of justice among
men is absolutely independent of the Divinity, and based uniquely on the very nature
of things, as is the case with the principles of arithmetic and geometry, or it is not
based on the nature of things in any respect.”27 And why might there be no middle
ground There is one to be sure, and here it is: obligation derives from the very nature
of things, but the Divinity is among the number of these things, whose nature
determines the rules of justice and injustice, and provides the motives which constitute
obligation. Moreover, we have noted earlier (§XXIX) that the will of God is also an
immediate and very powerful principle of obligation. It is not difficult to prove what
Mr. Leibniz advances—that the opinion of those who derive every right from the will
of a superior is devoid of foundation, and that we need always to come back to the
nature of things. When a man who has no other lights but those of reason identifies
that one action is good and that another is bad, what proof does he have that it is the
will of God that creates the former and is absent from the latter? His reason, you will
say, teaches him that God wishes for all that is good. Very well. But this response
itself demonstrates that the intrinsic quality of the action is already a reason to prefer
it, disregarding the will of God; and that the very will of God orders itself according
to this reason. This will is therefore not the first principle, the foundation of the
preference that places the good above the bad: it adds only a great weight to reason
derived from the nature of things; and when it is clearly known, it must take the place
of everything, and provide us with a sufficient reason to determine our action without
further investigation, on the particular merits of the prescribed end (§XXIX).

XXXVI. “The nature of things in itself,” adds Mr. Barbeyrac,28 “could not impose on
us an obligation, as such. Whether there is this or that relation of equality and
proportion, harmony or disharmony in the nature of things, that alone does not require
us to recognize this relation: something further is required to limit our freedom and
subject our actions to regulation in a particular manner.” It is true that the relations of
harmony or disharmony, which exist between things, do not in themselves require
recognition of these relations; but the influence that these very things can have on our
happiness by virtue of these connections is a powerful motive which compels us to act
or not since obligation is the link between motive and action (§XI). There is the extra
factor that Mr. Barbeyrac requests to limit our freedom and subject our actions to
regulation in a particular manner.

XXXVII. “Nor can reason,” he continues,29 “considered in itself, and independent of
the Creator who has given it to us, place us under an absolute necessity of following
these ideas, although it approves them as based on the nature of things. For, first, the
passions set against these abstract and speculative ideas, ideas based on emotion and
sensibility etc.” If reason shows us clearly that by following these ideas based on the
nature of things we are working toward our greater good, to our true happiness, then it
sets us under a necessity of following it; since this necessity is nothing other than
passive obligation (§XII), which derives from active obligation (§XII), which consists

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 507 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

of the link between motive and action (§XI & XII). Given that self-love and a desire
for happiness are the strongest and most all-encompassing of our passions (§XX), will
that passion be able to overcome the counsels of reason successfully, when reason
will show us clearly the link between our happiness and a certain action? Rather it
will enlighten us as to the truly appropriate route to our happiness, and our passions
themselves will bring us to perform our duty.

XXXVIII. “Why,” says our author on the same page, “should we follow the lights of
our own minds, rather than the inclination of our hearts, if there is no external
principle—no being beyond us—to whom we are subject?” It is because we
understand that the lights of our minds will lead us more securely to happiness than
the inclination of our hearts. And setting aside this thought, what might be this
principle external to our will? And how might this being beyond ourselves compel us
to follow his orders freely, rather than our inclination? For sure, he can only make us
his subjects by motives capable of influencing our wills. He might force us through
physical action, but this would no longer be a matter of a required obligation, for we
would no longer be acting freely. For sure, it is true that regard for a sovereign
Master, our Creator, is highly efficacious in placing an obligation on us to practice the
duties of morality. It is why Mr. Leibniz said earlier that to neglect consideration of
the life to come, which has an inseparable link with divine Providence, is to deprive
natural law of the finest of its parts, and to destroy at the same time several duties of
life. Indeed, although every good action is useful in itself, and every bad action
harmful, there are a thousand instances in which we do not see clearly enough the
influence that actions have in themselves on our happiness, however much this
reflection bears down on the strength of our inclinations. But the concept of a wise
God, a good and just disposer of good and evil—this concept, I say, is always at the
forefront of our minds—and directs us to an action that we know to conform to his
will, even though we do not perceive at that moment the reasons bound up in the very
nature of this action which should bring us to give it our preference. Besides, we
should note that this concept of a divinity only acts on us as a motive. Why therefore
is it so powerful in making up our minds and placing us under such a strong
obligation? It is because we are convinced that nothing is more important for our
happiness than a perfect obedience toward an omnipotent Being, who holds our fate in
his hands and whose orders are always wise and just.

XXXIX. Mr. Barbeyrac has foreseen this reply. Let us look at his response.30
“Reason, you say, shows us clearly that by following the rules of harmony, based on
the nature of things, we will act in a fashion more in line with our interests, than if we
allow ourselves to be led by our passions. But is not every man free to give up his
interest, insofar as there is nothing besides to prevent him, and there is no other
person who is concerned that he does not act against his interests, and has the right to
require that he pursue them?” It is not a matter here of some petty interests, or some
advantages of fortune which we recognize each man is free to renounce; it is a
question of our greatest interest, since the author himself says that all things
considered, our interest requires that we follow what reason dictates. And he has to
be understood in this sense, for otherwise all his reasoning would be meaningless
against ours. But, good God, what a moral system! And for what kind of beings will it
be created? If every man were free to give up his greatest interest, what would

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 508 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

become of obligation? Where would duties be? What obligation, I ask you, or what
duties would there be for a man who gave up his temporal and eternal happiness? If
he is capable by himself of renouncing it, what could there be besides to prevent him?
And why should the rights of another person concerned about his conduct matter to
him? I agree that this other person will have the right to restrain him as a madman is
restrained with a tourniquet; but this person will never be able to oblige him to act
voluntarily. Our author would never have advanced such unsustainable paradoxes if
he had worked out clear notions of these matters, and if he had begun by providing
good definitions of terms. We have shown (§XI & XII) that obligation can only be
understood as the connection between motive and action, from which it follows that
there is no obligation at all for a man who renounces all his interests. And as for duty,
however we may define this term, we shall never be able to show that a man capable
of giving up happiness has duties. If we say that our duty is the manner in which we
must determine our actions, whether they are good or bad (§XVI), or that a duty is an
action resolved in conformity with law, insofar as we are obliged to resolve it in this
way; we have shown (§XVII) that all the strength of duty in this sense, comes from
obligation, as we have defined it (§XII). If duties, as they are often defined in
theology, are things that we must practice if we wish to please God and to be happy, it
is all the more clear that there is no duty for the man who has given up all interest.
What does it matter to such a man that God approves, wishes, or commands an action?
Why would he obey him if he does not care at all about doing what is fine and
praiseworthy, or working to be happy? Now, he will not care one bit if he can
renounce all interest. Finally, in a particular sense our duties in respect of others are
things that they have the right to require from us, that we owe them, so that they could
with justice do us harm if we refuse to fulfill our obligation. But in this sense also,
what would these duties become for anyone who gave us his own interests? And how
could he be brought to recognize them other than by force? Will he do for anyone else
what he will not do for himself?

XL. Here is another objection: “But what we must reflect carefully on above all is that
our reason, considered outside all dependence on the Creator from whom we possess
it, is ultimately nothing other than ourselves. Now, no one can impose on himself an
absolute necessity to act or not in one way or another.”31 This is a pure begging of
the question. The objection is based on the view that we have already refuted, that all
obligation comes from an external principle, the will of a superior. Besides, we should
note that it is not our reason that imposes obligation on us: reason only makes
apparent the link between motive and action that constitutes obligation. This link
comes from the nature of things, and it is the Creator who established it when he
made the world as it is. There is also a response which anticipates what Mr. Barbeyrac
adds: “For necessity to truly exist, it cannot cease at the will of the person subject to
it—otherwise it is reduced to nothing.” This necessity or obligation for sure cannot
cease at our behest, for we cannot separate a motive from an action to which it is
joined by the nature of things.

XLI. I believed that these few reflections on what the learned translator of Pufendorf
objects to in Judgment of an Anonymous Author could serve to shed more light on the
subject, and it is in the same light that I shall conclude by recalling the fine words of
the anonymous author, or Mr. Leibniz:32 “What we have just argued is very useful in

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 509 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

relation to the practice of true piety; for it is not enough to be subject to God as if we
were in obedience to a tyrant; for we must not only fear him on account of his
greatness but also love him because of his goodness. These are the maxims of right
reason, as well as the precepts of Scripture, and they are where the good principles of
jurisprudence lead, which are in accord with sound theology and which lead to a true
virtue. Those who perform good actions not through a motive of hope or fear in
respect of a superior but following the inclination of their hearts, do not act with
justice. On the contrary, those who act most justly are those who imitate in some way
the justice of God. For when we have done good through love of God or our neighbor,
we take pleasure in our action itself (such is the nature of love), and we need no
further spur or command of a superior. It is of such a person that it is said ‘the law is
not made for the just.’33 It is indeed against reason to argue that law or constraint
alone creates the just man. However, we must concede that those who have not
reached this point of perfection are only made subject to obligation through hope and
fear. It is above all in the expectation of divine punishment that we find a full and
complete necessity, which has power to compel all men to follow the rules of justice
and equity.”

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 510 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

Dissertation On This Question: “Can Natural Law Bring
Society To Perfection Without The Assistance Of Political
Laws?”
Translated by T. J. Hochstrasser

I. This question, proposed in 1742 by the Academy of Dijon, struck me as chosen
with real wisdom; for any reliable and principled handling of this topic requires
reflection on the foundation of the nature and goal of politics. Men are not often given
the chance to undertake such researches.

II. So as to advance this interesting subject in a clear and precise manner, and to
determine the issue unambiguously, it is necessary above all to define the meaning of
terms precisely, and to make clear and distinct the concepts that match them. That is
the key point in matters of moral theory, and once it is resolved, the solution follows
naturally and presents itself. Let us see therefore what are the perfection of society,
natural law, and political laws.

III. The perfection of a thing consists generally in the harmony or agreement of
everything within it in the direction of a common goal; so we need to see what is the
goal of society if we want to get to know exactly what constitutes its perfection.

IV. Man naturally desires perfection and happiness, and he enjoys gifts of intelligence
and free will to attain them. But he cannot work toward that goal without a peaceful
life, and the resources to provide for his security and all his needs. There is no one
who can obtain these advantages without the help of others. This is what induced men
to create a society in which they promised such reciprocity. The perfection of this
society therefore consists in the provision of arrangements such that not only do all
members enjoy personal security, but also their labor yields the necessities and even
the comforts of life; as a result there are no obstacles to each pursuing his own
perfection, in accordance with the views of God.

V. So that a society can be well founded, so that everything is in order, and each
individual can pursue his own business in peace, there must be rules of conduct based
on wise reasoning and to which all the members submit. These rules are laws. We
recognize two forms of them: natural and civil law.

VI.Natural law comprises rules of conduct based on the nature of things, and in
particular on the nature of man. We get to know it through reason. This faculty of the
soul reveals to us the agreement or disagreement which exists between free actions
and the nature of things and man in particular. Moreover, it demonstrates that if we
want to act as rational beings, we must scrutinize carefully these different
relationships that actions have with the nature of things, and above all with the nature
of man—relations between good and evil, and the good and the bad. Reason teaches
us that we are under obligation to practice the former and avoid the latter. Finally, we

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 511 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

cannot doubt that in so acting we are fulfilling the will of the Creator, who has
imposed the rule of law on us by the same means that he has established the world as
it is.

VII. The ancient philosophers had the same idea of the law of nature as we do. Here is
the definition that they gave of it: Law is the height of reason innate in nature, which
commands those actions which must be undertaken and forbids the contrary.1 Cicero
adds in the same place: The same reason, when it finds confirmation and completion
in the mind of man, is law. And the same philosopher, in the company of the wisest
men of the ancient world, relates the whole of natural law to this general rule that man
must live in a way that conforms to his nature, living in harmony with nature. Indeed,
from the nature of man can be deduced all the duties and commands of natural law, in
the same way that mathematicians deduce all the laws of movement from this single
proposition based on the nature of bodies: “Every body remains in its state of rest or
movement so long as no external force compels it to leave that condition.”

VIII. From there it follows that natural law is universal. Since it requires us to do all
that is most suited to our nature, there is no situation in which it can let us down; for
in every situation in which there is a better option to take, we are ordered to take it;
and if it were possible to find a case of perfect indifference, no law would be of any
use in resolving the matter.

IX. Lastly, let us also note that if natural law is essential to man, based on his nature
and the nature of things, it is eternal, immutable, and prescribed by God. This was the
view of the Roman jurists. Indeed, said the emperor Justinian, natural laws, which are
observed for the most part the world over, remain established and unchanging,
established by a divine Providence.2 From which it follows self-evidently that no law
can be contrary to the law of nature.

X. This is a very important feature to note of political or civil laws, which are rules of
conduct, established by a public authority for the good of society, and furnished with
a positive obligation, by virtue of the penalties linked to their neglect. As they cannot
be contrary to natural law in any way (para. IX), and have universal application (para.
VIII), political laws correspond at bottom with natural laws. What separates them is,
first, that they are written or pronounced formally and that they reduce natural law to
general rules to cover every instance of the same kind; and, secondly, that they are
provided with civil power, and accompanied with the positive obligation that the
threat of punishment adds to natural obligation.

XI. It is not possible to deduce natural law in the form of general rules directed to the
good of society and adapted to circumstances, without causing it to undergo some
slight alterations, or some deviation in particular instances, and this has given rise to
this definition of civil law which is found in law six of the Digest: On justice and law:
civil law neither departs wholly from the law of nature or nations, nor is it a slave to
it in every particular. Therefore when we add or subtract something from common
law, we create particular or civil law.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 512 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

XII. According to the idea that we have furnished of the law of nature, it is clear that
this law is sufficient in itself to bring society to perfection; and if that were all that
were required, I reckon that the issue would be settled. A law founded on the nature of
things, especially on the nature of man, and which is, in consequence, wisdom and
justice itself; a law, which applies in all instances; a law, in a word, which provides
wisely for everything, is, without doubt, appropriate to regulate society perfectly. It
would invariably produce this outcome if men were as they should be; if they tried to
live in conformity with their nature, while never abusing their freedom. Given the
parallel between the laws of nature and the laws of motion according to the axiom or
proposition cited earlier (para. VII), if men took care to follow all the precepts that
flow from it, just as bodies follow the laws given to them, then the moral world in
human society would bear witness to the same order and harmony that we look on
with wonder in the material world.

XIII. When I say, “If men were as they ought to be,” I do not at all ask that they
exceed their humanity, but only that they make full use of their faculties. Let us
imagine one thousand people of both sexes, chosen from the most rational and
virtuous in Europe, and that together they form a kind of small republic. Who can
doubt that this society would not be better regulated by natural law alone, than has
been any other state with the support of political laws? These one thousand people
will be enlightened enough to get to know natural law, and to be convinced that their
best interest requires that they conform to it exactly. As a result, their society will be
as perfect a human society as any such can. They will have a body of law, just, wise,
and complete, which is known to all the members and accompanied by sufficient
incentives to shape their will. Without the need for subordination to the authority of a
government, they will acknowledge themselves under the obligation of this law that
they derive from nature to provide for the common good. They will focus their talents
and labor on this goal; everyone will compete to preserve order and peace. If
differences arise, they will choose arbitrators to resolve them. And if it should happen
that one individual, possessed by the force of a violent passion, departs from his duty,
then the others, whose reason would not be obscured by the same clouds, would they
not readily and with one will restrain him without provoking the least social
dislocation? Some might vainly object that regulations would be required for trade,
for example, or for crucial periods of war and epidemic disease, and a sovereign
authority to ensure that they are observed. But reason will promote wise measures in
these instances to the people as we have imagined them, and natural law will oblige
them to preserve those rules devotedly, as they will tend to social benefit.

XIV. But men are very different both from what they ought to be and from these one
thousand people of whom we have just spoken. Two considerations make natural law
useless in respect of them: first, the majority do not know in all instances what it
determines, either because they lack the necessary insight or because their passions
and prejudices throw up an illusion and cast them into error, by representing to them
as legitimate or neutral conduct that is in fact criminal. There are even subtle
circumstances in which the slightest prejudice can prevent an honest man from seeing
the truth that otherwise he would discern. Secondly, men are not always sufficiently
enlightened as to their true interests to be aware of the incentives with which natural
law is accompanied, and often in the midst of passion these motivations do not

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 513 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

present themselves to their minds, or do not strike them with sufficient force. Two
considerations bring the man of reason to adherence to this law: first, the obedience
which he owes to his Creator; and secondly, the advantages which flow naturally from
this adherence. Virtue adorns the soul and ennobles it through its beauty, and in its
results and consequences it is always more reliably useful than vice: The good hate to
sin through love of virtue. But experience shows only too well how few of these
motives hold sway over the generality of men. Most scarcely think of God in the fever
of their passions, or if they think of him in more collected moments, his goodness
conveys to them an illusion, and they imagine that after having satisfied their desires,
they will easily win pardon. Are they truly so blind as to underestimate their Creator?
As for the second motivation, how small is the number of those who know and are
aware of it! It would be a pleasant means of preventing a criminal by making him
aware that through his crimes he dishonors the dignity of his being, and that poverty,
accompanied by virtue, is of more lasting worth than a criminal wealth. A reason
which is fine and persuasive in the mind of a wise man would become absurd in the
eyes of a wretch degraded by vice.

XV. It has therefore been necessary, for the good of society, to repair these defects
and to supply what is missing in natural law—not in itself—but with regard to the
corruption of men. So that this law, perfect in itself, may become sufficient to regulate
a society of men, such as they are, these steps need to be taken: first, that it may be
known to everyone and have a determinate meaning, which is the same for everyone.
This is the way to head off disputes and the swarm of other difficulties that might
emerge from the ignorance, passions, and prejudices which produce such a
bewildering diversity of human opinions. It would be too dangerous, in a myriad of
examples, to assign to each person the task of determining in their own fashion what
the natural law decides in one case or another. For example, this law states that a man
whose reason is not yet mature, and who does not have the good sense required to
handle business, is not in a condition to make contracts, and that if someone had
abused his lack of knowledge to make him take on burdensome obligations, then the
contract would be void. There is nothing more just than this rule, but also nothing
better calculated to produce a multitude of quarrels and injustices among men who are
ignorant, prejudiced, and self-interested. Individuals would be perpetually at odds, so
as to know whether or not a youth is really in a fit state to handle his affairs, and the
judges would frequently be perplexed in deciding the issue. The honorable magistrate
could easily fall into error, and the wicked one would have his hands free to practice
his iniquity. Civil laws have prevented this abuse, by setting an age below which a
man is a juvenile; i.e., that he is judged incapable of forming a contract; and the laws
have fixed the period of his majority at the time when experience has shown that
subjects of the State commonly have the degree of reason sufficient to regulate their
own affairs. So it is for the benefit and peace of society that general laws have had to
be derived from natural law, which can be acknowledged by everyone, where the
meaning is fixed and the application clear. Secondly, a source of authority is needed to
compel a respect for the laws on the part of those who are not amenable to the voices
of reason, and which adds to natural obligation, which is too weak for the majority of
men, a new positive obligation through the means of penalties attached to
disobedience. It is the only motive that can influence the will of the wicked. The evil
hate to sin through fear of punishment.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 514 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

XVI. But if by setting up a public authority natural law experiences the two changes
or additions that we have just touched on, then it becomes public law. For the political
or civil laws, to be precise, differ from natural law only in these two respects (para.
X).

XVII. Thus, given the depravity of mankind, the good regulation of society has been
seen to depend on two steps: first, extending the knowledge of natural law by making
its application easy, and as a result reducing it to clearly publicized general rules;
secondly, establishing a public authority, and adding a positive obligation to natural
obligation, through the means of punishments (para. XV). To do that is nothing other
than to establish civil or political laws (para. XVI); and thus it is demonstrated that in
the current condition of the human race, natural law cannot bring society to
perfection without the assistance of political laws.

XVIII. We have already remarked that those laws must never be contrary to the law of
nature. It is only in examples where there is a necessary deviation that they can be
separated; for it would be impossible to do otherwise without giving up all the
benefits that these laws produce for society: natural law itself states that one must
always choose the lesser of two evils. For example, Louis XIV [of France] wisely
established under his ordinance of April 1667 that every transaction that exceeds the
sum or value of one hundred livres, even a voluntary trust, must be signed off in front
of lawyers or under formal signature; and that witnesses will not be recognized
outside the content of those documents. It is certain that, according to natural law, a
man who has acknowledged a debt, whether major or minor, or who has received
money on trust, and who has promised verbally to pay back or return it, is no less
obligated than if he had made undertakings in writing. However, French law wisely
determines that he cannot be compelled because it is more useful to head off a host of
lawsuits than harmful for one man to be deprived of the sum of money he is owed.
Besides, it is up to the creditor to know the law and take precautions, and if he
neglects them then he has no right to complain.

XIX. If the help of state laws is necessary to provide natural law with its full force, we
must not imagine that that is sufficient and that we can neglect the study of the latter.
On the contrary, the two categories of law must always be kept together, and lend
each other mutual support. The legislator who wishes to provide a State with good
laws, must know natural law to perfection, and be governed by its always infallible
rulings. It is indeed the true source of law, as the ancients rightly remarked: may I
reach back to the source of law through nature, says Cicero.3 When political or civil
laws are established, those to whom their execution is entrusted must exercise fairness
in interpretation, and apply the study of natural law. Knowledge of it is even
necessary for members of the public. Cases repeatedly present themselves which the
legislator has not foreseen, and in which we have no other guide than nature.

XX. A good philosophy is the only means of reaching to a precise and reliable
knowledge of the law of nature—a knowledge that is essential to anyone who wishes
to be well trained in the law. This is why Cicero said that jurisprudence must not be
drawn from anything in the Praetorian Edict or the Twelve Tables, but from the heart
of the deepest philosophy: the science of law is to be derived not from the praetorian

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 515 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

edict, as several writers now suggest, nor from the Twelve Tables, as earlier
authorities argued, but deep from within the resources of philosophy.4 Also, the
wisest of the ancient philosophers, convinced that there is no more useful social
science than morality, devoted their chief reflections to this part of philosophy. Is
there, indeed, a science worthier of human attention than the one that teaches them the
ways of being wise and happy? This is, says Pliny, the most beautiful part of
philosophy—to discover and practice jurisprudence.5 He speaks of a jurisprudence
founded on morality or on natural law. However, this very part of philosophy is today
the most neglected. Most modern philosophers only study physics or mathematics.
And among the awards that the famous Academies offer to the learned to stimulate
their researches, there is not one devoted to moral theory. Is there none of these Royal
Societies that wishes to merit the eulogy Cicero offered of Socrates? Socrates was the
first, however, who summoned philosophy from heaven, relocated it in cities and
introduced it into homes, and compelled consideration of the meaning of life, customs,
good, and evil.6

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 516 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

DIALOGUE Between The Prince Of ****And His Confidant,
On Certain Essential Elements Of Public Administration
Translated by Kenneth Goodwin

It was the day of the crowning of the Prince of ****, who had been named as
Successor to the Throne. The Count of ****, the Prince’s Confidant, entered the
bedroom early in the morning. He found that the Prince had risen, and seeing that he
appeared to be very busy, remained a little distance away. When the Prince looked
up, the Count began to address him thus:

THE COUNT.

This is the loveliest day of my life and a very happy one for the **** [people of this
country]. You, my Prince, are going to reign over them.

THE PRINCE.

Ah! My dear Count, thank Heaven that today will be really happy for the ****! It will
nevertheless be dreadful for me.

THE COUNT.

How so? You seem to fear something that most men regard as the greatest good
fortune, being in a position almost above humanity [la Condition humaine].

THE PRINCE.

The crown is scarcely a benefit destined for the particular advantage of its possessor. I
consider it a burden, as difficult an office as it is important.

THE COUNT.

Ah, my dear Prince! (Allow me to use this expression; nothing is more fitting.) Since
you have such an idea of Royalty, I am certain that you will fulfill its functions
perfectly.

THE PRINCE.

If the task was less daunting, I would risk promising myself that. But who could cope
in dealing with so many important matters that are so varied and so complicated? I
believe, however, that I can categorize them under two general headings, the Glory of
the Supreme Being and the Happiness of the Nation. There you have the twin objects
of my actions and my cares. They are the great ends for every just government.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 517 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

THE COUNT.

You could make this fine aim a great deal simpler since both goals are intertwined
and are dependent upon each other. In all your steps in the short term, choose the one
that pleases you more. Be constant to it and, being an enlightened Prince, you will
achieve your other goal.

THE PRINCE.

What you’ve just said, my dear Count, is all very well, and at first sight seems very
reasonable. However, I still have something of a problem. I have been told so often
that we must sacrifice everything to the Glory of God, that the goods of this world are
not those recommended to us by our Religion.

THE COUNT.

The desire to please God must without any doubt be the great motivation which
animates every intelligent Being, and this motivation should be reflected in our deeds.
This is what I call “glorifying God.” But this Supreme Being has no need of men. He
demands nothing from us for himself, and if he gives us our Laws, it is as an infinitely
good and wise Father and for our own good. It would be very easy to demonstrate that
for every thinking Being without exception, the paths of sound Religion [saine
Religion] and those of real happiness are one and the same. Practicing Virtue is the art
of making oneself happy. But now, let us speak about the State, of the Nation as a
whole. You understand that Religion can flourish, spread, and be fully effective
among men only in the kindly shade of peace, safety, and good order, which in turn
can be derived only from the establishment of a well-governed Civil Society.

THE PRINCE.

All this is certain. If men used to live without Laws, or without any form of
Government, each living in his own small world, reason and experience show us
equally that Religion was not able to make itself heard, be studied, enjoyed, or
practiced, in the midst of such awful confusion.

THE COUNT.

You see then that Religion is very much interested in the prosperity of the State and
that you will serve it extremely well by working to encourage this prosperity. Can you
conceive of anything more agreeable to the Common Father of all men than to
procure the happiness of an infinite number of His Creatures, by maintaining and
securing an Establishment under whose shade men can cultivate their Souls, improve
their Morals, enlighten themselves, understand their Maker, and serve him by helping
their brothers. Allow me in this regard to quote the words of a Pagan Philosopher:
Nihil est enim illi principi Deo, qui omnem hunc mundum regit, quod quidem in terris
fiat, acceptus, quim concilia catusque hominum jure sociati, qui Civitates
appellantur.1 CICERO spoke thus in this fine piece called Scipio’s Dream.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 518 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

THE PRINCE.

What an admirable Pagan! It is quite shameful that several of our Doctors, with so
much help that CICERO did not enjoy, should appear so inferior to him in their
reasoning about Morality.

THE COUNT.

These wise Romans had an excellent maxim. One never saw them separate the
interests of Religion from the true welfare of the State. On the contrary, they used to
apply themselves constantly to maintain these two great designs in perfect harmony.

THE PRINCE.

Their Religion was false, however. And we, who have happily discovered the true
faith, will struggle to reconcile it with the welfare of the State. We shall see it often
put into direct opposition to the happiness of the Nation!

THE COUNT.

In the Roman Republic, the same men presided over Religious Ceremonies and the
Affairs of State. They did not recognize the distinction between the Clergy and the
Laity. Senators were High Priests, Augurs, performed Altar Rituals, ensured Justice,
and commanded Armies. As these were only different Ministries of the Republic, they
were often carried out by the same persons.

THE PRINCE.

Should not all citizens, however, irrespective of their social rank, work toward the
same goal? Do they not have a common interest, the prosperity of the State?

THE COUNT.

You should appreciate, Prince, that men carry their passions and their individual
interests even into the most sacred matters.

THE PRINCE.

Alas! I know this only too well nowadays. I know too that such men are more false,
more difficult to unmask, when they are members of a state which makes them wear a
brave face in everyday affairs. How can I identify those who merit my confidence?

THE COUNT.

In my view, here are the means. When you find a wise Pastor—moderate, charitable,
motivated by a true zeal for the good of the Kingdom—listen to him, my Prince, and
follow his advice in all matters pertaining to Religion.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 519 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

THE PRINCE.

But there are others who only speak to me about the sacrifices that are owed to God.
They say that everything should give way before the greater interest of the Faith.

THE COUNT.

Do not listen to such imposing talk. It is all too often used by the fanatic or the
hypocrite. True Piety, enlightened Piety, will not hold you to vague and obscure
ramblings. It will constantly reveal its Doctrine to you, in happy harmony with the
practice of reasonable Morality and sound Politics. Have you not agreed just now that
true Religion can never be opposed to the welfare of the State? It is, on the contrary,
its most firm support. The God who approves of and protects Civil Societies, would
he allow into the Religion he has imparted to mankind, any Dogma, any Practice or
any Maxim contrary to the well-being of such necessary institutions? When you see a
dogmatic Doctor holding forth in an incomprehensible manner, or who crosses the
threshold into vulgarity, and is quite useless in his profession, always refusing to
compromise, and pursuing anyone who does not think like him, can you doubt that
pride and a domineering nature are his motivating impulses, rather than zeal for a
Religion which teaches only sweetness and charity? You will be doing him a kindness
if you accuse him of fanaticism. Reject zeal of this kind and guard against such
counsels when these people call upon you to use your power to persecute their
adversaries.

THE PRINCE.

But ought I not protect our Religion and fight its enemies?

THE COUNT.

Of course you must, my Prince. The means, however, must be well chosen. It is an
error and bad faith to support Religion by violence and force. Content to force
everyone to bend their heads beneath the yoke, false Religion is never impeded by the
fear of making hypocrites. But true Religion desires only the happiness of mankind. It
scorns enforced submission and lays claim to reign only in our hearts. The Truth
alone persuades, it does not enter into souls by violence. And by the same token,
when a Pastor does not act in good faith, if he is wise and prudent he would refrain
from advising or ever soliciting persecution. The blood of Martyrs from every Sect,
every Religion, whether true or false, pours oil upon the flames, a sprinkling which
produces in its turn thousands of followers of these Sects. Add to this consideration
the frightful evils arising in a State which result from persecution, and I am certain
that you will reject all advice from Persecutors with revulsion and deal with them
severely.

THE PRINCE.

Praise be to God for helping me to understand so clearly that true Religion does not
ever demand anything which is detrimental to the public good. In working for His

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 520 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Creatures, I will no longer be afraid of failing the Supreme Being. The happiness of
my People will be my guiding rule. I believe it better for Religion to be in the hands
of a Prince, and far safer than leaving it to the wiles of Theologians. If Religion,
however, does not entail anything contrary to the well-being of the State, would it be
equally true to say that nothing can be of value to the Kingdom unless at the same
time it is given the approbation of Religion, or at least tolerated by it? Some would
raise many questions with me over this.

THE COUNT.

I would be very happy if I could alleviate any doubts for you. Whereas in ordinary
Morals, SOCRATES and CICERO roundly condemned those who distinguished
between the useful and the honest,2 I would want in any ordered State [Etat police]
for everyone to indignantly reject this idea, along with those who wish to set Religion
against the good of the State, and he who dares boast that what damages Religion is
beneficial to Society. The first among these people is the wrong-headed, ignorant, and
fanatic Theologian; the second is the false and superficial Politician.

THE PRINCE.

I relish your maxims, my dear Count, and it appears to me that this is how things
should be. Help me, though, to resolve some difficulties that occur to me. Take
Luxury, for example. People vaunt its utility in a large Kingdom, but without giving
in to too much austerity, it would seem that Religion does not approve of it.

THE COUNT.

Yet, Prince, Luxury is as unsuitable to the good of the State as it is to the purity of
Religion.

THE PRINCE.

One reads about it in pompous eulogies and one hears these matters being discussed
in daily conversation. They say that in a large State, Luxury is the lifeblood of
commerce, industry, and labor. It is a source of riches, through the high regard that
foreigners have for elegance and arts of every kind, of which Luxury is the source.
You cannot deny that there is something of the truth in all of this.

THE COUNT.

Before proceeding further, we must first agree on what we define as Luxury. I
understand by this term, excessive expenditure that goes beyond normal amounts. I
am not talking about the necessary and the useful alone, or yet the convenient or even
the agreeable and what decency demands from its depiction according to rank and
station. I say also that in the usual course of affairs, this spending exceeds the
capacities of anyone who indulges in it and it always carries with it some element of
frivolity.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 521 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

THE PRINCE.

Well! Luxury, as you have just defined it, provides employment for a huge number of
workers, enables them to gain their livelihood, makes them richer, and through the
prestige that it gives to our tastes and Manufactures, every year brings considerable
revenue into the Country.

THE COUNT.

I can tell you another singular fact. We do not have close at hand, the wherewithal
required by Luxury. We lack gold and silver mines and those for precious stones. The
delicious wines of our Kingdom are hardly the only things needed for our delicate and
sumptuous tables. Hungary, Spain, and the Islands furnish them at great expense, and
our much-vaunted fabrics do not stop us from seeking out foreign alternatives. While
I would agree that Luxury brings more money into the Country than goes out, more
money goes out than is useful.

THE PRINCE.

Nevertheless, riches are very necessary for the defense of the Realm. They supply a
large part of our armed forces.

THE COUNT.

I scarcely know anyone today who doubts it. The Duc de SULLY3 will teach you to
put this precept into a proper perspective. When the Kingdom provides you, at much
less cost, with larger, more dependable, braver, and more frugal Armed Forces, would
you be any less powerful with reduced revenue? But I don’t want to give up easily.
Let us consider the Luxury that increases the wealth of the Kingdom and thus
furnishes the means to extend its power. The case for that has not yet been made.

THE PRINCE.

I think I understand your line of argument, but do continue.

THE COUNT.

Firstly, here’s a fine and delicate question to consider: to know if our well-kept and
well-cultivated agricultural lands would not provide us with exports as large and with
a surer return than all the Manufactures sustained by Luxury. Furthermore, it is clear
that Luxury has caused the neglect of the purely useful or necessary arts like the
cultivation of the Land and the work of artisans. It depopulates the Countryside,
everybody heads for the Towns, where the means are to be found of getting rich
quickly and with less of a struggle. The Laboring class, that unique pool of good
Soldiers, is thereby diminished. Yet, after all of these facts, I am told that Luxury
increases the force of the State!

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 522 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

THE PRINCE.

Oh, my dear Count! You are beginning to alarm me, and I see that those who praise
this public menace are shallow Politicians. They have put before me only their most
positive contentions.

THE COUNT.

That is not the half of it. Let us now see this menace in its other guises. Can it be
denied that Luxury sustains and strengthens the spirit of softness and frivolity which
characterizes this Century? And what damage has it not caused to your Army? How
would they under similar circumstances sustain the glory of our forefathers who were
hardened to toil, indefatigable on the field of honor, and when peace obliged them to
lay down their arms, sought their amusement only in games and exercises where they
recaptured the memory of their battles?

THE PRINCE.

Honor, so natural to my Nobility, will sustain our courage. My Nobles will fly from
their ablutions straight to the battlefield, and one could hardly accuse them of being
driven mad by Luxury.

THE COUNT.

I do know that, Prince, and have seen it myself. And please Heaven that this bright
flame will always burn despite the universal depravity of morals! Though by unique
fortune effeminate leanings ought never diminish the courage of our young Warriors,
Valor is not the only quality necessary for Soldiers. Wise heads are required to direct
all those arms. Certainly too, I do not see how a young Lord can do this, while
occupied with his pleasures, his appearance, his accoutrements, jewelry, and baubles.
Neither do I see, I can say, how he would be able to acquire the prudence and wisdom
so necessary in a General; nor by what happy chance resolve and greatness of spirit
would find a place within him in the midst of so many trifles.

THE PRINCE.

History confirms only too well the truth you have uttered. After the Romans had
given in to the excesses of Luxury, they fell into soft ways and their warrior virtues
did not hold out for long. CAESAR understood only too well the effect of these
effeminate morals. At the battle of Pharsala,4 he ordered his Soldiers to strike the
enemy in the face. What was in his mind regarding the youth of the city, who were
fighting under POMPEY’s orders? Soft living had not yet been able to extinguish the
courage of these young Romans. It had sufficient influence on them, though, to make
them fear being disfigured even more than death itself.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 523 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

THE COUNT.

I too have often seen in our Armies that discomfort, tiredness, and inclement weather
spread an almost general despondency and discouragement among the men that the
sight of the greater dangers had not been able to undermine. Our Warriors scorn death
in battle and on the march, but cannot bear the loss of their equipment.

THE PRINCE.

Ah! I see the reason for that. Honor places upon them the obligation to face danger
bravely, and unfortunately it cannot shame them for any effeminate posturing as
unworthy of a Warrior, worse even than cowardice. Oh, Count! How impatient I am
to eradicate the harmful causes of such a shameful weakness! If I could only bring
back the times of manly and virtuous simplicity!

THE COUNT.

You would certainly make the Nation more powerful, more respectable to its
neighbors, more redoubtable to its enemies. What is more, you would even make our
citizens happier. All these refinements of Luxury become essential for someone
immersed in his own pleasure. Their loss would torment him, but their enjoyment
does not make him happy. Consider these things, the air of laziness, of boredom and
disgust, that nearly always can be discerned in the so-called fortunates of the century.

THE PRINCE.

What am I waiting for to take action? I want to begin my Reign with such a salutary
reform.

THE COUNT.

This enthusiasm is all to the good and is worthy of admiration and of praise! I have no
fear of a little vivacity even when engaged in an undertaking where one has to
proceed with measured tread. I understand your prudence.

THE PRINCE.

Quite right, Count. I sense that this work will take time, prudence, and appropriate
and well-managed measures. Help me to carry it through. You have excited me
against luxury. I am asking for your advice in the war that I am going to declare upon
it.

THE COUNT.

You have convinced me, my Prince, that you want to attack this enemy with all the
application humanity demands. You intend to put down its tyranny without upsetting
its unfortunate victims, without reducing to penury those who perpetuate its existence.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 524 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

When Luxury has put down so many deep roots in a Kingdom, it becomes a
deepseated illness that must be given proper treatment. Too strong a medicine will
send the ailing body into dangerous convulsions. We are talking about an illness that
has several causes and several symptoms, each one of which has to be treated with the
appropriate remedy.

THE PRINCE.

I can, for example, forbid a particular product, anything that Luxury draws from
abroad. Nothing prevents me from disallowing its use.

THE COUNT.

I see no objections to such a wise move. In that way, you could save for the Kingdom
all the money that those foreign goods lose us. There is another area of Luxury that
you could remove without difficulty, and by a single authoritative act that would be
remarkably easy to enforce. I am speaking about the inordinate number of useless
servants whom people employ merely for show. Nothing prevents your delivering us
from this vain and ruinous extravagance. Fix the number of lackeys or other domestic
servants people are allowed to employ, in accordance with their rank, and you will
stop them from drawing on ploughboys or men from the army. Those of your subjects
who are the most healthy and robust will no longer be enticed into lives of idleness
and corruption through service in the houses of the rich and powerful.

THE PRINCE.

Would it not be easy to destroy luxury in all its manifestations! But I would be
somewhat uneasy about laying down a limit on everybody’s expenditure for the table,
furniture, or clothes.

THE COUNT.

Nothing could be truer, Prince, and you would have to determine how far to go in this
regard. I can hardly advise you how to proceed with such Orders in Council.
Sumptuary Laws are convenient, essential in a small State and especially in a
Republic. In a large Kingdom, however, or in the situation where we find ourselves,
you will cause a sort of revolution by fiercely attacking all these trifles to which men
are so attached. There are more subtle, indirect ways more suited to circumstances
and that I believe are more effective in their results. I place your own example at the
top of the list. If a populace has, over a long period of time, been accustomed to
follow the example of their Masters, to flatter them and imitate them, should you not
wait until the Nation’s eyes and hearts are turned toward you? “Our Kings,”
Montaigne wrote, “can do what they please in such external reformations; their own
inclination stands in this case for a law. Quidquid Principes faciunt, praecipere
videntur.5Whatever is done at court, passes for a rule throughout the rest of
France.”6 If your Courtiers see for themselves that the excesses of Luxury and
frivolity displease you, one will no longer see them ruin themselves through
trivialities. Unconsciously, they will bring themselves back within the bounds of

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 525 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

reason and decency. They will set the tone for the Nobility, and the leading citizens
and all the nation will soon follow their lead.

THE PRINCE.

It was excellent in the olden days when the Nobility and the most eminent in the
kingdom alone held positions where people took notice of them. Today, the country is
full of these new men who, while not being admitted to Court, spread a contagious
luxury in the cities, mainly in the capital.

THE COUNT.

It is a good thing that you know about such abuses and that you are aware of their
consequences.

THE PRINCE.

Of course I know about them, Count, and I know the remedy. I will cut off the source
of these quick-made fortunes, and I will deliver my people from these men who
together become their tyrants and corruptors.

THE COUNT.

Oh, Prince, how you have filled one faithful Subject with joy. In one single stroke,
through such a necessary reform in the administration of your finances, you will be
giving a new face to this fine Kingdom. We shall no longer see useless limbs bloated
with blood and foulness whilst the rest of the body perishes from exhaustion. Wealth
will circulate afar in a wider and more sustained manner. Honest abundance will be
come from the fruits of our labors, and it will circulate with an equality that conforms
to the good of the State, just as it does to justice and common humanity.

THE PRINCE.

I can appreciate what the followers concerned with the favorites of PLUTUS7 tell me,
that opulent financiers are an ever-present resource to meet the pressing needs of the
State. A vain attraction, capable of dazzling only the poorest eyesight! Is not money
distributed more equally always in the hands of the citizens themselves? I would no
longer need large amounts. It will flow into my Coffers in abundance when the needs
of State demand it. I am confident of being able to provide all I need even during the
most trying times when I govern a rich and happy People with wisdom.

THE COUNT.

I do not doubt it, Prince. You will win the confidence and the hearts of your Subjects.
They will happily give you all you demand of them for their defense, and you are
going to put them into a position where they can satisfy your needs.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 526 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

THE PRINCE.

Of course, I want to provide them with all the necessities of life. I sense that in order
to secure a comfortable state for them they must refrain from delivering themselves
up to ruinous fantasies and from seeking out trivialities that nowise bring them
happiness. Here is a very important point for the success of my undertaking. We must
mark out the real limits of Luxury and clearly indicate the expenditure that is to be
permitted and what we will agree not to forbid. I would not want to reduce my
Subjects to petty meanness, force the rich to live as if they were poor, and snuff out
the arts and industry.

THE COUNT.

I had not counted on pushing the reform that far. A great and rich Kingdom should
not present itself as a poor State. Such austerity would perhaps not be entirely fitting
and might prove to be a dangerous introduction into a state. Praiseworthy
magnificence is acceptable when it does not exceed the means of those who indulge in
it. The tastes of rich people for truly beautiful things, for the best of the arts, can only
be beneficial to the Kingdom. They galvanize industry, and excite genius and talent.
Far from your opposing these tastes, expand them yourself, by protecting the Fine
Arts so that they serve to heighten the luster of your grandeur. Ensure that they
convey a lofty impression of us to the whole world. The magnificence of our public
buildings, for example, sits well upon a powerful Nation. They will imbue the State
with esteem, gain the respect of foreigners, and contribute to the majesty of the State.
The Great will imitate you according to their means, and all the Citizens will follow
suit in proportion to their rank. Take care that when men’s inclinations turn them
toward praiseworthy undertakings, they are not acting out of fear. The form and
effects of their tastes will continue to be characterized by wisdom and solidity.

THE PRINCE.

It has to be done if I am to achieve fully and without opposition my goal of drawing
men away from frivolity, and inspiring them to seek wise and wholesome pursuits.

THE COUNT.

You have reached the second matter I wanted to put to you, Prince, and which
together should serve as a means of destroying Luxury and set a limit on the kinds of
magnificence that can be admitted. Regulate the tastes of your subjects and everything
will follow. To regulate their tastes, give them a fine education. This is the soundest
basis of all good order in a State, the fecund source of its advantages, which lead in
turn to its success. Just as a poor education is the polluted source from which all
public misfortunes flow. I tremble when thinking about the effect that the present
system has upon young people of quality today. What can you expect from a young
man who has been fed on and molded by frivolity, who has sought after pleasures, is
taken with elegant dress, and concerned with how he looks and with cultivating
effeminate manners. Far from becoming embarrassed, he derives all his glory from
these miserable things. He calls it “good manners,” and he looks down on anyone

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 527 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

who is not able to be, or who does not want to be, as frivolous as he is. It gives me no
joy to say this, and I do not make any exaggeration in stating that these “good
manners” will lead a powerful state to its ruin. “These are superficial errors,” said
MONTAIGNE,8 and warned us “but they are of ill augury, and enough to inform us
that the whole fabric is crazy and tottering, when we see the roughcast of our walls to
cleave and split.”

THE PRINCE.

I promise you, my dear Count, that I will begin by banning these so-called “good
manners” at my Court. The breath of contempt will soon make these puerilities
vanish into thin air. And as a result, the ambition of the Fathers will answer me
through the education that they provide for their children. I will let it be known far
and wide that throughout the course of my reign, no one will be able to aspire to any
position unless he has made himself capable of filling it.

THE COUNT.

May you enjoy a long reign over a nation that you will make glorious! You will make
it happy, and you will not fail to be happy yourself.

THE PRINCE.

You are my lucky augur, my dear Count. The first words I have heard since ascending
the Throne are those from a faithful Servant. May Heaven grant that I never listen to
any others.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 528 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[Back to Table of Contents]

Biographical Sketches Of Authors Referred To By Vattel
Ammianus Marcellinus (ad 330–95): A Greek from Antioch, Ammianus served as a
soldier in the Roman army. He later wrote a history of Rome and on “civilitas,” the
moral and institutional restraints that an emperor ought to observe. His work Res
gestae libri was published in thirty-one volumes, of which only the last eighteen
survive.

Anson, George (1697–1762): First Baron Anson, admiral and naval reformer,
appointed First Lord of the Admiralty in 1757. He is notable for his work A Voyage
Round the World (1748), in which he recounted his experiences circumnavigating the
globe.

Appian (or Appianus) (ad ca. 95–ca. 165): Known as Appian of Alexandria, he earned
recognition for his rhetorical skills in pleading cases in Rome and was appointed
Procurator Augusti of Egypt in 147. He wrote Roman History in twenty-four books,
of which thirteen survive. His work gives accounts of various peoples and countries
up to their incorporation into the Roman Empire.

Aristotle (384–322 bc): Greek philosopher, polymath, and student of Plato, he wrote
on everything from anatomy to rhetoric. His major works—Physics, Metaphysics, On
the Soul, Politics, Nicomachean Ethics, Rhetoric, and On the Heavens—have had a
long-lasting influence on the development of every aspect of Western philosophical
thought.

Arrian (L. Flavius Arrianus) (ad ca. 92–ca. 175): Of Greek origin, born in Nicomedia
(now Izmit, west Turkey), he was important in the Roman administration and became
proconsul of Baetica. He is best known for his work as a historian; of his many books,
his Anabasis Alexandri is the oldest-surviving complete account of the campaigns of
Alexander the Great.

Augier de Marigny, François (1690–1762): French writer known for the Histoire des
Arabes (1750), which covers 636 years of the Islamic world, from the first successors
of Mohammed in the seventh century to 1258 when the last caliph was toppled from
power by the Tartars. His work was based on the writings of the Coptic bishop
Severus.

Aulus Gellius (ad ca. 125–ca. 180): Studied grammar and rhetoric in Rome and
philosophy in Athens, eventually holding judicial office in Rome. His work Noctes
Atticae, comprising twenty books, was in the form of a “commonplace” book, in
which he noted things of interest, including notes on grammar, geometry, philosophy,
and conversations.

Bacallar y Sanna, Vicente (Marquis de San Felipe) (1669–1728): Spanish nobleman
and author. His works included Mémoires pour servir à l’histoire d’Espagne sous le
règne de Philippe V (1756) and Monarchia Hebrea (1745).

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 529 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Bellay, Martin Du (1495–1559): Born in Langey, France. Bellay’s work Les
mémoires de Mess. M. Du Bellay was originally started by his older brother
Guillaume, who was a successful general and diplomat for Francis I. After
Guillaume’s death, Bellay incorporated his brother’s writing into his own to form a
single work.

Bernard, Jacques (1658–1718): Born in Nions, Dauphiné, Bernard was a French
theologian trained at Geneva. After preaching reformed doctrines in France, he left for
Gouda in the 1680s, where he became pensionary minister. His Abrégé de l’histoire
de l’Europe appeared monthly between 1686 and 1688; it was followed by Lettres
historiques (1692–98) and his continuation of Bayle’s Nouvelles de la république des
lettres (1699–1710, 1716–18). From 1705 he was minister of the Walloon Church at
Leiden.

Bilain, Antoine (d. 1672): French jurist who wrote on French foreign policy. His
books presented legal arguments in support of Louis XIV’s claims against
neighboring powers.

Bodin, Jean (1530–96): Born in Angers, France. Bodin was a jurist, natural law
philosopher, and advocate of free trade. Part of the circle of the Duc d’Alençon, he
also served as a delegate in the Third Estate of the Estates-General, working with
D’Hôpital advocating religious tolerance between extremist Protestants and Catholics.
He wrote La démonomanie des sorciers (1580), but it is his book of political theory,
Six livres de la République (1576), on the nature of sovereignty, that established his
reputation.

Boizard, Jean: Early eighteenth-century writer about whom little is known, except that
he was the royal treasurer for a time in France. His book Traité des monnoyes (1714)
explains monetary systems, financial terms, the variety of forms of money, and how
money is made.

Bontekoe, Willem (1587–1657): Born in Hoorn, Holland, Bontekoe was a boat
captain in the Dutch East India Company who compiled a journal of his eventful
journey to Sumatra. His story, Voyages of the Dutch to the East-Indies (1646),
recounted shipwrecks and adventure on the high seas and became a best-seller, going
through many editions in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.

Bougeant, Guillaume Hyacinthe (1690–1743): Born in Quimper, Brittany, he became
a Jesuit priest and taught classics at the Colleges of Caen and Nevers. His work
Amusement philosophique sur le langage des bêtes (1737) caused his exile from Paris.
However, his historical works on the Thirty Years’ War and on the Treaty of
Westphalia reestablished his reputation. His three comedies in which he satirized
Jansenists were widely translated.

Bourbon Condé, Anne Geneviève de (1619–79): The only daughter of Henry II,
prince of Condé, she moved in court circles and was involved in the factional
religious politics of the day. She instigated the first and second Frondes and was a
lifelong enemy of Mazarin. An avowed Jansenist, she gave up court life in 1653 and

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 530 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

retired to a convent in Port Royal. She wrote Abrégé du memoire de Madame la
Duchesse de Longueville.

Buddeus [Budaeus], Johann Franz (1667–1729): Born in Anklam, Pomerania.
German Lutheran theologian, professor of Greek and Latin at Coburg (1692),
professor of moral philosophy at Halle (1693), and professor of theology at Jena
(1705). His writings most commented-upon across Europe were Historia juris
naturae et synopsis juris naturae et gentium iuxta disciplinam Hebraeorum (1695)
and Elementa philosophiae practicae (1697).

Bullinger, Heinrich (1504–75): One of the key figures of the Reformation in Zurich
and a close ally of Zwingli, whom he succeeded in 1531 as head of the Zurich
congregation. Bullinger published widely, including histories of the Reform (1564),
the Swiss Confederation (1568), and Zurich (1573–74).

Bynkershoek, Cornelius van (1673–1743): Born in Holland. Writer on international
maritime law, publishing De dominio maris in 1702. He also wrote on and specialized
in diplomatic rights and public law and proposed the “three-mile limit rule,” which
stated that a nation may claim sovereignty over a territorial distance of three miles
from shore, roughly the distance a cannon could then shoot.

Caesar (Gaius Julius Caesar) (100–44 bc): Roman political and military leader who
played a key role in changing the Roman Republic into an empire, an act which
famously precipitated his murder. He wrote several memoirs of his different
successful military campaigns, including De bello Africo, De bello Alexandrino, and
De bello Gallico.

Callières, François de (1645–1717): Born in Thorigny, France, Callières was sieur de
Rochelay et de Gigny and private secretary to Louis XIV, as well as a diplomat and
man of letters. A member of the Académie Française, he published eight books,
including De la manière de négocier avec les souverains (1716), which was
considered a preeminent guide to diplomacy.

Camden, William (1551–1623): English antiquarian, archaeologist, and headmaster of
Westminster School. He wrote Britannia, the first comprehensive, county-by-county
topographical survey of Great Britain, and Annales rerum gestarum Anglicarum et
Hibernicarum regnante Elizabetha (1615), a detailed historical account of the reign of
Elizabeth I.

Campanella, Tommaso (1568–1639): Born in Calabria in southern Italy, Campanella
became a Dominican monk in 1583. He was well known for his heterodox theological
beliefs and radical political views. His opposition to Spanish rule in Italy led to a life
of intermittent imprisonment. His most famous work, La città del sole, written during
imprisonment, was published in Italian in 1602 and in Latin as Civitas solis in 1623.

Champier, Symphorien (1471–1538): Born in Lyons, France. Doctor of medicine and
cofounder of the College of the Doctors of Lyon with François Rabelais. Categorie

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 531 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

medicinales, on the logic of medical analysis and argumentation, is the best known of
his many works.

Charlevoix, Pierre François Xavier (1682–1761): Born in St. Quentin, France,
Charlevoix was a Jesuit teacher and explorer who wrote chronicles of his traveling
adventures. His work Histoire et description générale de la Nouvelle France was
among the earliest written descriptions of North America.

Chauvelin, Henri-Philippe (Abbé) (1716–70): Little is known of Chauvelin except
that he was canon of Our Lady of Paris and adviser to the Parlement of Paris. The
lengthy title of his work translates as “Tradition of the facts which express the system
of independence that the Bishops opposed, in the various centuries, with the
invariable principles of the sovereign justice of the king on all his subjects
indistinctly; and need for letting act the secular judges against their companies, to
maintain the observation of the law, and the public tranquillity.”

Chevalier, Nicolas (1650–1720): Little is known about him other than that he wrote
Histoire de Guillaume III, roi de la Grande Bretagne, a biography of King William
III of England.

Choisy, François Timoléon de (1644–1724): Born in Paris. An extravagant cross-
dresser and flamboyant character in Louis XIV’s court who later underwent a
religious conversion, he was ordained and became the abbé of Choisy. He was author
of six historical and religious works, but it was his Mémoires (1737), a salacious
account of his years at court, that proved his most popular publication.

Cicero (Marcus Tullius Cicero) (106–43 bc): Born in Arpinium, Italy. An orator,
statesman, political theorist, and philosopher of ancient Rome. He was famous for his
skillful prosecutions in court, for his views on the rhetorical arts, and for defining
philosophy as an education in citizenship.

Commines, Philippe de (1447–1511): Flemish diplomat and writer who served in the
courts of Burgundy and France. In his Mémoires de Messire Philippe Commines
(1552), he analyzed the contemporary political scene with the aim of instructing the
reader in statecraft. He was an advocate of political machination over military action.

Crevier, Jean Baptiste Louis (1693–1765): Born in Paris. Professor of rhetoric at the
College of Beauvais for twenty years. He produced major works on Roman history,
two editions of Livy, and Rhétorique français (1767).

Curtius Rufus, Quintus: First-century ad historian and the author of Historiae
Alexandri Magni, a biography of Alexander the Great in ten books that focused on
character rather than events.

Daniel, Gabriel (1649–1728): Born in Rouen, France. A Jesuit, Daniel was appointed
historiographer of France by Louis XIV. Among philosophical, theological, and
historical treatises, he wrote the epic Histoire de France (1713) in seventeen volumes,
which was quickly translated into four languages.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 532 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

de la Vega, Garcilaso (1539–1616): Born in Cuzco, Peru. Although he left Peru for
Spain and was conscripted into military service at a young age, his writings on Inca
life, history, and subsequent Spanish conquest earned him the sobriquet “El Inca.” He
was the first Spanish writer to sympathize with the Inca plight.

Demosthenes (384–322 bc): Athenian orator and statesman. He was instrumental in
his city’s uprising against Alexander the Great. Defeat forced him into exile, where he
took his own life. The corpus of his work that survives amounts to sixty-three texts,
including many of his political and judicial orations.

Diodorus Siculus (ca. 80–20 bc): Greek historian from Agyrium in Sicily (hence
“Siculus”) whose forty books, of which only fifteen survive, provide a history of the
world from mythical times to 60 bc

Duport du Tertre, François-Joachim (1716–59): Born in St. Malo, France, he was a
Jesuit priest and historical writer. He left the priesthood to become an independent
author and wrote the Abrégé de l’histoire d’Angleterre (1751) and Project utile pour
le progrès de la littérature (1756).

Etterlin, Peterman (d. 1509): Swiss chronicler and historian of Lucerne. Served as a
captain in the wars against Charles of Burgundy (1474–77).

Eutropius (ad ca. 320–ca. 390): A Roman, Eutropius held the office of secretary in
Constantinople at the height of the Byzantine era, working under both Emperors
Julian and Valens. His book Eurtopii breviarium ab urbe condita is a ten-book
compendium of the history of Rome.

Frederick II of Prussia (Frederick the Great) (1712–86): An “enlightened despot”
from the Hohenzollern dynasty, he was responsible for transforming Prussia from a
small kingdom into a European power through a series of military conquests. He
wrote several works, including Anti-Machiavel (1739) and Instructions militaires du
roi de Prusse pour ses généraux (1762).

Gramond, Gabriel-Barthélemy de (1590–1654): Born in Toulouse, France. Little is
known of this author except that he was a nobleman and adviser to the president of the
Parlement of Toulouse.

Grotius, Hugo (1583–1645): Born in Delft. A jurist in the Dutch republic, a great and
prolific humanist scholar, an European diplomat, and an ecumenical theologian. His
works include De iure praedae (1605) and De jure belli ac pacis (1625), by which he
was seen to have laid the foundations of international law, and De veritate religionis
Christianae (1627).

Guicciardini, Francesco (1483–1540): Born in Florence, Italy. A statesman and a
political and historical writer, he worked for the Medici popes and was appointed
governor of Modena, Reggio, and Parma. Among his many histories and political
discourses, the History of Italy (Storia d’Italia) (1537–40) established his reputation.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 533 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Heiss von Kogenheim, Johann: Of German origin. Although precise details of his life
are unknown, in the late seventeenth century he was the resident historian at the court
of Louis XIV.

Herodotus (fifth century bc): Born in Halicarnassus, in Asia Minor. Called the “Father
of History” for his detailed account of the Greco-Persian wars from 500 to 479 bc

Hobbes, Thomas (1588–1679): English philosopher and author of many works
concerning ethics, politics, history, and human nature, such as De cive (1642), De
corpore (1655), De homine (1658) and Questions Concerning Liberty, Necessity, and
Chance (1656). Leviathan (1651), his major work, cemented his reputation, which has
endured.

Horace (Quintus Horatius Flaccus) (65–8 bc): Born in Venusia, Italy. Leading Roman
lyric poet and satirist in the time of Augustus. The themes of his odes and epistles
were love, friendship, and the pleasures of life. His works included Satires (35–30 bc)
Epodes (30 bc) and three books of Odes (23 bc).

Joinville, Jean de (ca. 1224/5–1317): French nobleman from Champagne, medieval
historian, crusader, friend and servant of Louis IX, the French king canonized in
1297. Joinville’s history of this king was completed in 1309 at the request of the then
queen, Jean of Navarre.

Justinian I (Flavius Petrus Sabbatius Justinianus) (ad 483–565): Known as the last
Roman Emperor, he was ruler of the Eastern Empire and is notable for his conquests
and for re-taking Rome and the Western Empire from the Ostrogoths. His lasting
legacy was the great codification of Roman law.

Lacombe, Jacques (1724–1811): French lawyer and author. His writings included
histories of northern Europe and of Queen Christina.

Lancelotti, Giovanni Paolo (1522–90): Italian jurist and historian.

La Pimpie Solignac, Pierre Joseph de (1687–1773): Little is known of this French
author except that he served on the staff of King Stanislas of Poland. He wrote Les
amours d’Horace (1728), which was an attempt to recreate the life and times of
Horace, and L’histoire générale de Pologne (1752).

Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm (1646–1716): German philosopher and polymath who
served the house of Hanover as court counselor, diplomat, librarian, and much else.
Of his prodigious writings on virtually all areas of philosophy, science, mathematics,
technology, law, and history, only a few were published in his lifetime, most
importantly Essais de théodicée (1710).

Le Vassor, Michel (1646–1718): French Protestant, historian, and critic of Louis XIV.
Through his various writings and membership in the circle of Pierre Jurieu, he
underscored the instability in the European state system caused by aspirations to
universal monarchy.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 534 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Livy (Titus Livius) 59 bc–ad 17): Born in Patavium, Italy. Historian and historical
interpreter on a grand scale, rejecting the contemporary method of yearly
chronological history. He focused instead on themes, such as public morality, and on
periods of thought, exemplified by his epic work of Roman history, comprising one
hundred forty-three books.

Lucretius (Titus Lucretius Carus) (ca. 94–ca. 49 bc): Roman poet, philosopher, and
Epicurean. His poem De rerum natura was accredited with influencing Virgil and
naturalizing Greek philosophical ideas and discourse in the Latin language.

Machiavelli, Nicolò (1469–1527): Florentine political philosopher, musician, poet,
and playwright. Famous for such works as The Prince (1505) and Discourses on Livy
(1519). Accused of justifying reason-of-state in politics, he sought to show how
republics could maintain themselves in early modern Europe.

Mariana, Juan de (1536–1624): Born in Talavera, Spain. A Jesuit and a Spanish
historian whose work was noted for its accuracy and style. His major work, Historiae
de rebus Hispaniae (1592–1605), consisted of thirty books; his other important work,
De rege et regis institutione (1598), debated whether it was lawful to overthrow a
tyrant. He concluded that it was, which led to his imprisonment by the Inquisition.

Matthieu, Pierre (1563–1621): French historian and poet, popularizer of Charron and
Montaigne and chronicler of the history of the French court and kingly life.

Mézeray, François Eudes de (1610–83): Official historiographer of France and in
1649 admitted to the Académie Française. He wrote summaries of French and Latin
chronicles in his three-volume Abrégé chronologique (1667).

Molesworth, Robert (First Viscount Molesworth) (1656–1725): Supporter of William
of Orange and a prominent member of the Irish Privy Council, he was very much
involved in the European political scene, which he commented upon in his various
writings.

Montaigne, Michel de (1533–92): Born near Bordeaux. French Renaissance scholar
and statesman during the Wars of Religion. The first edition of his famous Essays was
published in 1580 and a later edition in 1588.

Montesquieu, Charles-Louis de Secondat, Baron de La Brède et de (1689–1755):
Born near Bordeaux. French nobleman, magistrate, and prolific author. His Lettres
persanes (1721) brought him to prominence in European literary circles. His
magisterial reflection on the nature of law and the likely future of France, De l’esprit
des lois (The Spirit of the Laws) (1748), became one of the most influential works of
the century.

Montgon, Charles Alexander de (1690–1770): The Abbé de Montgon was a French
diplomat and the secret agent of King Philippe V of Spain. His Mémoires de M.
l’Abbé de Montgon (1748–49) in ten volumes reveal his machinations regarding the
succession to the thrones of Spain and France and his negotiations with Portugal. His

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 535 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

duplicity was discovered and he was condemned to exile. His memoirs proved a
significant source in European diplomatic history.

Monthenault D’Egly, Charles Philippe de (1696–1749): Wrote Histoire des rois des
deux Siciles (1741).

Nevers, Louis de Gonzage, Duc de (1539–95): Leading French Catholic soldier in the
Wars of Religion, whose memoirs related his experiences in battle.

Noel, Alexandre (also Natalis Alexander) (1630–1724): Born in Rouen, France.
Dominican priest and professor of theology, he lectured on theology, philosophy, and
ecclesiastical law at the Sorbonne before becoming archbishop of Rouen. He was a
Thomist and his writings, Selecta historiae ecclesiasticae capita (1676–86) in twenty-
six volumes and Selecta historiae veteris testamenti (1689), comprised a pioneering
study of comparative religion.

Ockley, Simon (1678–1720): Born in Exeter, England. Ockley was a British
Orientalist and fellow of Jesus College Cambridge, where he lectured on Arabic
history. He translated many Arabic texts into English. His central work was the two-
volume Conquest of Syria, Persia, and Egypt by the Saracens (1708–18).

Ossat, Arnauld d’ (1536–1604): Born in Gascony, France. Bishop of Bayeux and a
French diplomat, he played a major role in negotiating the reconciliation of Henry IV
in 1595 with the Holy See. He was named Conseiller d’Etat in 1587 and served Henry
IV in Italy.

Ovid (Publius Ovidius Naso) (43 bc–ad 17): Born in Sulmonia, Italy. Roman poet
who wrote about love and mythology. His themes and style were influential in art and
literature throughout the Renaissance. Much of his work has survived, such as Amores
(10 bc) in five volumes and Heroides (5 bc), consisting of twenty-one letters.
Metamorphoses (ad 8), describing the creation and history of the world, remains his
most famous work.

Papon, Jean (1507–90): Lieutenant general of Ballifs de Forez.

Pas, Antoine de (Marquis de Feuquieres) (1648–1711): An important figure in the
French military. His Mémoires sur la guerre (1730) recounted his battle experiences
serving Louis XIV.

Pecquet, Antoine (1704–62): Held the position “premier commis” in the French
ministry of Foreign Affairs during the reign of King Louis XV. He wrote Discours
sur l’art de négocier (1737), later published as De l’art de négocier avec les
souverains, par M. Pecquet (1738).

Pineau-Duclos, Charles (1704–72): French biographer and novelist. He was secretary
of the Académie Français and succeeded Voltaire as the official historiographer of
France.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 536 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Pliny the Younger (Gaius Plinius Caecilius Secundus) (ad ca. 63–ca. 113): Born in
Comum, Italy. Roman magistrate serving as senator, quaestor, tribune, praetor,
consul, augur, and ambassador between ad 81 and ad 110. His numerous letters
(Epistulae) described Roman life in the first century.

Plumard de Danguel, Louis-Joseph (John Nickolls, pseud.) (1722–77): Born in Mans,
France, de Danguel was a political economist whose essay Remarques sur les
avantages et les désavantages de la France et de la Gr. Bretagne (1754) was a
comparative study of the condition of workers, agriculture, taxation, and the fishing
industry.

Plutarch (Mestrius Plutarchus) (ad 40–ca. 120): Born in Chaeronea, Greece.
Biographer and essay writer as well as an ambassador for Chaeronea at Rome. In total
he wrote forty-four biographies and seventy-eight works on moral, political,
philosophical, and scientific topics in essay or dialogue form.

Polybius (ca. 200–118 bc): Born in Megalopolis. An officer of the Achaean League,
he is considered reliable as a historian because of his presence at the destruction of
both Carthage and Corinth. In Rome at the end of the Punic Wars, he wrote the
Histories, comprising forty books, in which he attempted to trace the causes of the
rise of Rome and the Mediterranean world from 220 to 146 bc

Prévost, Antoine François (Abbe Prévost) (1697–1763): Born in Hesdin, Artois.
Prévost served as Jesuit priest for many years before leaving the church and fleeing to
London and Utrecht. These experiences formed the basis of his Mémoires et
aventures d’un homme de qualité (1728) and Le philosophe Anglais (1731), the
seventh volume of which became the novel Manon Lescault (1731), which was
forbidden in France as a scandalous work.

Pufendorf, Samuel (1632–94): Born in Chemnitz, Saxony. A German jurist and
historian, he was seen, along with Grotius, as one of the major voices in defining
natural law and jurisprudence in the late seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. While
a professor at Heidelberg, he introduced natural and civil law into the curriculum. He
also served Charles XI of Sweden and the elector of Brandenburg.

Quintilian (Marcus Fabius Quintilianus) (ad ca. 40–ca. 96): Born in Calahorra, Spain.
The first professor of any subject to hold an official appointment in Rome. In his
Institutio oratoria he described how to train men for leadership and what qualities
they should possess, advocating the importance of rhetoric and education.

Rebmann, Hans (or Johann) Rudolf (1566–1605): Born in Bern, Switzerland.
Rebmann was a poet noted for writing in the German vernacular.

Rohan, Henri, Duc de (1579–1638): Born in Blain, Brittany. A favorite of Henry IV,
he made his name as a soldier and leader of the Huguenot forces and died after being
wounded in battle. He wrote Le parfait capitaine (1631) and Traité du gouvernement
des treize cantons (1630s) in which he applied the lessons of Caesar’s military tactics
to contemporary warfare.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 537 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Schodeler, Wernher (1490–1541): Born in Bremgarten (Bern), Switzerland. Little is
known about him except that he was a town clerk who spent much of his time writing
the Eidgennössische Chronik, an illuminated chronicle of Switzerland. It was
published ca. 1535, six years before he died of the plague.

Selden, John (1584–1654): Born in West Tarring, Sussex. Scholar, jurist, and legal
antiquary who studied law and became keeper of records at the Inner Temple and a
member of Parliament. His various works included Titles of Honour (1614), De diis
Syris (1617), History of Tithes (1618), Mare clausum (1618)—a rejection of Grotius’s
Mare Liberum concerning sovereignty of the sea—and De jure naturali et gentium
juxta disciplinam Ebraerorum (1640).

Seneca (Lucius Annaeus Seneca) (ca. 4 bc–ad 65): Born in Cordova, Spain.
Undogmatic Stoic and polymath, politician and courtier, eventually tutor of Nero. He
was forced to commit suicide at the age of seventy after falling from Nero’s favor. His
extensive oeuvre comprises essays on ethics and natural phenomena, as well as nine
tragedies.

Sextus Aurelius Victor (ad ca. 320–90): Little is known about his life except that he
was prefect of the Roman province of Pannonia Secunda, present-day Serbia, Bosnia,
and Croatia. Four works that have been published together as Historia Romana have
been ascribed to him, although his authorship remains contested.

Sharaf Ad-Din ˛Ali Yazdi (d. 1454): A Persian historian from Yazd, in Samarkand.
He was well known to Shāh Rokh Mirza, who was the fourth son of Tamerlane and
the ruler of Central Asia. His main work was The History of Timur-Bec, Known by the
Name of Tamerlain the Great (London, 1723).

Simler, Josias (1530–76): Born in Kappel, Switzerland. A Swiss theologian and
classicist, Simler was professor of theology in Zürich and penned the first known
study of the Alps in De Alpibus commentarius (ca. 1574). His De Helvetorium
republica (1576) focused on Swiss constitutional issues.

Socrates (ca. 470–399 bc): Athenian philosopher and teacher. Socrates served as a
soldier in the Peloponnesian War and was later appointed to the Athenian Assembly.
His life and writings are known through the works of Plato, Aristotle, and Xenophon,
among others.

Solís y Rivadeneira, Antonio de (1610–86): Born in Alcala de Henares, Spain.
Dramatist, poet, and historian of the conquest of Mexico. His Historia de la conquista
de México (1686) covered the initial journey of Juan de Grijalva in 1518 to Cortes’s
defeat of Montezuma in 1520. His work celebrated the achievements of the
conquistadors.

Stettler, Michael (1580–1642): Citizen of Bern and one of the most influential
historians in seventeenth-century Switzerland. His works included the famous
Chronikon oder Grundliche Beschreibung der fürnembsten Geschichte und Thaten.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 538 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Stumpf, Johannes (1500–78): Originally from Bruchsal, in Germany, he studied at
Heidelberg. Stumpf converted to Protestantism during the early 1520s and became an
ally and close friend of Zwingli.

Sully, Maximilien de Béthune, Duc de (1560–1641): Born in Rosny. French
Protestant and nobleman who fought in the Wars of Religion before serving Henry IV
in numerous offices, becoming well known for fostering agriculture and commerce.
His famous Mémoires were published in 1638, with additional volumes appearing
posthumously in 1662.

Tacitus (Publius Cornelius Tacitus) (ca. ad 55–117): Roman orator and historian of
imperial Rome, he became prefect consul under Nerva in 97. His Annals and
Histories examined the reigns of Tiberius, Claudius, and Nero.

Tertullian (Florens Quintus Septimius Tertullianus) (ad ca. 155–230): Born in
Carthage. He was the first notable Latin theological thinker of early Christianity and a
church leader, whose work later influenced St. Thomas Aquinas. Known as the
“Father of the Latin Church,” he introduced the term “Trinity” into Christian
eschatology. His many works included De testimonio animae, De monogamia, De
patientia, and De spectaculis, which were polemical, moral, and ascetic treatises.

Thou, Jacques Auguste de (1553–1617): French historian who moved in the court
circles of Henry III. He was appointed “président à mortier” in 1596 and was
instrumental in negotiating the Edict of Nantes with the Protestants. He later replaced
Sully in the Conseil des Finances. His Historia sui temporis (1620), in eighteen
books, focused on the history of his own time, especially the Wars of Religion.

Thucydides (ca. 454–399 bc): Born in Athens. His unfinished History of the
Peloponnesian War, comprising eight books, became famous as the earliest surviving
work of contemporary history that was factual and avowedly devoid of mythical and
religious inspiration.

Tribbechov, Adam (1641–87): Born in Lübeck, Germany. German theologian.
Professor of moral philosophy, then of history, at the new University of Kiel, later
church administrator in Gotha. His writings included De philosophia morum inter
barbaros praecipue orientales (1666) and De doctoribus scholasticis et corrupta per
eos divinarum humanarumque rerum scientia (1665).

Tschudi, Aegidius (also Giles) (1505–72): Born in Glarus, Switzerland. He devoted
himself to the Counter-Reformation, using his authority as chief magistrate. He is
better known as a historian of the Swiss Confederation, although his work was
published posthumously. Beschreibung Galliae Comatae (1758) was a topographical,
historical, and antiquarian description of ancient Helvetia; his major work, Chronicon
helveticorum (1734–36), related Swiss history from 1001 to 1470.

Turretini [Turretin] [Turretinus], François (1623–87): Born in Geneva of Italian
descent. Pastor of the Italian church at Geneva, where he used his position to redefine
Calvinist orthodoxy. He was appointed professor of theology in 1653, and his polemic

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 539 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Institutio theologiae elencticae in three parts (1679–85) was used as a standard text in
Reformed circles.

Valerius Maximus: Early-first-century Roman author. Little is known about him
except that he was a professional rhetorician. His book Factorum et dictorum
memorabilium, dedicated to Tiberius, was a collection of anecdotes and miscellany
about Roman history for the use of orators.

Varro, Marcus Terentius (116–27 bc): Born in Rieti, Italy. A Roman scholar, writer,
and supporter of Pompey in the civil wars of the Triumvirate, reaching the offices of
tribune and then praetor. After Pompey’s defeat he was granted a pardon by Caesar
and in 47 bc was appointed to run the public library planned by Caesar. He wrote
hundreds of works, of which only two survive, De Lingua Latina in twenty-five books
and Rerum rusticarum libri III, on agricultural topics.

Velly, Paul François (Abbé) (1709–59): Prolific French historian and theological
author.

Vertot, René-Aubert de (1655–1735): Born in Benetot, Normandy. A Capuchin abbé
and prolific historian with histories of, among other matters, the Knights of Malta and
the revolutions in Sweden and Portugal.

Virgil (Publius Vergilius Maro) (70–19 bc): Born in Mantua, Italy. The most famous
of his works is the Aeneid, an epic poem on the history of Rome comprising six
books. Other works included the Eclogues and Georgics.

Vogel, Franz Adam (d. 1749): Born in Colmar. Lawyer and grand-juge of the Swiss
Guard stationed in France. Author of Code criminal de l’empereur Charles V (1735).

Vopiscus, Flavius: In 59 bc he was tribune to the plebs and involved with the factions
against Cataline, becoming praetor in 54 bc

Wattenwyl (French spelling is Watteville), Alexander Ludwig von (1714–81): Born in
Berne, Switzerland, of a patrician family, Wattenwyl became a magistrate and
historian and was one of the first to attempt a modern history of the Swiss
Confederation based on original source material. Between 1763 and 1766 Wattenwyl
participated in the reform-oriented Helvetic Society, where he defended anti-
Rousseauian positions. Wattenwyl’s views on Bernese constitutional history were
summarized in his posthumously published Über die Staatsverfassung der Stadt und
Republik Bern (Schweizerisches Museum, 1783). He was also the author of Histoire
de la Confédération helvétique (1754).

Wicquefort, Abraham de (1598–1682): Born in Amsterdam. A Dutch diplomat to
France, in 1675 Wicquefort was accused of high treason after selling secret dispatches
to the English ambassador. He escaped the death penalty; however, all his goods were
confiscated, and he was imprisoned in Lowenstein, where he wrote The Embassador
and His Functions (1716) about his experiences.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 540 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Witt, Johan de (1625–72): Born in Dordrecht. In 1650 he became leader of the
deputation of Dordrecht to the States of Holland. He later ruled the Republic of
United Provinces and was assassinated by his enemies in the Orange party, whom he
had opposed throughout his political career. He wrote a book on mathematics,
Elementa curvarum linearum (1659) and Waardije van lyf-renten naer proportie van
los-renten (1671), on political economy.

Wolff, Christian (1679–1754): Born in Breslau, Silesia. A German philosopher and
polymath, he composed a vast philosophical system comprehending all sciences, first
in German, then in Latin, and dominated philosophy in Germany and beyond for
decades in the middle of the eighteenth century.

Xenophon (ca. 428–353 bc): Born in Ephesus. Soldier, mercenary, and historian. His
history Hellenica focused on events of 411 to 362 bcAnabasis (The Inland Expedition
[of Cyrus]) is a record of his travels in the expedition against the Persians and was
used as a field guide by Alexander the Great.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Works Referred To By Vattel

COLLECTIONS
Canon in nona actione [Can. in nona actione], Corpus Iuris Canonici. In The
1917 or Pio-Benedictine Code of Canon Law in English Translation, edited
by Edward N. Peters. San Francisco: Ignatius Press, 2001.
Extravagantes communes [Extravag. Commun.]. In Corpus Iuris Canonici,
edited by Emilius Ludwid Richter. Reprint of the 1879–81 edition. Graz,
1959.
Hardouin, Jean. Conciliorum collectio regia maxima. 12 vols. Paris, 1715.

OTHER SOURCES
Ammianus Marcellinus. Res gestae XXXI. In Ammianus Marcellinus, Roman
History III. Books 27–31. Excerpta Valesiana, translated by J. C. Rolfe. Loeb
Classical Library no. 331. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
1939.
Anonymous. Mémoires pour server à l’histoire du differend entre le Pape et
le Canton de Lucerne. à L***. Lucerne, 1727.
Anson, George. A Voyage Round the World [Anson’s Voyage Round the
World]. London, 1748. Modern edition, London: Oxford University Press,
1974.
Appian. De bello punico. In Appian, Roman History. Translated by Horace
White. 2 vols. Loeb Classical Library, nos. 2, 3. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1912.
Aristotle. Politics. Translated by H. Rackham. Loeb Classical Library, no.
264. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1932.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 541 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Arrian. Anabasis Alexandri I [de Exped. Alexand.]. In Arrian, The Anabasis
of Alexander 1–4, translated by P. A. Brunt and E. Iliff Robson. Loeb
Classical Library, no. 236. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
1929.
Augier de Marigny, François. Histoire des Arabes sous le gouvernement des
califes [Hist. of the Arabs]. Paris, 1750. Published in English as The History
of the Arabians, Under the Government of the Caliphs. London, 1758.
Aulus Gellius. Noctes Atticae III [Aul. Gell. Noct. Attic. lib. iii]. In Aulus
Gellius, Attic Nights, Books 1–5, translated by J. C. Rolfe. Loeb Classical
Library, no. 195. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1927.
Bacallar y Sanna, Vicente (Marquis de San Felipe). Mémoires pour servir à
l’histoire d’Espagne sous le règne de Philippe V [Memoirs of M. de St.
Phillippe] [Memoirs of Mons. de St. Phillipe] [Memoirs of M. St.
Phillip;Memorial of the marquis de St. Philip]. Translated by Maudave. Paris,
1756. Published in English as Memoirs of Elizabeth Farnese. London, 1746.
Bellay, Martin Du. Les mémoires de Mess. M. Du Bellay [Memoirs of Martin
Du Bellay]. Paris, 1569. Modern edition, Mémoires de Martin et Guillaume
Du Bellay, edited by V. L. Bourrilly and F. Vindry. Paris: Renouard, H.
Laurens, succ., 1908–19.
Bernard, Jacques, ed. Nouvelles de la République des Lettres. Amsterdam,
1698–1710.
Bilain, Antoine. Traité des droits de la reyne tres-chrestienne sur divers
estats de la Monarchie d’Espagne [A treatise on the right of the queen to
several states of the Spanish monarchy]. Paris, 1667.
Bodin [Bodinus], Jean. Six livres de la République [Republic]. Paris, 1576.
Published in English in Jean Bodin, On Sovereignty. Edited and translated by
Julian H. Franklin. Cambridge Texts in the History of Political Thought.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992.
Boizard, Jean. Traité des monnoyes, de leurs circonstances & dépendances
[Treatise on Coin]. Paris, 1714.
Bontekoe, Willem. Journael ofte gedenckwaerdige beschrijvingevan de Oost-
Indische reyse van Willem Ysbrantsz Bontekoe [Voyages of the Dutch to the
East-Indies]. Hoorn, 1646. Published in English as Memorable Description of
the East-Indian Voyage, 1618–25. Translated and edited by C. B. Bodde-
Hodgkinson and Pieter Geyl. London: Routledge, 1929.
Bougeant, Guillaume Hyacinthe. Histoire des guerres et des négociations qui
précédèrent le traité de Westphalie sous le règne de Louis XIII [History of the
Treaty of Westphalia]. Paris, 1751.
Bourbon Condé, Anne Geneviève de. Abrégé du Mémoire de Madame la
Duchesse de Longueville, contre Madame la Duchesse de Nemours, touchant
la compétence des trois Estats de Neuf-chastel. N.p., 1670–80.
Buddeus [Budaeus], Johann Franz. Elementa philosophiae practicae,
instrumentalis et theoreticae [Elementa Philos. Pract.]. Magdeburg, 1697.
Published in English as Elements of Instrumental Philosophy. 1717.
Burke, William. An Account of the European Settlements in the Americas.
London, 1757.
Bynkershoek, Cornelius van. De foro legatorum liber singularis [Competent
Judge of Embassadors]. Leiden, 1721. Published in English as De foro

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 542 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

legatorum liber singularis—a monograph on the jurisdiction over
ambassadors in both civil and criminal cases. Translated by Gordon J. Laing.
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1946.
Caesar. De bello Gallico. In Caesar, The Gallic Wars, translated by H. J.
Edwards. Loeb Classical Library, no. 72. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1917.
Callières, François de. De la manière de négocier avec les souverains
[Manner of negotiating with Sovereigns]. Brussels, 1716. Published in
English as The Art of Negotiating with Sovereign Princes. London, 1716; On
the Manner of Negotiating with Princes. Translated by A. F. Whyte.
Washington, D.C.: University Press of America, 1983.
Camden, William. Annales rerum Anglicarum et Hibernicarum, regnante
Elizabetha [Annal. Angl.]. London, 1615. Published in English as Annales,
or, the True and Royall History of the Famous Empresse Elizabeth Queene of
England, France, and Ireland [History of Queen Elizabeth]. London, 1625.
Excerpts published in William Camden, The History of the Most Renowned
and Victorious Princess Elizabeth, Late Queen of England. Chicago/London:
University of Chicago Press, 1970.
Campanella, Tommaso. Civitas solis (La città del sole). Frankfurt, 1623.
Champier, Symphorien. Les gestes, ensemble la vie du preulx chevalier
Bayard [Life]. Lyons, 1525. Modern edition edited by Denis Crouzet. Paris:
Impr. nationale, 1992.
Charlevoix, Pierre François Xavier. Histoire et description générale de la
Nouvelle France, avec le journal historique d’un voyage fait par ordre du roi
dans l’Amérique septentrionnale [History of New France]. Paris, 1744.
Chauvelin, Henri-Philippe (Abbé). Tradition des faits, qui manifestent le
sistème d’indépendance que les évêques ont opposé dans les différens siècles
aux principes invariables de la justice souveraine du roi sur tous ses sujets
indistinctement; et la nécessité de laisser agir les juges séculiers contre leurs
entreprises, pour maintenir l’observation des loix, et la tranquillité publique.
N.p., [1753].
Chevalier, Nicolas. Histoire de Guillaume III, roi de la Grande Bretagne.
Amsterdam, 1692.
Choisy, François Timoléon de. Histoire de Charles Cinquième roi de France
[Choisy’s History of Charles V] [abbé de Choisy, Hist. de Charles V]. Paris,
1689.
Choisy, François Timoléon de. Histoire de France sous les règnes de S.
Louis, de Philippe de Valois, du roi Jean, de Charles V., et de Charles VI
[Choisy’s History of St. Louis]. Paris, 1688–95.
Cicero. De divinatione [de Divinat.]. In Cicero, On Old Age. On Friendship.
On Divination, translated by W. A. Falconer. Loeb Classical Library, no. 154.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1923.
Cicero. De inventione. In Cicero, On Invention. The Best Kind of Orator.
Topics, translated by H. M. Hubbell. Loeb Classical Library, no. 386.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1949.
Cicero. De legibus [de Legib.]. In Cicero, On the Republic. On the Laws,
translated by Clinton W. Keynes. Loeb Classical Library, no. 213.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1928.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 543 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Cicero. De natura Deorum [De Natura Deorum]. In Cicero, On the Nature of
Gods. Academics, translated by H. Rackham. Loeb Classical Library, no. 268.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1933.
Cicero. Fragment. Ex lib. ii De Republica. In Cicero, On the Republic. On the
Laws, translated by Clinton W. Keynes. Loeb Classical Library, no. 213.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1928.
Cicero. De officiis III [De Offic.]. In Cicero, On Duties, translated by Walter
Miller. Loeb Classical Library, no. 30. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1913.
Cicero. In Verrem I [Orat. i]. In Cicero, The Verrine Orations I: Against
Caecilius. Against Verres, translated by L. H. G. Greenwood. Loeb Classical
Library, no. 221. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1928.
Cicero. In Verrem I [Orat. ii, i.85]. In Cicero, The Verrine Orations II:
Against Verres, part 2, books 3–5, translated by L. H. G. Greenwood. Loeb
Classical Library, no. 293. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
1935.
Cicero. Pro Caecina [Orat. pro Caecina]. In Cicero, Pro Lege Manilia. Pro
Caecina. Pro Cluentio. Pro Rabirio Perduellionis Reo, translated by H. Grose
Hodge. Loeb Classical Library, no. 198. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1927.
Cicero. Pro Roscio Comoedo [Orat. pro Q. Roscio, comoedo]. In Cicero, Pro
Quinctio. Pro Roscio Amerino. Pro Roscio Comoedo. The Three Speeches on
the Agrarian Law Against Rullus. Translated by J. H. Freese. Loeb Classical
Library, no. 240. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1930.
Cicero. Pro Sestio [Pro P. Sextio]. In Cicero, Pro Sestio. In Vatinium,
translated by R. Gardner. Loeb Classical Library, no. 309. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1958.
Cicero. Somnium Scipionis [Som. Scip.; De republica VI.xiii]. In Cicero, On
the Republic. On the Laws, translated by Clinton W. Keynes. Loeb Classical
Library, no. 213. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1928.
Cicero. Tusculan Disputations [Tuscul.]. Translated by J. E. King. Loeb
Classical Library, no. 141. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
1927.
Commines, Philippe de. Mémoires de Messire Philippe Commines [Memoires
of Commines]. Paris, 1552. Published in English as Memoirs of Philip de
Commines, Lord of Argenton. Praeger Series in War Studies. London, 1991.
Crevier, Jean Baptiste Louis. Histoire des empereurs romains [History of the
Emperors]. Paris, 1750–56. Published in English as The History of the Roman
Emperors. Translated by John Mill. London, 1814.
Curtius Rufus, Quintus [Q. Curt.]. History of Alexander. [Quint. Curt.]. In
Quintus Curtius, History of Alexander, translated by J. C. Rolfe. 2 vols. Loeb
Classical Library, nos. 368, 369. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1946.
Daniel, Gabriel. Histoire de France [Father Daniel’s History of France]
[Hist. of France]. Paris, 1713. Published in English as The History of France.
London, 1726.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 544 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

D’Egly, Charles Philippe de Monthenault. Histoire des rois des deux Siciles
[History of the Kings of the Two Sicilies] [History of the Two Sicilies]. Paris,
1741.
Demosthenes. Against Aristocrates [Orat. Adv. Aristocrat.]. In Demosthenes,
Against Meidias. Against Androtion. Against Aristocrates. Against
Timocrates. Against Aristogeiton 1 and 2 (21–26), translated by J. H. Vince.
Loeb Classical Library, no. 299. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1935.
Diodorus Siculus. Library of History. Vol. IX, books 18–19.65. Translated by
R. M. Geer. Loeb Classical Library, no. 377. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1947.
Duport du Tertre, François-Joachim. Histoire des conjurations, conspirations
et révolutions célèbres [Conspiracies] [Du Port’s Hist. of Conspir.]. Paris,
1754.
Etterlin, Peterman. Kronica von der loblichen Eydtgnoschaft [Etterlin]. Basel,
1507. Reprint, Winterthur, 1978.
Eutropius. Eutropii breviarium ab urbe condita [Eutropius]. Published in
English as The Breviarium ab urbe condita of Eutropius. Translated by H. W.
Bird. Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 1993.
Frederick II of Prussia. Memoirs of the House of Brandenburg. Translated by
M. Darget. London, 1748.
Gramond, Gabriel-Barthélemy de. Historiarum Galliae ab excessu Henrici IV
libri XVIII, quibus rerum per Gallos tota Europa gestarum accurata narratio
continetur, autore Gabr. Bartholomaeo Gramondo, ... [Hist. Gall.]. Tolosae:
apud A. Colomerium, 1643.
Grotius, Hugo. Annales et historiae de rebus Belgicis [Ann.] [Annals of the
Netherlands] [Hist. of the Disturb. in the Netherlands] [Hist. of the
Disturbances in the Low Countries] [Hist. of the Disturbances in the
Netherlands] [Hist. of Netherlands] [Hist. of the Troubles in the Low
Countries] [History of the Disturbances in the Low Countries] Amsterdam,
1657. Published in English as De rebus belgicis, or, The Annals and History
of the Low-Countrey-Warrs. London, 1665.
Grotius, Hugo. The Free Sea [Mare Liberum]. Edited by D. Armitage.
Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 2004.
Grotius, Hugo. The Rights of War and Peace, in Three Books: Wherein Are
Explained, the Law of Nature and Nations, and the Principal Points Relating
to Government [De Jure Belli et Pacis] [Law of War and Peace]. Edited and
translated by Jean Barbeyrac. London, 1738. Modern edition edited by R.
Tuck. Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 2005.
Guicciardini, Francesco. The History of Italy, from the Year 1490, to 1532 ...
In twenty books. Translated into English by the Chevalier Austin Parke
Goddard. London, 1753–56.
Heiss von Kogenheim, Johann. Histoire de l’Empire [History of the Empire].
Paris, 1684. Published in English as History of the Empire. Translated by
Bourgeois de Chastenet. London, 1727–29.
Herodotus. The History of Herodotus. Translated by G. Rawlinson. 4 vols.
London: J. Murray, 1862.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 545 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Hobbes, Thomas. De Cive, or the Citizen [De Cive]. Published in English as
Thomas Hobbes, De Cive, or the Citizen—English Version. Edited by
Howard Warrender. Clarendon Edition of the Works of Thomas Hobbes.
Oxford, 1984. Published in Latin as Thomas Hobbes, De Cive—Latin
Version. Edited by Howard Warrender. Clarendon Edition of the Works of
Thomas Hobbes. Oxford, 1984.
Horace. Carmina IV [Hor. lib. iv. od. 6]. In Horace, Odes and Epodes,
translated by Niall Rudd. Loeb Classical Library, no. 33. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 2004.
Horace. Satires, Epistles. The Art of Poetry [Ars poetica]. Translated by H.
Rushton Fairclough. Loeb Classical Library, no. 33. New York: G. P.
Putnam, 1926.
Joinville, John de. Histoire de saint Louis, Credo et lettre à Louis X.
Accompagné d’une traduction par M. Natalis de Wailly. Paris: Firmin-Didot,
1874.
Justinian I [Justin.]. Digests (Pandects) [Digest.]. In The Digest of Justinian,
translated by Alan Watson. Philadelphia: University of Philadelphia Press,
1997.
Justinian I [Justin.]. Institutes I [Instit. lib. i]. In The Institutes of Justinian:
Text, Translation, and Commentary, edited and translated by J. A. C.
Thomas. New York: American Elsevier, 1975.
Lacombe, Jacques. Abrégé chronologique de l´histoire du Nord [Histoire du
Nord]. Paris, 1762.
Lancelotti, Giovanni Paolo (Johannis Pauli). Institutiones juris canonici: Cum
notis variorum, praecipue arcana dominationis papalis, episcopalis, et
clericalis in Ecclesia Romana detegentibus; In usum auditorii Thomasiani
[Thomas. Nat. ad Lancell.]. Halle, 1715–17.
La Pimpie Solignac, Pierre Joseph de. L’histoire générale de Pologne de Mr.
de Solignac [History of Poland]. Paris, 1750.
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm. Codex juris gentium diplomaticus. [Codex Juris
Gent. Diplomat.] [diplomatic code of the law of nations] [Leibnitii Codex
Juris Gent. Diplomat.] [diplomatic Code of the Law of Nations] [Leibnitii
Codex Juris Gent. Diplomat.] [Leibnitz, Cod. Jur. Gent. Diplomat.].
Hanover, 1693.
Le Vassor, Michel. The History of King Lewis XIII [Hist. of Louis XIII].
London, 1700–1702.
Livy [Tit. Liv]. Ab urbe condita I. In Livy, History of Rome, Books 1–2,
translated by B. O. Foster. Loeb Classical Library, no. 114. Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1919.
Livy [Tit. Liv]. Ab urbe condita II. In Livy, History of Rome, Books 1–2,
translated by B. O. Foster. Loeb Classical Library, no. 114. Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1919.
Livy [Tit. Liv]. Ab urbe condita IV. In Livy, History of Rome, Books 3–4,
translated by B. O. Foster. Loeb Classical Library, no. 133. Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1922.
Livy [Tit. Liv]. Ab urbe condita V. In Livy, History of Rome, Books 5–7,
translated by B. O. Foster. Loeb Classical Library, no. 172. Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1924.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 546 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Livy [Tit. Liv]. Ab urbe condita VI. In Livy, History of Rome, Books 5–7,
translated by B. O. Foster. Loeb Classical Library, no. 172. Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1924.
Livy [Tit. Liv]. Ab urbe condita VII. In Livy, History of Rome, Books 5–7,
translated by B. O. Foster. Loeb Classical Library, no. 172. Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1924.
Livy [Tit. Liv]. Ab urbe condita VIII. In Livy, History of Rome, Books 8–10,
translated by B. O. Foster. Loeb Classical Library, no. 191. Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1926.
Livy [Tit. Liv]. Ab urbe condita IX. In Livy, History of Rome, Books 8–10,
translated by B. O. Foster. Loeb Classical Library, no. 191. Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1926.
Livy [Tit. Liv]. Ab urbe condita XXVIII. In Livy, History of Rome, Books
28–30, translated by F. G. Moore. Loeb Classical Library, no. 381.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1949.
Livy [Tit. Liv]. Ab urbe condita XXX. In Livy, History of Rome, Books
28–30, translated by F. G. Moore. Loeb Classical Library, no. 381.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1949.
Livy [Tit. Liv]. Ab urbe condita XXXVIII. In Livy, History of Rome, Books
38–39, translated by E. T. Sage. Loeb Classical Library, no. 313. Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1936.
Livy [Tit. Liv]. Ab urbe condita XLII. In Livy, History of Rome, Books
40–42, translated by E. T. Sage and A. C. Schlesinger. Loeb Classical
Library, no. 332. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1938.
Livy [Tit. Liv]. Epitom. lib. XVIII. In Livy, Summaries, Fragments, and
Obsequens, translated by A. C. Schlesinger. Loeb Classical Library, no. 404.
London: Heinemann, 1959.
Lucretius. De rerum natura [unreferenced]. In Lucretius, On the Nature of
Things, translated by W. H. D. Rouse, revised by Martin F. Smith. Loeb
Classical Library, no. 181, rev. ed. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1992.
Machiavelli, Nicolò. Discorsi sopra la prima deca di Tito Livio [Disc. on
Livy ]. 1531. Published in English as Discourses on Livy. Translated by
Harvey C. Mansfield and Nathan Tarcov. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1996.
Mariana, Juan de. De rege et regis institutione [de Rege et Regis Institut.].
Toledo, 1599.
Matthieu, Pierre. Histoire de France sous les regnes de François I, Henri II,
François II, Charles IX, Henri III, Henri IV, and Louis XIII [Matthieu vol. ii
book 3]. 2 vols. Paris, 1631.
Mézeray, François Eudes de. A General Chronological History of France
[Hist. of France] [History of France]. London, 1683.
Molesworth, Robert. Etat présent du Danemark, par M. Molesworth, envoyé
d’Angleterre à la Cour de Danemark [Present State of Denmark].
Amsterdam: Jansons à Waesberge, 1732.
Montaigne, Michel de. Les essais de Michel de Montaigne, nouvelle edition.
3 vols. London, 1724.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 547 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Montesquieu, Charles de Secondat, Baron de. The Spirit of the Laws [Spirit of
Laws]. Edited by A. M. Cohler et al. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1989.
Montgon, Charles Alexander de. Mémoires de M. l’Abbé de Montgon
[Memoirs of the abbé De Montgon]. Lausanne, 1748–49.
Nevers, Louis de Gonzage, Duc de. Les Mémoires de Monsieur le Duc de
Nevers [Memoires de Nevers]. Paris, 1665.
Noell [Natalis], Alexandre. Historia ecclesiastica [Dissert. Hist. Eccl.]
[Natal. Alex. Dissert. Hist. Eccles.]. Paris, 1676.
Ockley, Simon. The Conquest of Syria, Persia, and Egypt by the Saracens
[Alvakedi’s History of the Conquest of Syria]. London, 1708–18.
Ockley, Simon. The History of the Saracens [History of the Saracens].
London, 1718. Reprint, Whitefish, Mont.: Kessinger, 2003.
Ossat, Arnauld d’. Lettres de illustrissime et reverendissime Cardinale
d’Ossat [Letters of Cardinal d’Ossat]. Paris, 1624.
Ovid. Tristia I. In Ovid, Tristia. Ex Porto, translated by A. L. Wheeler,
revised by G. P. Gould. Loeb Classical Library, no. 151. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1988.
Papon, Jean. Recueil d’arrests notables des cours souveraines de France
[Arrêts Notables]. Paris, 1565.
Pas, Antoine de, Marquis de Feuquières. Mémoires sur la guerre [Memoires
de Feuquieres]. [Paris?], 1730. Published in English as Memoirs Historical
and Military. London, 1736.
Pecquet, Antoine. Discours sur l’art de négocier. Paris, 1737.
Pineau-Duclos, Charles. The History of King Louis XI, King of France.
London, 1746.
Pliny the Younger [Gaius Plinius Caecilius Secundus]. Epistulae [Ep. L]. In
Letters, I Books 1–7, translated by Betty Radice. Loeb Classical Library. New
York: Heinemann, 1969.
Plumard de Danguel, Louis-Joseph [John Nickolls, pseud.]. Remarques sur
les avantages et les désavantages de la France et de la Gr. Bretagne, par
rapport au commerce. Leiden [Paris], 1754. Published in English as Remarks
on the Advantages and Disadvantages of France and Great-Britain with
Respect to Commerce. London, 1754.
Plutarch. Agesilaus [Life of Agesilaüs]. In Plutarch, Agesilaus and Pompey.
Pelopidas and Marcellus, translated by Bernadotte Perrin. Loeb Classical
Library, no. 87. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1917.
Plutarch. Demetrios [in Demetrio.]. In Plutarch, Demetrius and Antony.
Pyrrhus and Gaius Marius [Plut. in Pyrr.], translated by Bernadotte Perrin.
Loeb Classical Library, no. 101. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1920.
Plutarch. Fabius [life of Fabius Maximus]. In Plutarch, Pericles and Fabius
Maximus. Nicias and Crassus, translated by Bernadotte Perrin. Loeb
Classical Library, no. 65. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1916.
Plutarch. Publicola [in Poplicol.]. In Plutarch, Theseus and Romulus.
Lycurgus and Numa. Solon and Publicola, translated by Bernadotte Perrin.
Loeb Classical Library, no. 46. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
1914.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 548 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Polybius. Historiae III [Histor. lib. iii]. In Polybius, Histories Books 3–4,
translated by W. R. Paton. Loeb Classical Library, no. 137. Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1922.
Prévost, Antoine François. Histoire générale des voyages, ou Nouvelle
collection de toutes les relations de voyages par mer et par terre qui ont été
publiées jusqu’à présent dans les différentes langues. 20 vols. Paris,
1746–1801.
Pufendorf, Samuel. Les devoirs de l’homme et du citoien. 4th ed. Amsterdam,
1718. Modern English edition, The Whole Duty of Man, According to the Law
of Nature. Edited by I. Hunter and D. Saunders. Indianapolis: Liberty Fund,
2003.
Pufendorf, Samuel. Of the Law of Nature and Nations [Law of Nature and
Nations; De jure naturae et gentium]. Edited by Jean Barbeyrac. Translated
by Basil Kennet. 4th ed. London, 1729. Reprint, Clark, N.J.: Lawbook
Exchange, 2005.
Quintilian. Institutio Oratoria VII [Inst. Orat.] [Instit. Orat.]. In Quintilian,
The Orator’s Education, Books 6–8, translated by Donald A. Russell. Loeb
Classical Library, no. 126. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
2002.
Quintilian. The Major Declamations Attributed to Quintilian [Declamations].
Translated by L. A. Sussman. Frankfurt am Main; New York: Verlag P.
Lang, 1987.
Rebmann, Hans Rudolf. Ein neuw, lustig, ernsthafft, poetisch Gastmal, vnd
Gespräch zweyer Bergen, in der löblichen Eydgnossschafft, vnd im Berner
Gebiet gelegen ... Bern, 1606.
Ricci, Pietro Andrea. Synopsis, decreta et resolutiones sac. congr.
Immunitatis super controversijs iurisdictionalibus complectens. [Synops.
Decret. et Resol. S. Congreg. Immunit.]. Praeneste: Typis Barberinis apud
Antonium Ruzzolum, 1708.
Rohan, Henri, Duc de. Mémoires du Duc de Rohan sur les choses qui se sont
passées en France depuis la mort de Henri le Grand jusqu’à la Paix faite
avec les Réformés [Memoires de Rohan]. [Paris?], 1644. Published in English
as The Memoires of the Duke of Rohan. Translated by George Bridges.
London, 1660.
Schodeler [Schodoler], Wernher. Eidgenössische Chronik [Schodeler].
Bremgarten an der Reuss, [ca. 1510–35]. Reprint, Luzern: Faksimile-Verlag,
1980.
Selden, John. Mare clausum, of the Dominion, or, Ownership of the Sea
[Mare Clausum]. London, 1635. Reprint, Clark, N.J.: Lawbook Exchange,
2002.
Seneca. De beneficiis. In Seneca, Moral Essays, vol. 3. Translated by John
W. Basore. Loeb Classical Library, no. 310. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1935.
Seneca. De ira I. In Seneca, Moral Essays. De providentia. De constantia. De
ira. De clementia, translated by John W. Basore. Loeb Classical Library, no.
214. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1928.
Sextus Aurelius Victor. De Viris Illustribus [Auctor de Viris Illust.]. In Sexti
Aurelii Victoris Liber de Caesaribus. Praecedunt Origo gentis Romanae et

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 549 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Liber de viris illustribus urbis Romae. Subsequitur Epitome de Caesaribus,
edited by Franz Pichlmayr and Roland Gründel. Leipzig: B. G. Teubneri,
1966.
Sharaf ad-Din ˛Ali Yazdi. The History of Timur-Bec, Known by the Name of
Tamerlain the Great [Hist. of Timur-Bec]. From the Persian by Cherefeddin
Ali. Translated into French by Petis de la Croix and into English by John
Darby. 2 vols. London, 1723.
Simler, Josias. De Helvetiorum republica [de Repub. Helvet.]. Zürich, 1576.
Socrates of Constantinople [Scholasticus]. Ecclesiastical History [Hist.
Eccles.]. Whitefish, Mont.: Kessinger, 2003.
Solís y Rivadeneira, Antonio de. Historia de la conquista de México. Spain,
1686. Modern edition, Prologue and appendices by Edmundo O’Gorman.
Notes by José Valero Silva. Mexico City, 1973. Published in English as
History of the Conquest of Mexico by the Spaniards. Translated by Thomas
Townsend. London, 1742.
Stettler, Michael. Chronikon oder Grundliche Beschreibung der fürnembsten
Geschichte und Thaten, welche sich in gantzer Helvetia, den jüngsten Jahren
nach, von ihrem Anfang her gerechnet, ... bis auff das 1627. Jahr /participirt,
verlauffen. Bern, 1627.
Stumpf, Johannes. Gemeiner loblicher Eydgnoschafft Stetten/Landen vnd
Völckeren Chronick wirdiger thaaten beschreybung. Zürich, 1554.
Sully, Maximilien de Béthune, Duc de. Mémoires de Maximilien de Béthune
Duc de Sully, principal ministre de Henry le Grand, mis en ordre: Avec des
rémarques [Memoirs digested by M. de l’Ecluse] [Sully’s Memoirs] [Sully’s
Memoirs, by M. de l’Ecluse]. Edited by Pierre Mathurin de L’Écluse des
Loges. London [Paris], 1752.
Tacitus, Annales I. In Tacitus, Histories 4–5. Annals 1–3, translated by
Clifford H. Moore and John Jackson. Loeb Classical Library, no. 249.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1931.
Tacitus. Annales II [Tacit. Annal. lib. ii]. In Tacitus, Histories 4–5. Annals
1–3, translated by Clifford H. Moore and John Jackson. Loeb Classical
Library, no. 249. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1931.
Tacitus. Annales III. In Tacitus, Histories 4–5. Annals 1–3, translated by
Clifford H. Moore and John Jackson. Loeb Classical Library, no. 249.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1931.
Tacitus. Annales XII. In Tacitus, Annals 4–6, 11–12, translated by John
Jackson. Loeb Classical Library, no. 312. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1937.
Tacitus. Annales XIII. In Tacitus, Annals 13–16, translated by John Jackson.
Loeb Classical Library, no. 322. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1937.
Tacitus. Annales XIV. In Tacitus, Annals 13–16, translated by John Jackson.
Loeb Classical Library, no. 322. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1937.
Tertullian. Tertullian De exhortatione castitatis [Exhort. Castit.]: Ermahnung
zur Keuscheit. In Tertullian, edited by Hans-Veit Friedrich. Stuttgart:
Teubner, 1990.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 550 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Thou [De Thou], Jacques Auguste de. A. Thuani historiarum sui temporis.
Geneva, 1620. Published in English as Monsieur de Thou’s History of His
Own Times. Translated by Bernhard Wilson. London, 1729–30.
Thucydides. The History of the Peloponnesian War, Books 3–4. Translated by
C. F. Smith. Loeb Classical Library, no. 109, rev. ed. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1930.
Tribbechov, Adam. Exercitationes ad baronii annales ubi desiit Isaacus
Casaubonus: In Acad. Kiloniensi ad disputandum propositae Kilonium [ad
Baron. Annal.]. Kiel: Reumann, 1667; later edition Leipzig: Reumann, 1708.
Tschudi, Aegidius. Chronicon Helveticorum. Basle, 1734–36. Reprint, Bern:
Allgemeine Geschichtsforschende Gesellschaft der Schweiz, 1968–2000.
Turretini [Turretin] [Turretinus], François. Compendium theologicae didacto-
elencticae [Turretin, Hist. Ecclesiast. Compendium]. Published in English as
Institutes of Elenctic Theology. Edited by James T. Dennison. Translated by
George Musgrave Giger. Phillipsburg, N.J.: P & R Publications, 1992.
Valerius Maximus [Valer. Maxim.]. Factorum et dictorum memorabilium
[Valer. Max.]. In Valerius Maximus, Memorable Doings and Sayings,
translated by D. R. Shackleton Bailey. 2 vols. Loeb Classical Library, nos.
492, 493. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2000.
Varro. De lingua Latina V [de Ling. Lat. lib. iv]. In Varro, On the Latin
Language, translated by Roland G. Kent. Loeb Classical Library, no. 333.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1951.
Vattel, Emer de. Le loisir philosophique ou pièces diverses de philosophie, de
morale, et d’amusement. Geneva, 1747.
Vattel, Emer de. Mélanges de littérature, de morale, et de politique.
Neuchâtel: Edit. du Journal Helvétique, 1760.
Vega, Garcilaso de la. Royal Commentaries of the Incas and General History
of Peru [Garcillasso de la Vega]. Edited and translated by Harold V.
Livermore. Lisbon, 1609. Austin: University of Texas Press, 1966.
Velly, (Abbé) Paul François. Histoire de France, depuis l’établissement de la
monarchie jusqu’au règne de Louis XIV—Nouvelle édition [Abbé Velly,
History of France] [Hist. of France]. Vols. 1–7 by Velly. Vols. 8–17 by C.
Villaret. Vols. 18–30 by J. J. Garnier. Paris, 1755–86.
Velly, (Abbé) Paul François. Poliergie, ou Mêlange de littérature et de
poësies. Amsterdam: Arkstée et Merkus, 1757.
Vertot, René-Aubert de. History of the Revolutions in Sweden, Occasioned by
the Change in Religion [History of the Revolutions in Sweden]. London,
1696.
Vertot, René-Aubert de. Revolutions of Portugal. Translated by G.
Roussillon. London, 1721.
Virgil. Aeneid II. In Virgil, Eclogues, Georgics, Aeneid Books 1–6, translated
by H. Rushton Fairclough, revised by G. P. Goold. Loeb Classical Library,
no. 63. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1916.
Virgil. Aeneid VI. In Virgil, Eclogues, Georgics, Aeneid Books 1–6, translated
by H. Rushton Fairclough, revised by G. P. Goold. Loeb Classical Library,
no. 63. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1916.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 551 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Virgil. Aeneid X [Aen.]. In Virgil, Aeneid 7–12, Appendix Vergiliana,
translated by H. Rushton Fairclough, revised by G. P. Goold. Loeb Classical
Library, no. 64. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1918.
Virgil. Eclogues. In Virgil, Eclogues, Georgics, Aeneid Books 1–6, translated
by H. Rushton Fairclough, revised by G. P. Goold. Loeb Classical Library,
no. 63. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1916.
Vogel, Franz Adam. Traité historique et politique des alliances entre la
France et les XIII. Cantons: Depuis Charles VII jusqu’à présent par Mr.
Vogel G[rand] J[uge] D[es] G[ardes] S[uisses]. Suivant la copie imprimée-
Paris [Vogel’s Historical and Political Treatise]. 1733.
Vopiscus, Flavius. Probus [Prob.]. In Historia Augusta III, translated by
David Magie. Loeb Classical Library, no. 263. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1932.
Wattenwyl (French spelling is Watteville), Alexander Ludwig von. Histoire
de la Confédération helvétique [History of the Helvetic Confederacy] [Hist. of
the Helvetic Confederacy]. Bern: Gottschall, 1754.
Wicquefort, Abraham de. The Embassador and His Functions [The
Ambassador] [Embassador] [Embassad.] [Embass.]. Translated by John
Digby. London, 1716. Reprint, Leicester: Leicester University, 1997.
Witt, Johan de. Brieven geschreven ende gewisselt tusschen den Heer Johan
de Witt. [De Witt’s Letters and Negotiations] Gravenhage, 1723–25. Modern
edition, Brieven van Johan de Witt. Edited by Robert Fruin. Amsterdam: J.
Müller, 1919.
Wolf[f], Christian. Ius naturae et ius gentium [Jus Gent.] [Law of Nations]
[Law of Nature] [Wolf, Jus Gent.] [Wolf, Jus Gentium] [Wolf, Jus Nat.]
[Wolfii, Jus Gent.] [Wolfius, Jus Gent.] [Wolfius, Jus Nat.]. Halle, 1740–46.
Reprinted in J. Ecole et al., eds., Christian Wolff: Gesammelte Werke, series 2
(Latin), vol. 61. Hildesheim [Zurich] New York, 1960.
Wolf[f], Christian. Ius gentium methodo scientifica pertractatum. Translated
by Joseph H. Drake. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1934.
Wolf[f], Christian. Philosophia practica universalis methodo scientifica
pertractata [Phil. Pract. Univ.]. Frankfurt, 1738–39. Reprinted in
Gesammelte Schriften. Abtl. 2, Lateinische Schriften. Band 10–11.
Hildesheim: Olms, 1971–78.
Wolf[f], Christian. Theologia naturalis scientifica pertractata [Theol. nat.]. 2
vols. Frankfurt, 1736–37.
Xenophon [Xenoph.]. Constitution of Lacedaemon [Lacedaemon.
Respublica.]. In Xenophon, Hiero. Agesilaus. Constitution of the
Lacedaemonians. Ways and Means. Cavalry Commander. Art of
Horsemanship. On Hunting. Constitution of the Athenians, translated by E. C.
Marchant and G. W. Bowersock. Loeb Classical Library, no. 183.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1925.
Xenophon [Xenoph.]. Cyropaedia V [Cyrop.]. In Xenophon, Cyropaedia 5–8,
translated by Walter Miller. Loeb Classical Library, no. 52. Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1914.
Xenophon [Xenoph.]. Hellenica. [Hist. Graec.] In Xenophon, Hellenica
Books 1–4, translated by Carleton L. Brownson. Loeb Classical Library, no.
88. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1918.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 552 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Writings On Vattel
Bandelier, André. “De Berlin à Neuchâtel: La genèse du Droit des gens
d’Emer de Vattel.” In Schweizer im Berlin des 18. Jahrhunderts, 45–56,
edited by Martin Fontius and Helmut Holzhey, Berlin: Akademie Verlag,
1996.
Baudenet D’Annoux, Henry. Le développement de la neutralité de Grotius à
Vattel. Orléans: A. Gout, 1910.
Beaulac, Stéphane. “Emer de Vattel and the Externalization of Sovereignty.”
Journal of the History of International Law 5 (2003): 237–92.
Beaulac, Stéphane. “The Westphalian Legal Orthodoxy—Myth or Reality?”
Journal of the History of International Law 2 (2000): 148–77.
Béguelin, Eduard. “En souvenir de Vattel.” In Recueil de travaux, 35–176.
Neuchâtel: Attinger, 1929.
Brierly, J. L. The Law of Nations. 6th ed. Oxford: Clarendon, 1963.
Bull, Hedley. The Anarchical Society: A Study of Order in World Politics.
London: Macmillan, 1977.
Butler, Peter F. “Legitimacy in a States-System: Vattel’s Law of Nations.” In
The Reason of States, edited by Michael Donelan, 45–63. London: Allen and
Unwin, 1978.
Cavallar, Georg. The Rights of Strangers: Theories of International
Hospitality, the Global Community, and Political Justice Since Vitoria,
306–17. Aldershot: Ashgate, 2002.
Dufour, Alfred. “Religion, église, état dans la pensée d’Emer de Vattel.”
Musée Neuchâtelois 2002: 169–92.
Fenwick, Charles G. “The Authority of Vattel.” American Political Science
Review 7 (1913): 395–410.
Guggenheim, Paul. Emer de Vattel et l’étude des relations internationales en
Suisse. Genève: Georg et Cie, 1956.
Guggenheim, Paul. “La souveraineté dans l’histoire du droit des gens de
Vitoria à Vattel.” In Mélanges offerts à Juray Andrassy, edited by Vladimir
Ibler, 111–21. La Haye: Martin Nijhoff, 1968.
Haggenmacher, Peter. “L’Etat souverain comme sujet du droit international,
de Vitoria à Vattel.” Droits: Revue française de théorie juridique 16 (1992):
11–20. Paris: PUF.
Hochstrasser, Timothy J. Natural Law Theories in the Early Enlightenment,
177–83. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000.
Hurell, Andrew. “Vattel: Pluralism and Its Limits.” In Classical Theories of
International Relations, edited by Ian Clark and Iver B. Neumann, 233–55.
New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1996.
Jouannet, Emmanuelle. “La critique de la pensée classique durant l’entredeux
guerres: Vattel et Van Vollenhoven (Quelques réflexions sur le modèle
classique du droit international).” Miskolc Journal of International Law 1
(2004): 45–63.
Jouannet, Emmanuelle. Emer de Vattel et l’émergence doctrinale du droit
international classique. Paris: A. Pedrone, 1998.
Jouannet, Emmanuelle. “Vattel et la sujétion directe de l’Etat au droit
international.” In L’Etat Moderne: Regards sur la pensée politique de

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 553 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

l’Europe Occidentale entre 1715 et 1848, edited by Simone Goyard-Fabre,
153–79. Paris: J. Vrin, 2000.
Kant, Immanuel. “Perpetual Peace.” In Kant: Political Writings, edited by H.
S. Reiss. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991.
Kapossy, Béla. Iselin contra Rousseau: Sociable Patriotism and the History
of Mankind. Basel: Schwabe, 2006.
Kelsen, Hans. “Quincy Wright’s A Study of War and the Bellum Justum
Theory.” Ethics 3, no. 3 (1943): 208–11.
Koskenniemi, Martti. From Apology to Utopia: The Structure of
International Legal Argument, 89–97. Helsinki: Finnish Lawyers’ Publishing
Co., 1989.
Lapradelle, Albert de. Introduction to The Law of Nations or the Principles of
Natural Law, by Emer de Vattel, iii–lix. Carnegie ed. Washington, D.C.,
1916. Reprint, New York: Oceana, 1964.
Linklater, Andrew. Men and Citizens in the Theory of International
Relations. London: Macmillan, 1982.
Manz, Johannes. Emer de Vattel: Versuch einer Würdigung; Unter
besonderer Berücksichtigung seiner Auffassung von der individuellen
Freiheit und der souveränen Gleichheit. Diss. Zürich, 1971.
Midgley, E. B. F. The Natural Law Tradition and the Theory of International
Relations, 184–95. London: Elek, 1975.
Montmorency, J. E. G. de. “Emerich de Vattel.” Journal of the Society of
Comparative Legislation, n.s., 10 (1909): 17–39. Reprinted in Great Jurists
of the World, edited by John Macdonell and Edward Manson, 477–504.
Boston: Little, Brown, 1914.
Nussbaum, A. A Concise History of the Law of Nations. New York:
Macmillan, 1954.
Onuf, Nicholas Greenwood. “Civitas Maxima: Wolff, Vattel, and the Fate of
Republicanism.” American Journal of International Law 88 (1994): 280–303.
Rabkin, Jeremy. “Grotius, Vattel, and Locke: An Older View of Liberalism
and Nationality.” Review of Politics 59 (1997): 292–322.
Remec, Peter Pavel. The Position of the Individual in International Law
According to Grotius and Vattel. The Hague: M. Nijhoff, 1960.
Ruddy, Francis Stephen. “The Acceptance of Vattel.” Grotian Society Papers
1972: 177–96. The Hague: M. Nijhoff.
Ruddy, Francis Stephen. International Law in the Enlightenment: The
Background of Emmerich de Vattel’s Le Droit des Gens. Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.:
Oceana, 1975.
Schmitt, Carl. Der Nomos der Erde im Völkerrecht des Jus Publicum
Europaeum. 4th ed. Berlin: Duncker and Humblot, 1997.
Senellart, Michel. “La qualification de l’ennemi chez Emer de Vattel.”
Astérion, no. 2 (juillet 2004) 31–51.
Staub, Hans. Die Völkerrechtlichen Lehren Vattels im Lichte der
naturrechtlichen Doktrin: Ein Beitrag zur Gründungsgeschichte des
Völkerrechts. Berlin: Vahlen, 1922.
Thévenaz, Henri. “Vattel ou La destinée d’un livre.” Schweizerisches
Jahrbuch für Internationales Recht 14 (1957): 9–16.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 554 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Tuck, Richard. The Rights of War and Peace: Political Thought and the
International Order from Grotius to Kant, 191–96. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1999.
Van Vollenhoven, Cornelius. Du droit de paix. De iure pacis. La Haye: M.
Nijhoff, 1932.
Van Vollenhoven, Cornelius. Les trois phases du Droit des gens. La Haye:
M. Nijhoff, 1919.
Whelan, Frederick G. “Vattel’s Doctrine of the State.” History of Political
Thought 9 (1988): 59–90. Reprinted in Grotius, Pufendorf, and Modern
Natural Law, edited by K. Haakonssen, 403–34. Brookfield, Vt.: Dartmouth
Publishing, 1998.
Wright, Quincy. Preface to The Position of the Individual in International
Law According to Grotius and Vattel, by Peter Pavel Remec. The Hague: M.
Nijhoff, 1960.
Wright, Quincy. A Study of War. 2 vols. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1942.
Zurbuchen, Simone. “Die schweizerische Debatte über die Leibniz-Wolffsche
Philosophie und ihre Bedeutung für Emer von Vattels philosophischen
Werdegang.” In Reconceptualizing Nature, Science, and Aesthetics:
Contribution à une nouvelle approche des Lumières helvetiques, edited by
Patrick Coleman, Anne Hofmann, and Simone Zurbuchen, 91–113. Genève:
Slatkine, 1998.

This book is set in Adobe Garamond, a modern adaptation by Robert Slimbach of the
typeface originally cut around 1540 by the French typographer and printer Claude
Garamond. The Garamond face, with its small lowercase height and restrained
contrast between thick and thin strokes, is a classic “old-style” face and has long been
one of the most influential and widely used typefaces.

Printed on paper that is acid-free and meets the requirements of the American
National Standard for Permanence of Paper for Printed Library Materials,
z39.48-1992. (archival)

Book design by Louise OFarrell Gainesville, Florida

Typography by Apex CoVantage Madison, Wisconsin

Printed and bound by Worzalla Publishing Company Stevens Point, Wisconsin

[1. ] Vattel was christened “Emer.” Modern authors have mistakenly given him a
German name, “Emerich.”

[2. ] The most authoritative biography of Vattel is still E. Béguelin, “En souvenir de
Vattel,” in Recueil de travaux offert par la Faculté de Droit de l’Université de
Neuchâtel à la Société Suisse des Juristes à l’occasion de sa réunion à Neuchâtel,
15–17 septembre 1929, 35–176; in English, the most informative account is A. de
Lapradelle’s introduction to the Carnegie edition of The Law of Nations or the
Principles of Natural Law, iii–lix. For a concise summary, see also S. Beaulac, “Emer

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 555 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

de Vattel and the Externalization of Sovereignty,” Journal of the History of
International Law 5 (2003): 237–92; especially pp. 242–47.

[3. ] Vattel, “Apologie de la médisance”; “Essai sur l’utilité du jeu”; and “Relation
d’un jugement rendu sur le Mont Olympe” appeared in the October and December
1740 issues of the Journal Helvétique. In 1741 Vattel wrote a number of essays
explaining the relation between self-love and friendship, in which he put forward
some of the arguments later developed in his discussion of the foundation of
obligation: “Lettre à Mademoiselle de M ... sur les sentimens délicats, généreux et
désintéressés”; “Lettre sur la nature de l’amour”; and “Sur la différence de l’amour et
de l’amitié.” They were included in the Pièces diverses (see note 5) and Le loisir
philosophique (see note 6).

[4. ] Vattel, Défense du système leibnitzien contre les objections et imputations de Mr
de Crousaz, contenues dans l’Examen de l’Essai sur l’homme de Mr Pope. Ou l’on a
joint la Réponse aux objections de Mr Roques, contenues dans le Journal Helvétique,
par Mr Emer de Vattel (Leyde: Jean Luzac, 1741). See S. Zurbuchen, “Die
schweizerische Debatte über die Leibniz-Wolffsche Philosophie und ihre Bedeutung
für Emer von Vattels philosophischen Werdegang,” in Reconceptualizing Science,
Nature, and Aesthetics, ed. P. Coleman, A. Hofmann, and S. Zurbuchen, 91–113.

[5. ] Vattel, Pièces diverses, avec quelques lettres de morale et d’amusemens (Paris:
Briasson, 1746).

[6. ] Vattel, Le loisir philosophique ou Pièces diverses de philosophie, de morale, et
d’amusement (Genève [in fact, Dresden]: Walther, 1747); see Béguelin, “En souvenir
de Vattel,” 106n112.

[7. ] Béguelin, “En souvenir de Vattel,” 47.

[8. ] Vattel, Poliergie ou mélange de littérature et de poësie (Amsterdam: Arkstêe et
Merkus, 1757).

[9. ] Vattel first mentions the work in a letter to Brühl from March 1758; see
Béguelin, “En souvenir de Vattel,” 131.

[10. ] The numerous editions of The Law of Nations in French, English, German,
Spanish, and Italian are listed in Lapradelle, introduction, lvi–lix. To these should be
added Greek, Russian, Polish, Chinese, and Japanese.

[11. ] See especially Vattel’s “Réflexions sur le Discours de M. Rousseau touchant
l’origine de l’inégalité parmi les hommes” (Amusemens de littérature, de morale, et
de politique, 79–89), where he attacked Rousseau’s elaborate critique of the idea of
sociability. Although Vattel, in The Law of Nations, does not mention Rousseau by
name, he repeatedly rejected arguments that contemporaries immediately associated
with the latter. See, for example, Preliminaries §10, where Vattel argued against the
Rousseauvian image of solitary natural man: “Each individual, moreover, is
intimately conscious that he can neither live happily nor improve his nature without
the intercourse and assistance of others.” See also bk. I, §113, where he defended the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 556 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

arts and the sciences: “Let the friends of barbarism declaim against the sciences and
polite arts; let us, without deigning to answer their vain reasonings, content ourselves
with appealing to experience.”

[12. ] For a discussion of mid- eighteenth-century Swiss reform discourse, see B.
Kapossy, Iselin contra Rousseau: Sociable Patriotism and the History of Mankind.
For the wider European context of Vattel’s theory, see F. Stephen Ruddy,
International Law in the Enlightenment: The Background of Emmerich de Vattel’s
“Le Droit des Gens.”

[13. ] N. Greenwood Onuf, “Civitas Maxima: Wolff, Vattel, and the Fate of
Republicanism,” American Journal of International Law 88 (1994): 280–303.

[14. ] For a detailed treatment of Vattel’s theory of international law, see Emmanuelle
Jouannet, Emer de Vattel et l’émergence doctrinale du droit international classique.

[15. ] Vattel, Law of Nations, I §81; II §86–87, 97; Questions, 71–72.

[16. ] C. Van Vollenhoven, Du droit de paix. De iure pacis, 99. See Emmanuelle
Jouannet, “La critique de la pensée classique durant l’ entre-deux guerres: Vattel et
Van Vollenhoven,” in Miskolc Journal of International Law 1 (2004): 45–63. Kant, in
his “Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch,” had famously labeled Vattel, together
with Grotius and Pufendorf, as “sorry comforters,” in Political Writings, 103. See also
R. Tuck, The Rights of War and Peace: Political Thought and the International Order
from Grotius to Kant, 191–96; and T. J. Hochstrasser, Natural Law Theories in the
Early Enlightenment, 177–83.

[17. ] Vattel, Essay on the Foundation, 752.

[18. ] See also Vattel’s essays on friendship from 1741 (see note 3, below).

[19. ] Note the revealing subtitle added to the pirated edition (Leyden, 1758), which
suggested that Vattel’s treatise should be read as “a work tending to display the true
interest of powers.” This additional subtitle seems to have been included only in the
German edition of 1760, the first English translation of 1759, and the second
American edition of 1805.

[20. ] Vattel dealt with the distinction between true and false glory at length in his
“Dialogue entre Pierre le Grand & Charles XII sur la gloire des conquérans,”
published in the Amusemens de littérature (La Haye: Pierre Gosse, 1765), 1–19.

[21. ] See Vattel’s essay Dialogue entre le prince de **** & son confident, sur
quelques parties essentielles de l’administration publique, reproduced in this edition,
p. 783.

[22. ] On Vattel’s critique of the patrimonial state, see Frederick G. Whelan, “Vattel’s
Doctrine of the State,” History of Political Thought, 9 (1988): 59–90.

[23. ] Béguelin, “En souvenir de Vattel,” 131; see Law of Nations, III §168.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 557 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[24. ] Berne’s chief magistrate.

[25. ] Béguelin, “En souvenir de Vattel,” 172.

[26. ] For two opposite interpretations, see A. Nussbaum, A Concise History of the
Law of Nations, 152, and Q. Wright, A Study of War, 336–37.

[27. ] For the reception of Vattel, see C. G. Fenwick, “The Authority of Vattel,”
American Political Science Review 7 (1913): 395–410; F. S. Ruddy, “The Acceptance
of Vattel,” Grotian Society Papers (1972): 177–96; and H. Thévenaz, “Vattel ou la
destinée d’un livre,” Schweizerisches Jahrbuch für Internationales Recht, 14 (1957):
9–16.

[1. ] Emer de Vattel, Essay on the Foundation of Natural Law and on the First
Principle of the Obligation Men Find Themselves Under to Observe Laws (Essai sur
le fondement du droit naturel, et sur le premier principe de l’obligation où se trouvent
tous les hommes, d’en observer les lois), translated by T. J. Hochstrasser.

[2. ]Dissertation on This Question: “Can Natural Law Bring Society to Perfection
Without the Assistance of Political Laws?” (Dissertation sur cette question: “Si la loi
naturelle peut porter la société à sa perfection, sans le secours des loix politiques?”),
translated by T. J. Hochstrasser.

[3. ] Emer de Vattel, Dialogue Between the Prince of **** & his Confidant, on
certain Essential Elements of Public Administration (Dialogue entre le prince de
**** & son confident, sur quelques parties essentielles de l’administration publique),
translated by K. Goodwin.

[1. ] “For to the Supreme God who governs this whole universe nothing is more
pleasing than those companies and unions of men that are called cities.”

[2. ] Somnium Scipionis (Scipio’s Dream) in Cicero, De republica.

[3. ] “I ask forgiveness not praise,—I will be praised in full, if you don’t despise me,
reader” (Ovid, Tristia I, VII).

[* ] Neque vero hoc solum natura, id est, jure gentium, &c. Cicero de Offic. lib. iii. c.
5.

[† ] Jus naturale est, quod natura omnia animalia docuit. Instit. lib. i. tit. 2.

[‡ ] Quod quisque populus ipse sibi jus constituit, id ipsius proprium civitatis est,
vocaturque jus civile, quasi jus proprium ipsius civitatis: quod vero naturalis ratio
inter omnes homines constituit, id apud omnes peraeque custoditur, vocaturque jus
gentium, quasi quo jure omnes gentes utantur. Ibid. §1.

[§ ] Jus autem gentium omni humano generi commune est: nam usu exigente et
humanis necessitatibus, gentes humanae jura quaedam sibi constituerunt. Bella etenim

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 558 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

orta sunt, et captivitates secutae et servitutes, quae sunt naturali juri contrariae. Jure
enim naturali omnes homines ab initio liberi nascebantur. Ibid. §2.

[* ]Feciales, quod fidei publicae inter populos praeerant: nam per hos fiebat ut justum
conciperetur bellum (et inde desitum), et ut foedere fides pacis constitueretur. Ex his
mittebant, antequam conciperetur, qui res repeterent: et per hos etiam nunc fit foedus.
Varro de Ling. Lat. lib. iv. [[“The Fetiales [herald-priests] because they were in
charge of the state’s word of honor in matters between peoples; for by them it was
brought about that a war that was declared should be a just war, and by them the war
was stopped, that by a foedus [treaty], the fides [honesty] of the peace might be
established. Some of them were sent before war should be declared, to demand
restitution of the stolen property, and by them even now is made the foedus.”De
lingua Latina V.XV

]]

[† ]De Jure Belli & Pacis, translated by Barbeyrac: Preliminary Discourse, §41.

[* ] Rursus (lex) naturalis dividi potest in naturalem hominum, quae sola obtinuit dici
Lex Naturae, et naturalem civitatum, quae dici potest Lex Gentium, vulgo autem Jus
Gentium appellatur. Praecepta utriusque eadem sunt: sed quia civitates semel
institutae induunt proprietates hominum personales, lex quam, loquentes de hominum
singulorum officio, naturalem dicimus, applicata totis civitatibus, nationibus, sive
gentibus, vocatur Jus Gentium. De Cive, c. xiv. §4. [[“Again, the Natural Law may be
divided into that of men, which alone hath obtained the title of the Law of Nature, and
that of cities, which may be called Law of Nations, but vulgarly it is termed the Right
of Nations. (The precepts of both are alike, but because cities once instituted do put
on the personal proprieties of men, that law, which speaking of the duty of single
men, we call natural, being applied to whole cities, and nations, is called the Right of
Nations. And the same Elements of natural law, and right, which have hitherto been
spoken of, being transferred to whole cities and nations, may be taken for the
Elements of the laws, and Right of Nations.” Hobbes, De Cive, ed. Warrender, 28.

]]

[* ] Puffendorf’s Law of Nature and Nations, book ii. chap. iii. §23.

[† ] Book i. chap. 1, §14, note 3.

[* ] In his Elementa Philos. Pract.

[† ] Note 2 on Puffendorf’s Law of Nature and Nations, book ii. chap. 3, §23. I have
not been able to procure Budaeus’s work, from which I suspect that Barbeyrac
derived this idea of the Law of Nations.

[* ] If it were not more advisable, for the sake of brevity, of avoiding repetitions, and
taking advantage of the ideas already formed and established in the minds of
men,—if, for all these reasons, it were not more convenient to presuppose in this
instance a knowledge of the ordinary law of nature, and on that ground to undertake

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 559 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

the task of applying it to sovereign states,—it would, instead of speaking of such
application, be more accurate to say, that, as the law of nature, properly so called, is
the natural law of individuals and founded on the nature of man, so the natural law of
nations is the natural law of political societies, and founded on the nature of those
societies. But as the result of either mode is ultimately the same, I have in preference
adopted the more compendious one. As the law of nature has already been treated of
in an ample and satisfactory manner, the shortest way is simply to make a rational
application of it to nations.

[1. ] Christian Wolff, Ius naturae et ius gentium (Halle, 1740–46).

[† ] A nation here means a sovereign state, an independent political society.

[* ] In the VIIIth Part of his Law of Nature, and in his Law of Nations.

[* ] Nihil est quod adhuc de republicâ putem dictum, et quo possim longius progredi,
nisi sit confirmatum, non modo falsum esse istud, sine injuriâ non posse, sed hoc
verissimum, sine summâ justitiâ rempublicant regi non posse. Cicero, Fragment. ex
lib. de Republica.

[2. ] Vattel is probably referring to his so-called protector Count Brühl. As Vattel
considered Brühl to be the very opposite of his idea of a good minister, the remark is
one of pure flattery.

[* ] The study of this science presupposes an acquaintance with the ordinary law of
nature, of which human individuals are the objects. Nevertheless, for the sake of those
who have not systematically studied that law, it will not be amiss to give in this place
a general idea of it. The natural law is the science of the laws of nature, of those laws
which nature imposes on mankind, or to which they are subject by the very
circumstance of their being men; a science, whose first principle is this axiom of
incontestable truth—“The great end of every being endowed with intellect and
sentiment, is happiness.” It is by the desire alone of that happiness that we can bind a
creature possessed of the faculty of thought, and form the ties of that obligation which
shall make him submit to any rule. Now, by studying the nature of things, and that of
man in particular, we may thence deduce the rules which man must follow in order to
attain his great end,—to obtain the most perfect happiness of which he is susceptible.
We call those rules the natural laws, or the laws of nature. They are certain, they are
sacred, and obligatory on every man possessed of reason, independently of every
other consideration than that of his nature, and even though we should suppose him
totally ignorant of the existence of a God. But the sublime consideration of an eternal,
necessary, infinite Being, the author of the universe, adds the most lively energy to
the law of nature, and carries it to the highest degree of perfection. That necessary
Being necessarily unites in himself all perfection: he is therefore superlatively good,
and displays his goodness by forming creatures susceptible of happiness. It is then his
wish that his creatures should be as happy as is consistent with their nature:
consequently it is his will that they should, in their whole conduct, follow the rules
which that same nature lays down for them, as the most certain road to happiness.
Thus the will of the creator perfectly coincides with the simple indications of nature:

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 560 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

and those two sources producing the same law, unite in forming the same obligation.
The whole reverts to the first great end of man, which is happiness. It was to conduct
him to that great end that the laws of nature were ordained: it is from the desire of
happiness that his obligation to observe those laws arises. There is, therefore, no
man,—whatever may be his ideas respecting the origin of the universe,—even if he
had the misfortune to be an atheist,—who is not bound to obey the laws of nature.
They are necessary to the general happiness of mankind; and whoever should reject
them, whoever should openly despise them, would by such conduct alone declare
himself an enemy to the human race, and deserve to be treated as such. Now, one of
the first truths which the study of man reveals to us, and which is a necessary
consequence of his nature, is, that, in a state of lonely separation from the rest of his
species, he cannot attain his great end—happiness: and the reason is, that he was
intended to live in society with his fellow-creatures. Nature herself, therefore, has
established that society, whose great end is the common advantage of all its members:
and the means of attaining that end constitute the rules that each individual is bound
to observe in his whole conduct. Such are the natural laws of human society. Having
thus given a general idea of them, which is sufficient for any intelligent reader, and is
developed at large in several valuable works, let us return to the particular object of
this treatise. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.

]]

[* ] Xenophon points out the true reason of this first of all duties, and establishes its
necessity, in the following words. “If we see a man who is uniformly eager to pursue
his own private advantage, without regard to the rules of honour or the duties of
friendship, why should we in any emergency think of sparing him?” [[Note added in
1773/1797 editions.

]]

[* ] Etenim si haec perturbare omnia et permiscere volumus, totam vitam
periculosam, insidiosam, infestamque reddemus. Cicero in Verr. ii. 15. [[“The fact is
that if we are prepared to reduce all these principles to chaos and confusion, we shall
fill life with danger and resentment and hostility at every turn.” In Verrem.

]]

[* ] Nor shall we examine which of those different kinds of government is the best. It
will be sufficient to say in general, that the monarchical form appears preferable to
every other, provided the power of the sovereign be limited, and not absolute—qui
[principatus] tum demum regius est, si intra modestiae et mediocritatis fines se
contineat, excessu potestatis, quam imprudentes in dies augere satagunt, minuitur,
penitusque corrumpitur. Nos stulti, majoris, potentiae specie decepti, dilabimur in
contrarium, non satis considerantes eam demum tutam esse potentiam quae viribus
modum imponit. [[“This [sovereignty] is indeed kingly, if it confines itself within the
bounds of modesty and moderation, with a withdrawal from power. The imprudent
daily concern themselves to extend such power, but it is diminished and inwardly
corrupted. We fools, taken in by the appearance of superior power, lurch to the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 561 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

opposite conclusion, not sufficiently considering that in the end that power is secure
which imposes due measure on its energies” (trans. Eds.). The source is unidentified,
but the last sentence quotes Valerius Maximus, Factorum et dictorum memorabilium
libri novem, exemplum externum 8, the story of Theopompus. The maxim has both
truth and wisdom on its side. The author here quotes the saying of Theopompus, king
of Sparta 720–675 bc, who returning to his house amidst the acclamations of the
people after the establishment of the Ephori,—“You will leave to your children (said
his wife) an authority diminished through your fault.” “True (replied the king): I shall
leave them a smaller portion of it; but it will rest upon a firmer basis.” Five Ephors
were elected annually to “uphold” the rule of the kings, but instead they became a
constraint on the power of the two Spartan kings; hence the comment by
Theopompus’s wife. The Lacedaemonians, during a certain period, had two chiefs to
whom they very improperly gave the title of kings. They were magistrates who
possessed a very limited power, and whom it was not unusual to cite before the
tribunal of justice,—to arrest,—to condemn to death.—Sweden acts with less
impropriety in continuing to bestow on her chief the title of king, although she has
circumscribed his power within very narrow bounds. He shares not his authority with
a colleague,—he is hereditary,—and the state has, from time immemorial, borne the
title of a kingdom. Note added in 1773/1797 editions.

]]

[3. ] This is Vattel’s sole reference to Aristotle.

[4. ] Although there is no known case of mercenaries from Neuchâtel fighting against
Prussian forces, Vattel would have had in mind the battle of Novara (1500), when
Swiss troops employed by both France and the Italian states clashed. The event
acquired iconic status in Swiss historiography, and its ramifications were extensively
discussed by historians such as Wattenwyl.

[5. ] 1758.

[6. ] In his editions from 1834 Joseph Chitty here noted: “This is indeed a flattering
compliment from Vattel, a foreigner: but certainly it is just: for although, as a
commercial nation, it might be supposed that each individual principally labours for
his own individual gain; yet when we refer to the spirited employment of capital:
building national bridges, canals, rail-roads, &c not yielding even 2 per cent, it must
be admitted that great public spirit for national good very generally prevails.”

[7. ] Vattel is here positioning himself in the debate about the relative merits of
Britain and of France, and the vexed question of Britain’s likely prospects for survival
as a mixed state.

[8. ] Vattel is discussing France.

[9. ] “Resist the first advances.”

[* ] The last words of Louis VI. [[Louis the Fat, r. 1108–37 to his son Louis VII.
Louis VII, the Younger, r. 1137–80 were—“Remember, my son, that royalty is but a

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 562 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

public employment of which you must render a rigorous account to him who is the
sole disposer of crowns and sceptres.” Abbé Velly’s Hist. of France, Vol. III. p. 65.

Timur-Bec declared (as he often before had done on similar occasions) that “a single
hour’s attention devoted by a prince to the care of his state, is of more use and
consequence than all the homage and prayers he could offer up to God during his
whole life.” Timur-Bec, or Tamurlane, ca. 1336–1405, Mongol warlord; as conqueror
of much of central Asia, he founded the Timurid dynasty. The same sentiment is
found in the Koran. Hist. of Timur-Bec, Book II. ch. xli. Sharaf ad-Din ?Ali Yazdi,
History of Timur-Bec, translated into French by de la Croix. Note added in 1773/1797
editions.

]]

[10. ] Louis XII, called “Father of the People,” r. 1498–1515.

[* ] Neque enim se princeps reipublicae et singulorum dominum arbitrabitur, quamvis
assentatoribus id in aurem insusurrantibus, sed rectorem mercede a civibus designata,
quam augere, nisi ipsis volentibus, nefas existimabit. Ibid. c. v. [[“For the prince will
not consider himself lord of the state and of individuals, however much yes-men
might whisper in his ear, but rather a governor with remuneration assigned by the
citizens which he will think it unlawful to increase except by their wish” (trans. Eds.).
The source is not identified.—From this principle it follows that the nation is superior
to the sovereign. Quod caput est, sit principi persuasum, totius reipublicae majorem
quam ipsius unius auctoritatem esse: neque pessimis hominibus credat diversum
affirmantibus gratificandi studio; quae magna pernicies est. Ibid. “The chief point is,
let the prince be persuaded that the authority of the entire state is greater than that of
one person in himself, and let him not believe the opposite when the worst of men
affirm it out of a desire to curry favor, which is a great evil” (trans. Eds.). The source
is not identified. Note added in 1773/1797 editions.

]]

[* ] In some countries, formal precautions are taken against the abuse of power.—
“Reflecting, among other things (says Grotius), that princes are often found to make
no scruple of violating their promises under the stale pretext of the public good, the
people of Brabant, in order to obviate that inconvenience, established the custom of
never admitting their prince to the possession of the government without having
previously made with him a covenant, that, whenever he may happen to violate the
laws of the country, they shall be absolved from the oath of obedience they had sworn
to him, until ample reparation be made for the outrages committed. The truth of this is
confirmed by the example of past generations, who formerly made effectual use of
arms and decrees to reduce within proper bounds such of their sovereigns as had
transgressed the line of duty, whether through their own licentiousness or the artifices
of their flatterers. Thus it happened to John the Second: nor would they consent to
make peace with him or his successors, until those princes had entered into a solemn
engagement to secure the citizens in the enjoyment of their privileges.” Annals of the
Netherlands, book ii. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 563 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

]]

[11. ] Louis XIV of France, “the Sun King,” r. 1643–1715.

[* ] [[Antoine Bilaine, A treatise on the right of the queen to several states of the
Spanish monarchy, 1667, in 12mo, part II. p. 191.

]]

[* ] Since the above was written, France has witnessed a renewal of those horrors. She
sighs at the idea of having given birth to a monster capable of violating the majesty of
kings in the person of a prince, whom the qualities of his heart entitle to the love of
his subjects and the veneration of foreigners. [The author alludes to the attempt made
by Damien to assassinate Louis XV.]

[† ] In Mariana’s work above quoted [[De rege et regis institutione, I find (chap. vii.
towards the end) a remarkable instance of the errors into which we are apt to be led by
a subtle sophistry destitute of sound principles.—That author allows us to poison a
tyrant, and even a public enemy, provided it be done without obliging him, either by
force or through mistake or ignorance, to concur in the act that causes his own
death,—which would be the case, for instance, in presenting him a poisoned draught.
For (says he), in thus leading him to an act of suicide, although committed through
ignorance, we make him violate the natural law which forbids each individual to take
away his own life; and the crime of him who thus unknowingly poisons himself
redounds on the real author,—the person who administered the poison.—Necogatur
tantum sciens aut imprudens sibi conscire mortem; quod esse nefas judicamus, veneno
in potu aut cibo, quod hauriat qui perimendus est, aut simili alia retemperato. “Let
him not be forced knowingly or imprudently to be complicit in his own death; we
judge it to be unlawful that he who must perish should swallow poison in food or
drink or mixed with some other substance” (trans. Eds.). A fine reason, truly! Was
Mariana disposed to insult the understandings of his readers, or only desirous of
throwing a slight varnish over the detestable doctrine contained in that chapter? Note
added in 1773/1797 editions.

]]

[* ] Dissimulandum censeo quatenus salus publica patiatur, privatimque corruptis
moribus princeps contingat: alioquin si rempublicam in periculum vocat, si patriae
religionis contemptor existit, neque medicinam ullam recipit, abdicandum judico,
alium substituendum; quod in Hispania non semel fuisse factum scimus: quasi fera
irritata, omnium telis peti debet, cum, humanitate abdicata, tyrannum induit. Sic Petro
rege ob immanitatem dejecto publice, Henricus ejus frater, quamvis ex impari matre,
regnum obtinuit. Sic Henrico hujus abnepote ob ignaviam pravosque mores abdicato
procerum suffragiis, primum Alfonsus ejus frater, recte an secus non disputo, sed
tamen in tenera aetate rex est proclamatus: deinde defuncto Alfonso, Elisabetha ejus
soror, Henrico invito, rerum summam ad se traxit, regio tantum nomine abstinens
dum ille vixit. [[“My assessment is that there must be secrecy about the extent of what
public safety can tolerate, and the extent to which the prince can be privately involved

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 564 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

with corrupted morals; otherwise if he brings the state into danger, if he stands forth
as one who despises the religion of his country, and accepts no remedy, then I judge
he must abdicate and another take his place. We know this has happened more than
once in Spain when, as a provoked wild animal needs to be pursued by the weapons
of all, human decency has been in abeyance and she has taken on a tyrant. Thus, when
Peter was king, when the people were laid low on account of his excesses, his brother
Henry, although from a different mother, obtained the kingdom. Thus when by the
votes of the nobles Henry had been deposed by his grandson on account of his sloth
and vicious morals, in the first instance his brother Alfonsus was proclaimed king, I
will not argue whether rightly or wrongly but at any rate at a tender age. Then on the
death of Alfonsus his sister Elisabeth assumed control of affairs despite Henry’s
unwillingness and was queen in all but name as long as he lived” (trans. Eds.).
Mariana, de Rege et Regis Institut. Lib. I. c. iii.

To this authority furnished by Spain, join that of Scotland, proved by the letter of the
barons to the pope, dated April 6, 1320 the Declaration of Arbroath, or formal
confirmation of Scotland’s independence, requesting him to prevail on the king of
England to desist from his enterprises against Scotland. After having spoken of the
evils they had suffered from him, they add—A quibus malis innumeris, ipso juvante
qui post vulnera medetur et sanat, liberati sumus per serenissimum principem regem
et dominum nostrum, dominum Robertum, qui pro populo et haereditate suis de
manibus inimicorum liberandis, quasi alter Maccabaeus aut Josue, labores et taedia,
inedias et pericula, laeto sustinuit animo. Quem etiam divina dispositio, et (juxta leges
et consuetudines nostras, quas usque ad mortem sustinere volumus) juris successio, et
debitus nostrorum consensus et assensus nostrum fecerunt principem atque regem:
cui, tanquam illi per quem salus in populo facta est, pro nostra libertate tuenda, tam
jure quam meritis tenemur, et volumus in omnibus adhaerere. Quem, si ab inceptis
desistet, regi Anglorum aut Anglis nos aut regnum nostrum volens subjicere, tanquam
inimicum nostrum et sui nostrique juris subversorem, statim expellere nitemur, et
alium regem nostrum, qui ad defensionem nostram sufficiet, faciemus: quia, quamdiu
centum viri remanserint, nunquam Anglorum dominio aliquatenus volumus subjugari.
Non enim propter gloriam, divitias, aut honores pugnamus, sed propter libertatem
solummodo, quam nemo bonus nisi simul cum vita amittit. “But from these countless
evils we have been set free, by the help of Him Who though He afflicts yet heals and
restores, by our most tireless Prince, King and Lord, the Lord Robert. He, that his
people and his heritage might be delivered out of the hands of our enemies, met toil
and fatigue, hunger and peril, like another Maccabaeus or Joshua, and bore them
cheerfully. Him, too, divine providence, his right of succession according to our laws
and customs which we shall maintain to the death, and the due consent and assent of
us all have made our prince and king. To him, as to the man by whom salvation has
been wrought unto our people, we are bound both by law and by his merits that our
freedom may be still maintained, and by him, come what may, we mean to stand. Yet
if he should give up what he has begun, and agree to make us or our kingdom subject
to the king of England or the English, we should exert ourselves at once to drive him
out as our enemy and a subverter of his own rights and ours, and make some other
man who was well able to defend us our king; for, as long as but a hundred of us
remain alive, never will we on any conditions be brought under English rule. It is in
truth not for glory, nor riches, nor honours that we are fighting, but for freedom—for

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 565 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

that alone, which no honest man gives up but with life itself.” (Scottish nobles to Pope
John XXII.)

“In the year 1581 (says Grotius, Ann. book III.) the confederated provinces of the
Netherlands,—after having for nine years continued to wage war against Philip the
Second king of Spain, r. 1556–98 without ceasing to acknowledge him as their
sovereign,—at length solemnly deprived him of the authority he had possessed over
their country, because he had violated their laws and privileges.” The author
afterwards observes that “France, Spain herself, England, Sweden, Denmark, furnish
instances of kings deposed by their people, so that there are at present few sovereigns
in Europe whose right to the crown rests on any other foundation than the right which
the people possess of divesting their sovereign of his power when he makes an ill use
of it.” Pursuant to this idea, the United Provinces, in their justificatory letters on that
subject, addressed to the princes of the Empire and the king of Denmark,—after
having enumerated the oppressive acts of the king of Spain,—added—“Then, by a
mode which has been often enough adopted even by those nations that now live under
kingly government, we wrested the sovereignty from him whose actions were all
contrary to the duty of a prince.” Ibid. Note added in 1773/1797 editions.

]]

[* ] Populi patroni non pauciora neque minora praesidia habent. Certe a republica
unde ortum habet regia postestas, rebus exigentibus, regens in jus vocari potest, et, si
sanitatem respuat, principatu spoliari; neque ita in principem jura potestatis transtulit,
ut non sibi majorem reservârit potestatem. Ibid. cap. VI. [[“The defenders of the
people have means of defense which are not scantier or smaller. Certainly when
circumstances demand it the ruler can be brought before the law by the state from
which royal power has its origin, and if he refuses to see sense he can be stripped of
his power; and no power has legally transferred to the prince, so he does not reserve
power to himself.” Annales et historiae de rebus Belgicis, lib. III (trans. Eds.).

Est tamen salutaris cogitatio, ut sit principibus persuasum, si rempublicam
oppresserint, si vitiis et foeditate intolerandi erunt, ea se conditione vivere, ut non jure
tantum, sed cum laude et gloria, perimi possint. Ibid. “It is however a salutary
consideration, that princes should be persuaded, if they oppress the state, if through
vice and foulness they are unendurable, that they live under this condition that their
removal can be not just legal but praiseworthy and glorious” (trans. Eds.). Note added
in 1773/1797 editions.

]]

[12. ] “Even war is a good exchange for a miserable peace.” Tacitus, Annales, III.47.

[13. ] Charles IX, king of France, r. 1560–74.

[14. ] August 24, 1572, when approximately three thousand Protestants were
murdered at Paris.

[* ] Mezeray’s Hist. of France, vol. II. p. 1107.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 566 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[* ] De Jure Belli & Pacis, Lib. 1. cap. iv. §11. not. 2.

[15. ] I Samuel 19–20.

[16. ] Charles VI, “the Well-Beloved,” r. 1380–1422.

[* ] Nimirum, quod publicae salutis causa et communi consensu statutum est, eadem
multitudinis voluntate, rebus exigentibus, immutari quid obstat? [[“To be sure, when
circumstances demand it, what stands in the way of changing that which has been
established for the sake of public safety and by common consent when this too is the
will of the multitude?” (trans. Eds.) Mariana, ibid. De rege c. iv. Note added in 1773/
1797 editions.

]]

[* ] When Philip II. resigned the Netherlands to his daughter Isabella Clara Eugenia, it
was said (according to the testimony of Grotius) that it was setting a dangerous
precedent, for a prince to treat free citizens as his property, and barter them away like
domestic slaves;—that, among barbarians indeed, the extraordinary practice
sometimes obtained, of transferring governments by will or donation, because those
people were incapable of discerning the difference between a prince and a
master;—but that those whom superior knowledge enabled to distinguish between
what is lawful and what is not, could plainly perceive that the administration of a state
is the property of the people (thence usually denominated res-publica);—and that as,
in every period of the world, there have been nations who governed themselves by
popular assemblies or by a senate, there have been others who intrusted the general
management of their concerns to princes. For it is not to be imagined (it was added)
that legitimate sovereignties have originated from any other source than the consent of
the people, who gave themselves all up to a single person, or (for the sake of avoiding
the tumults and discord of elections) to a whole family: and those to whom they thus
committed themselves, were induced by the prospect of honourable pre-eminence
alone to accept a dignity by which they were bound to promote the general welfare of
their fellow citizens in preference to their own private advantage. Grotius. Hist. of the
Disturbances in the Netherlands. Book II. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.

]]

[* ] Spirit of Laws, Book XXVI. chap. XXIII. where may be seen very good political
reasons for these regulations.

[† ] See further on.

[* ] Memorial in behalf of Madame de Longueville, concerning the principality of
Neufchatel, in 1672.

[* ] But it is to be observed that those partitions were not made without the
approbation and consent of the respective states.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 567 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[† ] Nescio quomodo nihil tam absurde dici potest, quod non dicatur ab aliquo
philosophorum. [[“I do not know why, but nothing can be said which is so absurd,
that it is not said by one or other of the philosophers.” Cicero, de Divinat. Lib. II 119.

]]

[17. ] Charles IV, king of France, r. 1322–28.

[18. ] The dispute was over who would succeed to the throne after Charles IV died
without a male heir.

[* ] Answer in behalf of Madame de Longueville, to a Memorial in behalf of Madame
de Nemours.

[19. ] Francesco Guicciardini, The History of Italy, from the Year 1490, to 1532 ... In
Twenty Books. Translated into English by the Chevalier Austin Parke Goddard
(London, 1753–56), bk. 12, vol. 6, 395.

[20. ] Ferdinand I, king of Aragon and Sicily, r. 1412–16.

[21. ] Ferdinand II, king of Aragon, r. 1476–1516; king of Sicily, r. 1468–1516; king
of Naples, r. 1504–16; and king of Castile and León (as Ferdinand V), r. 1474–1504.

[22. ] Isabella, queen of Castile, r. 1474–1504.

[23. ] Martin I, king of Aragon, r. 1396–1410; king of Sicily as Martin II, r. 1409–10;
uncle of Ferdinand I.

[† ] Ibid.

[‡ ] See the same memorial, which quotes P. Labbe’s Royal Abridgement, page 501,
&c.

[24. ] Henry IV, king of Castile, r. 1454–74.

[25. ] Alphonso V, r. 1438–81.

[26. ] Pius II, r. 1458–64.

[* ] I take this historical passage from M. Du Port de Tertre’s Conspiracies. To him I
refer; for I have not the original historians by me. However, I do not enter into the
question relating to the birth of Jane: this would here be of no use. The princess had
not been declared a bastard according to the laws; the king acknowledged her for his
daughter; and besides, whether she was or was not legitimate, the inconveniences
resulting from the pope’s refusal still remained the same with respect to her and the
king of Portugal. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.

]]

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 568 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[27. ] Louis of Bavaria, Holy Roman Emperor, r. 1328–47.

[* ] P. 154 Forma divortii matrimonialis inter Johannem filium regis Bohemiae &
Margaretham ducissam Karinthiae. This divorce is given by the emperor on account
of the impotency of the husband, per auctoritatem, says he, nobis rite debitam &
concessam. [[“A form of matrimonial divorce between John, son of the king of
Bohemia, and Margaret, Duchess of Karinthia.” “... by authority ... duly owed and
granted to us” (trans. Eds.).

P. 156. Forma dispensationis super affinitate consanguinitatis inter Ludovicum
marchionem Brandenburg & Margaretham ducissam Karinthiae, nec non legitimatio
liberorum procreandorum, factae per dom. Ludovic. IV. Rom. imper. “A form of
dispensation in respect of affinity of blood between Ludwig, Marquis of Brandenburg,
and Margaret, Duchess of Karinthia, together with a legitimation of any children to be
begotten, made by the authority of Ludwig IV, Emperor of the Romans.”

It is only human law, says the emperor, that hinders these marriages intra gradus
affinitatis sanguinis, praesertim intra fratres & sorores. De cujus legis praeceptis
dispensare solummodo pertinet ad auctoritatem imperatoris seu principis Romanorum.
“within the degrees of affinity of blood, especially between brothers and sisters.
Dispensing of the requirements of this law is a matter for the authority of the emperor
or prince of the Romans” (trans. Eds.). He then opposes and condemns the opinion of
those who dare to say that these dispensations depend on ecclesiastics. Both this act
and the former are dated in the year 1341. Note added in 1773/1797 editions.

]]

[28. ] Peter I, r. 1682–1725.

[29. ] Marta Skavronskaya, Catherine I, 1684–1727.

[* ] De Jure Belli & Pacis, Lib. I. Cap. III. §12.

[† ] The pope [[Innocent III, r. 1198–1216 opposing the attempt made upon England
by Louis the son of Philip Augustus Louis VIII, r. 1223–26, and alleging, as his
pretext, that John John, king of England, r. 1199–1216 had rendered himself a vassal
of the holy see, received for answer, among other arguments, “that a sovereign had no
right to dispose of his states without the consent of his barons, who were bound to
defend them.” On which occasion the French nobles unanimously exclaimed that they
would, to their last breath, maintain this truth—“that no prince can, of his own private
will, give away his kingdom, or render it tributary, and thus enslave the nobility.”
Velly’s Hist. of France, Vol. III. p. 491. Note added in 1773/ 1797 editions.

]]

[* ] [[Louis-Joseph Plumard de Danguel, Remarks on the Advantages and
Disadvantages of France and Great Britain with respect to Commerce.

]]

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 569 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[30. ] Joseph Chitty noted, “This perpetual obligation to purchase Port wines from
Portugal in exchange for British wool cloths was established by the celebrated treaty
of Methuen, ad 1703 (so called because concluded by Sir P. Methuen) with Portugal.
A treaty which has been censured by some as evidently advantageous to Portugal and
disadvantageous to Great Britain.” Chitty cited Adam Smith, Dean Tucker, and his
own Commercial Law in support.

[* ] In Boizard’s Treatise on Coin, we find the following observations. “It is worthy
of remark, that, when our kings debased the coin, they kept the circumstance a secret
from the people:—witness the ordinance of Philip de Valois in 1350, by which he
ordered Tournois Doubles to be coined 2d. 5 ? gr. fine, which was in fact a
debasement of the coin. In that ordinance, addressing the officers of the mint, he says,
‘Upon the oath by which you are bound to the king, keep this affair as secret as you
possibly can, that neither the bankers nor others may by your means acquire any
knowledge of it: for if through you it comes to be known, you shall be punished for
the offence in such manner as shall serve as an example to others.’ ”—The same
author quotes other similar ordinances of the same king, and one issued by the
Dauphin who governed the kingdom as regent during the captivity of king John, dated
June 27, 1360, by virtue of which, the mint-masters directing the officers engaged in
the coinage to coin white Deniers 1d. 12 gr. fine, at the same time expressly
command them to keep this order secret, and, “if any persons should make inquiry
respecting their standard, to maintain that they were 2d. fine.” Chap. xxix.

The kings [of France] had recourse to this strange expedient in cases of urgent
necessity: but they saw its injustice.—The same author, speaking of the debasement
of coin, or the various modes of reducing its intrinsic value, says—“Those expedients
are but rarely resorted to, because they give occasion to the exportation or melting
down of the good specie, and to the introduction and circulation of foreign coin,—
raise the price of every thing,—impoverish individuals, diminish the revenue, which
is paid in specie of inferior value,—and sometimes put a total stop to commerce. This
truth has been so well understood in all ages, that those princes, who had recourse to
one or other of these modes of debasing the coin in difficult times, ceased to practise
it the moment the necessity ceased to exist.” We have, on this subject, an ordinance of
Philip the Fair, issued in May, 1295, which announces, that, “The king having
reduced the coin both in fineness and weight, and expecting to be obliged to make a
further reduction in order to retrieve his affairs,—but knowing himself to be, in
conscience, responsible for the injury caused to the state by such reduction,—pledges
himself to the people of his kingdom, by solemn charter, that, as soon as his affairs
are retrieved, he will restore the coin to its proper standard and value, at his own
private cost and expense, and will himself bear all the loss and waste. And, in addition
to this engagement, Dame Joan, queen of France and Navarre [[r. 1285–1305, pledges
her revenues and dower for the same purpose.” Note added in 1773/1797 editions.

]]

[* ] In his [[Bodin’s Republic, Book I. Chap. X.

]]

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 570 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[31. ] Sigismund Augustus, r. 1548–72.

[* ] See Xenophon, Lacedaemon. Respublica.

[* ] Nam, ut vere loquamur, superstitio fusa per gentes oppressit omnium fere animos,
atque omnium imbecillitatem occupavit.... multum enim & nobismet ipsis & nostris
profuturi videbamur, si eam funditus sustulissemus. Nec vero (id enim diligenter
intelligi volo) superstitione tollendâ religio tollitur. Nam & majorum instituta tueri,
sacris caeremoniisque retinendis, sapientis est: & esse praestantem aliquam
aeternamque naturam, & eam suspiciendam, admirandamque hominum generi,
pulchrit do mundi, ordoque coelestium cogit confiteri. [[“For, to speak truly, that
superstition has extended itself through all nations, and has oppressed the intellectual
energies of almost all men, and has betrayed into endless imbecilities.... For I thought
that I should be doing an immense benefit both to myself and to my countrymen if I
could entirely eradicate all those superstitious errors. Nor is there any fear that true
religion can be endangered by the demolition of superstition; for it is a part of a wise
man to uphold the religious institutions of our ancestors by the maintenance of their
rites and ceremonies. And the beauty of the world and the order of all celestial things
compel us to confess that there is an excellent and eternal Nature which deserves to be
worshipped and admired by all mankind.” De Divinatione, Lib. II.

]]

[* ] Harum ego religionem nullam unquam contemnendam putavi: mihique ita
persuasi, Romulum auspiciis, Numam sacris constitutis, fundamenta jecisse nostrae
civitatis, quae nunquam profecto sine summa placatione Deorum immortalium tanta
esse potuisset. Habes, Balbe, quid Cotta, quid pontifex sentiat. Fac nunc ego
intelligam, quid tu sentias: a te enim philosopho rationem accipere debeo religionis;
majoribus autem nostris, etiam nulla ratione reddita, credere. [[“I have always thought
that none of these departments of religion was to be despised, and I have held the
conviction that Romulus by his auspices and Numa by his establishment of our ritual
laid the foundations of our state, which assuredly could never have been as great as it
is had not the fullest measure of divine favour been obtained for it. There, Balbus, is
the opinion of a Cotta and a pontiff; now oblige me by letting me know yours. You
are a philosopher, and I ought to receive from you a proof of your religion, whereas I
must believe the word of our ancestors even without proof.” De Natura Deorum, Lib.
III.

]]

[32. ] Codrus, king of Athens, r. ca. 1089–1068 bc

[* ] His country being attacked by the Heraclidae, he consulted the oracle of Apollo;
and being answered, that the people whose chief should be slain, should remain
victorious, Codrus disguised himself, and, rushing into the battle, was killed by one of
the enemy’s soldiers. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.

]]

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 571 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[33. ] Louis XII, r. 1498–1515.

[34. ] Marcus Junius Brutus Caepio, governor of Gaul and praetor, most famous for
his role in the murder of Julius Caesar in 44 bc

[35. ] Marcus Curtius, legendary hero of ancient Rome, who (Livy, History of Rome,
I.6.1–6) managed to close a chasm that had opened in the Forum by leaping, fully
armed and on horseback, into it.

[36. ] The two Decii, father and son, sacrificed themselves to the gods for the
deliverance and safe keeping of the Roman army.

[37. ] At Sempach, Winkelried sacrificed himself to save the Swiss Confederation by
creating a passage through the rows of enemy lances with his body.

[38. ] Battle of Sempach, 1386.

[* ] This affair happened in the year 1386. The Austrian army consisted of four
thousand chosen men, among whom were a great number of princes, counts, and
nobility of distinguished rank, all armed from head to foot. The Swiss were no more
than thirteen hundred men, ill armed. In this battle, the duke of Austria perished with
two thousand of his forces, in which number were six hundred and seventy-six
noblemen of the best families in Germany. History of the Helvetic Confederacy, by
deWatteville,Vol. I. p. 183.—Tschudi.—Etterlin.—Schodeler.—Raebman [[Rebmann.

]]

[* ] The former assassinated Henry III. of France [[r. 1574–89; the latter murdered his
successor, Henry IV r. 1594–1610.

]]

[39. ] In Roman myth the water nymph was consulted by Numa concerning the
establishment of the Roman calendar in a series of nocturnal interviews (Livy, History
of Rome, I.19).

[* ] The duke de Sully; see his Memoirs digested by M. de l’Ecluse, Vol. V. p. 135,
136.

[† ] Deorum injuriae diis curae. Tacit. Ann. book I. c. 73. [[“The gods must look to
their own wrongs” (trans. Eds.). Tacitus, Annales I, chap. 23, p. 369.

]]

[‡ ] Qui secus faxit, Deus ipse vindex erit.... Qui non paruerit, capitale esto. [[“He
who acts otherwise will have God for his avenger.... If a person disobeys, it will be a
capital offense.” (trans. Eds.) De Legib. Lib. II.

]]

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 572 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[* ] Quas (religiones) non metu, sed ea conjunctione quae est homini cum deo,
conservandas puto. [[“Which, I believe, need to be preserved not out of fear but
because of the bond which exists between human and god.” Cicero de Legib. Lib. I.
What a fine lesson does this pagan philosopher give to Christians!

]]

[40. ] Constantine I, Roman emperor, r. ad 306–37.

[41. ] Julian, Roman emperor, r. ad 361–63.

[* ] When the chief part of the people in the principality of Neufchatel and Vallangin
embraced the reformed religion in the sixteenth century, Joan of Hochberg, their
sovereign, continued to live in the Roman Catholic faith, and nevertheless still
retained all her rights. The state council enacted ecclesiastical laws and constitutions
similar to those of the reformed churches in Switzerland; and the princess gave them
her sanction. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.

]]

[* ]History of New France, Books V. VI. and VII.

[42. ] The pontifex maximus was the high priest of the ancient Roman College of
Pontiffs.

[* ] See the Theodosian Code.

[43. ] “So potent was religion in persuading to evil deeds.” Lucretius, De rerum
natura I.102.

[44. ] Henry IV, Holy Roman Emperor, r. 1084–1105, and king of Germany, r. 1056–
1105.

[45. ] Frederic I, Holy Roman Emperor, r. 1155–90.

[46. ] Frederic II, Holy Roman Emperor, r. 1220–50.

[* ] In England, under Henry VIII.

[† ] Henry III. and Henry IV. assassinated by fanatics, who thought they were serving
God and the church by stabbing their king.

[‡ ] Though Henry IV. returned to the Romish religion, a great number of Catholics
did not dare to acknowledge him until he had received the pope’s absolution.

[§ ] Many kings of France in the civil wars on account of religion.

[47. ] Pope Boniface VIII, r. 1294–1303.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 573 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[* ]Turretin. Hist. Ecclesiast. Compendium, p. 182. Where may also be seen the
resolute answer of the king of France.

[† ]Extravag. Commun. Lib. I. Tit. De Majoritate & Obedientia.

[48. ] The papal bull Unam sanctam, 1302.

[‡ ] Gregory VII. endeavoured to render almost all the states of Europe tributary to
him. He maintained that Hungary, Dalmatia, Russia, Spain, and Corsica, were
absolutely his property, as successor to St. Peter, or were feudatory dependencies of
the holy see. Greg.Epist. Concil. Vol. VI. Edit. Harduin [[Harduin, Conciliorum
collection.—He summoned the emperor Henry IV. to appear before him, and make
his defence against the accusations of some of his subjects: and, on the emperor’s
non-compliance, he deposed him. In short, here are the expressions he made use of in
addressing the council assembled at Rome on the occasion: “Agite nunc, quaeso,
patres et principes sanctissimi, ut omnis mundus intelligat et cognoscat, quia si
potestis in coelo ligare et solvere, potestis in terra imperia, regna, principatus, ducatus,
marchias, comitatus, et omnium hominum possessiones, pro meritis tollere unicuique
et concedere.” “Act now, I beseech you, fathers and most holy princes [cardinals],
that all the world may understand and know that if you have power to bind and loose
in heaven, you have the same power on earth over each and every one to take away
and to grant, according to deserts, empires, kingdoms, dominions [or principalities],
dukedoms, marches, retinues, and the possessions of all men” (trans. Eds.). Natal.
Noell Alex.Dissert. Hist. Eccl. s. xi. and xii. p. 384.

The canon law boldly decides that the regal power is subordinate to the priesthood.
“Imperium non praeest sacerdotio, sed subest, et ei obedire tenetur.” “[Royal] power
is not superior to the priesthood, but is subordinate and is required to obey it.”
Decretals of Pope Gregory IX, bk. I, chap. vi, titulus 33, “De maioritate et obedienta.”
Rubric. ch. vi. De Major. et Obed. “Et est multum allegabile,” “And it is very
excusable” is the complaisant remark of the writer of the article. Note added in 1773/
1797 editions.

]]

[49. ] Trollius, archbishop of Upsal, was condemned in 1515.

[50. ] Pope Leo X, r. 1513–21.

[* ]History of the Revolutions in Sweden [[René-Aubert de Vertot.

]]

[51. ] Christiern, king of Denmark, r. 1513–23.

[52. ] Pope Paul V, r. 1605–21.

[53. ] Pope Pius V, r. 1566–72.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 574 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[54. ] Pope Alexander VI, r. 1492–1503; Charles VIII of France, r. 1483–98,
excommunicated in 1495.

[* ]Vogel’s Historical and Political Treatise on the Alliances between France and the
Thirteen Cantons, p. 33, and 36.

[* ] We may see in the letters of Cardinal d’Ossat [[b. 1536–d. 1604, what difficulties,
what opposition, what long delays Henry IV. had to encounter when he wished to
confer the archbishopric of Sens on Renauld de Baune, archbishop of Bourges, who
had saved France, by receiving that great prince into the Roman catholic church.

]]

[* ] This reflection has no relation to the religious houses in which literature is
cultivated. Establishments that afford to learned men a peaceful retreat, and that
leisure and tranquillity required in deep scientific research, are always laudable, and
may become very useful to the state.

[† ] The Papia-Poppaean law.

[‡ ] In the Theodosian Code.

[§ ] The president de Montesquieu, in his Spirit of Laws.

[* ] Tantum sacerdos praestat regi, quantum homo bestiae. Stanislaus Orichovius.—
Vide Tribbechov. Exerc. 1. ad Baron. Annal. Sect. 2. [[Adam Tribbechov,
Exercitationes ad Baronii Annales, 1667 & Thomas. Nat. ad Lancell. Thomasius’s
edition of Paolo Lancellotti’s Institutiones Juris Canonici (Halle, 1715–17).

]]

[* ] The Congregation of Immunities has decided that the cognisance of causes
against ecclesiastics, even for the crime of high treason, exclusively belongs to the
spiritual court:—“Cognitio causae contra ecclesiasticos, etiam pro delicto laesae
majestatis, fieri debet a judice ecclesiastico.” RicciSynops. Decret. et Resol. S.
Congreg. Immunit. p. 105.—A constitution of pope Urban VI. pronounces those
sovereigns or magistrates guilty of sacrilege, who shall banish an ecclesiastic from
their territories, and declares them to have ipso facto incurred the sentence of
excommunication. Cap. II. De Foro Compet. in VII.—To this immunity may be
added the indulgence shewn by the ecclesiastical tribunals to the clergy, on whom
they never inflicted any but slight punishments, even for the most atrocious crimes.
The dreadful disorders that arose from this cause at length produced their own remedy
in France, where the clergy were at length subjected to the temporal jurisdiction for
all transgressions that are injurious to society. See PaponArrêts Notables. Book I. tit
V. Act 34. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.

]]

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 575 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[† ] Indecorum est laïcos homines viros ecclesiasticos judicare. Can. in nona actione
22. XVI. q. 7.

[55. ] Pope Paul III, r. 1534–49; Pope Urban VIII, r. 1623–44.

[* ] See the Statement of Facts on the System of the Independence of Bishops. [[Henri-
Philippe Chauvelin, Tradition des faits, qui manifestent le sistème d’indépendance
que les évêques ont opposé dans les différens siècles aux principes invariables de la
justice souveraine du roi sur tous ses sujets, 1753.

]]

[† ] In the year 1725, a parish-priest, of the canton of Lucerne, having refused to
appear before the supreme council, was, for his contumacy, banished from the canton.
Hereupon, his diocesan, the bishop of Constance, had the assurance to write to the
council that they had infringed the ecclesiastical immunities,—that “it is unlawful to
subject the ministers of God to the decisions of the temporal power.” In these
pretensions, he was sanctioned by the approbation of the pope’s nuncio and the court
of Rome. But the council of Lucerne firmly supported the rights of sovereignty,
and—without engaging with the bishop in a controversy which would have been
derogatory to their dignity,—answered him—“Your Lordship quotes various passages
from the writings of the fathers, which we, on our side, might also quote in our own
favour, if it were necessary, or if there was question of deciding the contest by dint of
quotations. But let your Lordship rest assured that we have a right to summon before
us a priest, our natural subject, who encroaches on our prerogatives,—to point out to
him his error,—to exhort him to a reform of his conduct,—and, in consequence of his
obstinate disobedience after repeated citations, to banish him from our dominions. We
have not the least doubt that this right belongs to us; and we are determined to defend
it. And indeed it ought not to be proposed to any sovereign to appear as party in a
contest with a refractory subject like him,—to refer the cause to the decision of a third
party, whoever he be,—and run the risk of being condemned to tolerate in the state a
person of such character, with what dignity soever he might be invested,” &c. The
bishop of Constance had proceeded so far as to assert, in his letter to the canton, dated
December 18, 1725, that “churchmen, as soon as they have received holy orders,
cease to be natural subjects, and are thus released from the bondage in which they
lived before.” Memorial on the Dispute between the Pope and the Canton of Lucerne,
p. 65. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.

]]

[* ] [[René-Aubert de Vertot, Revolutions of Portugal.

]]

[56. ] John de Braganza, King John IV of Portugal, r. 1640–56. The plot to assassinate
the king in 1641 was led by the natural son of King Peter II, José of Braganza,
archbishop of Braga (1703–56).

[* ] See Letters on the Pretensions of the Clergy.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 576 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[57. ] Ives (Ivo) de Chartres, ca. 1040–1116, bishop of Chartres.

[* ] See Letters on the Pretensions of the Clergy.

[58. ] Otho IV, Holy Roman Emperor, r. 1209–15; Pope Innocent III, r. 1198–1216.

[59. ] John de Gray, 1205.

[* ] Matthew Paris.—Turretin. Compend. Hist. Eccles. Secul. XIII.

[60. ] Pope Innocent IV, r. 1243–54.

[† ]Heiss’s History of the Empire, Book II. Chap. XVI.

[61. ] Henry, Landgrave of Thuringia, r. 1292–1308.

[‡ ] Sovereigns were sometimes found, who, without considering future
consequences, favoured the papal encroachments when they were likely to prove
advantageous to their own interests. Thus Louis VIII. [[r. 1223–26 king of France,
wishing to invade the territories of the count of Toulouse, under pretence of making
war on the Albigenses, requested of the pope, among other things, “that he would
issue a bull, declaring that the two Raymonds, father and son, together with all their
adherents, associates, and allies, had been and were deprived of all their possessions.”
Velly’s Hist. of France. Vol IV. p. 33.—Of a similar nature to the preceding, is the
following remarkable fact. Pope Martin IV. excommunicated Peter, king of
Arragon,—declared that he had forfeited his kingdom, all his lands, and even the regal
dignity,—and pronounced his subjects absolved from their oaths of allegiance. He
even excommunicated all who should acknowledge him as king, or perform towards
him any of the duties of a subject. He then offered Arragon and Catalonia to the count
de Valois, second son of Philip the Bold, on condition that he and his successors
should acknowledge themselves vassals of the holy see, take an oath of fealty to the
pope, and pay him a yearly tribute. The king of France assembled the barons and
prelates of his kingdom to deliberate on the pope’s offer; and they advised him to
accept it:—“Strange blindness of kings and their counsellors!” exclaims, with good
reason, a modern historian: “they did not perceive, that, by thus accepting kingdoms
from the hands of the pope, they strengthened and established his pretensions to the
right of deposing themselves.” Velly’s Hist. of France. Vol. VI. p. 190. Note added in
1773/1797 editions.

]]

[* ]In cap. Novit. de Judiciis.

[† ] See Leibnitii Codex Juris Gent. Diplomat. Dipl. LXVII. §9.

[62. ] “To acknowledge all ecclesiastical laws.”

[* ]Ibid. Alliance of Zurich with the cantons of Uri, Schweitz, and Underwald, dated
May 1, 1351, §7.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 577 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[† ] See A Regulation of Parliament in an arret of March 19, 1409. Spirit of Laws.
These (says Montesquieu) were the very best nights they could pitch upon: they
would have made no great profit of any other.

[‡ ]De Jure Belli & Pacis, Lib. II. Cap. XXIV. He quotes Basil ad Amphiloch. X. 13.
Zonarcas in Niceph. Phoc. Vol. III.

[* ] See a dissertation on this subject, in the Loisir Philosophique, page 71 [[by Vattel,
published in 1747.

]]

[63. ] “The imperial majesty should not only be decorated with arms but should also
be armed with laws so that there may be good government in times both of war and of
peace.” Justinian, Institutes, prooemium.

[64. ] Morgarten, 1315; Sempach, 1386; Laupen, 1339; Morat, 1476.

[65. ] Battle of Dreux, 1562.

[* ]History of France, Vol. II. p. 888.

[66. ] King Henry IV of France, r. 1589–1610.

[67. ] Jacob Bernouilli, 1654–1705, Swiss mathematician and natural philosopher.

[68. ] Axel Oxenstierna, 1588–1654, lord high chancellor of Sweden.

[69. ] Henri de la Tour d’Auvergne, Vicomte de Turenne, 1611–75, military
commander and marshal of France.

[70. ] John Churchill, first duke of Marlborough, 1650–1712, military commander
serving William of Orange and Queen Anne.

[71. ] Michiel de Ruyter, 1607–76, victorious Dutch admiral in the Anglo-Dutch wars.

[72. ] Louis XI of France, r. 1461–83; battle of St. Jacques, August 26, 1444.

[* ] See the Memoirs of Commines.

[* ] Of this small army, “eleven hundred and fifty-eight were counted dead on the
field, and thirty-two wounded. Twelve men only escaped, who were considered by
their countrymen as cowards, that had preferred a life of shame to the honour of dying
for their country.” History of the Helvetic Confederacy, by M. de Watteville, Vol. 1. p.
250.—Tschudi, p. 425.

[† ] Vogel’s Historical and Political Treatise of the Alliances between France and the
Thirteen Cantons, pag. 75, 76.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 578 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[* ] Itaque populum Campanum, urbemque Capuam, agros, delubra deûm, divina
humanaque omnia, in vestram, patres conscripti, populique Romani ditionem
dedimus. [[“Therefore we now place under your sway and jurisdiction, senators, and
that of the Roman people, the people of Campania and the city of Capua, its fields, its
sacred temples, all things human and divine.” LIVY, book vii. c. 31. Ab urbe condita,
VII, 31.

]]

[* ] We speak here of a nation that has rendered itself subject to another, and not of
one that has incorporated itself with another state, so as to constitute a part of it. The
latter stands in the same predicament with all the other citizens. Of this case we shall
treat in the following chapter.

[† ] See [[Watteville The History of Switzerland the first edition is titled Les historiens
de la Suisse.—The United Provinces, having been obliged to rely wholly on their own
efforts in defending themselves against Spain, would no longer acknowledge any
dependence on the empire, from which they had received no assistance. GROTIUS,
Hist. of the Troubles in the Low Countries, B. xvi. p. 627. Note added in 1773/1797
editions.

]]

[* ] See Etterlin, Simler, and de Watteville.

[73. ] Bullinger discusses the events Vattel refers to at Zurich, including the role of
Charles IV (r. 1355–78), in his famous Chronicle of Zurich (“Tigurinerchronik,” pt. 1,
bk. 8, chap. 5). Never published, the Chronicle was available only in several
manuscript copies (see Zentralbibliothek Zürich, Ms. Car 43 and 44; for the relevant
passage see Car 43, p. 371r–374v). Vattel may well have had access to the Chronicle,
although there is no evidence to support such a claim.

[† ] See the same historians, and Bullinger, Stumpf, Tschudi, and Stettler.

[* ] Those decrees being of a very singular nature, and hardly any where to be found
but in very scarce books, the reader will not be displeased with seeing here an extract
of them.

The bull of Alexander VI. by which he gives to Ferdinand and Isabella, king and
queen of Castile and Arragon, the New World, discovered by Christopher Columbus.

“Motu proprio,” (says the pope) “non ad vestram, vel alterius pro vobis super hoc
nobis oblatae petitionis instantiam, sed de nostra mera liberalitate, & ex certa scientia,
ac de apostolicae potestatis plenitudine, omnes insulas & terras firmas, inventas, &
inveniendas, detectas & detegendas versus occidentem & meridiem,” (drawing a line
from one pole to the other, at an hundred leagues to the west of the Azores)
“auctoritate omnipotentis Dei nobis in beato Petro concessa, ac vicariatus Jesu Christi,
qua fungimur in terris, cum omnibus illarum dominiis, civitatibus, &c. vobis,
haeredibusque & successoribus vestris, Castellae & Legionis regibus, in perpetuum

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 579 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

tenore praesentium donamus, concedimus, assignamus, vosque, & haeredes ac
successores praefatos, illorum dominos, cum plena libera & omni moda potestate,
auctoritate & jurisdictione, facimus, constituimus, & deputamus.” [[“We, of our own
accord, not at your instance nor the request of anyone else in your regard, but of our
own sole largesse and certain knowledge and out of the fullness of our apostolic
power, by the authority of Almighty God conferred upon us in blessed Peter and of
the vicarship of Jesus Christ, which we hold on earth, do by tenor of these presents,
should any of said islands have been found by your envoys and captains, give, grant,
and assign to you and your heirs and successors, kings of Castile and Leon, forever,
together with all their dominions, cities, camps, places, and villages, and all rights,
jurisdictions, and appurtenances, all islands and mainlands found and to be found,
discovered and to be discovered towards the west and south.” Alexander VI, In
caetera, May 4, 1493. The pope excepts only what might be in the possession of some
other Christian prince before the year 1493,—as if he had a greater right to give what
belonged to nobody, and especially what was possessed by the American nations.—
He adds: “Ac quibuscunque personis cujuscunque dignitatis, etiam imperialis &
regalis, status, gradus, ordinis, vel conditionis, sub excommunicationis latae
sententiae poena, quam eo ipso, si contra fecerint, incurrant, districtius inhibemus ne
ad insulas & terras firmas inventas & inveniendas, detectas & detegendas, versus
occidentem & meridiem ... pro mercibus habendis, vel quavis alia de causa, accedere
praesumant absque vestra ac haeredum & successorum vestrorum praedictorum
licentia speciali, &c. Datum Romae apud S. Petrum anno 1493. IV. nonas Maji,
Pontific. nostri anno primo.” “Furthermore, under penalty of excommunication late
sententie to be incurred ipso facto, should anyone thus contravene, we strictly forbid
all persons of whatsoever rank, even imperial and royal, or of whatsoever estate,
degree, order, or condition, to dare, without your special permit or that of your
aforesaid heirs and successors, to go for the purpose of trade or any other reason to
the islands or mainlands, found and to be found, discovered and to be discovered,
towards the west and south.” Leibnitii Codex Juris Gent. Diplomat. Diplom. 203.

See ibid. (Diplom. 165.) the bull by which pope Nicholas V. gave to Alphonso, king
of Portugal, and to the Infant Henry, the sovereignty of Guinea, and the power of
subduing the barbarous nations of those countries, forbidding any other to visit that
country, without the permission of Portugal. This act is dated Rome on the 8th of
January, 1454.

]]

[* ] History of the English Colonies in North America. [[William Burke, An Account
of the European Settlements in the Americas.

]]

[74. ] William Penn, 1644–1718.

[* ] This is the foundation of the tax paid on quitting a country, called, in Latin,
census emigrationis.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 580 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[* ] Charles XII. [[of Sweden, r. 1697–1718 condemned to death and executed general
Patkul, a native of Livonia, whom he had made prisoner in an engagement with the
Saxons. But the sentence and execution were a violation of the laws of justice. Patkul,
it is true, had been born a subject of the king of Sweden: but he had quitted his native
country at the age of twelve years, and, having been promoted in the army of Saxony,
had, with the permission of his former sovereign, sold the property he possessed in
Livonia. He had therefore quitted his own country, to chuse another (as every free
citizen is at liberty to do, except, as we have observed above, at a critical moment
when the circumstances of his country require the aid of all her sons)—and the King
of Sweden, by permitting him to sell his property, had consented to his emigration.
Note added in 1773/1797 editions.

]]

[* ] See, above, the chapter on religion.

[75. ] Frederic William I, r. 1713–40.

[* ] The common acceptation of these two terms is not repugnant to our application of
them. The French academy says, “Banishment is only applied to condemnations in
due course of law,—Exile is only an absence caused by some disgrace at court.”—
The reason is plain;—such a condemnation from the tribunal of justice entails infamy
on the emigrant; whereas a disgrace at court does not usually involve the same
consequence.

[* ] Too great attention cannot be used in watching the imposition of taxes, which,
once introduced, not only continue, but are so easily multiplied.—Alphonso VIII.
king of Castile [[r. 1158–1214, besieging a city belonging to the Moors (Concham
urbem in Celtiberis) the city of Concha (now Cuenca) in Celtiberia (central Spain),
and being in want of money, applied to the states of his kingdom for permission to
impose on every free inhabitant a capitation-tax of five golden maravedis. But Peter,
count de Lara, vigorously opposed the measure, “contractaque nobilium manu, ex
conventu discedit, armis tueri paratus partam armis et virtute a majoribus
immunitatem, neque passurum affirmans nobilitatis opprimendae atque novis
vectigalibus vexandae ab eo aditu initium fieri; Mauros opprimere non esse tanti, ut
graviori servitute rempublicam implicari sinant. Rex, periculo permotus, ab ea
cogitatione desistit. Pertrum nobiles, consilio communicato, quotannis convivio
excipere decreverunt, ipsum et posteros,—navatae operae mercedem, rei gestae bonae
posteritati monumentum, documentumque ne quavis occasione jus libertatis imminui
patiantur.” And having gathered the group of noblemen, he leaves the assembly, ready
to defend with arms and bravery the immunity obtained by their predecessors, and
affirming that he was not going to tolerate through this opportunity the beginning of
the oppression of the nobility and its harassment with new taxes, and [affirming] that
oppressing the Moors was not so expensive for them to allow the commonwealth to
be entangled in a more degrading servitude. The king, moved by the danger, desisted
from that intention. Once this decision had been communicated, the noblemen
decided to celebrate Peter every year in a banquet, him and his successors, as a reward
for a zealous act and a reminder and testimony of a good work, so that on no occasion

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 581 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

would they allow the right to freedom [ius libertatis] to be diminished (trans. Eds.).
MARIANA. Juan de Mariana, De rege et regis institutione. Note added in 1773/ 1797
editions.

]]

[76. ] “To increase, lower [compress], or alter the market rate [of the year’s harvest].”

[* ] See his Memoirs.

[* ] Quod domania regnorum inalienabilia & semper revocabilia dicuntur, id respectu
privatorum intelligitur; nam contra alias gentes divino privilegio opus foret. [[“The
domains of kings are said to be inalienable and always revocable [i.e., subject to
forfeit], and this is understood to apply to private individuals, for against other nations
there is need of special law from God” (trans. Eds.). (Kings cannot sell off their
territories to private individuals and indeed are trustees rather than absolute owners of
their lands, but when it comes to international relations we need different rules from
God governing territorial acquisition and transfer.) Leibnitz, Praefat. ad Cod. Jur.
Gent. Diplomat. Leibniz, Introduction to Codex juris gentium diplomaticus.

]]

[77. ] Francis I, r. 1515–47.

[78. ] Treaty of Madrid, 1526.

[79. ] Charles V reigned as Holy Roman Emperor (1519–56) and also as King Carlos
I of Spain (1516–56).

[* ] Mezeray’s History of France, vol. ii, p. 458.

[80. ] 1526.

[* ] Mezeray, ibid.

[* ] See Grotius’s Mare Liberum, and Selden’s Mare Clausum, lib. i. cap. xvii.

[81. ] 1566–1648.

[82. ] James I of England (r. 1603–25) also ruled as James VI of Scotland (r. 1567–
1625).

[* ] Selden’s Mare Clausum, Lib. II.

[* ] In his Republic, Book I. Chap. X.

[† ] See Selden’s Mare Clausum.

[‡ ] Ibid. lib. ii, cap. xxviii.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 582 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[83. ] Edward I, king of England, r. 1272–1307.

[84. ] Uladislaus (Ladislaus), king of Naples, r. 1386–1414.

[85. ] Frederic III, Holy Roman Emperor, r. 1452–93.

[* ] Ibid. lib. i. cap. xvi.

[* ] See Book II. §83.

[* ] Fragm. ex lib. ii. De Republica.

[1. ] “A state cannot be happily governed without committing injustice; without a
strict attention to the most rigid justice, public affairs cannot be advantageously
administered.” Cicero, Fragment. Ex lib. ii De republica (see also preface, p. 19).

[† ] De Officiis lib. iii. cap. 5.

[2. ] “It is more in accord with Nature to emulate the great Hercules and undergo the
greatest toil and trouble for the sake of aiding or saving the world, if possible, than to
live in seclusion, not only free from all care but also reveling in pleasures and
abounding in wealth, while excelling others also in beauty and strength. Thus
Hercules denied himself and underwent toil and tribulation for the world, and, out of
gratitude for his services, popular belief has given him a place in the council of gods.
The better and more noble therefore the character with which a man is endowed, the
more does he prefer the life of service to the life of pleasure.” Cicero, De officiis
III.v.25.

[3. ] “Others again who say that regard should be had for the rights of fellow citizens,
but not for foreigners, would destroy the universal brotherhood of mankind; and,
when this is annihilated, kindness, generosity, goodness, and justice must utterly
perish; and those who work all this destruction must be considered as wickedly
rebelling against the immortal gods. For they uproot the fellowship between humans.”
Cicero, De officiis III.vi.28.

[* ] In 1672.

[† ] He defeated the Turks, and obliged them to raise the siege of Vienna, in 1683.

[4. ] Jan III Sobieski (r. 1674–99) defeated the Turks in 1683 at the battle of Vienna,
ending a two-month seige by the Ottoman Empire army.

[5. ] Henry IV, king of France, r. 1589–1610.

[‡ ] At the famous siege of Paris [[1590

]]

[* ] The earthquake by which a great part of that city was destroyed.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 583 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[6. ] The Lisbon earthquake struck on November 1, All Saints’ Day, 1755.

[* ] De Jure Belli et Pacis, lib. ii. cap. xx. §11.

[7. ] 1740–63.

[* ] Book i. chap. xv.

[8. ] Pope Benedict XIV, r. 1740–58.

[* ] Here again let us call in the authority of Cicero to our support. “All mankind (says
that excellent philosopher) should lay it down as their constant rule of action, that
individual and general advantage should be the same; for if each man strives to grasp
every advantage for himself, all the ties of human society will be broken. And if
nature ordains that man should feel interested in the welfare of his fellow man,
whoever he be, and for the single reason that he is a man,—it necessarily follows,
that, according to the intentions of nature, all mankind must have one common
interest.—Ergo unum debet esse omnibus propositum, ut eadem sit utilitas
uniuscujusque et universorum: quam si ad se quisque rapiat, dissolvetur omnis
humana consociatio. Atque si etiam hoc natura praescribit, ut homo homini,
quicunque sit, ob eam ipsam causam, quod is homo sit, consultum velit, necesse est,
secundum eandem naturam, omnium utilitatem esse communem. [[“This, then, ought
to be the chief end of all men, to make the interest of each individual and of the whole
body political identical. For, if the individual appropriates to selfish ends what should
be devoted to the common good, all human fellowship will be destroyed. And further,
if Nature ordains that one man shall desire to promote the interest of a fellow man,
whoever he may be, just because he is a fellow man, then it follows, in accordance
with that same Nature, that there are interests which all men have in common.” De
Offic. lib. iii. cap. vi.

]]

[* ] De Offic. lib. iii. cap. v.

[† ]Lézer (professedly borrowed from the Latin laedo) is the term used by the author,
who, in order the better to explain his meaning, proceeds to inform us, that “nuire (to
hurt), offenser (to offend), faire tort (to wrong), porter dommage (to cause detriment),
porter prejudice (to prejudice), blesser (to wound or hurt), are not of precisely the
same import,” and that by the word lézer (which is here rendered injure) he means,
“in general, causing imperfection in the injured party, or in his condition,—rendering
his person or his condition less perfect.” [[Note added in 1797 edition.

]]

[* ] To the example of the Romans may be added that of the English in former
days,—since, on the occasion of a navigator being accused of having committed some
depredations on the natives of India, “this act of injustice” (according to Grotius)
“was not without advocates, who maintained, that, by the ancient laws of England,
crimes committed against foreign nations, with whom there existed no public treaty of

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 584 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

alliance, were not punishable in that kingdom.” Hist.of the Disturbances in the Low
Countries, Book xvi. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.

]]

[† ] See (§1) a fine passage of Cicero.

[9. ] By the Kandyan Treaty of 1638, the Dutch allied themselves with the king of
Kandy (Ceylon) against the Portuguese. In return for military assistance, the Dutch
East India Company gained numerous commercial privileges.

[10. ] Charles I of England was beheaded on January 30, 1649, after which the state
was governed by the Rump Parliament and Oliver Cromwell’s Protectorate
(1653–58).

[11. ]Divisio Regnorum, 806.

[* ] Bartolus went so far as to say, that “all those were heretics, who did not believe
that the emperor was lord of the whole earth.” See Bodinus’s Republic, Book i. Chap.
ix. p. m. 139.

[† ] History of France, explanation of the medals of Charles V.

[12. ] Charles V, king of France, r. 1366–80.

[13. ] Charles IV, Holy Roman Emperor (r. 1355–78), visited his nephew Charles V
of France in 1378. He died in November of that same year.

[‡ ] In his Republic, p. 138.

[14. ] Sigismund, son of Charles IV, was Holy Roman Emperor from 1410 to 1437.

[* ] Pentherrieder, minister plenipotentiary of the emperor at the congress of Cambray
[[1722, made an attempt to insure to his master an incontestable superiority and pre-
eminence over all the other crowned heads. He induced count Provana, the king of
Sardinia’s minister, to sign a deed, in which he declared that neither his own
sovereign nor any other prince had a right to dispute pre-eminence with the emperor.
Its contents being made public, the kings made such heavy complaints on the
occasion, that Provana was recalled, and the emperor ordered his minister to suppress
the deed,—affecting at the same time a profound ignorance of the whole
transaction:—and thus the affair was dropped. Memoirs of Mons. de St. Philippe San
Felipe. Vol. iv. p. 194. Note added in 1773/1797 editions.

]]

[15. ] Frederick II of Prussia, in his Memoirs of the House of Brandenburg, 1748.

[* ] Memoirs of the House of Brandenburg.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 585 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[† ] Cromwell, in writing to Louis the Fourteenth, used the following
style—“Olivarius, Dominus Protector Angliae, Scotiae, et Hiberniae, Ludovico XIV.
Francorum Regi Christianissime Rex.” [[“Oliver, Lord Protector of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, to Louis XIV, ruler of the French and Most Christian
King.”—And the subscription was,—“In Aula nostra Alba. Vester bonus amicus.” “In
our English Court. Your good friend.” The court of France was highly offended at this
form of address.—The ambassador Boreel, in a letter to the Pensionary De Witt, dated
May 25, 1655, said that Cromwell’s letter had not been presented, and that those who
were charged with the delivery of it, had with-held it, through an apprehension of its
giving rise to some misunderstanding between the two countries. Note added in 1773/
1797 editions.

]]

[* ] At the famous treaty of Westphalia, the plenipotentiaries of France agreed with
those of the emperor, “that the king and queen writing with their own hand to the
emperor, and giving him the title of majesty, he should answer them, with his own
hand, and give them the same title.” Letter of the plenipotentiaries to M. de Brienne,
Oct. 15, 1646.

[† ] Catholic princes receive still from the pope titles that relate to religion. Benedict
XIV. gave that of “Most Faithful” to the king of Portugal; and the condescension of
other princes connived at the imperative style in which the bull is couched.—It is
dated December 23, 1748.

[16. ] Czar Peter I (r. 1682–1725) joined an alliance in 1700 with Denmark-Norway
and Saxony against Sweden, inaugurating the Great Northern War (1700–1721).

[17. ] Atahualpa, the last of the Incan emperors, was executed in 1533.

[* ] Garcillasso de la Vega.

[18. ] Antaeus, Libyan giant and son of Poseidon; Busiris, king of Egypt and son of
Poseidon; and Diomede, king of Thrace, known for owning man-eating horses.

[* ] When, however, we see a party inflamed with deadly hatred against the religion
we profess, and a neighbouring prince persecuting in consequence the professors of
that religion, it is lawful for us to give assistance to the sufferers,—as it was well
remarked by James I. of England [[1603–25 to Bouillon the ambassador of Mary de
Medici, queen regent of France 1600–1610,—“When my neighbours are attacked in a
quarrel in which I am interested, the law of nature requires that I should anticipate and
prevent the evil which may thence result to myself.” Le Vassor, Hist. of Louis XIII.
Note added in 1773/1797 editions.

]]

[* ] See, above, §146, and Bodinus’s Republic, book i. chap. ix. with his quotations,
p. m. 139.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 586 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[* ] Might not this duty be extended to the execution of sentences passed in other
countries according to the necessary and usual forms?—On this subject, M. Van
Beuningen wrote as follows to M. De Witt, Oct. 15, 1666. “By what the courts of
Holland have decreed in the affair of one Koningh of Rotterdam, I see they suppose
that every judgment pronounced by the parliaments of France against the inhabitants
of Holland in judicio contradictorio, ought to be executed on requisition made by
those parliaments. But I do not know that the tribunals of this country act in the same
manner with respect to sentences passed in Holland: and if they do not, an agreement
might be made, that sentences passed on either side against subjects of the other state
shall only take effect on such property as the condemned party is found to possess in
the state where the sentence has been given.” [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.

]]

[19. ] Greco-Bactrian king, r. ca. 200–180 bc

[* ] See Polybius, quoted by Barbeyrac, in his notes on Grotius, book iii. chap. xxiv.
§vii.

[20. ] Tommaso Campanella, 1568–1639, unorthodox natural philosopher and
theologian, wrote The City of the Sun (La città des sole, 1623) while imprisoned by
the Inquisition.

[* ] See the report made to the king of Great Britain by Sir George Lee, Dr. Paul, Sir
Dudley Ryder and Mr. Murray. It is an excellent piece on the law of nations. [[In his
lectures on international law at Cambridge in 1887, Henry Summer Maine mentions
this report: “The English Secretary of State at once addressed to him, for Prussia was
a friendly Power at the time, a letter dated February 8, 1753, in which he dwells upon
the unprecedented nature of the proceeding, and states that he has the King’s orders to
send to the King of Prussia a report made to his Majesty by Sir George Lee, Judge of
the Prerogative Court; Dr. Paul, his Majesty’s Advocate-General; Sir Dudley Ryder,
and Mr. Murray—the Mr. Murray who afterwards became Lord Mansfield. The report
in question is one of which British lawyers and the British Foreign Office have always
been exceedingly proud. It is praised by two great foreign authorities of the
time—Vattel and Montesquieu; they both of them speak of it as admirable; it is, in
fact, a most excellent example of the method of reasoning of which International Law
admits; and in the end the King of Prussia gave way to its arguments, and the interest
on the Silesian loan was ever afterwards punctually paid.”

]]

[* ] Memorial in behalf of the Duchess of Longueville, 1672.

[21. ] Armand de Bourbon, prince of Conti (1629–66). He was the second son of
Henry II, prince of Condé (1588–1646), and the brother of both Louis II de Bourbon,
prince of Condé (1621–86) and Anne Geneviève Bourbon Condé (1619–79).

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 587 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[* ] Sicut coelum diis, ita terras generi mortalium datas; quaeque vacuae, eas publicas
esse. Tacit. [[“As heaven is for the gods, so the earth has been given to mankind, and
lands uninhabited are common to all.” Annales XIII

]]

[22. ] The Treaty of Utrecht, actually a series of separate treaties, was signed in 1713/
14.

[* ] The Taurians. See Grotius de Jure Belli et Pacis, lib. ii. cap. xx. §xl. n. 7.

[† ] Ibid.

[* ] In his Republic, book i. chap. vi.

[* ] De Jure Belli et Pacis, lib. ii. cap. vi. §14.

[23. ] Titus Pomponius Atticus, ca. 110–32 bc, Roman nobleman and patron of letters,
close friend of Cicero.

[* ] Digest [[of Justinian, lib. xix. tit xv. De Captivis & Postlimin.

]]

[† ] His Republic, book i. chap. vi.

[‡ ] Ibid.

[* ] Bontekoe’s voyage, in the Voyages of the Dutch to the East-Indies.

[† ] Livy, book i.

[‡ ] Wolfii Jus Gent. §341.

[24. ] Council of Constance, 1414–18.

[* ] Stettler, vol. i. p. 114.—Tschudi, vol. ii. pp. 27, 28.

[25. ] Marcus Aurelius Probus, Roman emperor, r. ad 276–282; Flavius Julius Valens,
Roman emperor, r. ad 364–78.

[* ] Vopiscus, Prob. c. xviii.—Ammian. Marcell. lib. xxxi. [[Roman History—Socrat.
Hist. Eccles. lib. iv. c. 28.

]]

[† ] Caesar replied to the Tenchtheri and Usipetes, who wanted to retain possession of
the territories they had seized, that it was not just for them to invade the territories of
others, since they had not been able to defend their own.—Neque verum esse, qui suos

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 588 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

fines tueri non potuerint, alienos occupare. [[“It was not probable that they who were
not able to defend their own territories, should get possession of those of others.” IV.8
(not chapter 6 as Vattel writes). De Bello Gallico, lib. iv. cap. vi.

]]

[26. ] Friedrich Wilhelm, elector of Brandenburg, r. 1640–88.

[27. ] Herennius Modestinus, ca. ad 250, jurist and significant contributor to the
Corpus Juris Civilis.

[* ] See Grotius de Jure Belli & Pacis, lib. ii. cap. iv.—Puffendorf, Jus Nat. & Gent.
lib. iv. cap. xii.—and especially Wolfius [[Wolff, Jus Nat. part iii. cap. vii.

]]

[28. ] King Louis XII of France, r. 1498–1515; Emperor Maximilian I, r. 1508–19.
The treaty referred to was the Treaty of Trente, signed in October 1501 between
Maximilian of Austria, the future emperor, who was then “king of the Romans,” and
Louis XII.

[* ] See the French historians [[Choisy, Daniel, Mézeray, Pineau-Duclos, and Velly.

]]

[* ] De Jure Belli et Pacis, lib. ii. cap. xv. §8. et seq.

[* ] Mahommed warmly recommended to his disciples the observance of treaties.
Ockley’s History of the Saracens, vol. i.

[* ] De Jure Belli et Pacis, lib. ii. cap. xv. §5.

[29. ] Emperor Charles VI, r. 1711–40; King George II, r. 1727–60.

[30. ] Cardinal Richelieu, chief minister (1624–42) to King Louis XIII of France.

[31. ] Gustavus Adolphus, king of Sweden, r. 1611–32.

[* ] The author was a native of Switzerland. [[Note added in 1797 edition.

]]

[32. ] Second Punic War, 218–202 bc

[33. ] Publius Cornelius Scipio Africanus Major, 236–183 bc, defeated Hannibal at
Zama and thereby ended the Second Punic War (218–202 bc).

[34. ] Hannibal Barca, 247–183 bc, Carthaginian general who proved a threat to
Roman miitary supremacy.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 589 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[35. ] Quintus Pedius, nephew of Julius Caesar, served as a Roman general in Gaul
and became consul in 43 bc

[* ] Digest. [[of Justinian lib. ii. tit. xiv. de Pactis, leg. vii. §8.

]]

[36. ] Domitius Ulpianus (Ulpian), d. ad 228. Roman jurist and major contributor to
the Corpus Juris Civilis.

[* ] De Jure Belli et Pacis, lib. ii. cap. xvi. §16.

[* ] See chap. xii. §153, of this book.

[† ] Law of Nature and Nations, book viii. chap. ix. §8.

[37. ] James II of England, r. 1685–88.

[38. ] Prince James Francis Edward Stuart (“the Young Pretender”), 1688–1766, son
of James II and Jacobite claimant to the British crown as James III of England and
James VIII of Scotland.

[39. ] William III, r. 1689–1702.

[40. ] King Charles II of Spain died without a direct heir in 1700 but was succeeded
by Philip of Anjou (as Philip V, r. 1700–1746), thereby raising the possibility of a
union of the French and Spanish crowns. The ensuing War of the Spanish Succession
(1700–1714) was fought to prevent French dominion on mainland Europe, with the
Austrians, English, and Dutch favoring Archduke Charles of Austria (Holy Roman
Emperor 1711–40) as the alternative to succeed Charles II.

[* ] See Wolfius, Jus Gent. §432.

[* ] Grotius de Jure Belli et Pacis, lib. ii. cap. xv. §15.

[41. ] Frederick II (r. 1740–86), king of Prussia, known as Frederick the Great.

[42. ] The Treaty of Breslau, 1742.

[* ] Lib. vi. cap. x. [[“When the sanctity of their surrender proved to be more binding
on them than that of their alliance.” Ab urbe condita VI.10.

]]

[43. ] Battle at the Caudine Forks (321 bc) as described in the ninth book of Livy’s
History of Rome (the Second Samnite War 321–304 bc).

[* ] Livy, lib. ix.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 590 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[* ] De Jure Belli & Pacis, lib. ii. cap. xv. §16.

[44. ] Livy, History of Rome, ii, 16.

[* ] I have said in my preface, that the fecial law of the Romans was their law of war.
The college of the feciales were consulted on the causes that might authorise the
nation to engage in a war, and on the questions to which it gave rise. They had also
the care of the ceremonies on the declaration of war, and on concluding treaties of
peace. The feciales were likewise consulted, and their agency employed, in all public
treaties.

[45. ] Quintus Fabius Maximus Verrucosus, ca. 275–203 bc, served as consul,
dictator, and censor at Rome and fought in the Second Punic War.

[* ] Lib. ii. chap. xv. §16 [[Grotius, Law of War and Peace. Fabius Maximus having
concluded an agreement with the enemy which the senate disapproved, sold a piece of
land for which he received two hundred thousand sesterces, in order to make good his
promise. It related to the ransom of the prisoners. Aurel. Victor Sextus Aurelius
Victor, de Viris Illustr. Plutarch’s life of Fabius Maximus.

]]

[* ] Jus Nat. et Gent. lib. viii. cap. ix. §12.

[46. ] “The rigor of the law is the greatest injury.”

[47. ] Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor, r. 1508–19; Louis II de la Trémoille,
1460–1525.

[* ] Guicciardini, book xii. chap. ii.—De Watteville’s Hist. of the Helvetic
Confederacy, part ii. p. 185, &c. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.

]]

[* ] See De Watteville’s Hist. of the Helvetic Confederacy, p. 190. [[Note added in
1773/1797 editions.

]]

[* ] In 1596, Philip II. [[King of Spain declared himself a bankrupt, under pretence
that an unfair advantage had been taken of his necessities. His creditors loudly
exclaimed against his conduct, and asserted that no confidence could thenceforward
be placed either in his word or his treaties, since he interposed the royal authority to
supercede them. He could no longer find any one who was willing to lend him money;
and his affairs suffered so severely in consequence, that he was obliged to replace
things on their former footing, and to heal the wound which he had given to the public
faith. Grotius, Hist. of the Disturbances in the Netherlands, book v. Note added in
1773/1797 editions.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 591 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

]]

[* ] Resolution of the States-General, of the 15th of March 1726, in answer to the
Memorial of the Marquis de St Philip, Embassador of Spain.

[48. ] Pope Eugene IV, r. 1431–47; King Vladislaus III of Poland, r. 1434–44; Sultan
Amurath (Murad) II, r. 1421–51.

[* ] History of Poland by the Chevalier de Solignac [[La Pimpie Solignac, vol. iv.
112. He quotes Dlugoss, Neugebauer, Sarnicki, Herburt, De Fulstin, &c.

]]

[49. ] In 1444.

[50. ] “The sons of Romulus mark Cannae by its disaster, and so I mark Varna. /
Learn, ye mortals, not to violate faith. / If the bishops had not ordered me to break the
treaty, / the shores of Pannonia would not have to bear the Scythian yoke” (trans.
Eds.).

[51. ] The text is in error here. It should read: Pope John XXII.

[52. ] Frederick of Austria promised to recognize Louis IV of Bavaria as Holy Roman
Emperor in return for his freedom, having been defeated at the battle of Mühldorf
(1322). He returned to prison having failed to persuade his brothers to also recognize
Louis IV. Pope John XXII (r. 1316–34) declared the oath invalid, and Frederick was
given the title “King of the Romans.”

[53. ] Henry II, king of France, r. 1547–59.

[* ] On these facts, see the French and German historians.—“Thus war was
determined on in favour of the pope: and after cardinal Caraffa, by virtue of the
powers vested in him by his holiness, had absolved the king from the oaths he had
taken in ratification of the truce, he even permitted him to attack the emperor and his
son without a previous declaration of hostilities.” De Thou [[Jacques Auguste de
Thou, lib. xvii. The quoted material and the source were added in the 1773/1797
editions.

]]

[54. ] Pope Innocent X (r. 1644–55) condemned the Treaty of Westphalia (1648) in
his bull Zelo Domus Dei.

[* ] History of the Treaty of Westphalia by Father Bougeant, in 12mo, vol. vi. p. 413.

[55. ] Charles V, king of France, r. 1364–80; Robert II, king of Scotland, r. 1371–90.

[† ] Choisy’s History of Charles V. p. 282.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 592 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[* ] At quid interest inter perjurum et mendacem? Qui mentiri solet, pejerare
consuevit. Quem ego, ut mentiatur, inducere possum, ut pejeret, exorare facile potero:
nam qui semel a veritate deflexit, hic non majori religione ad perjurium quam ad
mendacium perduci consuevit. Quis enim deprecatione deorum, non conscientiae fide
commovetur? Propterea, quae poena ab diis immortalibus perjuro, haec eadem
mendaci constituta est. Non enim ex pactione verborum quibus jusjurandum
comprehenditur, sed ex perfidia et malitia per quam insidiae tenduntur alicui, dii
immortales hominibus irasci et succensere consuêrunt. Cicer. Orat. pro Q. Roscio,
comoedo.

[56. ] Ferdinand II, king of Spain, r. 1479–1516; Philip I of Castile, son-in-law of
Ferdinand, r. 1478–1506.

[* ] De Jure Belli et Pacis, lib. ii. cap xvi. §5.

[57. ] Pericles, 495–429 bc, Athenian statesman, orator, and general.

[* ] Literally, “laid down their iron or steel”: hence the perfidious quibble on the
word iron, which cannot be so well rendered in English.

[† ] Q. Fabius Labeo [[Quintus Fabius Labeo, Roman consul ca. 183 bc, according to
Valerius Maximus. Livy makes no mention of the transaction.

]]

[‡ ] Annal. lib. xii.

[58. ] Antiochus IV Epiphanes, ruler of the Seleucid Empire 215–163 bc

[59. ] Rhadamistus, ruler of Iberia ad 51–55, became king of Armenia, having killed
his uncle and married the uncle’s daughter, Zenobia.

[‡ ] Annal. lib.xii

[60. ] Mithridates, king of Armenia ad 42–55, uncle of Rhadamistus.

[§ ] Lib. iii. cap. xxiv. §1 [[Law of War and Peace.

]]

[¶ ] Livy, lib. xxxviii. cap. xxv.

[61. ] Valerian, emperor of Rome, r. ad 253–60; Sapor I, king of Persia, r. ad 241–71.

[* ] The Life of Valerian in Crevier’s History of the Emperors.

[† ] Lib. iii. cap. xxiv. §5 [[Law of War and Peace.

]]

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 593 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[62. ] The Pragmatic Sanction was issued as a decree on April 19, 1713, by the Holy
Roman Emperor Charles VI, with the intent that all of his Hapsburg kingdoms would
descend without partition to his eldest daughter, Maria-Theresa.

[63. ] “It is not for us to end such great disputes” Virgil, Eclogues, III (trans. Eds.).

[* ] Jura negat sibi nata, nihil non arrogat armis. Horat. [[“He denies that laws were
made for him, and thinks that everything should yield to arms” (said of Achilles).
Horace, Ars poetica, 121.

]]

[64. ] Christiern (Christian) II, king of Denmark and Norway, r. 1513–23.

[65. ] Regent Sten Sture (the Younger), r. 1512–20.

[* ] History of the Revolutions of Sweden. [[René-Aubert de Vertot, History of the
Revolutions in Sweden.

]]

[† ] Grotius, lib. iii. cap. xx. §55 [[Law of War and Peace.—Wolfius, Jus Gent. §503.

]]

[66. ] Albert II, king of Austria, r. 1298–1358.

[* ] Tschudi, vol. i. p. 421.

[67. ] King Francis I of France (r. 1515–47) signed the Treaty of Madrid in 1526.

[68. ] Lars Porsenna of Clusium, king of the Etruscans, ca. 500 bc

[* ] Et Romani pignus pacis ex foedere restituerunt. [[“And the Romans returned the
pledge of peace, as the treaty required.” Tit. Liv. History of Rome lib. ii. cap. xiii.

]]

[* ] Tit. Liv. [[History of Rome lib. xxviii. cap. xxxiv.

]]

[† ] See Grotius, lib. iii. cap. xi. §18, not. 2 [[Law of War and Peace.

]]

[* ] Standum omnino est iis, quae verbis expressis, quorum manifestus est
significatus, indicata fuerunt, nisi omnem a negotiis humanis certitudinem removere
volueris. Wolf. Jus Nat. par. vii. n. 822. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 594 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

]]

[† ] [[Justinian’s Digest. lib. ii. tit. xiv. de Pactis, leg. 39.—See likewise Digest. lib.
xviii. tit. i. de Contrahenda Emptione, leg. 21. Labeo scripsit obscuritatem pacti
nocere potius debere venditori, qui id dixerit, quam emptori; quia potuit re integra
apertius dicere. “Labeo wrote that obscurity in a contract should harm the vendor who
had spoken it rather than the purchaser, because he could have spoken more clearly in
the whole matter” (trans. Eds.).

]]

[69. ] “An obscure contract [should] injure those in whose power it was to write the
law more clearly.” Digesta Justiniana, liber 18.1.21.

[* ] History of Queen Elizabeth.

[70. ] Muhammad II, sultan of the Ottoman Empire, r. 1451–81.

[71. ] Negropont, an island in the Aegean Sea, was conquered by the Turks in 1470.

[72. ] In 1400.

[* ] See Puffendorf’s Law of Nature and Nations, book v. chap xii. §3.—La Croix, in
his Hist. of Timurbec, book v. ch. xv. speaks of this cruelty of Timurbec or Tamerlane
towards 4,000 Armenian horsemen, but says nothing of the perfidy which others
attribute to him.

[† ] Fraus enim adstringit, non dissolvit perjurium. De Offic. lib. iii. cap. xxxii.

[73. ] Jacques Cujas, 1520–90, French jurist, professor at Toulouse, and counsellor to
the Parlement of Grenoble.

[* ] The French expression, “ourdir une trame,” which is here rendered “hatch a
plot,” literally signifies “to lay the warp of a web”;—“fire and sword,” literally,
“fire and steel” (or iron). [[Note added in 1797 edition.

]]

[74. ] Cleomenes, king of Sparta, died ca. 490 bc

[* ] Puffendorf [[Of the Law of Nature and Nations, lib. v. cap. xii. §7.

]]

[75. ] “According to the relevant subject.”

[* ] [[History of the Peloponnesian War, Lib. iv. cap. xcviii.

]]

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 595 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[* ] Digest [[of Justinian. Lib. i. tit. iii. De Legibus, leg. 24.

]]

[76. ] “It is impertinent to give an opinion or make a response on any detail put
forward without examining the whole law” (trans. Eds.).

[* ] Quid? verbis satis hoc cautum erat? Minime. Quae res igitur valuit? Voluntas:
quae si, tacitis nobis, intelligi posset, verbis omnino non uteremur. Quia non potest,
verba reperta sunt, non quae impedirent, sed quae indicarent voluntatem. [[“Well, did
the wording of the will provide adequately for this situation? Far from it. Then what
was the deciding consideration? Intention; for if our intention could be made clear
without speaking, we should not use words at all; but because it cannot, words have
been invented, not to conceal but to reveal intention.” Cicer. Orat. pro Caecina 53.

]]

[* ] Puffendorf [[Of the Law of Nature and Nations, lib. v. cap. xii. §18. He quotes
Ammianus Marcellinus, lib. xxii. cap. xvi.

]]

[† ] Puffend. ibid.—Herodotus, lib. vi.—Five drachmae amounted to little more than
three shillings sterling.

[77. ] Tiberius, emperor of Rome, r. ad 14–37.

[78. ] Lucius Aelius Sejanus (20 bc–ad 31), appointed praetorian prefect by Tiberius.

[* ] Tacit. Annal. lib. v. 9.

[† ] [[Seneca, De beneficiis Lib. iv. Declam. xxvii.

]]

[79. ] Victor Amadeus II, duke of Savoy, r. 1675–1720.

[80. ] Charles Emmanuel III, son of Victor Amadeus II and king of Sardinia, r.
1730–73.

[81. ] Gustavus Adolphus, king of Sweden, was killed in the battle of Lützen in 1632.

[82. ] “In every convention it must be understood that material conditions must
remain the same” (trans. Eds.).

[83. ] Titus Flavius Vespasianus (ad 39–81), son of Vespasian (r. ad 69–79),
succeeded his father as Roman emperor, r. ad 79–81.

[84. ] Servius Sulpicius Galba (3 bc–ad 69), Roman emperor, r. ad 68–69.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 596 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[* ] Digest [[of Justinian. lib. xxvi. tit. iii. De Confirm. Tutor. leg. 10.

]]

[* ] See Barbeyrac’s remarks on Grotius and Puffendorf.

[85. ] Jean Barbeyrac (1674–1744) commented on Grotius’s De jure belli in his
edition of 1720 (Amsterdam) and on Pufendorf’s Les devoirs de l’homme et du citoien
in his edition of 1707 (Amsterdam).

[* ] Quintilian, Instit. Orat. lib. vii. cap. iv.

[86. ] Lucius Sergius Catilina, ca. 108–62 bc, Roman politician and soldier
notoriously denounced by Cicero for seeking to overthrow the republic.

[* ] Orat. pro Caecina, cap. xxiii.

[* ] Digest [[of Justinian. lib. xliii. tit. xvi. De Vi, et Vi Armata, legg. 1 et 3.

]]

[* ] Lib. ii. cap. xvi. §13 [[Law of War and Peace.

]]

[87. ] Under the Roman general Scipio Aemilianus, the city of Carthage was
destroyed in 146 bc

[* ] Αυτονομος. Appian. de Bello Punico.

[* ] Such is the decision of the Roman law.—Javolenus [[Javolenus Priscus, Roman
jurist, praetor, and proconsul, ad 60–120 says: “Beneficium imperatoris quam
plenissime interpretari debemus”; and he gives this reason for it, “quod a divina ejus
indulgentia proficiscatur.” “We should interpret the bounty of the emperor as
generously as possible ... because it proceeds from his divine permissiveness.” Digest
of Justinian. lib. i. tit. iv. de Constit. Princ. leg. 3.

]]

[* ] The prohibitory law creates, in that particular instance, an exception to the
injunctive law. “Deinde utra lex jubeat, utra vetet. Nam saepe ea quae vetat, quasi
exceptione quadam corrigere videtur illam quae jubet.” [[“Then, which law enjoins
and which prohibits, for frequently the law that prohibits seems to have amended the
law that enjoins by making an exception.” Cicero, de Inventione, lib. ii. 145 146.

]]

[* ] Jus Gent. [[De jure naturae et gentium lib. v. cap. xii. §23.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 597 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

]]

[* ] “Primum igitur leges oportet contendere, considerando utra lex ad majores, hoc
est, ad utiliores, ad honestiores, ac magis necessarias res pertineat. Ex quo conficitur
ut, si leges duae, aut si plures, aut quotquot erunt, conservari non possint quia
discrepent inter se, ea maxime conservanda putetur, quae ad maximas res pertinere
videatur.” [[“In the first place then, one should compare the laws by considering
which one deals with the most important matters, that is, the most expedient,
honorable, or necessary. The conclusion from this is that if two laws (or whatever
number there may be if more than two) cannot be kept because they are at variance,
the one is thought to have the greatest claim to be upheld which has reference to the
greatest matters.” De inventione II.145. Cicero, ubi supra.

]]

[* ] This is also the reason which Cicero gives: “Nam maxime conservanda est ea
[lex] quae diligentissime sancta est.” [[“For that law is to be upheld, in which the
penalties are most carefully prescribed.” De inventione II.146. Cicero, ubi supra.

]]

[88. ] “To spare the vanquished and subdue the arrogant.” Virgil, Aeneid VI.853.

[* ] In 1724.

[† ] In 1728.

[89. ] “There is only one hope of safety [for the vanquished]—not to hope for any
well-being.” Virgil, Aeneid II, 354.

[* ] When, in the year 1355, they submitted their differences with the dukes of
Austria, in relation to the countries of Zug and Glaris, to the arbitration of Charles IV.
it was not without this preliminary condition, that the emperor should not touch the
liberty of those countries, nor their alliance with the other cantons. Tschudi, p. 429,
&c.—Stettler, p. 77.—History of the Helvetic Confederacy, by De Watteville, book
iv. at the beginning.

[90. ] Charles Emmanuel III of Sardinia, r. 1730–73.

[* ] “Nam, ut Plato ait, nemo prudens punit quia peccatum est, sed, ne peccetur.”
[[“For, as Plato says, no one (who is) prudent punishes because of sin but to stop
sinning.” Seneca, de Ira I.XIX.7.

]]

[* ] On the subject of reprisals, it is necessary to observe, that when we adopt that
expedient as being a gentler mode of proceeding than that of war, the reprisals ought
not to be general. The grand pensionary De Witt [[Johan de Witt (1625–72), Dutch

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 598 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

statesman very properly remarked—“I do not see any difference between general
reprisals and open war.” Note added in 1773/1797 editions.

]]

[* ] On that subject, the grand pensionary De Witt wrote as follows—“Nothing can be
more absurd than that grant of reprisals: for—to say nothing of its proceeding from a
board of admiralty who have no power to grant it without infringing on the sovereign
authority of their prince—it is evident that no sovereign can grant or make reprisals,
except for the defence or indemnification of his own subjects, whom he is, in the sight
of God, bound to protect: but he can never grant reprisals in favour of any foreigner
who is not under his protection, and with whose sovereign he has not any engagement
to that effect, ex pacto vel foedere. Besides, it is certain that reprisals ought not to be
granted except in case of an open denial of justice. Finally, it is also evident, that,
even in case of a denial of justice, he cannot empower his subjects to make reprisals,
until he has repeatedly demanded justice for them, and added, that, in the event of a
refusal, he will be obliged to grant them letters of marque and reprisal.”—From the
answers of Mr. Boreel, it appears that this conduct of the British admiralty was
strongly condemned by the court of France. The king of England testified his
disapprobation of it, and gave orders for the release of the Dutch vessels whose
seizure had been permitted by way of reprisal. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.

]]

[† ] See Bynckershock’s Competent Judge of Embassadors, chap. xxii. §5.

[* ] Ανδροληψια, seizure of men.

[† ] Demosthenes, Orat. adv. Aristocrat.

[‡ ] De Jure Belli et Pacis, lib. iii. cap. ii. §6.

[* ] See book iii. chap. iv.

[* ] I here speak of the right considered in itself. But as a king of England cannot,
without the concurrence of parliament, either raise money or compel his subjects to
take up arms, his right of making war is, in fact, but a slender prerogative, unless the
parliament second him with supplies. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.

]]

[1. ] Charles XII of Sweden, r. 1697–1718.

[2. ] This paragraph illustrates Vattel’s belief that to some extent all successful
monarchies needed to learn lessons from republics. Another example can be found in
book 3, §50.

[* ] Formerly bishops went to war in virtue of their fiefs, and led with them their
vassals. The Danish bishops were not inattentive to a function which pleased them

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 599 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

better than the peaceful cares of episcopacy. The famous Absalom, bishop of
Roschild, and afterwards archbishop of Lunden, was the principal general of king
Waldemar I [[r. 1157–82. And since the use of regular troops has superseded that
feudal service, there have not been wanting some martial prelates, who eagerly
courted the command of armies. The cardinal De la Valette, and Sourdis archbishop
of Bourdeaux, appeared in arms under the ministry of cardinal Richelieu, who also
acted himself in a military capacity, at the attack of the pass of Susa. This is an abuse
which the church very justly opposes. A bishop makes a better appearance in his
proper station in his diocese, than in the army; and, at present, sovereigns are in no
want of generals and officers, who will perform more useful services than can be
expected from churchmen. In short, let every person keep to his vocation. All I
dispute with the clergy is their exemption as matter of right, and in cases of necessity.

]]

[* ] A bishop of Beauvais, under Philip Augustus [[Philippe II of France, r. 1180–
1223. He fought at the battle of Bouvines Bovines, 1214.

]]

[3. ] Although Vattel’s argument was common in Swiss circles, it is notable that the
unintended consequence of mercenary employment of Swiss citizens was deemed to
be the maintenance of republican valour, when this was transposed to the defense of
Switzerland itself.

[* ] Disc. on Livy.

[4. ] War of the Austrian Succession, 1741–48.

[5. ] Philippe-Henri, Marquis de Ségur, 1724–1801.

[* ] Livy, lib. v. cap. 49.

[6. ] “Everything, in a word, which it was their duty to defend, to recover, or to
avenge” (trans. Eds.). The famous Roman soldier and statesman Marcus Furius
Camillus (ca. bc 446–356) defended Rome against successive Gallic invasions when
serving as dictator, as described by Plutarch and Livy.

[* ] Αιτιαι. Histor. lib. iii. cap. 6.

[† ] Προ?ασ?ις.

[* ] Livy [[Ab urbe condita, lib. ix. init.

]]

[7. ] “Just is the war that is necessary and the arms are righteous, where there is hope
in nothing but arms” (trans. Eds.).

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 600 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[8. ] Charles II of Spain, r. 1665–1700.

[9. ] Vattel here argues that war was justified against Louis XIV in order to prevent
universal monarchy in Europe.

[10. ] François-Michel Le Tellier (1641–91), Marquis de Louvois, served as secretary
of state for war under Louis XIV of France and was particularly concerned with the
reform of the army.

[11. ] The Holy Roman Emperor Charles V (r. 1530–56) defeated John Frederick,
elector of Saxony, in 1547 at Mühlberg, outside Leipzig.

[12. ] Once again Vattel underlines the danger of monarchs in Europe aspiring to
expand their power and upset the existing balance between states. His strategy for
ending the threat of universal monarchy is outlined in the following paragraphs.

[* ] Of France.

[13. ] Vattel has attacked projects for perpetual peace associated with expanding
French power as unworkable, and argues that only greater British involvement in
European power politics can retain a political equilibrium which would maintain
existing states—especially the smaller republics threatened by commercial
monarchies. This argument becomes commonplace in republican reform politics in
the decades up to the French Revolution.

[* ] Livy, lib. i. cap. 31.

[14. ] Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle, 1748.

[* ] See Sully’s Memoirs.

[15. ] Between 1588 and 1593, Charles Emmanuel I took Saluzzo from France and
after the murder of Henry III (1589) sent troops into France to assert his own claims
to the throne against Henry IV (r. 1589–1610).

[* ] It is remarked, as a very singular circumstance, that Charles the Second, king of
Great Britain, in his declaration of war against France, dated February 9, 1668,
promised security to French subjects who should “demean themselves properly, ”
—and moreover his protection and favour to such of them as might chuse to emigrate
to his dominions. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.

]]

[* ] De Jure Belli et Pacis, lib. i. cap. iii. §4.

[† ] Lib. iii. cap. iv [[Law of War and Peace.

]]

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 601 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[* ] See chap. xii. of this book.

[† ] In the year 1602.

[* ] Grotius, de Jure Belli & Pacis, lib. iii. cap. viii. §4.

[* ] Book ii. ch. xvii.

[* ] See Wolf, Jus Gentium, §§730 and 736.

[16. ] War of the Austrian Succession, 1741–48.

[17. ] Maria Theresa, r. 1740–80.

[18. ] Gnaeus Manlius Vulso served as Roman consul in 189 bc and defeated the
Galatian Gauls after accusing them of sending troops to support the Seleucids in the
recent Roman-Syrian war.

[* ] De Jure Belli et Pacis, lib. iii. cap. iii. §10.

[† ] Livy, lib. xxxviii.

[* ] Grotius, ubi supra, not. 3.

[19. ] Victor Amadeus II, Duke of Savoy (r. 1675–1720), was forced to leave the
Anglo-Dutch alliance against France during the War of the Spanish Succession
(1701–13) after the siege of Turin in 1706.

[20. ] During the War of the Austrian Succession (1741–48), Augustus III of Poland
(r. 1734–63), who was also elector of Saxony as Frederick Augustus II, and Charles
Emmanuel III of Savoy (r. 1730–73), opposed Empress Maria Theresa of Austria.

[* ] The following is an instance.—It was determined by the Dutch, that, on a vessel’s
entering a neutral port after having taken any of the enemies of her nation prisoners
on the high seas, she should be obliged to set those prisoners at liberty, because they
were then fallen into the power of a nation that was in neutrality with the belligerent
parties.—The same rule had been observed by England in the war between Spain and
the United Provinces. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.

]]

[* ] See other instances in Grotius, de Jure Belli et Pacis, lib. iii. cap. i. §5, not. 6.

[† ] The Pensionary De Witt, in a letter of January 14, 1654, acknowledges that it
would be contrary to the law of nations to prevent neutrals from carrying corn to an
enemy’s country: but he says that we may lawfully prevent them from supplying the
enemy with cordage and other materials for the rigging and equipment of ships of
war.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 602 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

In 1597, queen Elizabeth would not allow the Poles and Danes to furnish Spain with
provisions, much less with arms,—alleging that “according to the rules of war, it is
lawful to reduce an enemy even by famine, with the view of obliging him to sue for
peace.” The United Provinces, finding it necessary to observe a greater degree of
circumspection, did not prevent neutral nations from carrying on every kind of
commerce with Spain. It is true, indeed, that, while their own subjects sold both arms
and provisions to the Spaniards, they could not with propriety have attempted to
forbid neutral nations to carry on a similar trade. (Grotius, Hist. of the Disturbances in
the Low Countries, book vi.) Nevertheless, in 1646, the United Provinces published
an edict prohibiting their own subjects in general, and even neutral nations, to carry
either provisions or any other merchandise to Spain, because the Spaniards, “after
having, under the appearance of commerce, allured foreign vessels to their ports,
detained them, and made use of them as ships of war.” And for this reason the same
edict declared that “the confederates, when blocking up their enemies’ ports, would
seize upon every vessel they saw steering towards those places.” Ibid. book xv. p.
572. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.

]]

[* ] In our time the king of Spain [[Philip V, r. 1700–1746 prohibited all Hamburg
ships from entering his harbours, because that city had engaged to furnish the
Algerines with military stores; and thus he obliged the Hamburgers to cancel their
treaty with the Barbarians.

]]

[21. ] In 1590.

[* ] Grotius, ubi supra.

[† ] “I have obtained” (said the ambassador Boreel, in a letter to the Grand Pensionary
De Witt) “the abrogation of that pretended French law, that enemies’ property
involves in confiscation the property of friends; so that, if henceforward any effects
belonging to the enemies of France be found in a free Dutch vessel, those effects
alone shall be liable to confiscation; and the vessel shall be released, together with all
the other property on board. But I find it impossible to obtain the object of the twenty-
fourth article of my instructions, which says that the immunity of the vessel shall
extend to the cargo, even if enemies’ property.” De Witt’s Letters and Negotiations,
vol. i. p. 80.—Such a law as the latter would be more natural than the former. [[Note
added in 1773/1797 editions.

]]

[22. ] King Demetrius of Macedonia, r. 294–288 bc

[* ] Plutarch, in Demetrio.

[† ] Grotius, ubi supra.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 603 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[23. ] Between 1745 and 1747 Italy became a major battleground in the War of the
Austrian Succession, with an alliance of Genoa, Naples, France, and Spain fighting
against the Austrian forces.

[* ] Plutarch’s life of Agesilaüs.

[† ] Book ii. chap. ii. §13. note 5 [[Law of War and Peace.

]]

[‡ ] By the Eleans, and the ancient inhabitants of Cologne. See Grotius, ibid.

[* ] The author [[Robert Molesworth of the “Present State of Denmark,” written in
English, pretends that the Danes had engaged to deliver up the Dutch fleet, but that
some seasonable presents made to the court of Copenhagen saved it. Chap. x.

]]

[* ] From several passages in Grotius’s History of the Disturbances in the Low
Countries, it appears that the war between the Dutch and Spaniards was carried on
with unrelenting cruelty at sea, although the parties had agreed to observe the usual
rules of moderation on land.—Intelligence being received by the confederate states,
that the Spaniards had, by the advice of Spinola, embarked at Lisbon a body of troops
destined for Flanders, they dispatched a squadron to wait for them in the strait of
Calais, with orders to drown without mercy every soldier that was taken; and the
order was punctually executed.—Book xiv. p. 550. [[Note added in 1773/1797
editions.

]]

[24. ] In 146 bc

[* ] In the French, we here find (apparently, very much out of place) a verbatim
repetition of the long note which has already appeared in page 286. [[Note added in
1797 edition.

]]

[† ] Lysander [[commander of the Spartan fleet, d. 395 bc, having captured the
Athenian fleet, put the prisoners to death, on account of various cruelties practised by
the Athenians during the course of the war, but principally on account of the
barbarous resolution which they were known to have adopted, of cutting off the right
hand of every prisoner, in case of victory declaring on their side. He spared
Adeimantus alone, who had opposed that infamous resolution. Xenoph. Hist. Graec.
lib. ii. cap. 1. Note added in 1773/1797 editions.

]]

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 604 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[‡ ] Neque se in obsides innoxios, sed in ipsos, si defecerint, saeviturum; nec ab
inermi, sed ab armato hoste, poenas expetiturum. Tit. Liv. [[History of Rome lib.
xxviii.

]]

[§ ] Quint. Curt. lib. iv. cap. 1 & 11.

[* ] Arrian. de Exped. Alexand. lib. i. cap. 20.

[† ] Lib. xiv. cap. 113, quoted by Grotius, lib. iii. cap. 2, §16, n. 5 [[Law of War and
Peace.

]]

[‡ ] The false maxim which formerly prevailed on this subject, is noticed in the
relation of the battle of Musselburgh [[1547 (De Thou Jacques Auguste de Thou, vol
i. p. 287). “The general (the duke of Somerset), the regent of England, was on this
occasion much admired for his clemency, which induced him to spare the lives of the
besieged (the garrison of a castle in Scotland), notwithstanding that ancient maxim in
war which declares that a weak garrison forfeit all claim to mercy on the part of the
conqueror, when, with more courage than prudence, they obstinately persevere in
defending an ill-fortified place against a royal army, and when, refusing to accept of
reasonable conditions offered to them, they undertake to arrest the progress of a
power which they are unable to resist.”—Pursuant to that maxim, Caesar answered
the Aduatici that he would spare their town, if they surrendered before the battering-
ram touched their walls,—and the duke of Alva strongly blamed Prosper Colonna for
having granted terms of capitulation to the garrison of a castle, who had refused to
treat of a surrender until the cannon had been employed against them. Note added in
1773/1797 editions.

]]

[25. ] The French soldier Pierre Terrail, seigneur de Bayard (1473–1524), defended
Mézières with a tiny force against Charles V’s imperial troops in 1521.

[* ] See his life. [[Champier, Les Gestes, ensemble la vie du preulx chevalier Bayard
(Lyons, 1525).

]]

[26. ] Between May and September 1565, the knights of Saint John of Jerusalem held
Malta against the Ottoman Turks.

[27. ] Karl Sigismond Friedrick Wilhelm Leutrum (1692–1755), commanding
Piedmontese troops, defended the city of Coneo against Franco-Spanish forces in
1744 during the War of the Austrian Succession.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 605 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[* ] But it is not lawful to employ menaces of every kind in order to induce the
governor or commandant of a town to surrender. There are some, against which
nature revolts with horror.—Louis the Eleventh, being engaged in the siege of St.
Omer, and incensed at the long resistance he experienced, informed the governor,
Philip, son of Antony the Bastard of Burgundy, that, if he did not surrender the place,
his father, (who was a prisoner in Louis’s hands) should be put to death in his sight.
Philip replied that he would feel the most poignant regret to lose his father, but that
his honour was still dearer to him, and that he was too well acquainted with the king’s
disposition, to apprehend that he would disgrace himself by the perpetration of so
barbarous a deed. [[Charles Pineau-Duclos, Hist. of Louis XI. book viii. Note added
in 1773/1797 editions.

]]

[* ] See Simler, de Repub. Helvet.

[* ] Book iii. ch. 11. §11 [[Law of War and Peace.

]]

[† ] Cyrus [[Cyrus the Great, founder of the Persian Empire, r. 576–529 bc, Belisarius
Flavius, Byzantine general serving under Justinian I, ad 505–65, &c.

]]

[‡ ] Cyrus proposed to the king of Assyria, that both parties should reciprocally spare
the cultivators of the soil, and make war only against those who appeared in arms:—
and the proposal was agreed to. Xenoph. Cyrop. lib. v. cap. 4.

[28. ] Siege of Jerusalem, ad 70.

[29. ] Charles I of Naples, r. 1266–85.

[30. ] Conradin, or Conrad V (1252–68), the last of the Hohenstaufen line, held the
duchy of Swabia from 1262 and considered himself to be king of Jerusalem and of
Sicily. Upon his defeat by Charles I of Naples, he was tried and beheaded.

[31. ] Peter III of Aragon, r. 1276–85.

[* ] Epist. Pet. Arrag apud Petr. de Vineis. [[Petrus de Vineis is Pierre de la Vigne (ca.
1190–1249), chancellor of Frederic II of Hohenstauffen. The letter from Peter III,
king of Aragon, is in a collection that has not been identified.

]]

[* ] In 1593, the council of the Netherlands, at the persuasion of the count de Fuentes,
resolved no longer to observe towards the United Provinces that moderation which
humanity renders so necessary in war. They gave orders for putting to death every
man who should be made prisoner, and, under the same penalty, prohibited the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 606 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

payment of any contributions to the enemy. But the complaints of the nobility and
clergy, and, still more, the murmurs of the military, who saw themselves exposed to
an infamous death in case of falling into the enemy’s hands, obliged the Spaniards to
re-establish those indispensable usages, which, in the words of Virgil [Aen. x. 532],
are called belli commercia,—the ransom or exchange of prisoners, and the payment of
contributions to avert pillage and devastation. The ransom of each prisoner was then
settled at a month’s pay. Grotius, Hist. of Netherlands, book iii. [[Note added in 1773/
1797 editions.

]]

[32. ] War of the Austrian Succession.

[33. ] Charles XII of Sweden (r. 1697–1718) defeated the forces of Czar Peter the
Great at Narva in 1700 during the Great Northern War (1700–21).

[* ] See Anson’s Voyage round the World.

[* ] [[Daniel Hist. of France, reign of Charles VI.

]]

[34. ] Gaius Mucius Scaevola, ca. sixth century bc, in Roman legend the hero who
saved Rome from Porsenna’s Etruscans.

[* ] See Livy, lib. ii. cap. 12.—Cicero, pro P. Sextio.—Valer. Max. lib. iii. cap. 3.—
Plutarch, in Poplicol.

[35. ] Pepin the Younger, 714–68, king of the Franks 751–58.

[† ] Grotius, lib. iii. cap. 4, §18, n. 1 [[Law of War and Peace.

]]

[36. ] Leonidas, king of Sparta, ca. 489 bc

[37. ] Xerxes I of Persia, r. 485–465 bc

[* ] Justin. [[Digest. lib. ii. cap. xi.

]]

[38. ] The reference is to Hasan ibn al-Sabbah, founder of the Assassins, a secret order
of the Ismaili sect of Islam. Folklore called him the Old Man of the Mountain.

[* ] See the dialogue between Julius Caesar and Cicero, in the Mélanges de Littérature
et Poésies.—Farrudge, sultan of Egypt, sent to Timur-bec an embassador
accompanied by two villains who were to assassinate that conqueror during the
audience. This infamous plot being discovered—“It is not (said Timur) the maxim of

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 607 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

kings to put embassadors to death: but as to this wretch, who, under the sacred garb of
religion, is a monster of perfidy and corruption, it would be a crime to suffer him and
his accomplices to live.” Pursuant, therefore, to that passage of the Koran which says
that “treachery falls on the traitor’s own head,” he ordered him to be dispatched with
the same poignard with which he had intended to perpetrate the abominable deed. The
body of the traitor was then committed to the flames, as an example to others. The
two assassins were only condemned to suffer the amputation of their noses and
ears,—Timur contenting himself with this punishment, and forbearing to put them to
death, because he wished to send them back with a letter to the sultan. [[La Croix.
Hist. of Timur-bec, book v. chap. 24. Note added in 1773/1797 editions.

]]

[† ] Book iii. chap. 4, §15 [[Law of War and Peace.

]]

[39. ] Caius Luscinus Fabricius served as consul in 282 and 278 bc with Quintus
Aemilius Papus. In 280 bc while serving as ambassadors from Rome, they rejected
the approach of the physician employed by the Molossian king Pyrrhus of Epirus.

[* ] Ουδε γαρ ταυτα σ? χαριτι μηνυομεν, αλλ’ ?πως μη το σον πα?ος ?μιν διαβολην
ενεγκ?, Plut. in Pyrr.

[† ] Sed communis exempli et fidei ergo visum est, uti te salvum velimus; ut esset,
quem armis vincere possemus. [[“But as a matter of general precedent and honor, it
has seemed to us that we should desire your personal safety, in order that we may
have the opportunity of vanquishing you in the field.” Aul. Gell. Noct Attic. lib. iii.
cap 8.

]]

[‡ ] Armis bella, non venenis, geri debere. [[“War is to be fought with arms, not
poison.” Valer. Maxim. lib. vi. ch. 5, num. 1.

]]

[40. ] Emperor Tiberius, r. ad 14–37.

[41. ] Arminius, chief of the Cherusci, defeated Varus and his Roman army at
Teutoburg Forest in ad 9.

[§ ] Non fraude, neque occultis, sed palam, et armatum, populum Romanum hostes
suos ulcisci. Tacit. Annal. lib. ii. cap. 88.

[42. ] Publius Quinctilius Varus, 46 bc–ad 9, military governor appointed by
Augustus, died at the battle of Teutoburg Forest.

[* ] Quint. Curt. lib. iv. cap. 11, num. 18.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 608 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[43. ] Eumenes of Cardia, 362–316 bc, Greek scholar and general, served under
Alexander the Great.

[† ] Nec Antigonum, nec quemquam ducum, sic velle vincere, ut ipse in se exemplum
pessimum statuat. Justin. [[Digest lib. xiv. cap. 1, num. 12.

]]

[44. ] Bessus, Persian nobleman who proclaimed himself king after murdering Darius
III.

[‡ ] Quem quidem [Bessum] cruci adfixum videre festino, omnibus regibus
gentibusque fidei, quam violavit, meritas poenas solventem. [[“I am assuredly in haste
to see him (Bessus) nailed to a cross, paying the penalty he has deserved to all kings
and nations for the loyalty which he has dishonoured.” Q. Curt. lib. vi. ch. 3, num. 14.

]]

[45. ] Darius III, king of Persia 336–330 bc, deposed by Alexander prior to being
assassinated by Bessus.

[* ] Grotius, book iii. chap. 4, §16 [[Law of War and Peace.

]]

[† ] Grotius, ibid. §17 [[Law of War and Peace.

]]

[‡ ] The laws of justice and equity are not to be less respected even in time of war.
The following I quote as a remarkable instance. Alcibiades, at the head of an Athenian
army, was engaged in the siege of Byzantium, then occupied by a Lacedaemonian
garrison; and finding that he could not reduce the city by force, he gained over some
of the inhabitants, who put him in possession of it. One of the persons concerned in
this transaction was Anaxilaüs, a citizen of Byzantium, who, being afterwards brought
to trial for it at Lacedaemon, pleaded, in his defence, that, in surrendering the city, he
had not acted through ill-will to the Lacedaemonians, or under the influence of a
bribe, but with a view to save the women and children, whom he saw perishing with
famine, for Clearchus, who commanded the garrison, had given to the soldiers all the
corn that was found in the city. The Lacedaemonians, with a noble regard to justice,
and such as seldom prevails on similar occasions, acquitted the culprit,—observing
that he had not betrayed but saved the city,—and particularly attending to the
circumstance of his being a Byzantine, not a Lacedaemonian. Xenoph Hist. Graec. lib.
i. cap. 3. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.

]]

[46. ] Gaius Marius, 157–86 bc, Roman general and politician, famously cruel and
rapacious.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 609 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[47. ] Attila, 405–53, last and most powerful king of the Huns (r. 445–53), notorious
for his barbarity.

[* ] Watteville’s Hist. of the Helvetic Confederacy, vol. i. p. 126.

[† ] In the year 1743.

[* ] Timur-bec made war on Joseph Sofy, king of Carezem, and subdued his kingdom.
During the course of the war, that great man proved himself to be possessed of all that
moderation and politeness which is thought peculiar to our modern warriors. Some
melons being brought to him whilst he was besieging Joseph in the city of Eskiskus,
he resolved to send a part of them to his enemy, thinking it would be a breach of
civility not to share those new fruits with that prince, when so near him; and
accordingly he ordered them to be put into a gold bason, and carried to him. The king
of Carezem received this instance of politeness in a brutal manner: he ordered the
melons to be thrown into the fossé, and gave the bason to the city gate-keeper. La
Croix, Hist. of Timur-bec, book v. ch. 27. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.

]]

[* ] On this subject, let us notice a trait of Charles XII. of Sweden [[r. 1697–1718, in
which sound reason and the most exalted courage are equally conspicuous. That
prince being engaged in the siege of Thorn in Poland 1703, and frequently walking
round the city, was easily distinguished by the cannoneers, who regularly fired upon
him as soon as they saw him make his appearance. The principal officers of his army,
greatly alarmed at their sovereign’s danger, wished to have information sent to the
governor, that, if the practice was continued, no quarter should be granted either to
him or to the garrison. But the Swedish monarch would never permit such a step to be
taken,—telling his officers that the governor and the Saxon cannoneers were perfectly
right in acting as they did,—that it was himself who made the attack upon them,—and
that the war would be at an end if they could kill him; whereas they would reap very
little advantage even from killing the principal officers of his army. Jacques Lacombe
Histoire du Nord, p. 26. Note added in 1773/1797 editions.

]]

[48. ] Henry IV of France, r. 1589–1610.

[49. ] Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle, 1748.

[* ] The peace was become absolutely necessary to him; and he had, in return for his
few conquests, Louisbourg, with all its dependencies, which were of more importance
to him. [Note by the former translator.] [[The bracketed note by the 1797 editor refers
to the note on p. 543 of the Dublin edition (1787) of The Law of Nations.

]]

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 610 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[50. ] The prince in question is Louis XIV of France. The bombardment of Algiers,
undertaken to effect deliverance of the Christian captives, occurred in 1682–83; the
bombardment of Genoa in 1684.

[51. ] Peter the Great, czar of Russia, r. 1682–1725.

[52. ] In 1697–1718, during the Great Northern War.

[53. ] In 1709 Peter the Great decisively defeated the forces of King Charles XII of
Sweden at Poltava. The Russian victory became a contributing factor in the
destruction of Sweden’s empire during the Great Northern War.

[* ] In 1674, and a second time, much more dreadfully, in 1689.

[* ] See his letter in Procopius. It is quoted by Grotius, lib. iii. cap. 12, §2, not. 11
[[Law of War and Peace.

]]

[54. ] Gustavus Adolphus had invaded Bavaria in 1632 and occupied Munich. He
considered Maximilian I, elector of Bavaria, a Machiavellian supporter of his enemy
Emperor Ferdinand II.

[* ] [[Nicolas Chevalier, Histoire de Guillaume III. liv. vi. tom. 2. p. 66.

]]

[55. ] War of the Austrian Succession.

[* ] De salute certatum est. [[“The fight was for survival.”

]]

[56. ] Louis François, Duc de Boufflers, 1644–1711, marshal of France, 1692.

[* ] [[Chevalier Histoire de Guillaume III. tom. ii. p. 148.

]]

[* ]Falsiloquy, false-speaking, untruth, falsehood.

[* ] There was a time when those who were taken in attempting to surprise a town
were put to death. In 1597, prince Maurice [[of Nassau, Prince of Orange (1618–25),
and capitain-general of the Dutch forces from 1587 attempted to take Venloo by
surprise: the attempt failed; and some of his men being made prisoners on the
occasion, “were condemned to death,—the mutual consent of the parties having
introduced that new rule, in order to obviate dangers of this kind.” (Grotius Hist. of
the Disturb. in the Netherlands.) Since that time, the rule has been changed: at present,
military men who attempt to surprise a town in time of open war, are not, in case of

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 611 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

being taken, treated in a different manner from other prisoners: and this custom is
more consonant to reason and humanity. Nevertheless, if they were in disguise, or had
employed treachery, they would be treated as spies: and this is perhaps what Grotius
means: for I do not, in any other instance, find that such severity was used towards
troops who were simply come to surprise a town in the silence of the night. It would
be quite another affair, if such an attempt were made in a time of profound peace; and
the Savoyards who were taken in the escalade of Geneva, deserved the punishment of
death which was inflicted on them. [See page 508.] Note added in 1773/1797 editions.

]]

[* ] [[Antoine de Pas Memoires de Feuquieres, tom. iii. p. 87.

]]

[57. ] May 15, 1756.

[* ] This was the practice of the ancient Gauls. See Livy.—It is said of Achilles, that
he was for fighting openly, and not of a disposition to conceal himself in the famous
wooden horse which proved fatal to the Trojans:—

Ille non, inclusus equo MinervaeSacra mentito, male feriatosTroas, et laetam Priami
choreisFalleret aulam;Sed palam captis gravis. ... Hor. lib. iv. od. 6.

[[“He would not have hidden within the horse that feigned sacrifice to Minerva, not
striven to deceive the Trojans keeping ill-timed holiday, or Priam’s court taking joy in
dances but with open cruelty to his captives.” Horace, Odes 4.6.13–17.

]]

[† ] Virg. Aen. ii. 390.

[‡ ] Tit. Liv. lib. xlii. cap. 47.

[58. ] Perseus, king of Macedonia (r. 179–168 bc). In books 39–44 of Livy’s History
of Rome, Livy argued that the leaders of the empire had always planned to subjugate
Macedonia and were inconsistent and unfair to Perseus in justifying war against him.
The result was the defeat of Perseus at Pydna in bc 168, along with his capture and
imprisonment.

[* ] Xenophon very properly expresses the reasons which render treachery detestable,
and which authorise us to repress it by other means than open force. “Treachery”
(says he) “is more dreadful than open war, in proportion as it is more difficult to
guard against clandestine plots than against an open attack: it is also more odious,
because men engaged in overt hostilities may again treat together, and come to a
sincere reconciliation, whereas nobody can venture to treat with or repose any
confidence in a man whom he has once found guilty of treachery.” Hist. Graec. lib. ii.
cap. 3. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 612 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

]]

[59. ] Viriatus (180–139 bc) sought to maintain Lusitanian independence and defeated
the Roman general Quintus Fabius Maximus Servilianus in 140 bc The latter’s
successor, Servilius Caepio, contrived the murder of Viriatus in 139 bc

[* ] Viriati etiam caedes duplicem persidiae accusationem recepit; in amicis, quod
eorum manibus interemptus est; in Q. Servilio Caepione consule, quia is sceleris hujus
auctor, impunitate promissa, fuit, victoriamque non meruit, sed emit. lib. ix. cap. 6.
[[“Indeed the killing of Viriatus brought a double accusation of treachery, on the part
of his friends, because he was done away with at their hands, and on the part of Q.
Servilius Caepio the consul, because he was the instigator of this crime, promising
immunity, and he did not earn but purchased his victory” (trans. Eds.). Although this
instance seems to belong to another head (that of assassination), I nevertheless quote
it here, because it does not appear from other authors that Caepio had induced
Viriatus’s soldiers to assassinate him. Among others, see Eutropius, lib. vi. cap. 8.

]]

[† ] Quae victoria, quia empta erat, a senatu non probata. [[“Because this victory was
purchased it was not commended by the senate.” Auctor de Viris Illust. Sextus
Aurelius Victor cap. 71.

]]

[‡ ] Transfugam jure belli recipimus. [[“By the law of war we take back the deserter.”
Digest. Justinian l. xli. tit. 1, de adquir. Rer. Dom. leg. 51.

]]

[§ ] Eâdem fide indicatum Pyrrho regi medicum vitae ejus insidiantem; eâdem
Faliscis vinctum traditum proditorem liberorum regis. [[“This [Roman] sense of honor
made them warn Pyrrhus against his physician who was plotting against his life; it
made them hand over to the Faliscans as a prisoner the betrayer of their children.” Tit.
Liv. lib. xlii. cap. 47.

]]

[* ] When the duke of Parma [[Alessandro Farnese, r. 1586–92 was engaged in the
siege of Bergen-op-zoom 1588, two Spanish prisoners, who were confined in a fort
near the town, attempted to gain over a tavern-keeper, and an English soldier, to
betray that fort to the duke. These men having acquainted the governor with the
circumstance, received orders from him to feign acquiescence; and, accordingly,
having made all their arrangements with the duke of Parma for the surprisal of the
fort, they gave notice of every particular to the governor. He, in consequence, kept
himself prepared to give a proper reception to the Spaniards, who fell into the snare,
and lost near three thousand men on the occasion. Grotius, Hist. of the Disturb. in the
Netherlands, book i. Note added in 1773/1797 editions.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 613 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

]]

[* ] De Jure Belli et Pacis, lib. iii. cap. 10.

[* ] Grotius, de Jure Belli et Pacis, lib. iii. cap. 6, §3, n. 7.

[† ] See Grotius, ibid. and in the text.

[‡ ] Grotius, ibid.

[* ] Grotius, lib. iii. cap. 16 [[Law of War and Peace.

]]

[* ] By the treaty of Schwedt, October 6, 1713.

[* ] Inter dominum et servum, nulla amicitia est; etiam in pace, belli tamen jura
servantur. Q. Curt. lib. vii. cap. 8.

[† ] Montesquieu, in his Spirit of Laws. [[Book 10, chaps. 3–4.

]]

[* ] Quid, si poenam (inquit consul) remittimus vobis, qualem nos pacem vobiscum
habituros speremus? Si bonam dederitis, inquit, et fidam et perpetuam; si malam,
haud diuturnam. Tum vero minari, nec id ambigue Privernatem, quidam, et illis
vocibus ad rebellandum incitari pacatos populos. Pars melior senatûs ad meliora
responsa trahere, et dicere viri et liberi vocem auditam: an credi posse ullum
populum, aut hominem denique, in eâ conditione cujus eum poeniteat, diutius quam
necesse sit, mansurum? ibi pacem esse fidam, ubi voluntarii pacati sint; neque eo
loco, ubi servitutem esse velint, fidem sperandam esse. Tit. Liv. lib. viii. cap. 21.

[60. ] Marius Furius Camillus, 446–364 bc, Roman soldier and statesman. He served
as censor, and on five occasions as dictator.

[† ] Certe id firmissimum longe imperium est, quo obedientes gaudent. Tit. Liv. lib.
viii. cap. 13.

[* ] Histoire de la Confédération Helvétique, par M. De Watteville. liv. iii. under the
year 1351.

[* ] See several instances in Grotius, book iii. chap. 16, §2 [[Law of War and Peace.

]]

[* ] Lib. iii. cap. 9, §6 [[Law of War and Peace.

]]

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 614 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[61. ] In 1580.

[62. ] John IV of Portugal, r. 1640–56.

[* ] [[Justinian’s Digest. lib. xlix. de Capt. et Postlim. leg. v. §2.

]]

[63. ] December 5–11, 1767.

[64. ] Siege of Prague, 1741, during the War of the Austrian Succession.

[* ] Tit. Liv. lib. viii. cap. 7.

[65. ] Charles-Louis-Auguste Fouguet, Duc de Belle-Isle, 1684–1774, French soldier
and diplomat.

[66. ] Siege of Coni (Cuneo), 1744.

[67. ] Karl Sigismond Friedrick Wilhelm Leutrum.

[† ] Volcatius Gallicanus, quoted by Grotius [[in Law of War and Peace, book iii.
chap. 18, §1, note 6. “It might,” he said, “have been an ambush, and the barbarians’
awe for the Roman Empire might have been lost.” Avidius Cassius, Historia Augusta
IV.6.

]]

[* ] Lib. iii. cap. 20. §8 [[Law of War and Peace.

]]

[* ] It is in general the indispensable duty of every sovereign to adopt the most
efficacious measures for the protection of his subjects engaged in war, in order that
they may suffer by it as little as possible,—instead of voluntarily exposing them to
greater evils. During the wars in the Netherlands, Philip the Second prohibited the
release or exchange of prisoners of war. He forbade the peasants, under pain of death,
to pay any contributions with a view to purchase an immunity from pillage and
conflagration; and, under the same penalty, prohibited the use of safe-guards and
protections. In opposition to this barbarous ordinance, the states-general adopted
measures fraught with consummate wisdom. They published an edict, in which, after
having described the destructive consequences of the Spanish barbarity, they exhorted
the Flemings to attend to their own preservation, and threatened to retaliate on all who
should obey the cruel ordinance of Philip. By such conduct they put an end to the
dreadful proceedings to which it had given birth. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.

]]

[† ] Lib iii. cap. xxi. §1 [[Law of War and Peace.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 615 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

]] —— Belli commercia TurnusSustulit ista prior. Aen. x. 532.

[‡ ] [[“Such trafficking in war Turnus first put away.”

]]

[§ ] Ann. lib. xiv. cap. 33.

[68. ] In 1745.

[69. ] In 425 bc

[* ] Tit. Liv. lib. iv. cap. 30.

[* ] Sully’s Memoirs, by M. de l’Ecluse, vol. iv. p. 179.

[70. ] Procopius of Caesarea, 500–565, Byzantine scholar and historian.

[* ] Hist. Goth. lib. ii. cap. 1, quoted by Puffendorf, book viii. chap. 7, §14.

[* ] At the famous interview at Peronne [[1468, Charles duke of Burgundy r.
1467–77, exasperated to find that Louis XI. r. 1461–83 had engaged the people of
Liege to take up arms against him, paid no respect to the safe-conduct which he had
granted to that prince. If Louis had plotted and negotiated their defection while he was
at Peronne, Charles would have been justifiable in disregarding a safe-conduct of
which an improper use had been made. But the French monarch had dispatched agents
to Ghent for that purpose, before there was any question of the meeting at Peronne;
and Charles, in the transports of blind resentment excited by the disagreeable and
unexpected intelligence, committed a flagrant breach of the law of nations. Note
added in 1773/1797 editions.

]]

[71. ] In 1746.

[72. ] Don Fernando Álvarez de Toledo y Pimental, third duke of Alba, 1507–82,
Spanish general and governor of the Spanish Netherlands (1567–73), named “the Iron
Duke” by the Protestants for his cruelty.

[73. ] Henry IV of France, r. 1589–1610.

[* ] An instance of this occurs in the transactions which took place after the
insurrection at Madrid, in 1766. At the requisition of the cortes, the king [[Charles III,
r. 1759–88 revoked the concessions which he had been obliged to make to the
insurgent populace: but he suffered the amnesty to remain in force. Note added in
1773/ 1797 editions.

]]

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 616 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[* ] The prince of Condé [[Louis II de Bourbon, 1621–86, commander of Louis XIII’s
forces against the reformed party, having hanged sixty-four officers whom he had
made prisoners during the civil war, the protestants resolved upon retaliation; and the
duke de Rohan, who commanded them, caused an equal number of catholic officers to
be hanged. See Memoires de Rohan.

The duke of Alva made it a practice to condemn to death every prisoner he took from
the confederates in the Netherlands. They, on their part, retaliated, and at length
compelled him to respect the law of nations and the rules of war in his conduct
towards them. Grotius, Ann. lib. ii. Note added in 1773/1797 editions.

]]

[74. ] François, Duc de Montpensier, 1542–92, fought for Henry IV of France in the
1580s and early 1590s.

[75. ] François de Beaumont, Baron des Adrets, 1513–87, Huguenot leader during the
Wars of Religion in France. He was notorious for his excessive violence, and for
changing sides.

[76. ] King Louis XIII of France, r. 1610–43.

[77. ] Louis XIII defeated the rebellion of his brother Gaston d’Orléans and Henri de
Montmorency at Castelnaudary in September 1632.

[* ] See the historians of the reign of Louis XIII. [[Le Vassor, Velly, Daniel, Mézeray.

]]

[* ] Nam cum sint duo genera decertandi, unum per disceptationem, alterum per
vim,—cumque illud proprium sit hominis, hoc belluarum,—confugiendum est ad
posterius, si uti non licet superiore. [[“For, since there are two ways of settling a
dispute: first, by discussion, second by physical force; and since the former is a
characteristic of man, and the latter of the brute, we must resort to force only in case
we may not avail ourselves of discussion.” Cicero, de Offic. lib. i. cap. 2.

]]

[1. ] Gaius Octavian, Emperor Augustus, r. 27 bc–ad 14.

[2. ] Cardinal Richelieu, chief minister (1624–42) to King Louis XIII of France.

[3. ] In 1718.

[4. ] King Francis I of France (r. 1515–47) signed the Treaty of Madrid in 1526.

[* ] The abbé de Choisy, Hist. de Charles V. p. 492.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 617 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[* ] The renunciation made by Anne of Austria, consort of Louis the Thirteenth, was
good and valid, because it was confirmed by the general assembly of the cortes, and
registered in all the offices. The case was otherwise with that made by Maria Theresa,
which was not sanctioned by those formalities,—consequently, not stamped with the
national approbation, and the character of a law of the state. The cardinals who
examined this affair by order of the pope, whom Charles II. had consulted, paid no
regard to Maria Theresa’s renunciation, as not deeming it of sufficient force to
invalidate the laws of the country, and to supersede the established custom. Memoirs
of M. de St. Philippe [[San Felipe, vol. i. p. 29. Note added in 1773/1797 editions.

]]

[* ] See Wolf, Jus Gent. §982.

[* ] See Tit. Liv. epitom. lib. xviii and other historians.

[5. ] Nimeguen, 1678–79; Ryswick, 1697; Utrecht, 1713.

[* ] It is an essential point, to neglect none of the formalities which can ensure the
execution of the treaty, and prevent new disputes. Accordingly, care must be taken to
have it duly recorded in all the proper offices and courts. M. Van Beuningen, writing
to the Grand Pensionary De Witt in 1662, thus observes—“The articles and conditions
of this alliance contain various matters of different natures, the majority of which fall
under the cognisance of the privy council,—several, under that of the
admiralty,—others, under that of the civil tribunals, the parliaments, &c.—escheatage,
for instance, which comes under the cognisance of the chambre des comptes
[exchequer]. Thus the treaty must be recorded in all those different places.” This
advice was followed; and the states general required that the treaty concluded the
same year should be recorded in all the parliaments of the kingdom. See the king’s
reply on this subject, in his letter to the count D’Estrades, page 399. [[Note added in
1773/1797 editions.

]]

[6. ] Louis XV of France supported Stanislaw Leszcyński’s compaign to return to the
Polish throne, inaugurating the War of the Polish Succession (1733–38) against
Emperor Charles VI and Russia.

[7. ] Sextus Pompey, also known as Magnus Pius, the youngest son of Pompey the
Great, led the opposition to the Second Triumvirate of Octavian, Marc Antony, and
Lepidus, before being executed without trial in 35 bc

[* ] Appian. de Bell. Civ. lib. v. quoted by Grotius, lib. ii. cap. 20, §22 [[Law of War
and Peace.

]]

[* ] Book II. Chap. XVII.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 618 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[8. ] Hernando Cortés, 1485–1547, conqueror of the Aztec empire from 1519.

[9. ] Montezuma, 1466–1520, Aztec emperor defeated by Cortés in the battle of
Tenochtitlán in 1520.

[* ] Lib. iii. cap. 20, §28 [[Law of War and Peace.

]]

[* ] See Wolf, Jus Gent. §§1022, 1023.

[† ] Lib. iii. cap. xix. §14 [[Law of War and Peace.

]]

[10. ] Philippe de Commines, French diplomat and chronicler, ca. 1447–1511.

[11. ] 1648.

[* ] See the History of the Helvetic Confederacy, by M. de Watteville.

[* ] Wicquefort’s Embassador, book i. §1.

[12. ] Cardinal Mazarin, a chief minister of France, 1642–61.

[13. ] Sir William Lockhart, 1621–76.

[14. ] Louis XI of France, r. 1461–83.

[* ] In Wicquefort, may be seen a particular account of the whole transaction. That
writer is justifiable in expressing a degree of indignation against the Swiss
embassadors: but he ought not to have insulted the whole nation by coarsely asserting
that “they prefer money to honour.” Embassad. book i. §19. See also §18.

[* ] An enormous infraction of the law of nations caused the ruin of the powerful
empire of Khovarezm or Kakesm, and opened a door to the Tartars for the
subjugation of almost all Asia. The famous Gengis-khan, wishing to establish a
commercial intercourse between his states and those of Persia and the other provinces
subject to Mohammed Cotheddin, sultan of Khovarezm, sent to that prince an
embassador accompanied by a caravan of merchants. On the arrival of that caravan at
Otraw, the governor caused them to be arrested, together with the embassador, and
wrote word to the sultan that they were a company of spies. Mohammed thereupon
ordered him to have the prisoners put to death. Gengis-khan demanded satisfaction of
the sultan for this barbarous massacre; and, finding him backward to give it, he took
up arms. The conquest of the whole empire of Khovarezm soon followed; and
Mohammed himself, reduced to the condition of a wretched fugitive, died of a broken
heart in a desert island of the Caspian sea.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 619 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

Canson, the last sultan of the Mammelucs, having put to death the embassadors of the
Turkish emperor Selim the First, the injured monarch took a signal vengeance for the
atrocious deed. He conquered all the dominions of Canson, and having defeated and
captured that prince near Cairo, he caused him to be hanged at one of the gates of the
city. Marigny [[François Augier de Marigny, Hist. of the Arabs, vol. ii. pp. 105, 427.
Note added in 1773/1797 editions.

]]

[* ] Memoires de Martin du Bellay, liv. ix.

[† ] Solis’s history of the Conquest of Mexico.

[* ] Wicquefort’s Embassador, b. i. §17.

[† ] In Verrem, orat. i. [[Orat. II, 1.85: “The very name legatus should inspire such
respect that its bearer should be able to move unharmed not only among allies who
acknowledge our rights but among enemies whose swords are drawn against us!”

]]

[15. ] Maurice, prince of Orange, r. 1618–25.

[* ] Wicquefort, book i. §3.

[† ] Ibid.

[* ] Ibid.

[16. ] In 1580–81.

[† ] Wicquefort, book i.

[* ] Wicquefort, ubi supra.

[* ] Idem, ibid.

[† ] See Wolf, Jus Gent. §1059.

[* ] The fact is advanced by Antony de Vera, in his “Idea of a Perfect Embassador”:
but Wicquefort suspects the authenticity of the anecdote,—not having, as he says, met
with it in any other writer. Embassad. book i. §29.

[† ] The king of England having received information that the French and Spanish
embassadors had severally collected considerable numbers of armed men for the
purpose of supporting on a solemn occasion their respective claims to precedency,
made a general request to all the foreign ministers not to send their carriages to attend
the public entry of the Venetian embassador. The count D’Estrades, at that time
minister from the court of France, having complied with his majesty’s desire,—Louis

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 620 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

XIV. testified his dissatisfaction at the deference paid by the count to the British
monarch’s message, “which was no more than a simple request not to send
carriages;—whereas, even if he had issued an express order (as being at liberty to give
what orders he pleases in his own kingdom), you should have replied that you receive
no commands but from me: and if, after that, he had attempted to use violence, the
part which remained for you to act, was that of withdrawing from his court.”—I think
the French monarch entertained erroneous ideas on the subject; since every sovereign
must surely have a right to prohibit all foreign ministers doing any thing in his
dominions which may tend to produce disorder, and which, moreover, is not
necessary to the exercise of their ministerial functions. [[Note added in 1773/1797
editions.

]]

[* ] Mons. Pequet, Discours sur l’Art de negocier, p. 91.

[* ] See Sully’s Memoirs, and the French historians.

[17. ] In 1601.

[18. ] In 1601.

[* ] Wicquefort, book i. §29.

[† ] Idem, ibid.

[* ] Livy, book v. chap. 26 [[chap. 36, where the historian peremptorily decides that
those embassadors violated the law of nations: “Legati, contra jus gentium, arma
capiunt.” “The legates took up arms in defiance of the law of nations.”

]]

[* ] Embassad. book i. §§27, 28, 29.

[19. ] Duke of Orléans, r. 1715–23.

[20. ] In 1718.

[21. ] Lucius Tarquinius Superbus was the last king of Rome, reigning between bc
535 and 510. His expulsion marked the beginning of the Roman republic.

[* ] Et quamquam visi sunt (legati) commisisse ut hostium loco essent, jus tamen
gentium valuit. [[“But, notwithstanding they appeared to have deserved nothing less
than being treated as enemies, the law of nations prevailed.” Tit. Liv. Ab urbe condita
lib. ii. cap. 4.

]]

[22. ] In 1618.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 621 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[* ] In his notes on Bynkershoek’s treatise on the Competent Judge of Embassadors,
ch. xxiv. §5, note 2.

[* ] History of the Kings of the Two Sicilies, by Monsieur D’Egly [[Monthenault
D’Egly.

]]

[23. ] Mary, Queen of Scots, r. 1542–67.

[† ] [[William Camden Cambden’s Annal. Angl. ad ann. 1571, 1573.

]]

[* ] See the discussion of the question, and the discourse which Henry IV. held on this
subject, to the Spanish embassador, in the Memoires de Nevers, vol. ii. p. 858, et seq.
in Matthieu, vol. ii. book 3, and other historians.

Joseph Sofi, king of Carezem, having imprisoned an embassador of Timur-Bec,
Timur’s secretary of state wrote him a letter couched in strong terms of expostulation
on the subject of that infraction of the law of nations,—informing him that “it is a
maxim with kings to consider the person of an embassador as sacred: for which
reason he is always held exempt from the punishment of death or imprisonment, if the
sovereign to whom he is sent has even the slightest knowledge of the law of nations,
or the embassador himself does but possess sufficient prudence to refrain from the
commission of any heinous offence, and to behave with common decency.” La Croix,
Hist. of Timur-Bec, book ii. chap. 26.—The same historian, in his account of
Barcouc, sultan of Egypt, who put Timur’s embassador to death, observes,—“that it
was an infamous action;—that to insult an embassador, is a violation of the law of
nations, and a deed at which nature herself shudders.” Ibid. book v. chap. 17. [[This
paragraph added in 1773/1797 editions.

]]

[* ] Appian, quoted by Grotius, lib. ii. cap. 28, §7 [[Law of War and
Peace.—According to Diodorus Siculus, Scipio said to the Romans, “Do not imitate
that conduct with which you reproach the Carthaginians.” Εκιπιων ουκ εφη δειν
πραττειν ο τοις καρχηδονιοις εγκαλουσι. Diod. Sic. Excerpt. Peiresc. p. 290.

]]

[† ] Livy, book xxx. chap. 28, §7. That historian makes Scipio say “Though the
Carthaginians have violated the faith of the truce, and the law of nations, in the person
of our embassadors, I will do nothing against theirs that is unworthy of the maxims of
the Roman people, and of my own principles.”

[* ] Mezeray’s Hist. of France, vol. ii. p. 470.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 622 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[† ] General Hist. of Voyages, artic. China, and Indies. [[Prévost, Histoire générale
des voyages (Paris, 1746–1801).

]]

[‡ ] Alvakedi’s History of the Conquest of Syria. [[Alvakedi was translated by
Ockley, and incorporated into the latter’s History of the Saracens.

]]

[* ] Ockley’s History of the Saracens, vol. i.

[† ] Choisy’s History of St. Louis.

[* ] Wicquefort’s Embass. book i. §28. towards the end.

[24. ] Francis Sforza, Duke of Milan, r. 1450–66.

[* ] See the Memoirs of Martin Du Bellay, book iv. and Father Daniel’s History of
France, vol. v. p. 300, &c.

[* ] It is surprising to see a grave historian give into this opinion. See Gramond’s Hist.
Gall. lib. xii. The cardinal De Richelieu also alleged this trifling reason, when he gave
orders for arresting Charles Lewis, the elector Palatine, who had attempted to pass
through France incognito: he said, that “No foreign prince was permitted to pass
through the kingdom without a passport.” But he added better reasons, drawn from
the prince Palatine’s designs against Brissac and the other places left by Bernard duke
of Saxe-Weymar, and to which France pretended to have a greater right than any
other power, because those conquests had been made with the money furnished by
that kingdom. See the History of the Treaty of Westphalia, by Father Bougant
[[Bougeant, vol. ii. in 12mo. pag. 88.

]]

[25. ] Queen Christina of Sweden, r. 1632–54.

[26. ] In 1654.

[27. ] Henry III, r. 1574–89.

[28. ] In 1588 the French Estates General met at Blois.

[* ] See the French historians [[Daniel, Mézeray, Velly.

]]

[* ] Nec pontificem (in jus vocari oportet) dum sacra facit. [[“One should not bring a
priest before the law while he is performing religious rites” (trans. Eds.). Justinian’s
Digest. lib. ii. tit. 4, De in Jus vocando, leg. 2.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 623 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

]]

[† ] [[Justinian’s Digest. lib. v. tit. 1, De Judiciis, &c. leg. 24, §2.

]]

[* ] Ibid. leg. xxvi.

[29. ] “Now for that reason a lawsuit is not granted (against an ambassador) in case he
is called away from the diplomatic post he has taken up, and lest diplomacy be
hampered.”

[† ] M. de Bynkershoek’s Competent Judge of Embassadors, chap. xiii. §1.

[* ] Ibid.—It is not long since the world witnessed the circumstance of a foreign
minister in France being pursued by his creditors, and refused a passport by the
French court. See Journal Politique de Bouillon, Feb. 1, 1771, page 54, and Jan. 15, p.
57. [[Journal politique (March 1766–95), later called Gazette des Gazettes, published
at Bouillon. Note added in 1773/1797 editions.

]]

[* ] [[Callières Manner of negotiating with Sovereigns, chap. vi.

]]

[† ] Bynkershock, ubi supra, chap. xi.

[30. ] Baron De Charnacé, r. 1639–40.

[31. ] Count D’Estrades, r. 1640–48.

[* ] On the Competent Judge of Embassadors, chap. xvi. §6.

[* ] Memoirs of the abbé Du Montgon, vol. i.

[* ] Wicquefort’s Embassad. book i. §28, towards the end.

[* ] Wicquefort, book i. §27.

[† ] It is his duty to watch over their conduct, and to exert his authority in order to
prevent them from transgressing the bounds of their station, and committing actions
which may give just offence to the sovereign at whose court he resides,—an event
which may sometimes be productive of very serious and disagreeable consequences.
The French court having sent the count De Harcourt to England to mediate an
accommodation between Charles I. and his parliament, several gentlemen of that
minister’s suite repaired to the royal army, and fought against the parliamentarians: on
which account the parliament immediately declined all further negotiation with the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 624 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

count De Harcourt. Du Port’s Hist. of Conspir. vol. iv. p. 261. [[Note added in 1773/
1797 editions.

]]

[* ] Sully’s Memoirs, vol. vi. chap. i.

[* ] “It was, at that time,” says Joinville, “an established custom, as well in pagan as
in christian countries, that, when two princes were at war, if one of them happened to
die, the embassadors whom they had mutually sent to each other, remained prisoners
and slaves.” p. 72. [[Note added in 1773/1797 editions.

]]

[1. ] [[For persons and books referred to in these essays, see the biographical sketches
and the bibliography of works cited by Vattel. Droit has been translated as “right” or
“law,” according to context. Utile/utilité has been translated as “self-interest,”
“expediency,” or “interest,” according to context. Honnêteté and its cognates have
been translated as “integrity.”

]]

[2. ] See Wolff, Phil. Pract. Univ., part I, §cxxxvii.

[3. ] A thing is morally necessary when it cannot fail to happen, given the nature of
the intelligent being which produces it; just as it is said that a thing is physically
necessary when it cannot fail to happen, given the nature of the physical agent that
creates it.

[4. ] See Wolff, Phil. Pract. Univ., part I, §cxviii.

[5. ]Idem, §cxix.

[6. ]Droit de la nature et des gens, book 1, ch. i, §xxi.

[7. ]De Jure Belli ac Pacis, l. I, c. 1, §x.

[8. ] In Latin rectae. The correctness of an action, rectitudo, means what is understood
by the words right, just, good, praiseworthy, etc.

[9. ] The difference which exists between free actions, in respect to this correctness, is
what is called the morality of actions.

[10. ] Wolff, Theol. nat., part I, §dccccl.

[11. ] Book I, ch. vi, §v, note 4.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 625 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

[12. ]Nouvelles de la République des Lettres, April 1700, p. 408. [[In 1699 the French
Reformed theologian Jacques Bernard began a continuation of Pierre Bayle’s
Nouvelles de la République des Lettres (1684–87), which appeared until 1710.

]]

[13. ] At the time of writing Mr. Barbeyrac was still alive.

[14. ] “Thus will may stand in the place of reason.” Wolff, Phil. Prac. Univ., part 1,
§cxxxii, in note.

[15. ] Translation of On the Law of War and Peace, of Grotius, book I, ch. I, §x, no. 2,
note 4.

[16. ] [[The great German natural jurist Samuel Pufendorf published an abridgment of
his De jure naturae et gentium (On the Law of Nature and Nations, 1672) as De
officio hominis et civis juxta legem naturalem (On the Duty of Man and Citizen
According to Natural Law) in 1673. The latter work was translated into French as Les
devoirs de l’homme et du citoien in 1707 by the Swiss Huguenot Jean Barbeyrac and
became famous throughout Europe. Barbeyrac’s successive editions were increasingly
heavily annotated, and his fourth edition of 1718 included a French translation, with
Barbeyrac’s response, of Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz’s critique of Pufendorf’s De
Officio in a Latin letter composed in 1701. Barbeyrac gave Leibniz’s letter the title
“Jugement d’un anonyme sur l’original de cet abrégé.” The letter had been printed in
1709 as the Epistola Viri Excellentissimi ad Amicum, quâ monita quaedam ad
principia Pufendorfiani operis, De Officio hominis et civis, continentur, but had
circulated in manuscript since its composition. Barbeyrac’s response has been
published for the first time in English from the Latin original in Samuel Pufendorf,
The Whole Duty of Man, According to the Law of Nature, ed. I. Hunter and D.
Saunders (Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 2003). Vattel is here concerned, as he notes,
with Barbeyrac’s fourth edition of Les devoirs of 1718.

]]

[17. ] Translation of On the Law of Nature and Nations of Pufendorf, book II, ch. III,
§x, note 6.

[18. ]De officiis, book II, ch. iii.

[19. ]Ibid., book III, ch. iii. [[Translations taken from Loeb edition edited by Walter
Miller (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1913).

]]

[20. ]Satires 3, book 1.

[21. ] Mr. Leibniz.

[22. ] P. 444. I use the 4th edition published in Amsterdam in 1718. [[See note 16.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 626 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

]]

[23. ] P. 442.

[24. ] P. 441.

[25. ] P. 445.

[26. ] From the cited [[1718 fourth French edition of On the Duties of Man and the
Citizen, in which the “Judgment of an Anonymous Author” (Mr. Leibniz) has been
interpolated with the reflections of the editor.

]]

[27. ] P. 470.

[28. ] P. 470.

[29. ] P. 471.

[30. ] P. 471 & 472.

[31. ] P. 472.

[32. ] §xvi, p. 476.

[33. ] Timothy I, 9.

[1. ] Cicero, de Legib. I. 1.

[2. ]Instit. Book I, title II, para. II, De jure nat. gent. et civ.

[3. ] Cicero, as above. [[De legibus.

]]

[4. ]De Leg. I. 5 [[The Praetorian Edict was a guide to Roman legal procedure which
each praetor (magistrate) issued before it was standardized under Emperor Hadrian
(ad 117–38). The Twelve Tables were the earliest code of Roman law, established by
ten consuls between 455 and 450 bc

]]

[5. ]Ep. L. I. 10. [[Pliny the Younger, Epistulae (Letters).

]]

[6. ]Tuscul. 1. V [[Cicero, Tusculan Disputations.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 627 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246



Online Library of Liberty: The Law of Nations, Or, Principles of the Law of Nature, Applied to the
Conduct and Affairs of Nations and Sovereigns, with Three Early Essays on the Origin and Nature of

Natural Law and on Luxury (LF ed.)

]]

[1. ] “For to the Supreme God who governs this whole universe nothing is more
pleasing than those companies and unions of men that are called cities.” [[Cicero’s
Somnium Scipionis (Scipio’s Dream) formed a digression within the sixth book of his
De republica (On the Republic), in which the consul who commanded at the
destruction of Carthage in 146 bc, Publius Cornelius Scipio Aemilianus (185–129 bc),
meets the adopted grandfather who had defeated Hannibal in the Second Punic War,
Publius Cornelius Scipio Africanus (236–184 bc).

]]

[2. ] Cicero, de Offic. lib. II. cap. 3. & lib. III. cap. 3.

[3. ] See his Memoires. [[Vattel was most likely using the Mémoires de Maximilien de
Béthune Duc de Sully, principal ministre de Henry le Grand (London [Paris], 1752).

]]

[4. ] [[Julius Caesar defeated General Gnaeus Pompey, his fellow member of the
Triumvirate and the Roman consul, in 48 bc at Pharsala, the ancient city of Thessaly
in northeastern Greece.

]]

[5. ] [[“What princes themselves do, they seem to prescribe.” Quintilian,
Declamationes, 3.

]]

[6. ]Essays, Book I, Chap. XLIII. [[Vattel was using Les essais de Michel de
Montaigne, nouvelle edition, London, 1724, 3 vols. Montaigne’s essay “Des lois
somptuaires” (“Of Sumptuary Laws”) contained a critique of the dangerous influence
of the frivolous manners of the French court (Montaigne’s Essays in Three Books,
trans. Charles Cotton, London, 1743, 325–28).

]]

[7. ] [[God of wealth and money in Greek mythology.

]]

[8. ]Ibid. See at the end. [[Montaigne’s “Des lois somptuaires” (“Of Sumptuary
Laws”), Montaigne’s Essays, trans. Charles Cotton (London, 1743), 327.

]]

[† ]Contaminatio?Edit.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 628 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2246