A.V.	Malko,	V.V.	Subochev,	G.V.	Fedorov

BASICS	OF	RUSSIAN	LAW
Textbook

ebooks@prospekt.org



Information	of	book
УДК	811.111:36(075)

ББК	81.2Англ

B29

About	the	Authors:

A.	V.	Malko	–	Doctor	of	 Juridical	Science,	Professor,	Director	of	 the
Saratov	Branch	of	the	Institute	of	State	and	Law	of	the	Russian	Academy
of	Sciences,	Honoured	Science	Worker	of	the	Russian	Federation;

V.	V.	Subochev	–	Doctor	of	Juridical	Science,	Professor	of	Department
of	Legal	Support	of	Management	Activities,	MGIMO-University;

G.	V.	 Fedorov	 –	Master	 of	 Laws,	 Associate	 at	 the	Moscow	 office	 of
Hogan	 Lovells,	 an	 international	 law	 firm	 (Infrastructure,	 Energy,
Resources	and	Projects	practice).

Peer	reviewers:

V.	 B.	 Isakov	 –	 Doctor	 of	 Juridical	 Science,	 Professor,	 Honoured
Lawyer	of	the	Russian	Federation;

N.	 I.	 Matusov	 –	 Doctor	 of	 Juridical	 Science,	 Professor,	 Honoured
Science	Worker	of	the	Russian	Federation;

Y.	 I.	Vaslavskiy	 –	 Ph.D.	 in	 Political	 Science,	 Associate	 Professor	 of
Political	Theory.

This	 textbook	 presents	 in	 accessible	 form	 information	 necessary	 for
comprehensive	 understanding	 of	 the	 basics	 of	 Russian	 law:	 theory	 of
state	 and	 law,	 constitutional,	 civil,	 labour,	 administrative	 and	 criminal



law.

It	is	based	on	the	Russian	legislation	in	force	and	the	market	practice,
combining	theoretical	material,	classical	and	modern	doctrinal	works,	as
well	as	the	basics	of	the	current	legislation.	The	above	will	allow	readers
to	obtain	practically-oriented	knowledge.

This	 textbook	 is	 intended	 for	 lawstudents,	 legalscholars,	 legal
practitioners,	 as	 well	 as	 everyone	 who	 is	 interested	 in	 the	 basics	 of
Russian	law.

УДК	811.111:36(075)

ББК	81.2Англ

©	Малько	А.	В.,	Субочев	В.	В.,	Федоров	Г.	В.,	2016

©	LTP	«Prospect»,	2016



Preface
This	 is	 one	 of	 the	 first	 Russian	 textbooks	 which	 provides	 in	 a

concentrated	 form	 the	 most	 important	 information	 on	 the	 basics	 of
Russian	 law	 and	 which	 is	 primarily	 intended	 for	 JD,	 LLB,	 LLM	 or	 PhD
students	 of	 foreign	 universities	 who	 study	 Russian	 legal	 system	 or	 are
interested	in	it.

Besides,	 this	book	may	be	useful	 for	academics	who	 teach	both	 legal
and	non-legal	disciplines,	as	well	as	for	everyone	who	wishes	to	find	out
the	most	important	information	on	the	basic	branches	of	Russian	law	in
accessible	form	or	organise	their	existing	knowledge	into	a	well-defined
system.

The	 purpose	 of	 this	 book	 is	 to	 give	 adequate	 understanding	 of	 the
fundamentals	of	state	and	law	under	the	Russian	doctrine,	and	to	briefly
characterise	the	main	branches	of	Russian	law	and	their	specifics,	taking
into	account	the	latest	legislative	reforms.

This	 textbook	 combines	 theoretical	 material,	 classical	 and	 modern
doctrinal	works,	as	well	as	the	basic	aspects	of	the	current	Russian	laws.
This	will	allow	readers	to	obtain	practically-oriented	knowledge.

With	 due	 account	 for	 the	 latest	 changes	 of	 Russian	 legislation,	 the
authors	outline	the	basics	of	the	theory	of	state	and	law,	constitutional,
civil,	 labour,	 administrative	 and	 criminal	 law	 to	 the	 extent	 required	 to
understand	 theoretical	 issues	 and	 practical	 aspects	 of	 Russian	 legal
system,	 use	 legal	 concepts	 and	 categories	 correctly,	 analyse	 legal	 acts
and	 legal	 relations	arising	on	 their	basis,	 take	 legitimate	decisions	and
commit	lawful	acts.



Part	1	Basics	of	the	theory	of	state	and	law
Chapter	1.	Origins	of	state	and	law

1.1.	Primary	Causes	and	Forms	of	the	Birth	of	State

There	 are	 many	 views	 and	 theories	 concerning	 the	 origins	 of	 state,
since	state	is	the	main	political	structure	of	society	which	emerges	at	a
certain	 stage	of	 its	development	and	which	 is	 the	principal	 institute	of
power	in	any	civilised	society.

Different	sciences	provide	a	rich	factual	background	on	the	causes	and
forms	of	state	origin.	Such	facts	are	rather	hard	to	classify	or	unite	in	one
uniform	 doctrine	 of	 the	 origin	 of	 state.	 Therefore	 there	 are	 several
theories	of	the	origins	of	state:	theological	(by	will	of	God),	contractual
(by	will	of	mind),	psychological	(due	to	the	humans,	psychology),	organic
(biological	factors),	materialistic	(societal	and	economic	factors),	theory
of	violence	(politico-military	factors),	etc.

Such	a	variety	of	opinions	exists	since	the	process	of	state	origination
was	affected	by	environmental,	psychological,	historical,	ethnic,	moral,
religious	 and	 other	 factors.	 Such	 factors,	 apart	 from	 manifesting	 in
different	 ways	 in	 different	 regions	 of	 the	 world,	 were	 differently
interpreted	by	various	researches	and	philosophers	who	lived	in	different
historical	periods.

The	dissolution	of	the	primitive	communal	society	with	its	clan	system
and	 the	 emergence	 of	 state	 authority	 occurred	 differently	 in	 different
regions	 and	 under	 varying	 conditions:	 such	 processes	 had	 their	 own
peculiarities	 in	 different	 societies.	 The	 formation	 of	 state	 is	 a	 long
process	and	happened	in	different	ways	and	within	different	time	periods
for	different	nations.

In	 the	 East,	 (Egypt,	 Babylon,	 China,	 India,	 etc.)	 “Asiatic	 mode	 of
production”	was	most	common.	Such	a	form	of	state	origination	is	linked
to	 the	 necessity	 to	 conduct	 wide-scale	 works	 in	 such	 regions
(construction	 and	 maintenance	 of	 irrigation	 facilities,	 different
agricultural	 works,	 irrigated	 cropping,	 etc.).	 Therefore	 the	 most	 firm
structures	 in	 such	 societies	 were	 clan	 systems,	 village	 communities,



collective	property	and	other	institutes	which	were	the	most	suitable	for
such	 works.	 The	 first	 states	 of	 the	 Ancient	 East	 were	 pre-class	 states:
they	 simultaneously	 exploited	 the	 village	 communities	 and	 managed
them,	i.e.	organised	the	production.

Another	 form	 of	 state	 origination	 was	 present	 in	 Athens	 and	 Rome
where	 the	 slave-owning	 states	 emerged	 as	 a	 result	 of	 the	 advent	 of
private	property	and	the	division	of	society	into	classes.

Athens	 exemplifies	 the	 classical	 form	 of	 state	 origination	 since	 the
state	 there	emerged	as	a	direct	 result	of	clashes	between	classes	—	the
internal	 clashes	 within	 the	 communal	 society.	 Two	 revolutions	 within
one	century	which	resulted	in	Solons,	(594	BC)	and	Cleisthenes,s	reforms
(509	BC),	 lead	 to	 the	 final	dismantlement	of	 the	old	communal	 system
and	 the	 old	 form	 of	 government,	 to	 the	 territorial	 division	 of	 the
population	 and	 the	 creation	 of	 political	 authority:	 legislative	 and
executive	bodies,	active	military	forces,	police	and	customs,	prisons	and
other	state	institutions.

Ancient	 Roman	 state	 origination	 has	 been	 sped	 up	 by	 the	 strife
between	the	plebs	and	the	Roman	nobility	—	patricians.	The	plebs	were
free	 men	 from	 the	 ranks	 of	 the	 conquered	 peoples	 who	 did	 not	 have
Roman	lineage	and	were	not	considered	a	part	of	 the	Roman	people.	 If
the	 plebs	 possessed	 land	 property,	 they	were	 obliged	 to	 pay	 taxes	 and
serve	 in	 the	military,	but	 they	were	deprived	of	 the	political	 rights	and
could	not	enjoy	the	rights	to	Roman	land	plots.	The	political	movement
of	the	plebs	for	the	patrician	privileges	may	be	seen	as	the	fight	against
the	 ancient	 societal	 hierarchy	 based	 on	 blood	 ties.	 The	 plebs,	 victory
eliminated	 the	 old	 structures	 and	 created	 a	 state	 based	 on	 territorial
division	and	the	division	of	wealth.	This	supports	the	theory	that	states
may	 emerge	 as	 a	 result	 of	 disintegration	 of	 tribal	 relations	 and	 the
lessening	of	the	importance	of	blood	ties.

The	 advent	 of	 Ancient	 Germanic	 states	 was	 largely	 caused	 by	 the
conquest	 of	 large	 territories	 (namely,	 the	 Western	 part	 of	 the	 Roman
Empire)	 by	 the	 German	 tribes.	 These	 tribes	 which	 at	 that	 time	 had	 a
primitive	 tribal	 societal	 structure	 could	 not	 use	 it	 to	 govern	 Roman
provinces	while	 it	was	not	 suitable	 for	managing	such	 large	 territories.



Enforcement	 mechanisms	 and	 coercion	 machinery	 became	 necessary.
The	 supreme	 warlord	 became	 the	 monarch;	 the	 common	 property
became	 the	 royal	property;	 tribal	 authorities	quickly	 evolved	 into	 state
authorities1.

In	any	case,	the	process	of	state	origination	is	an	objective	and	natural
phenomenon	in	the	course	of	societal	development	and	transformation
which	 may	 be	 explained	 by	 various	 economic,	 political,	 social,	 moral,
religious,	environmental	and	other	reasons.

1.2.	Principal	Theories	of	State	Origin

Various	 and	 rather	 numerous	 theories	 of	 state	 origin	 make	 some
definite	 manner	 of	 statehood	 formation	 its	 cornerstone.	 One	 believes
that	 neither	 theory	 is	 able	 to	 list	 an	 exhaustive	 summary	 of	 factors
affected	the	formation	of	the	state.

The	best	known	theories	include	the	following:

1.	 Theological	 theory.	 It	 was	 widespread	 in	 the	 works	 of	 Catholic
Church	 ideologists	 of	 the	 Middle	 Ages	 (Thomas	 Aquinas,	 Saint
Augustine),	 and	 it	 goes	 on	 evolving	 in	 modern	 Islamic	 and	 Catholic
(Jacques	Maritain)	advocates’	works.

According	 to	 the	advocates	of	 this	doctrine,	 the	 state	 is	a	product	of
divine	 will,	 whereby	 state	 authority	 is	 eternal	 and	 unyielding,	 and
depends	primarily	on	religious	organisations	and	characters.	Therefore,
each	 and	 every	 person	 must	 obey	 the	 sovereign	 unconditionally.	 The
existing	 socioeconomic	 and	 legal	 inequality	 is	 predetermined	 by	 the
abovementioned	God’s	will,	and	one	must	come	to	terms	therewith.	No
resistance	 must	 be	 furnished	 against	 God’s	 power	 holder	 on	 Earth.
Consequently,	 any	 disobedience	 against	 state	 authority	 may	 be
considered	 disobedience	 against	 the	 Lord.	 Any	 secular	 authority	 is
derivative	from	that	of	the	Church	and	religious	organisations.

The	 ideologists	of	 the	 theological	doctrine	 lay	an	odor	of	 sanctity	 to
the	state	and	rulers	 (the	 latter	being	representatives	and	spokesmen	of
divine	will),	thereby	raising	their	prestige,	and	encouraging	social	order,



harmony,	 and	 spirituality.	 Greater	 focus	 is	 placed	 on	 the
“commissioners”	 between	 God	 and	 state	 authority	 —	 the	 church	 and
religious	organisations.

2.	 Patriarchal	 theory	 (advocates	 include	 Aristotle,	 Robert	 Filmer,
Nikolay	Mikhaylovskiy).	This	theory’s	proponents	consider	the	fact	that
people	 are	 social	 creatures	 craving	 communication	 and	 developing	 at
their	best	 in	harmonic	 families.	As	 the	 family	evolves	and	grows,	 these
processes	ultimately	 are	 followed	by	 formation	of	 state.	 Therefore,	 the
state	is	a	product	of	extension	of	family.

Consequently,	 the	sovereign	power	 is	a	product	of	 father’s	unlimited
power	 in	 the	 family.	Due	 to	 the	 fact	 that	patriarchal	power	 is	 godsent,
subjects	are	 to	obey	the	sovereign.	No	resistance	 is	allowed.	Monarch’s
patriarchal	care	can	provide	necessary	living	conditions.

Like	 the	 father	 of	 the	 family,	 the	 monarch	 of	 the	 state	 is	 neither
elected,	 nor	 appointed,	 nor	 deposed	 by	his	 subjects,	 since	 they	 are	 his
children.

3.	 Contractual	 theory	 (advocates	 include	 Benedict	 Spinoza,	 Thomas
Hobbes,	 John	 Locke,	 Jean-Jacques	 Rousseau,	 Hugo	 Grotius,	 Paul
Holbach,	 Alexander	 Radischev).	 According	 to	 these	 philosophers,	 the
state	 emerged	 as	 a	 product	 of	 conscious	 activities,	 as	 a	 result	 of	 a
contract	 made	 by	 and	 between	 people	 who	 previously	 were	 in	 a
“natural”,	disconnected,	unorganised,	primitive	condition.	The	state	is	a
rational	union	of	people	based	on	an	agreement	whereby	they	surrender
some	 part	 of	 their	 freedom	 and	 authority	 to	 the	 state.	 Isolated
individuals	turn	into	a	united	nation	inhabiting	a	particular	territory.	As
a	result,	the	rulers	and	the	society	are	left	with	a	series	of	mutual	rights
and	obligations	and	liability	for	non-performance.

Thus,	the	state	is	vested	with	exclusive	rights	to	adopt	laws,	levy	taxes,
punish	 criminals,	 etc.,	 although	 it	 must	 at	 the	 same	 time	 protect	 its
territory,	citizens’	rights,	their	property,	etc.	The	citizens	must	abide	by
the	 laws,	 pay	 taxes,	 but	 they	 are	 also	 entitled	 to	 protection	 of	 their
liberty	 and	 property.	 Should	 the	 rulers	 abuse	 their	 power,	 the	 citizens
may	rescind	the	contract	through	deposition.



4.	Patrimonial	theory	(the	most	eminent	representative	is	Ludwig	von
Galler).	According	to	this	theory,	the	state	originated	from	the	landlord's
right	to	his	land	(patrimonium),	and	it	spread	onto	people	who	lived	on
the	land.	Therefore,	the	rulers	reign	over	a	territory	due	to	their	original
right	to	property.	In	this	situation,	the	people	are	represented	as	tenants
to	the	land,	and	officials	as	managers.

5.	 Theory	 of	 violence.	 This	 theory	 took	 full	 shape	 in	 the	 nineteenth
century	 in	 the	 works	 of	 Eugen	 Duhring,	 Ludwig	 Gumplowicz,	 Karl
Kautsky,	 and	 others.	 They	 did	 not	 see	 the	 origins	 of	 the	 statehood	 in
economic	relations,	divine	intervention,	or	social	contract,	but	saw	it	in
militarist	political	 factors	—	violence	and	exploitation	of	one	nation	by
another.	 Management	 of	 conquered	 territories	 required	 enforcement
mechanism,	which	was	the	state.

Thus,	 the	 state	 is	 an	organisation	 for	governance	of	one	nation	over
another.	Violence	 and	 subordination	 is	 the	 foundation	 of	 formation	 of
economic	 dominance.	 As	 a	 result	 of	 wars,	 tribes	 reformed	 into	 castes,
estates,	 and	 classes.	 The	 conquerors	 enslaved	 the	 conquered.
Consequently,	the	state	is	a	force	inflicted	from	the	outside,	rather	than
a	product	of	inner	social	development.

K.	Kautsky	reasoned	that,	as	the	society	evolves,	the	state	turns	into	a
means	of	 reaching	universal	harmony,	a	protective	body	which	aims	 to
provide	 common	 welfare	 for	 the	 weak	 as	 well	 as	 for	 the	 strong.	 This
theory	was	embraced	by	the	Nazi	Germany	as	its	official	ideology.

6.	 Organic	 theory.	 It	 was	 widespread	 in	 the	 second	 half	 of	 the
nineteenth	 century	 in	 the	 works	 of	 Herbert	 Spencer,	 René	 Worms,
August	Kont,	Albert	Schaeffle,	etc.

This	 doctrine	 considers	 the	 state	 an	 organism,	 the	 parts	 whereof
interact	 like	 ones	 of	 a	 living	 organism.	 Thus,	 the	 state	 is	 a	 product	 of
social	evolution,	which	is	a	form	of	biological	evolution.

Like	a	living	organism,	the	state	has	a	brain	(its	rulers)	and	a	means	of
enforcing	its	decisions	(its	subjects).



Just	 as	 the	 fittest	 biological	 organisms	 survive	 during	 natural
selection,	separate	states	emerge	during	wars	(natural	selection,	as	well),
governments	are	formed,	management	structure	is	worked	out.	Thus,	the
state	is	virtually	equalised	to	a	biological	organism.

7.	Materialistic	(Marxist)	theory	(Karl	Marx,	Friedrich	Engels,	Vladimir
Lenin).	 This	 doctrine	 dominated	 for	 decades	 in	 many	 countries,
including	Russia,	the	majority	of	Eastern	European	countries,	as	well	as	a
number	of	Western	European	countries.

According	 to	 this	 theory,	 the	 state	 emerged	 due	 to	 socioeconomic
factors.	Three	types	of	division	of	labour	played	a	significant	role	in	the
emergence	 of	 state:	 cattle	 breeding	 separated	 from	 agriculture,	 then
craftsmanship,	 then	barter.	This	division	of	 labour	and	development	of
work	equipment	boosted	the	productivity.	Surplus	was	produced,	which
lead	to	origination	of	private	property.	As	a	result,	the	society	split	into
the	haves	and	the	have-nots,	the	exploiters	and	the	exploited.

The	most	significant	after-effect	of	private	property	is	the	detachment
of	 public	 authority,	 which	 no	 longer	 represented	 the	 whole	 society’s
interests.	 The	 commanding	 role	 went	 over	 to	 the	 rich,	 the	 managers,
who	 created	 a	 political	 body	 —	 the	 state,	 which	 acted	 as	 a	 means	 of
protecting	the	interests	of	the	well-to-do.

To	 sum	 up,	 the	 state	 emerged	 primarily	 for	 the	 conservation	 and
maintenance	 of	 superiority	 of	 one	 class	 over	 the	 other,	 as	 well	 as	 of
society’s	integrity.	The	advocates	of	this	theory	believed	that,	as	soon	as
classes	and	social	inequality	are	erased,	the	state	will	perish.

This	 theory	 is	 quite	 rational,	 although	 it	 seriously	 underestimated
ethnic,	 religious,	 psychological,	 military,	 and	 other	 factors	 which
influenced	the	statehood.

8.	Psychological	theory	(Leo	Petrazhitsky,	Siegmund	Freud).	According
to	 this	 theory,	 the	 origins	 of	 the	 state	 lie	 in	 human	 psyche:	 some	 are
inclined	 to	 lead,	 and	 others	—	 to	 be	 lead.	 The	 founders	 of	 this	 theory
focus	 on	 the	 human	 need	 to	 live	 in	 a	 society,	 the	 need	 to	 search	 for
authority.



At	the	same	time,	there	have	always	been	people	who	are	dissident	or
aggressive.	The	state	emerged	for	the	suppression	of	those	psychological
personal	qualities,	as	well.

Consequently,	 on	 the	 one	 hand,	 the	 state	 is	 aimed	 at	 catering	 the
majority’s	 needs	 for	 obedience,	 and	 on	 the	 other	 hand,	 at	 suppressing
the	 aggressive	 tendencies.	 Therefore,	 the	 nature	 of	 state	 is
psychological,	rooted	in	the	human	psyche	principles.

There	 are	 also	 other	 theories	 of	 origins	 of	 state:	 irrigational	 (Karl
August	Wirrfogel),	sportive	(José	Ortega	y	Gasset),	racial	(Joseph	Arthur
Gobineau),	 etc.	 One	must	 remember,	 however,	 that	 each	 of	 the	 above
theories	 is	merely	 yet	 another	 point	 of	 view	 at	 the	 statehood	 and	may
not	claim	omnitude.

1.3.	Peculiarities	of	the	Birth	of	Law

Law	 as	 a	 social	 institute	 emerged	 almost	 simultaneously	 with	 the
state,	since	they	generally	support	each	other's	existence	and	efficiency
(although	 there	 are	 differing	 opinions	 on	 this	 topic).	 The	 state	 cannot
exist	without	the	law	(since	the	law	regulates	the	political	authority	and
often	is	a	means	of	enacting	state	policies),	just	as	the	law	cannot	exist
without	 statehood	 (since	 the	 state	 establishes,	 warrants	 and	 enforces
legal	 rules).	 State	 agencies	 are	 the	 main	 structures	 in	 control	 of
compliance	with	law	and	enforcing	the	respective	legal	sanctions	in	case
of	a	breach	of	legal	rules.

Apart	from	that,	it	is	worth	noting	that	the	state	is	not	the	only	force
which	may	create	the	law.	For	example,	in	the	East,	the	Quran	and	other
religious	 norms	 are	 the	 supreme	 source	 of	 law.	 Besides,	 the	 clergy
sometimes	directly	influences	the	legislative	process:	both	in	Russia	and
in	Western	Europe.

It	is	an	axiom	that	the	law	is	the	only	means	for	the	state	to	impose	its
will	as	compulsory	for	everyone.

The	 advent	 of	 law	 is	 a	 long	 process	which	 lasted	 during	 the	 lives	 of
many	 generations.	 Initially,	 only	 some	 separate	 legal	 concepts	 and



principles	 came	 into	 existence.	 Over	 time,	 such	 “fragments”	 of	 law
gradually	 formed	 a	 uniform,	 inherently	 consistent	 legal	 system	 of	 any
given	society.

It	 may	 be	 argued	 that	 historically	 the	 law	 emerged	 to	 maintain	 the
dominant	 position	 and	 ensure	 the	 safety	 of	 some	 societal	 strata	 and
groups	 and	 only	 subsequently	 it	 evolved	 into	 the	 instrument	 of	 social
compromise.	 For	 example,	 an	 infringement	 on	 the	 life	 or	 property	 of
noblemen	traditionally	led	to	a	much	more	severe	penalty	than	the	same
actions	committed	against	a	member	of	a	non-priviledged	group.

E.g,	 under	 the	 Ancient	 Babylonian	 Hammurabi	 Code	 (XVIII	 century
BC),	a	thief	was	obliged	to	compensate	the	owner	of	the	stolen	item	its
losses	 tenfold,	 and	 if	 property	belonged	 to	 a	 church	or	 to	 the	 supreme
state	authorities,	thirtyfold.

Customs	 were	 kept	 in	 the	 mind	 of	 people	 and	 manifested	 in	 their
behaviour.	 In	contrast,	 legal	 rules	were	 from	their	very	emergence	 in	a
written	form	and	publicly	available.	Formality	and	positivism	of	the	law
are	its	principal	characters,	and	without	them	the	law	may	not	exist.

Law	 is	 a	 more	 complex	 regulator	 than	 custom,	 while,	 apart	 from
prohibitions,	it	uses	other	methods	such	as	authorisation	(enabling)	and
obligation	 (command)	 which	 make	 it	 possible	 to	 choose	 between	 a
number	 of	 methods	 to	 regulate	 social	 relations.	 The	 birth	 of	 law	 is	 a
result	of	sophistication	of	social	interactions	and	aggravation	of	societal
antagonism,	 since	 primitive	 social	 norms	 were	 insufficient	 for	 coping
with	both	of	the	above.

There	are	three	ways	in	which	legal	rules	were	mainly	formed:

1)	 transformation	 of	 primitive	 customs	 into	 legal	 rules	 and	 their
sanctioning	by	the	state;

2)	 law-making	 activity	 of	 the	 state	which	manifests	 in	 promulgating
special	documents	containing	legal	rules	—	i.e.,	legal	acts	(laws,	decrees,
orders,	etc.);



3)	court	practice,	 consisting	of	case-by-case	decisions	of	 state	courts
which	 grow	 into	 precedents	—	 guiding	models	 for	 judges	 in	 similar	 or
analogous	cases.

Many	factors	including	cultural,	historical,	geographical	and	other	had
an	impact	on	the	birth	of	the	law.

Thus,	 legal	 rules,	 just	 as	 customary	 norms,	 are	 one	 of	 the	 types	 of
social	norms,	although	they	significantly	differ	from	customary	norms.

Customs	were	 created	 by	 the	 society	 as	 a	whole,	 whereas	 the	 law	 is
formed	either	by	states	themselves,	or	by	their	authorised	bodies,	or	by
other	social	institutions.

Customs	manifested	general	will	and	were	a	habitude	of	sorts,	whereas
the	 law	 embodies	 the	 balance	 between	 the	 interests	 of	 a	 person,	 a
society,	 and	 a	 state.Customs	 could	 exist	 in	 a	 non-formalised	 form,
whereas	 the	 law	 is	 always	 formalised	 in	 official	 documents	 (laws,
subordinate	acts,	decrees,	court	orders,	etc.).

Customs	are	enforced	by	the	society	itself	and	by	the	force	of	societal
persuasion,	whereas	the	law	is	enforced	and	safeguarded	by	the	state	and
its	specialised	enforcement	and	management	agencies.

Test	questions	and	tasks

1.	Which	are	the	principal	causes	of	the	birth	of	the	state?

2.	Please	name	the	principal	characteristics	of	 state	 formation	 in	 the
East,	Athens	and	Rome.

3.	Where	does	the	main	difference	lie	between	the	materialistic	theory
of	state	origination	and	the	theory	of	violence?

4.	Please	list	the	differences	between	a	legal	rule	and	a	custom.

Chapter	2.	State:	Its	Essence	and	Functions



2.1.	State	Power:	Its	Nature	and	Distinctive	Features

State	power	 (state	authority)	 is	a	 type	of	social	power	without	which
existence	 of	 any	 organised	 society	 is	 unthinkable.	 Almost	 all	 social
relations	 are	 in	 some	 way	 or	 another	 a	 manifestation	 of	 power,	 since
social	 power	 is	 a	 very	 important	 form	 of	 managing	 not	 only	 social
behaviour,	but	also	complex	social	processes.	Social	power	is	practically
the	only	way	to	ensure	alignment	between	the	actions	of	individuals.

In	 general,	 social	 power	 denotes	 a	 domination-submission
relationship	 between	members	 of	 the	 society	which	 is	 inherent	 in	 any
group	 of	 people	 and	 which	 is	 based	 on	 coercion	 (enforcement).	 As	M.
Weber	noted,	power	 is	“the	ability	of	an	 individual	or	group	to	achieve
their	 own	 goals	 or	 aims	 when	 others	 are	 trying	 to	 prevent	 them	 from
realising	them”,	regardless	of	the	basis	for	such	ability.

In	 academic	 literature,	 there	 have	 been	 various	 viewpoints	 as	 to	 the
interrelation	between	two	notions:	“state	power”	and	“political	power”.

According	 to	 one	 view,	 state	 power	 is	 a	 narrower	 category	 than
political	power,	since	political	power	is	exercised	by	the	state	as	a	whole
or	its	specialised	agencies	as	well	as	by	other,	non-state	elements	of	the
political	system:	local	governments,	political	parties,	labour	unions,	etc.

At	the	same	time,	while	state	power	represents	the	society	as	a	whole,
political	 power	 often	 represents	 only	 a	 part	 of	 the	 society	 or	 a	 social
group.

According	 to	 another,	 less	 widespread	 point	 of	 view,	 the	 notions	 of
“political	 power”	 and	 “state	 power”	 are	 one	 and	 the	 same,	 since	 the
political	power	is	emanated	from	the	state	and	is	exercised	by	the	state
(either	directly	or	indirectly)	and	upon	its	authorisation.

State	 power	 is	 a	 relationship	 of	 authority	 and	 hierarchy	 between
political	 actors,	 individuals	 and	 entities	 supported	 by	 state	 coercion
(enforcement).

State	power	leads	to	the	establishment	of	a	system	where	it	becomes



the	supreme	influencing	force,	recognised	by	the	population	of	the	state
(willingly	or	against	their	will).

State	power	is	characterised	by	the	following	distinctive	features:

1.	it	extends	to	the	whole	territory	of	the	state	and	all	society;

2.	it	is	public-political	(i.e.	it	is	emanated	from	the	society	and	governs
it	on	the	basis	of	certain	criteria);

3.	it	is	supported	by	state	coercion;

4.	 it	 is	 executed	 only	 by	 specially	 authorised	 agencies	 (bodies)	 and
persons	(public	officials,	politicians,	internal	bodies,	etc.);

5.	 it	 establishes	 a	 system	 of	 taxes	 and	 is	 financed	 by	 the	 taxpayers'
means;

6.	it	determines	and	supports	a	division	of	the	population	on	the	basis
of	certain	territorial	criteria;

7.	it	is	legitimate	and	legal.

Legitimacy	and	 legality	of	power	are	not	the	same	notion.	Legality	 is
the	legal	basis	of	the	power,	its	legal	characteristic,	whereas	legitimacy	is
the	 trust	 of	 the	 population	 to	 the	 power,	 its	 justification	 in	 the	 public
perception,	 which	 is	 its	 moral	 characteristic.	 Any	 authority	 (power)
which	promulgates	laws,	however	unpopular,	is	legal,	whereas	it	may	be
illegimate,	i.	e.	unaccepted	and	neglected	by	the	population.

It	 is	 widely	 believed	 that	 state	 power	 is	 the	 supreme	 form	 of	 power
within	any	state.

2.2.	Definition	and	Characteristics	of	State

The	 state	 is	 an	 apparatus	 of	 public-political	 authority	 at	 a	 certain
territory.	All	other	organisations	which	constitute	the	society’s	political
system	coordinate	with	the	state	and	its	legal	regulations,	laws	in	some
way	or	another.



There	 is	 a	 number	 of	 definitions	 of	 state,	 which	 is	 justified	 by	 its
contradictory	nature,	as	well	as	by	various	takes	on	its	essence.

For	 instance,	M.	Baitin	 supposes	 that	 the	 state	 is	 an	 organisation	 of
political	 authority	 required	 for	 the	 performance	 of	 objectives	 of	 the
particular	classes	as	well	as	common	objectives	intrinsic	to	all	societies.

A	number	of	scholars	believe	that	the	state	is	designed	to	combine	two
principalities:	the	class	and	the	universal.

The	 class	 approach	 to	 the	 essence	 of	 the	 state	 focuses	 on	 the
assumption	that	the	state	is,	above	all,	an	organisation	of	political	power
of	 the	 economically	 dominant	 class.	 Using	 this	 approach,	 the	 state	 is
used	 in	 the	 narrow	 sense	 —	 as	 a	 means	 of	 protecting	 the	 dominant
class’s	 interests.	 In	 this	 case,	 the	 priority	 of	 the	 dominating	 class’s
interests	 will	 inevitably	 cause	 opposition	 of	 the	 other	 classes.	 The
problem	therefore	arises:	 the	opposition	should	be	eliminated	with	 the
help	 of	 violence,	 dictatorship,	 domination.	 Slave	 states,	 feudal	 states,
early	 bourgeois	 states,	 socialist	 states	 (at	 the	 stage	 of	 proletarian
dictatorship)	are	to	a	large	extent	class	states.

The	universal	approach	focuses	on	the	fact	that	the	state	should	be	the
common	 welfare	 institution	 designed	 for	 achievement	 of	 social
compromise.	 The	 search	 for	 mutually	 advantageous	 ways	 of
reconciliation	 of	 conflicting	 social	 interests	 must	 become	 the	 main
priority	 of	 each	 and	 every	 governmental	 agency	 and	 the	 state	 on	 the
whole.	Pursuant	to	this	approach,	the	state	does	not	take	a	definite	class
position,	 but	 acts	 as	 an	 arbitrator	 trying	 to	 reconcile	 social	 conflicts,
collisions,	and	challenges.

Regardless	of	the	fact	that	the	class	and	the	universal	approach	to	the
essence	of	the	state	are	two	completely	different	takes	on	its	nature	and
purpose,	 a	 lot	 of	 scholars	 encourage	 to	 consider	 them	 both	 in
conjunction,	 since	 each	 state	 is	 designed	 to	 see	 for	 performance	 of
common	tasks	as	well	as	class-specific	tasks.

According	 to	 the	 religious	 approach,	 the	 state	 is	 defined	 as	 an
organisation	 of	 political	 power	which	 assists	 the	 enforcement	 of	 some



religion’s	 interests.	 Take,	 for	 instance,	 Catholic	 Vatican,	 Muslim
states	—	Pakistan,	 Iran,	Saudi	Arabia,	which	are	motivated	by	 religious
principles.

The	 national	 (nationalist)	 approach	 defines	 the	 state	 as	 an
organisation	 of	 political	 authority	 which	 protects	 the	 interests	 of	 the
ethnic	majority	at	 the	 cost	of	 ignoring	other	nations’	 interests.	Perfect
examples	 in	 this	 regard	 are	 modern	 Latvia,	 Estonia,	 which,	 having
declared	 democratic	 states	 of	 law,	 in	 reality	 (as	 confirmed	 by
international	 organisations	 and	 commissions)	 implement	 nationalistic
policy	 (in	 the	 interests	 of	 native	 people)	 and	 infringe	 on	 other
nationalities’	rights.

The	 racial	 approach	 defines	 the	 state	 as	 an	 organisation	 of	 political
authority	which	protects	a	certain	race’s	interests	at	the	cost	of	ignoring
other	 races’	 interests.	 This	 approach	 was	 popular	 in	 the	 eighteenth,
nineteenth,	and	even	in	early	twenteeth	century.

That	 being	 said,	 the	 state	 may	 be	 defined	 as	 an	 organisation	 of
political	 authority	 which	 strives	 to	 satisfy	 particular	 group’s	 interests
(class,	common,	religious,	national,	others)	on	the	certain	territory.

Other	 widely	 spread	 definitions	 of	 state	 include	 the	 following.	 The
state	 is	 “a	 social	 union	 of	 free	 people	 where	 a	 peaceful	 order	 was
imposed	and	the	exclusive	right	to	exercise	coercion	was	granted	to	state
agencies”	(N.	Korkunov),	is	a	“natural	organisation	of	authority	designed
for	 the	 protection	 of	 the	 existing	 public	 order”	 (L.	 Gumplowicz),	 is	 a
“union	of	individuals	based	on	the	rule	of	law,	on	common	territory,	on
loyalty	 to	certain	authoriy”	 (I.	 Ilyin),	 is	a	“special	political	hierarchy	of
the	 society	 in	 possession	 of	 an	 enforcement	 apparatus	 and	 expressing
the	 will	 and	 interests	 of	 the	 dominant	 class	 or	 the	 whole	 nation”
(V.	Lazarev).

We	believe	that	the	most	suitable	characteristic	of	the	essence	of	the
state	is	the	following:	it	is	a	management	apparatus	which	acts	on	a	scale
of	the	society	on	the	whole	and	is	limited	by	certain	territory.

Therefore,	 one	 can	 declare	 that	 the	 state	 is	 a	 united	 political



organisation	of	the	society	whose	authority	covers	the	whole	territory	of
the	state	and	its	population,	and	which	possesses	a	special	enforcement
apparatus	 along	 with	 sovereignty.	 This	 definition	 includes	 authority,
territory,	 and	population	 as	 the	 three	most	 important	 features	 of	 state
(also	reffered	to	as	“triad	of	the	state”).

The	 state	 differs	 from	 other	 social	 institutions,	 organisations,	 and
establishments	in	the	following:

1)	 the	 state	 is	 the	 sole	 official	 representative	 of	 the	 society	 on	 the
whole;

2)	the	state	is	responsible	for	its	territory	and	population,	i.e.	for	those
who	 are	 united	 under	 its	 authority	 regardless	 of	 their	 affiliation	 with
some	race,	tribe,	institution;

3)	 the	 state	 is	 tightly	 bound	 with	 its	 population	 (institute	 of
citizenship);

4)	the	state	has	public	authority	which	is	separate	from	the	society	and
population	(enforcement	apparatus,	the	judiciary,	officials,	the	army,	the
police,	courts,	prisons,	etc.);

5)	the	state	establishes	a	system	of	taxes,	fees,	and	payments	required
for	solving	universal	social	matters	and	for	maintaining	the	bureaucratic
apparatus;

6)	 the	 state	 is	 indivisible	 from	 law	 (the	 two	 are	 interdependent),	 it
creates	and	maintains	the	system	of	judicature	for	addressing	conflicts;

7)	the	state,	as	a	rule,	holds	a	monopoly	 in	rule-making	(adopts	 laws
and	regulations)	and	in	legal	application	of	physical	coercion	and	force;

8)	 the	 state	possesses	 the	materiel	 for	 implementing	 its	policy	 (state
property,	budget,	currency,	etc.);

9)	 the	 state	 possesses	 sovereignty	 (territorial	 supremacy	 and
independence	 in	 foreign	 relations).	 In	 the	 society,	 authority	may	 come
from	 the	 party,	 the	 family,	 religion,	 etc.	 However,	 the	 only	 type	 of



authority	whose	decisions	are	binding	for	all	citizens,	organisations,	and
institutions	belongs	to	the	state.

It	 is	 generally	 believed	 that	 the	 state	 is	 the	 sole	 bearer	 of	 sovereign
power.

Apart	 from	the	abovementioned	characteristics,	 the	state	has	certain
paraphernalia.	The	core	ones	include	the	national	emblem,	the	flag,	and
the	anthem.

2.3.	State	Functions	and	Their	Classification

Functions	 of	 state	 are	 the	 primary	 lines	 of	 activity	 of	 the	 state.	 It	 is
through	the	functions	that	one	sees	the	essence	of	the	state,	 its	nature
and	social	designation.	The	subject	matter	of	functions	reflects	what	the
state	and	its	governmental	agencies	do,	which	matters	they	address.

Functions	of	state	should	not	be	confused	or	equated	with	functions	of
separate	governmental	agencies,	i.e.	with	the	matters	of	competence	of
various	 state	 organisations	 according	 to	 their	 position	 in	 state
mechanism	and	political	system.

Functions	of	state	should	not	be	equated	to	state	objectives.	While	the
former	represent	the	lines	of	state	activity,	the	latter	are	the	aims	which
the	 state	 pursues.	 Consequently,	 the	 objectives	 predetermine	 the
functions.

Functions	 illustrate	 the	 socially-oriented	 role	 of	 the	 state	 at	 some
period	 of	 its	 development,	 therefore	 functions	 evolve	 along	 with	 the
state,	depending	on	the	environment	where	the	state	exists.

Functions	of	state	may	be	classified	depending	on	various	criteria.

Based	 on	 the	 duration	 they	 can	 be	 permanent	 (e.g.,	 economic)	 and
temporary	(e.g.,	humanitarian	relief	for	the	benefit	of	a	region	hit	by	an
earthquake).

Based	on	the	principle	of	separation	of	powers	they	can	be	legislative
(law-making),	executive	(managerial),	and	judiciary.



Based	 on	 their	 significance	 they	 can	 be	 primary	 (e.g.,	 public	 order
maintenance)	 and	 secondary	 (i.e.,	 compound	 elements	 of	 the	 primary
functions,	e.g.	function	of	dispute	settlement,	protection	of	competition
at	the	market	of	goods	and	services,	etc.).

Depending	on	the	sphere	of	social	life,	functions	may	be	external	and
internal.

External	 functions	 of	 state	 are	 primary	 lines	 of	 state	 activity	 when
addressing	 external	 matters	 which	 provide	 sovereign	 existence	 and
harmonious	relations	with	the	global	community.

These	 include,	 by	 way	 of	 example,	 the	 following:	 defense,
maintenance	of	peace	in	foreign	relations	and	world	order,	cooperation
with	 other	 states.	 External	 activity	 of	 any	 state,	 including	 the	 Russian
Federation,	can	only	be	efficient	and	fruitful	provided	that	it	is	based	on
international	 documents,	 taking	 into	 account	 national,	 socioeconomic,
cultural,	 and	 other	 specific	 features	 of	 all	 the	 nations	 comprising	 the
global	community.

Internal	functions	of	state	are,	respectively,	the	primary	lines	of	state
activity	when	addressing	 internal	matters.	These	 include,	as	a	 rule,	 the
following:	 protection	 of	 individual	 rights	 and	 freedoms,	 economic
function,	taxation,	ecological	function,	function	of	social	welfare,	etc.

At	 the	same	time,	one	must	 take	 into	account	 that	 the	separation	of
functions	 into	external	and	internal	 is	somewhat	relative.	For	 instance,
the	 economic	 function	 of	 state	 which	 is	 traditionally	 characterised	 as
internal,	 also	 includes	 international	economic	activity	which	 is	hard	 to
ignore	in	today’s	globalising	world.

Test	tasks	and	questions

1.	 What	 do	 you	 think	 are	 the	 primary	 characteristics	 of	 state
authority?

2.	Please	list	the	features	of	state.



3.	What	do	you	think	is	the	most	objective	approach	to	understanding
the	essence	of	the	state?	Why?

4.	 What	 is	 the	 difference	 between	 the	 function	 of	 state	 and	 the
objective	(task)	of	state?

Chapter	3.	Form	of	State
3.1.	Form	of	State:	Definition	and	Elements

States	differ	 from	one	another	 through	a	number	of	 features:	 size	of
territory,	 population,	 climate,	 cultural	 norms,	 ethnic	 composition,	 etc.
At	the	same	time,	the	most	significant	 features	of	 the	state	concerning
its	 internal	 structure,	 manner	 of	 formation	 and	 hierarchy	 of	 its
governmental	bodies,	ways	of	administration	within	state	boundaries,	as
well	 as	methods	 of	 execution	 of	 its	 political	 will	—	 these	 features	 are
embroidered	in	the	form	of	state.

Therefore,	 form	 of	 state	 is	 a	 category	 involving:	 a)	 form	 of
government,	b)	form	of	state	structure,	and	c)	type	of	political	regime.

Form	 of	 state	 predetermines	 political	 reality	 and	 integrity	 of	 state
bodies,	since	form	of	state	is	a	three-dimensional	feature,	the	elements
whereof	should	be	considered	in	greater	detail.

3.2.	Form	of	Government

Form	 of	 government	 determines	 the	 manner	 of	 formation	 and
structure	 of	 higher	 governmental	 bodies,	 their	 interaction	 with	 one
another	 and	 with	 individuals.	 Higher	 governmental	 bodies	 include	 the
head	of	state	(either	monarch	or	president),	its	legislative	body	and	the
government.

Depending	 on	 the	 specific	 features	 of	 either	 form	 of	 government,
states	are	divided	into	two	categories:	monarchical	and	republican.

Monarchy	 is	 a	 form	 of	 government	 where	 full	 or	 partial	 authority
belongs	 to	 one-man	 head	 of	 state	 (monarch),	 be	 it	 king,	 tzar,	 shah,
emperor,	etc.



Characteristics	of	monarhy:	hereditary	and	termless	authority,	and	the
lack	of	definite	criteria	of	its	dependance	on	the	people’s	will.

Monarchies	 are	 further	 divided	 into	 absolute	 (i.e.,	 lacking
representative	 bodies	 and	 the	 monarch	 being	 the	 only	 bearer	 of
sovereignty	 —	 Saudi	 Arabia,	 Brunei),	 and	 limited	 (constitutional)	 —
other	state	bodies	apart	from	the	monarch	are	bearers	of	sovereignty	and
limit	 the	 monarch’s	 authority	 —	 Great	 Britain,	 Japan,	 Spain,	 Sweden,
Norway,	and	others.

Despite	the	fact	that	a	number	of	modern	monarchical	states	adopted
Constitutions	and	formed	parliaments	(such	as	Bahrain,	Qatar,	Kuwait),
they	essentially	remain	absolute	monarchies.	The	Constitutions	of	these
countries	envisage	that	all	authority	comes	from	the	monarch,	and	their
parliaments	are	only	vested	with	consultative	prerogatives.

One	 must	 bear	 in	 mind	 that	 monarchies	 have	 existed	 for	 several
centuries	 in	 a	 variety	 of	 types	 and	 forms	 (Eastern	 despotism,	 empires,
slave	 states,	 early	 feudal	 states,	 states	 of	 the	 feudal	 disunity	 period,
estate-representative	monarchies,	 and	 absolute	monarchies),	 therefore
any	categorisation	 is	arbitrary	and	should	be	based	on	concrete	 factual
and	cultural	circumstances	of	the	states	subject	to	characterisation.

Republic	 is	 a	 form	of	 government	where	 the	head	 of	 state	 is	 elected
and	 dative,	 and	 her	 or	 his	 authority	 is	 deemed	 derivative	 from	 the
electorate	or	the	representative	body.

Characteristics	 of	 a	 republic:	 electivity	 of	 governmental	 bodies	 and
temporality	of	authority;	dependance	on	the	electorate.

Depending	 on	 who	 forms	 the	 government	 and	 who	 the	 latter	 is
accountable	 to,	 republics	 can	 be	 subdivided	 into	 presidential,
parliamentary,	 and	 mixed.	 With	 presidential	 republics	 (USA,	 Brazil,
Argentina,	 Venezuela,	 Bolivia,	 Syria,	 etc.)	 the	 president	 is	 the	 central
body;	with	parlamentiary	republics	(Germany,	Italy,	India,	Turkey,	Israel,
etc.)	 it	 is	 the	parliament;	with	the	mixed	type	(Russia,	France,	Finland,
Poland,	 Bulgaria,	 Austria,	 etc.)	 it	 is	 the	 president	 and	 the	 parliament
jointly.



In	a	presidential	republic	the	president	is	elected	independently	from
the	 parliament	 either	 by	 an	 electoral	 college	 or	 by	 the	 people.	 The
president	is	simultaneously	the	head	of	state	and	of	government.	She	or
he	 appoints	 the	 government	 and	manages	 its	 activity.	 The	 parliament
may	not	vote	non-confidence	in	the	government,	and	the	president	may
not	 dismiss	 the	 parliament.	 However,	 the	 parliament	 may	 constrain
president’s	 and	 government’s	 actions	 through	 adopting	 laws	 and	 the
budget,	 sometimes	 even	 by	 removing	 the	 president	 from	 post	 (should
she	or	he	violate	the	Constitution	or	commit	a	crime).	The	president,	on
the	 contrary,	 is	 vested	 with	 permission	 to	 veto	 the	 parliament’s
decisions.

In	 a	 parliamentary	 republic,	 the	 government	 is	 formed	 by	 the
legislative	 body	 and	 is	 accountable	 thereto.	 The	 parliament	 may	 vote
non-confidence	 in	government	on	 the	whole,	 in	 the	prime-minister,	or
in	 a	 particular	 minister.	 The	 official	 head	 of	 state	 is	 the	 president,
elected	 either	 by	 the	 parliament,	 or	 by	 an	 electoral	 college,	 or	 by	 the
people.	 However,	 the	 president	 does	 not	 play	 a	 significant	 role	 in	 the
system	 of	 governmental	 bodies:	 presidential	 obligations	 are	 limited	 to
mere	representation	and	hardly	differ	from	the	functions	of	the	head	of
state	 in	constitutional	monarchies.	The	real	head	of	state	 is	 the	prime-
minister.

A	 specific	 feature	 of	 mixed-type	 (half-presidential,	 half-
parliamentary)	 republics	 is	 government’s	 double	 liability	 (before	 the
president	 as	 well	 as	 before	 the	 parliament).	 The	 president	 and	 the
parliament	are	elected	by	the	people.	The	head	of	state	is	the	president,
who	appoints	the	prime-minister,	taking	into	account	the	distribution	of
political	influence	in	the	parliament.	As	a	rule,	the	head	of	state	presides
at	 the	 governmental	 sessions	 and	 affirms	 the	 government’s	 decisions.
The	 parliament	 is	 also	 able	 to	 control	 the	 government	 by	 affirming
yearly	budget	and	by	voting	non-confidence.

3.3.	Form	of	State	Structure

Form	of	 state	 structure	 is	 an	 element	of	 form	of	 state	which	defines
the	 internal	 structure	 of	 state,	 manner	 of	 political	 and	 administrative
division,	 and	 which	 determines	 the	 interactions	 of	 the	 state	 with	 its



compound	parts.

State	structure	is	political	and	administrative	structure	of	the	state,	its
inner	territorial	organisation.

This	 definition	 determines	 the	 distribution	 of	 power	 between	 the
center	and	the	local	governments.

There	are	several	forms	of	state	structure,	depending	on	this	criterion.

Unitary	 state	 is	 a	—	 simple,	 uniform	 state,	 compound	 parts	whereof
are	administrative	units	 lacking	state	sovereignty.	A	uniform	system	of
higher	 governmental	 institutions	 and	 legislature	 is	 established,	 as,	 for
instance,	in	Poland,	Hungary,	Bulgaria,	and	Italy.

In	 a	 unitary	 state,	 central	 governmental	 bodies	 administer	 foreign
relations	 and	 represent	 the	 country	 at	 the	 international	 level.	 Unitary
states	 may	 be	 centralised	 —	 i.e.	 Norway,	 Sweden,	 Denmark,	 etc.,	 and
decentralised	 —	 Spain,	 France,	 etc.	 In	 the	 latter,	 major	 regions	 enjoy
greater	 autonomy	 and	 solve	 the	 matters	 withing	 their	 competence	 by
themselves.

Federation	is	a	complex,	associated	state,	compound	parts	whereof	are
state-like	 bodies	 and	 to	 some	 extent	 have	 state	 sovereignty	 and	 other
characteristics	of	a	state.	Along	with	higher	federal	governmental	bodies,
regional	 ones	 are	 formed,	 and	 regional	 legislation	 is	 passed,	 as,	 for
instance,	in	Germany,	India,	Mexico,	and	Canada.

Federations	 may	 be	 based	 on	 the	 territorial	 (USA)	 or	 national-
territorial	principle	(Russia).

Federations	 are	 based	 on	 the	 principle	 of	 distribution	 of	 functions,
competence,	and	power	and	authority	between	regions	and	center.	This
principle	 is	 set	 forth	 in	 the	 constitution,	 which	may	 only	 be	 amended
with	regions’	consent.	Authority	is	distributed	in	the	following	manner:
some	 part	 is	 vested	with	 the	 federal	 bodies,	 another	 with	 the	 regions,
another	is	joint.



Legislative	 body	 of	 federative	 states,	 as	 a	 rule,	 consists	 of	 two
chambers,	one	of	them	representing	regional	interests.

Nowadays,	 many	 decentralised	 unitary	 states	 virtually	 copy	 a
federative	 form	 of	 state	 (France,	 Spain),	 and	 it	 is	 quite	 difficult	 to
differentiate	between	the	two.

Confederation	is	a	temporary	union	of	states,	which	is	formed	for	the
sake	of	political,	military,	economic,	and	other	purposes.	Therefore,	it	is
not	 so	 much	 a	 form	 of	 state	 as	 it	 is	 a	 manner	 of	 cooperation	 among
independent	sovereign	states.

A	confederation	does	not	have	sovereignty,	because	there	is	no	central
governmental	body	and	no	uniform	legislation.	Within	a	confederation,
union	 bodies	 may	 be	 formed,	 however,	 only	 for	 the	 purposes	 of
confederation.

Historical	 records	 show	 that	 confederations	 are	 rather	 unstable
political	 unions	 that	 fall	 apart	 (for	 instance,	 Senegambia	 —
confederation	of	Senegal	and	Gambia	during	1982—1989)	or	reform	into
federative	 states	 (for	 instance,	 Old	 Swiss	 Confederacy	 during	 1815—
1848).

Confederative	 form	 of	 state	 may	 have	 different	 titles:	 “union”,
“commonwealth”,	etc.

3.4.	Political	Regime	and	Its	Types

Political	(state)	regime	is	a	system	of	methods,	manners	and	means	of
exercising	political	authority.

Political	 regime	 is	a	number	of	 instruments	and	methods	of	 carrying
out	authority	by	the	rulers,	high	officials.	In	some	ways	political	regime
is	closer	to	the	term	“style	of	state	management”.

The	term	“political	regime”	includes	the	following	characteristics:

—	the	extent	of	people’s	participation	in	the	mechanisms	of	formation
of	political	authority,	and	the	methods	of	such	formation;



—	 the	 relation	 of	 human	 rights	 and	 freedoms	 with	 the	 rights	 and
obligations	of	the	state,	security	of	human	rights	and	freedoms;

—	characteristic	of	real	mechanisms	of	exercising	political	authority	in
the	society;	extent	of	exercising	political	authority	by	the	people;

—	 status	 of	 mass	 media,	 degree	 of	 openness	 in	 the	 society	 and
transparency	of	governmental	mechanism;

—	 status	 and	 role	 of	 non-governmental	 agencies	 in	 the	 political
structure	 of	 the	 society,	 relation	 between	 the	 legislative	 and	 the
executive	branches;

—	type	of	political	behaviour;	character	of	political	leadership;

—	 domination	 of	 certain	 methods	 (persuasion,	 coercion,	 etc.)	 in
exercising	political	authority;

—	political	and	legal	status	of	“law	enforcement”	bodies	in	the	society
(the	army,	the	police,	state	security,	etc.);

—	degree	of	political	pluralism,	multi-party	system.

Depending	 on	 the	 means	 and	 manners	 of	 carrying	 out	 state
administration,	 political	 regime	 may	 be	 divided	 into	 democratic,
authoritarian,	and	totalitarian.

Democratic	 regime	may	 be	 characterised,	 above	 all,	 with	 the	 rule	 of
people,	 the	extent	of	 their	participation	 in	political	and	administration
processes.	 However,	 it	 is	 impossible	 to	 have	 the	 people	 exercise	 all
political	 authority.	 It	 is,	 rather,	 an	 ideal	 state.	 Meanwhile,	 there	 is	 a
number	of	states	which	have	stepped	forward	in	this	direction	(Germany,
France,	Sweden,	USA,	Switzerland,	Great	Britain)	and	others,	which	are
role	models	for	the	rest.

The	primary	characteristics	of	democratic	regime	are	the	following:

—	human	rights	and	freedoms	are	declared	and	virtually	enforced;



—	decisions	are	made	by	majority,	and	minority’s	 interests	are	 taken
into	account;

—	all	necessary	conditions	for	rule-of-law	state	and	civil	society	are	in
place;

—	central	and	local	governmental	bodies	are	elected,	replaceable,	and
accountable	to	the	electorate;

—	 law	 enforcement	 bodies	 (the	 armed	 forces,	 the	 police,	 security
bodies)	are	under	society’s	democratic	control;

—	methods	of	persuasion	and	compromise	dominate;

—	political	pluralism,	including	multi-party	system,	competition,	and
opposition;

—	openness;	mass	media	are	free	from	censorship;

—	 virtual	 enforcement	 of	 separation	 of	 powers	 into	 the	 legislative
(meant	 to	adopt	 laws	and	development	 strategy),	 the	executive	 (meant
to	 enforce	 laws	 and	 conduct	 day-to-day	 activities),	 and	 the	 judiciary
(meant	to	act	as	arbitrator	in	case	of	conflicts,	wrongdoings).

Democracy	 may	 be	 exercised	 via	 two	 forms:	 direct	 (immediate)	 and
representative.

Direct	democracy	allows	the	people	to	exercise	power	without	the	help
of	 political	 agents.	 That	 is	 why	 it	 is	 called	 immediate,	 i.e.	 carried	 out
through	 universal	 suffrage,	 referenda,	 people’s	 meetings,	 petitions,
demonstrations,	discussions.

Positive	features	of	direct	democracy	include	the	following:	it	provides
greater	 opportunities	 (as	 opposed	 to	 representative	 bodies)	 for
expression	 of	 citizen’s	 interests,	 for	 their	 participation	 in	 the	 political
process;	it	provides	for	the	total	legitimisation	of	power;	it	provides	for
control	over	the	political	elites	and	so	on.

Negative	features	of	direct	democracy:	lack	of	will	with	the	majority	of



the	population	to	administer,	 the	complexity	and	high	costs	of	holding
democratic	activities,	low	efficiency	of	decisions	due	to	low	competence
of	the	majority	of	“rulers”	and	so	on.

Representative	 democracy	 allows	 the	 people’s	 agents	 (members	 of
parliament)	and	other	elected	governmental	bodies	to	exercise	authority.
These	 agents	 should	 express	 the	 interests	 of	 various	 classes,	 social
groups,	political	parties,	and	social	organisations.

The	 advantage	 of	 representative	 democracy	 lies	 herein:	 it	 provides
greater	opportunities	 (as	opposed	 to	 immediate	democracy)	 for	greater
efficiency	of	decisions,	because	highly	professional	persons	take	part	in
the	decision-making,	rational	organisation	of	political	system	and	so	on.

The	 disadvantages	 of	 representative	 democracy	 include:	 possible
unlimited	growth	of	bureaucracy	and	corruption,	great	gap	between	the
government	 and	 its	 people,	 decision-making	 not	 in	 favour	 of	 the
majority,	but	in	the	favour	of	high	officials,	lobbists,	etc.

Totalitarian	regime	is	a	type	of	political	regime	which	is	characterised
by	 total	 state	 control	 over	 all	 spheres	 of	 social	 life,	 full	 submission	 of
citizens	to	the	political	power	and	the	dominating	ideology.

The	 primary	 characteristics	 of	 a	 totalitarian	 political	 regime	 are	 as
follows:

—	the	state	strives	to	global	dominance	over	all	spheres	of	social	life,
to	all-embracing	power;

—	political	power	is	almost	completely	alienated	from	the	society,	but
the	latter	fails	to	realise	it,	since	in	its	political	mind,	an	idea	of	“unity”,
“merger”	of	power	and	people	is	implanted;

—	 the	 state	 exercises	 monopolistic	 control	 over	 the	 economy,	 mass
media,	culture,	religion,	etc.,	including	personal	life,	motives	of	people’s
actions;

—	 state	 authority	 is	 formed	 in	 a	 bureaucratic	 manner,	 via	 means



hidden	from	the	society,	it	is	surrounded	with	a	“halo	of	secrecy”	and	is
inaccessible	to	people’s	control;

—	 the	 prevailing	 method	 of	 administration	 is	 violence,	 coercion,
terror;

—	 one-party	 dominance	 is	 present,	 virtual	 coupling	 of	 its	 apparatus
with	 the	 state,	 prohibition	 of	 opposition;	 declaratory	 nature	 of	 human
rights	and	freedoms,	lack	of	definite	warranties;

—	pluralism	is	virtually	eliminated,	state	authority	is	centralised,	lack
of	control	mechanisms	over	the	oppressive	state	bodies,	etc.

A	fascist	regime	is	a	special	form	of	totalitarianism.	The	former	may	be
compared	with	a	radical	organisation.	The	first	countries	where	fascism
emerged	were	Italy	and	Germany.

Authoritarian	regime	is	a	regime	where	political	authority	is	exercised
by	a	certain	person	(class,	party,	elite,	etc.),	people’s	participation	being
minimal.	Chief	feature	of	this	regime	is	authoritarianism	as	a	method	of
exercising	 power	 and	 managing,	 as	 a	 type	 of	 social	 relations	 (for
instance,	Spain	during	Franko’s	rule,	Chili	during	Pinochet’s	rule).

Authoritarian	regime	is	a	kind	of	compromise	between	totalitarian	and
democratic	 regimes.	Authoritarian	 regime,	on	 the	one	hand,	 is	weaker,
more	liberal	than	totalitarianism,	on	the	other	hand,	it	is	stricter,	more
antipopular	than	democratic.

Primary	characteristics	of	authoritarian	political	regime	include:

—	 authority	 on	 higher	 and	 local	 levels	 is	 concentrated	 in	 one	 or
several	 bodies’	 hands,	 the	people	 being	 alienated	 from	actual	 levers	 of
state	authority;

—	 principle	 of	 separation	 of	 powers	 is	 ignored	 (often,	 the	 President
and	executive	bodies	subdue	other	bodies	to	themselves	and	are	vested
with	legislative	and	judiciary	powers);

—	 representative	bodies’	 role	 is	 insignificant,	 although	 they	 can	 still



exist;

—	courts	act	as	collateral	bodies;	non-curial	bodies	may	be	in	place;

—	state	bodies	and	officials	are	not	elected	and	are	not	accountable	to
the	public;

—	primary	methods	of	state	administration	are	commanding	methods,
but	not	terror;

—	limited	censorship	is	in	place,	openness	is	only	half-full;

—	pluralism	is	partial;

—	human	rights	and	freedoms	are	declared	but	not	fully	enforced;

—	 law	 enforcement	 bodies	 are	 non-controllable	 and	 are	 sometimes
used	to	achieve	political	aims,	etc.

Authoritarian	regime	is	non-homogenous.	It	may	vary	from	despotical
to	tyrannical	to	military.

Autoritarian	 regimes	 are	 different	 from	 totalitarian	 in	 the	 following
ways:	1)	while	 totalitarianism	maintains	total	control,	authoritarianism
allows	the	existence	of	social	spheres	exempt	from	state	control;	2)	while
totalitarianism	 exercises	 systematical	 terror	 against	 its	 foes,
authoritarianism	 practices	 “selective”	 terror	 aimed	 at	 prevention	 of
opposition.

Test	questions	and	tasks

1.	Please	characterize	the	several	types	of	republic.

2.	Please	list	the	primary	issues	of	federative	states.

3.	Is	a	federative	state	less	stable	politically	than	a	unitarian	one?

4.	 Based	 on	 your	 knowledge,	 please	 list	 three	 most	 important



characteristics	of	democracy	and	analyze	them.

Chapter	4.	State	Mechanism	and	the	Society's	Political
System

4.1.	Definition	and	Structure	of	the	Mechanism	of	State

The	 state	 exercises	management	of	 the	 society	 through	an	 elaborate
and	 complex	 system	 of	 governmental	 bodies,	 which	 is	 called	 the
mechanism	of	 state.	 In	other	words,	mechanism	of	 state	 is	a	 system	of
state	authorities	designed	to	exercise	state’s	objectives	and	tasks.

In	the	academic	circles,	 the	phrases	“mechanism	of	state”	and	“state
apparatus”	 are	 quite	 often	 used	 as	 synomyms,	 and	 for	 a	 good	 reason.
However,	 another	 position	 appears	more	 objective,	 according	 to	which
the	mechanism	of	state	is	a	wider	term	than	“state	apparatus”.	The	latter
represents	 a	 system	 of	 state	 agencies	 which	 are	 directly	 involved	 into
exercising	power,	and	mechanism	of	state	also	includes	state	institutions
and	organisations,	as	well	as	material	and	technical	support	designed	to
facilitate	efficient	power	enforcement	(the	armed	forces,	the	police,	the
penitentiary,	etc.)

Traditionally,	the	following	elements	are	included	into	the	structure	of
the	mechanism	of	state:

1)	a	system	of	interrelated	and	subordinated	state	agencies	which	are
vested	with	authority;

2)	 state	 institutions	 which	 are	 not	 vested	 with	 authority	 (except	 for
administrative)	 and	 carry	 out	 practical	 activities	 pursuing	 the	 social,
cultural,	 educational,	 academic	 functions	 of	 state	 (libraries,	 hospitals,
the	 post,	 the	 telegraph,	 academic	 institutions,	 higher	 educational
institutions,	schools,	theaters,	etc.);

3)	 state	 enterprises	 which	 are	 not	 vested	 with	 authority	 (except	 for
administrative)	 and	 carry	 out	 economic	 activity,	 fabricate	 produce	 or
provide	manufacture,	perform	various	works	and	services	for	catering	to
the	society’s	needs	and	gaining	profits;



4)	 state	 corporations	 are	 a	 form	 of	 non-commercial	 organisations
which	 are	 established	by	 laws	 for	 accomplishing	 social,	 administrative,
and	other	tasks	of	public	interest;

5)	state	officials	carrying	out	management;

6)	materiel	and	technical	support,	as	well	as	enforcement	required	for
due	operation	of	the	state	apparatus.

Mechanism	 of	 state	 and	 its	 structure	 are	 not	 unvarying.	 They	 are
constantly	 influenced	 by	 internal	 (cultural-historical,	 national-
psychological,	 religious	 and	 ethic	 features,	 size	 of	 the	 territory,
economic	 development	 level,	 distribution	 of	 political	 power)	 and
external	(international	scenery,	foreign	relations)	factors.

4.2.	State	Agencies	and	Their	Classification

The	 primary	 element	 of	 the	 mechanism	 of	 state	 is	 a	 state	 agency,
which	 is	 defined	 as	 a	 unit	 of	 state	 apparatus	 carrying	 out	 certain
functions	and	vested	with	powers	of	authority.

The	most	important	characteristics	of	a	state	agency	are	as	follows:

1)	 it	 is	an	 independent	unit	of	 the	mechanism	of	state,	which,	at	 the
same	time,	is	an	integral	part	thereof;

2)	it	acts	on	behalf	of	the	state	and	with	the	latter’s	support;

3)	 it	 is	 established	 and	 acts	 based	 on	 legislative	 instruments	 (the
constitution,	laws,	and	regulations);

4)	 it	 carries	 out	 exclusive	 tasks	 and	 performs	 exclusive	 functions
through	 respective	 means	 and	 methods	 (having	 powers	 of	 authority,
including	enforcement	measures);

5)	it	has	its	own	matters	of	competence	—	a	complex	of	powers	(rights
and	 obligations)	 granted	 to	 a	 certain	 agency	 or	 an	 official	 for	 due
performance	of	important	tasks	and	functions;



7)	 it	 involves	 a	number	of	 state	officials	 and	branches	 (departments,
divisions,	 teams,	 executive	 offices,	 etc.)	 which	 are	 held	 together	 with
common	purposes;

8)	 it	possesses	 the	necessary	materiel	 (buildings,	 transport,	 facilities,
etc.)	 and	 financial	 funds	 (operating	 bank	 account)	 required	 for	 due
performance;

9)	it	operates	in	a	certain	territory.

State	agencies	may	be	classified	depending	on	various	criteria.

Based	 on	 the	manner	 of	 establishment	—	 there	 are	 agencies	 elected
directly	 by	 the	 people	 (the	 President,	 the	 State	 Duma,	 regional
legislatures)	 and	 agencies	 formed	 by	 other	 agencies	 (the	 Government,
the	Constitutional	Court,	etc.).

Based	 on	 the	 separation	 of	 powers	 principle	 —	 there	 are	 legislative
(representative),	executive,	and	judicial	agencies.

Legislative	agencies	(parliaments,	legislative	assemblies)	are	designed
to	 represent	 the	 will	 and	 the	 interests	 of	 the	 people	 through	 laws;
executive	 agencies	 (the	 Government,	 ministries,	 administrations)	 are
designed	to	bring	 into	effect	 the	 laws;	 judicial	agencies	 (constitutional,
arbitrazh	 (economic/commercial)	 and	 other	 courts)	 deliver	 justice	 by
adjudicating	matters.

Based	on	term	of	office	—	permanent	and	temporary.

Based	on	the	manner	of	operating	—	collective	and	one-man.

Based	on	the	form	of	activity	—	law-making,	law-administrating,	and
law-enforcing.

Based	 on	 the	 nature	 of	 authority	 —	 agencies	 of	 universal	 authority
(the	government)	and	agencies	of	special	authority	(ministries).

There	 is	 a	 number	 of	 other	 criteria	 for	 the	 classification	 of	 state
agencies.



Each	 state	 agency’s	 primary	 task	 is	 the	 efficient	 and	 timely
performance	of	the	respective	state	tasks	and	functions.	Therefore,	every
state	may	form	its	own	mechanism,	depending	on	its	needs.	The	aim	is
to	 minimize	 the	 bureaucracy	 and	 eliminate	 overlapping	 of	 state
agencies.

4.3.	Principles	of	Organisation	and	Functioning	of	the	Mechanism
of	State

The	 principles	 of	 organisation	 and	 functioning	 of	 the	mechanism	 of
state	are	the	initial	bases,	ideas,	requirements	(partially	set	forth	by	law)
which	 are	 underlying	 in	 the	 establishment	 and	 functioning	 of	 state
mechanism.	 The	 system	 of	 principles	 is	 constantly	 changing	 and
evolving.

These	principles	include:

1.	 principle	 of	 priority	 of	 human	 rights	 and	 freedoms	 (meaning	 that
the	state	and	its	agencies,	as	well	as	other	actors	in	the	political	system
must	acknowledge,	observe,	and	protect	them);

2.	principle	of	democratism	(meaning	that	citizens	take	an	active	part
in	 the	 formation	 and	 administration	 of	 state	 agencies,	 and	 that	 state
policy	 is	 developed	 in	 a	 manner	 that	 takes	 into	 account	 the	 various
interests	of	the	majority	of	the	society,	and	the	minority’s	rights	are	not
ignored);

3.	principle	of	separation	of	powers	(the	legislative,	the	executive,	and
the	judiciary),	creating	mechanisms	which	minimize	state	agencies’	and
officials’	discretion	and	bring	about	the	system	of	checks	and	balances;

4.	principle	of	legitimacy	(meaning	the	universal	obligation	to	abide	by
the	constitution,	laws,	and	regulations);

5.	principle	of	openness	(meaning	that	the	public	is	informed	of	state
agencies’	 activity,	 guarantees	 the	 transparency	 of	 the	 bureauctratic
apparatus	on	the	whole);



6.	principle	of	 federalism	 (meaning	 that	 regional	 interests	are	 taking
into	account	in	federative	states);

7.	 principle	 of	 expertise	 (creates	 favorable	 conditions	 for	 using
qualified	 employees	 in	 the	 activity	 of	 state	 apparatus,	 guarantees	 high
level	of	expertise).	At	the	same	time,	this	principle	does	not	mean	that
an	 official	 must	 practice	 some	 definite	 field,	 e.g.	 be	 a	 lawyer,	 an
economist,	a	doctor,	etc.).

8.	principle	of	combination	of	collegiality	and	one-man	management
(provides	 reasonable	 combination	 of	 the	 democratic	 and	 the
bureaucratic	 principles,	 determines	 the	 addressing	 of	 state	matters	 by
both	collegial	and	one-man	offices);

9.	principle	of	combination	of	electivity	and	way	of	appointment	(sets
an	 optimal	 ratio	 between	 decentralisation	 and	 concentration	 in	 state
management;	 reflects	 the	 obvious	 fact	 that	 not	 each	 and	 every	 state
authority	can	or	may	be	elected	or	be	accountable	to	the	electorate);

10.	 principle	 of	 hierarchy	 (means	 that	 state	 agencies	 are	 at	 various
levels,	 ones	 being	 subdued	 to	 the	 others	 and	 bound	 by	 the	 latter’s
decisions).

Universal	 consideration	 of	 the	 abovementioned	 and	 other	 principles
allows	to	provide	maximum	efficiency	of	state	management,	leads	to	its
democratisation	and	increased	strength.

4.4.	Definition	and	Structure	of	the	Society's	Political	System

Social	 management	 is	 performed	 by	 various	 actors:	 the	 state
(specifically	 designated	 for	 that	 purpose),	 the	 parties,	 political
movements,	 social	 organisations,	 trade	 unions,	 funds,	 etc.	 These
constitute	 the	 political	 system	 and	 influence	 society’s	 political	 reality
and	exercise	political	power.

Political	 system	 of	 the	 society	 is	 a	 law-based	 and	 socially	 oriented
combination	 of	 institutions	 (state	 agencies,	 political	 parties,
movements,	social	organisations)	where	political	life	of	the	society	takes



place	and	political	power	is	exercised.

The	 term	“political	 system	of	 the	society”	which	came	 into	scientific
use	 in	 the	 second	 half	 of	 the	 twentieth	 century	 shows	 how	 political
processes	are	governed,	how	political	authority	is	established	and	how	it
operates.	That	 is	 the	mechanism	of	political	activity’s	organisation	and
enforcement.

Any	 society’s	 political	 system	 reflects	 the	 relationships	 between	 the
domineers	and	the	dependents,	since	relations	of	power	are	the	core	of
the	 political	 system.	 In	 other	 words,	 political	 system	 is	 a	 form	 of
interaction	among	norms,	ideas,	political	institutions,	and	citizens.	The
political	 system	 organises	 and	 enforces	 political	 power,	 i.e.	 power
connected	with	social	management	(one	believes	that	political	power	is
the	 ability	of	 one	person	or	 a	 group	of	persons	 to	manage	a	 society	or
some	of	its	institutions	based	on	national	objectives).

A	political	system	has	a	number	of	characteristics:

1)	 it	 is	 within	 its	 frames	 and	with	 its	 aid	 that	 the	 political	 power	 is
exercised;

2)	 it	 depends	 on	 the	 society’s	 level	 of	 development,	 on	 its
socioeconomic	structure,	the	dominating	ideology,	etc.

3)	it	is	relatively	independent.

The	political	system	governs	production	and	distribution	of	amenities
among	social	groups	based	on	the	usage	of	state	authority,	participation
therein,	fighting	therefor.

The	following	compound	parts	of	political	system	are	highlighted:

1)	society’s	political	organisation,	including	the	state,	political	parties
and	movements,	social	unions	and	organisations,	labour	unions,	etc.;

2)	 the	 political	 consciousness	 which	 characterizes	 the	 psychological
and	ideological	incarnations	of	political	authority	and	political	system;



3)	sociopolitical	and	legal	rules	governing	the	society’s	political	reality
and	the	process	of	exercising	political	authority;

4)	political	 relations	between	 the	 actors	of	 the	 system	 related	 to	 the
political	authority;

5)	 political	 practice	 which	 includes	 political	 activity	 and	 existing
political	experience,	political	reality.

The	 primary	 definition	 which	 constitutes	 the	 core	 of	 an	 integral
political	system	is	“political	authority”.

Each	organisation	involved	into	a	political	system	takes	a	special	part
therein,	 has	 its	 own	 designation	 and	 functions	 and	 participates	 in
addressing	society’s	problems	accordingly.

Depending	on	 the	nature,	position,	and	 role	of	 certain	elements,	 the
following	 types	of	political	 systems	are	named:	democratic,	 command-
administrative,	theocratic,	mixed,	etc.

The	essence	of	society’s	political	system	is	epitomised	by	its	functions.
Therefore,	 the	 political	 system’s	 characteristic	 would	 not	 be	 complete
without	considering	the	functions.

The	functions	of	political	system	are	as	follows:

1)	maintaining	political	power	of	a	certain	social	group	or	its	majority
(political	system	sets	forth	certain	forms	and	methods	of	domination	—
democratic	and	anti-democratic,	violent	and	non-violent,	etc.);

2)	management	of	various	spheres	of	people’s	lives	in	the	interests	of
certain	 social	 groups	 or	 the	 majority	 (the	 political	 system,	 being	 the
manager,	 sets	 tasks	 and	 objectives,	 determines	 society’s	 development
patterns	and	works	out	programs	of	political	institutions’	activity);

3)	mobilisation	of	means	and	resources	required	for	achieving	the	set
tasks	and	objectives	(otherwise	these	are	impossible	to	achieve,	without
massive	managerial	work,	human,	material,	and	mental	resources);



4)	detection	and	representation	of	various	actors’	interests	(otherwise
politics	 is	 inviable,	 in	 the	 absence	 of	 selection,	 strict	 detection	 and
expression	of	these	interests).	The	important	questions	is	—	what	social
group’s	 interests	 will	 be	 dominant,	 what	 values	 they	 will	 represent	—
either	true	or	false;

5)	 catering	 to	 various	 actors’	 needs	 through	 distribution	 of	material
and	 spiritual	 interests	 in	 accordance	 with	 different	 ideas	 of	 an	 ideal
society	 (it	 is	 in	 the	 distribution	 process	 that	 the	 various	 interests
collide);

6)	integration	of	the	society,	establishment	of	necessary	conditions	for
the	 interaction	 between	 the	 elements	 of	 its	 structure	 (the	 political
system	 uses	 integration	 of	 conflicting	 political	 powers	 in	 order	 to
mitigate	the	existing	collisions);

7)	political	 adjustment	 (it	 facilitates	 formation	of	 individual	political
consciousness,	and	 the	 latter	 ‘enters	 into	 the	game’	of	certain	political
mechanisms,	which	leads	to	reproduction	of	the	political	system).

Thus,	 the	 political	 system	 performs	 a	 number	 of	 functions,	 thereby
fulfilling	 its	 purpose,	 providing	 stable	 political	 relations,	 binding	 all
actors	into	a	single	political	organism.

4.5.	State	and	the	Political	System

The	 correlation	 between	 the	 terms	 “state”	 and	 “political	 system”	 is
similar	to	the	one	between	the	particular	and	the	general,	since	the	state
is	merely	another	element	of	the	political	system	and	due	to	its	special
status	may	be	considered	the	core	thereof.

The	 state	 encircles	 numerous	 and	 various	 political	 interests,	 thus
regulating	political	processes.	Therefore,	the	state	plays	a	special	role	in
the	political	system,	making	it	integral	and	stable.	It	performs	the	most
of	its	management	activities	using	the	society’s	resources	and	directing
its	functioning.

The	state	holds	the	key	position	in	the	political	system,	since	it:



1)	acts	as	the	sole	official	representative	of	the	people	who	are	united
based	on	the	territorial	and	nationality	feature;

2)	is	the	sole	bearer	of	sovereignty;

3)	is	in	possession	of	a	special	apparatus	(public	authority)	designed	to
manage	 the	 society	 and	 of	 enforcement	 bodies	 (the	 armed	 forces,
security	office);

4)	holds	a	monopoly	on	law-making;

5)	is	 in	possession	of	a	specific	set	of	material	values	(state	property,
budget,	currency,	etc.);

6)	determines	the	main	development	directions	of	the	society.

The	 state	 does	 not	 only	 act	 as	 an	 independent	 actor	 in	 the	 political
field,	but	it	is	also	designed	to	regulate	other	actors’	behaviour.	The	state
is	vested	with	wide	powers	in	connection	therewith:

it	can	set	forth	legal	regimes	of	organisation	and	functioning	of	other
various	actors	—	political	parties,	movements,	lobbists,	etc.;

it	registers	these	actors	with	the	respective	authorities	(as	a	rule,	the
ministry	 of	 justice)	 and	 engages	 them	 into	 social	 and	 governmental
affairs;

it	 can	 effect	 control	 over	 the	 legitimacy	 of	 other	 political	 system’s
actors	activity	and	take	coercive	measures	against	wrongdoers.

At	 the	 same	 time,	 one	 must	 understand	 that	 the	 state	 should	 be
partner,	and	a	just	one,	equal	actor	in	political	relations,	one	which	does
not	abuse	authority.	State’s	domination	in	political	relations	may	result
in	the	establishment	of	authoritarianism	and	totalitarianism.

No	paternalist	ideas	should	be	dominant	in	the	society,	either	(that	is,
the	 people	 should	 not	 rely	 on	 the	 state	 exclusively,	 they	 should	 not
believe	that	the	state	is	obliged	to	take	care	of	them	as	of	children	and
solve	all	of	their	individual	problems).



The	state	must	carry	out	universal	social	 functions,	at	the	same	time
avoiding	putting	pressure	on	the	society	and	forcing	obligatory	ways	of
behaviour	upon	it.

Test	questions	and	tasks

1.	What	is	understood	by	“mechanism	of	state”	and	“state	apparatus”?

2.	Please	list	the	features	of	state	agencies	and	classify	them.

3.	What	is	the	political	system	of	the	society	and	how	is	it	structured?

4.	Please	define	the	position	of	state	and	law	in	the	political	system	of
the	society.

Chapter	5.	Essense	of	Law
5.1.	Definition	and	Characteristics	of	Law

Law	 is	 a	 complex	 and	 multifacet	 phenomenon.	 Therefore,	 there	 are
multiple	interpretations	of	law.	Nowadays,	the	most	common	definition
(with	certain	stipulations)	is	as	follows.

Law	 is	 a	 complex	 of	 formal	 rules	 made	 or	 sanctioned	 by	 the	 state,
expressing	the	ideas	of	freedom,	justice,	humanism,	ethics,	human	rights
and	 interests.	 Law	 aimed	 at	 regulating	 people’s	 behavior	 for	 proper
development	and	functioning	of	the	society.

There	 are	 other	 definitions	 of	 law	 which	 are	 also	 correct.	 Law	 is	 a
system	 of	 universally	 binding	 rules	which	 are	made	 or	 sanctioned	 and
enforced	by	the	state,	which	are	aimed	at	regulating	social	relationships;
law	is	an	official,	civilised	and	highly	efficient	regulator	of	social	life,	the
central	 social,	 cultural,	 and	 ethical	 value,	 measure	 of	 freedom	 and
responsibility.

These	definitions	of	law	do	not	contradict	each	other.

The	 origin,	 nature,	 character	 of	 law	 are	 determined	 by	 multiple



factors	—	economic,	political,	cultural,	national,	religious,	etc.	However,
the	prime	factor	is	economic	necessity	which	influences	social	processes.

Law	emerged	at	an	early	stage	of	social	development	as	a	reaction	to
obvious	need	to	establish	a	stricter	and	more	powerful	regulator	of	social
relationships	 which	 would	 possess	 coercive	 power.	 Ethical	 and	 other
norms	could	no	longer	cope	with	the	task.

The	essence	of	 law	 lies	 in	 the	 fact	 that	 it	 expresses	and	consolidates
the	 balance	 of	 interests	 of	 various	 social	 groups,	 layers,	 classes.	 The
interests	are	considered	nationwide	and	general.	The	consolidated	will	of
the	people	is	transferred	onto	laws	and	basic	legal	acts	which	are	binding
upon	those	who	they	are	addressed	to.

Law	 is	 a	public	 form	of	 alignment	of	 interests,	 a	means	of	 achieving
social	compromise,	and	that	is	why	each	modern	society	must	have	it.	R.
Ihering	 considered	 “accomodation	 of	 interests	 and	 reaching	 their
balance”	 to	 be	 the	 purpose	 of	 law.	 Pre-revolution	 Russian	 lawyers,
namely	 N.	 Korkunov,	 P.	 Novgorodtsev,	 E.	 Trubetskoy,	 and	 others	 also
deemed	harmonisation	of	interests	central	purpose	of	law.

In	other	words,	the	primary	mission	of	law	is	to	be	an	objective,	just,
and	 efficient	 (imperious)	 regulator	 of	 social	 relationships,	 the	 actors
whereof	represent	various	interests	and	needs.

At	 the	 same	 time,	 law	 cannot	 satisfy	 everyone.	 Alignment	 of
everyone’s	 interests	 is	 a	 sophisticated	 task,	 since	 there	 is	 hardly
something	 more	 dynamic,	 conflicting,	 and	 changeable	 than	 human
interests.	While	compromise	may	be	reached	today	in	some	topic,	it	may
cease	to	be	sufficient	tomorrow	due	to	the	change	of	circumstances.	That
is	why	 laws	can	exist	which	contradict	 the	expectations	of	 some	of	 the
society’s	members	or	even	groups.

In	 this	 regard,	 law	 may	 never	 achiveve	 one	 hundred	 percent
congruency.	 However,	 it	 should	 aspire	 to	 that	 purpose	 and	 remain	 a
means	of	mitigating	or	settling	social	conflicts.

Another	 important	 aspect	 of	 law	 is	 the	 fact	 that	 it	 is	 an	 official



measure,	 scale	 of	 personal	 freedom	 which	 is	 acknowledged	 and
guaranteed	by	law	and	formally	established	as	normative	acts.

Law	 is	 also	 measure	 of	 liability,	 since	 one’s	 freedom	 ends	 where
another	 one’s	 freedom	 begins.	 Therefore,	 law	 is	 a	 combination	 of
permissions	and	prohibitions,	incentives	and	punishments,	it	is	a	barrier
against	free	will	and	mercy.	Orderless	freedom	is	every	bit	as	dangerous
as	dictatorship.

The	most	important	characteristics	of	law	include	the	following:

1.	Connection	with	the	state.

State	can	either	produce	legal	norms	or	sanction	the	already	existing
ones	 or	 delegate	 rule-making	 powers	 to	 other	 organisations.	 In	 either
case,	 however,	 legal	 norms	 are	 deemed	 state-made.	No	 one	 can	 create
law	 of	 their	 own	 without	 the	 sanction	 or	 against	 the	 will	 of	 state.
Otherwise,	it	would	be	impossible	to	consider	the	state	sovereign.

The	close	connection	between	state	and	law	is,	among	others,	intrinsic
to	states	with	highly	democratic	types	of	political	regime.	The	increased
level	of	democracy	does	not	necessarily	signify	the	weakened	connection
between	law	and	state.

2.	Normalisation.

Law	 consists	 of	 a	 system	of	 norms.	 Law	 is	 a	 normalised	 regulator	 of
social	 relations,	 where	 the	 primary	 operating	 element	 is	 a	 legal	 norm
(rule).

3.	Formal	definitude.

Legal	norms	are	strictly	formalised	rules	giving	a	detailed	description
of	the	permitted	or	prohibited	action	and	of	liability	for	breach	thereof.
Apart	from	that,	formal	definitude	of	 law	is	epitomised	by	the	fact	that
legal	 norms	 are	 set	 forth	 in	 respective	 legal	 acts	 which	 are	 therefore
called	normative	(normative	legal	acts).

4.	Generally	binding	nature.



Prescriptions	of	law	are	binding	upon	those	who	they	are	addressed	to.
Inaccurate	 performance	 or	 non-performance	 thereof	 leads	 to	 legal
liability.

5.	Enforcement	by	state.

Law	differs	from	other	social	regulators	(morality,	ethics,	aesthetics)	in
the	 following:	 it	 is	 always	 backed	 by	 official	 (public)	 authority,	 its
agencies,	 apparatus	 which	 hold	 a	 monopoly	 to	 legally	 apply	 coercion
against	wrongdoers.

6.	Willful	nature.

Firstly,	law	is	a	product	of	the	mind	and	will	of	its	creators	(legislative
and	 other	 state	 agencies,	 corporations,	 citizens,	 etc.).	 Secondly,	 law	 is
actualised	 through	 the	 willful	 activity	 of	 individuals	 and	 their	 groups.
Thirdly,	law	acts	as	a	form	of	expressing	the	political	will	of	the	society
where	 various	 interests	 are	 present.	 Law	 is	 inconceivable	 outside	 of
people’s	activities.

7.	Imperious-regulating	nature.

Any	regulation	of	social	processes	requires	manifestation	of	authority.
Relations	 of	 power	 predetermine	 the	 existence	 of	 social	 compromise,
maintenance	 of	 social	 order,	 and	 enforcement	 of	 unpopular	 legal
prescriptions.	Therefore,	law	is	based	on	authority	and	is	a	special	form
of	authority	aimed	at	regulation	of	social	relations.

8.	Consistency.

Law	is	a	system	of	norms	which	is	not	random	or	chaotic	mechanical
mass,	but,	rather,	an	elaborate	and	integral	system	where	norms	are	built
into	 and	 grouped	 in	 a	 certain	 manner.	 Law	 is	 a	 complex	 hierarchic
formation	 including	 branches,	 institutions,	 norms,	 and	 other
components.

Law	 is	 a	 complex	 and	 unique	 regulator	 of	 social	 relations,	 therefore
various	approaches	to	its	understanding	coexist.	It	is	almost	impossible



to	identify	the	only	correct	definition	and	perception	of	law.

5.2.	Principles	of	Law

Principles	 of	 law	 are	 the	 basic	 ideas,	 notions,	 provisions	 which
demonstrate	 the	 role	 of	 law	 as	 a	 specific	 social	 regulator.	 They
demonstrate	 the	 patterns,	 nature,	 and	 designation	 of	 law.	 They
represent	the	generalised	rules	of	conduct	which	are	set	forth	expressly
or	implied	by	law.

Depending	 on	 the	 scope	 of	 action,	 principles	 can	 be	 grouped	 into
general,	inter-branch,	and	branch-specific	principles.

General	 legal	 principles	 are	 related	 to	 the	 law	 itself	 and	 apply	 to	 all
branches.

General	legal	principles	include:

1)	justice	(correspondence	between	one’s	role	in	the	society	and	their
social	 and	 legal	 status;	 congruence	 between	 action	 and	 retribution,
between	conduct	and	award,	between	crime	and	punishment);

2)	 legal	 equality	 before	 law	 and	 court	 (this	 principle	 is	 described	 in
detail	in	Article	19	of	the	Constitution	of	the	Russian	Federation:	“1.	All
people	 shall	 be	 equal	 before	 the	 law	 and	 court.	 2.	 The	 State	 shall
guarantee	 the	 equality	 of	 rights	 and	 freedoms	 of	 man	 and	 citizen,
regardless	of	sex,	race,	nationality,	languate,	origin,	property	and	official
status,	 place	 of	 residence,	 religion,	 convictions,	 membership	 in	 public
associations,	and	other	circumstances…”);

3)	humanism	(human	rights	and	freedoms	are	the	supreme	value.	The
state	makes	every	effort	to	observe	protection	of	human	dignity);

4)	 democracy	 (legal	 norms	 establish	 various	 mechanisms	 to	 ensure
citizens’	 participation	 in	 managing	 state’s	 and	 society’s	 matters,
protection	of	citizen’s	rights	and	freedoms);

5)	 unity	 of	 rights	 and	 obligations	 (no	 rights	 are	 conceivable	without
obligations,	and	vice	versa);



6)	 federalism	(inherent	 in	 those	political	 systems	only	which	exist	 in
federal	 states.	 This	 principle	 means	 that	 two	 legislative	 systems	 are
present	—	the	federal	and	the	regional);

7)	 legality	 (strict	 and	 exact	 abidance	 by	 the	 law	with	 those	 involved
into	legal	relations);

8)	 combination	 of	 persuasion	 and	 coercion	 (optimal	 conjunction	 of
encouraging	and	discouraging	means	of	influencing	social	relations).

Inter-branch	principles	of	 law	characterize	the	essential	 features	and
patterns	 of	 several	 branches	 of	 law.	 These	 involve,	 for	 instance,	 the
principle	 of	 unavoidability	 of	 liability,	 principle	 of	 adversary	 system	of
judicial	proceedings,	principle	of	openness	of	judicial	proceedings,	etc.

Branch-specific	 principles	 are	 ones	 operating	 in	 one	 branch	 of	 law.
These	 include:	 in	 civil	 law	 —	 the	 principle	 of	 equality	 of	 parties	 in
property	relations;	in	criminal	law	—	benefit	of	the	doubt	(presumption
of	innocence);	in	labour	law	—	the	principle	of	freedom	of	labour;	in	land
law	—	the	principle	of	purposeful	usage	of	land,	etc.

5.3.	Functions	of	Law

Functions	of	 law	are	 the	key	directions	of	 legal	 influence	onto	social
relations.	Functions	of	law	illustrate	its	essence	and	role	as	the	universal
social	regulator.

Functions	 of	 law	 are	 considered	 in	 two	 dimensions:	 narrow	 (strictly
legal)	and	wide	(general	social).

From	the	wide	(general	social)	standpoint,	 the	following	functions	of
law	are	distinguished:

—	economic	(law	regulates	business	relations,	established	mechanisms
of	distribution	and	re-distribution	of	collective	goods,	etc.).

—	 political	 (law	 establishes	 key	 mechanisms	 of	 state	 management,
political	system	of	the	society);



—	educational	(law	forms	certain	paradigms,	ideology,	attitude	toward
legal	and	illegal	conduct,	etc.);

—	 informative	 (law	 is	 a	 great	 array	 of	 information	 which	 should	 be
internalised);

—	 communicative	 (law	 and	 legal	 norms	 determine	 the	 manner	 of
communication	between	people,	between	authorities	and	citizens),	etc.

At	 the	 strictly-legal	 level,	 law	 performs	 the	 regulatory	 and	 the
protective	functions.

The	 regulatory	 function	 is	primary.	 It	 enables	 law	 to	maintain	 social
relations	which	 are	 crucial	 for	 the	 society	 and	 the	 state.	 This	 function
epitomizes	the	regulatory	capability	of	law,	promotes	desirable	conduct
and	discourages	undesirable	conduct.

One	believes	that	the	regulatory	function	operates	in	two	aspects:	the
dynamic	 and	 the	 static.	 The	 static	 regulatory	 function	 (sub-function)
sets	forth	the	existing	state	of	the	society	(sociocultural,	economic,	and
political	 foundation	 of	 the	 society	 —	 forms	 of	 ownership,	 political
regime,	the	principle	of	separation	of	powers,	local	administration).

The	dynamic	regulatory	function	is	aimed	at	achieving	the	objectives,
modifying	 and	 improving	 the	 existing	 relationships,	 at	 creating	 new
social	 institutions.	 This	 function	 regulates	 the	 dynamics	 of	 social
relations	(norms	of	civil,	administrative,	tax,	and	other	branches	of	law).

The	 protective	 function	 is	 aimed	 at	 the	maintenance	 of	 regular	 and
safe	development	of	social	relations,	at	the	protection	of	law	in	general
and	of	individual	interests	in	particular,	and	at	recovery	of	infringed	law.
The	 forms	 of	 exercising	 the	 protective	 function	 are:	 establishment	 of
obligations,	 prohibitions,	 suspensions,	 injunctions,	 and	 coercive
measures.

Abovementioned	 functions	 of	 law	 are	 constantly	 cooperating	 and
ensure	the	achievement	of	the	main	goal	—	regulation	of	social	relations.



5.4.	Legal	System	of	Society

The	terms	of	law	and	legal	system	are	related	as	the	particular	and	the
general,	 respectively.	 One	 traditionally	 perceives	 law	 as	 universally
binding	 norms	 established	 by	 the	 state,	 and	 legal	 system	 as	 a	 wider
reality	which	encompasses	various	legal	means	which	facilitate	influence
onto	social	relations	by	the	public	authority.

Legal	 system	 is	 one	 of	 the	 widest	 definitions	 in	 legal	 science;	 it
embraces	everything	 that	 is	connected	with	 the	existence	of	 law	 in	 the
society.	The	core	of	 legal	system	is	certainly	 the	 law	 itself.	However,	 it
also	 involves:	 law-making	 and	 its	 principles;	 legal	 practice	 (ways	 of
enforcing	 legal	 prescriptions);	 the	 existing	 legal	 ideology	 and	 value
system;	 the	 system	 of	 operating	 legal	 agencies	 (court,	 prosecutor,
attorneys);	 legal	 relations;	 legal	 liability	 and	mechanisms	 thereof;	 the
body	of	 rights,	 freedoms,	and	 legal	 interests;	 legal	awareness	and	 legal
culture;	practice	of	interpretation	of	law,	etc.

It	 is	hard	to	 list	the	elements	of	 legal	system	exhaustively,	since	this
category	is	extremely	wide,	and	some	of	its	elements	develop	unevenly,
though	they	are	closely	connected.

The	 concept	 of	 legal	 system	 allows	 to	 evaluate	 the	 level	 of	 legal
development	 of	 a	 state,	 the	 existing	manners	 of	 enforcement	 of	 rights
and	 legitimate	 interests	 and	 suppression	 of	 undesirable	 (prohibited)
conduct.

5.5.	Modern	Legal	Families

Legal	 systems	 of	 various	 states	 (national	 legal	 systems)	 can	 be
characterised	 by	 common	 features,	 which	 allow	 combining	 them	 into
legal	families.

A	 legal	 family	 is	 a	 body	 of	 several	 national	 legal	 systems	 which	 are
characterised	 with	 certain	 common	 features	 (paths	 of	 formation	 and
evolution;	 similarity	 of	 sources	 of	 law,	 principles	 of	 regulating	 social
relations,	 and	 branch	 structure	 of	 law;	 similarity	 of	 legal	 terminology;
mutual	adoption	of	primary	institutions	and	legal	theories).



Depending	 on	 the	 above	 named	 characteristics,	 the	 following	 legal
families	are	distinguished:

1)	Romano-Germanic	(the	family	of	continental	law);

2)	Anglo-Saxon	(the	family	of	common	law);

3)	religious	(the	family	of	Muslim	and	Hindu	law);

4)	traditional	(the	family	of	customary	law).

The	 Romano-Germanic	 legal	 family	 involves	 legal	 families	 of	 the
majority	 of	 European	 states:	 Italy,	 France,	 Spain,	 Portugal,	 Germany,
Austria,	Switzerland,	etc.	The	modern	Russian	 legal	system	can	also	be
described	as	related	to	the	Romano-Germanic	legal	family.

The	key	features	of	the	Romano-Germanic	legal	family	include:

—	integral	hierarchical	system	of	sources	of	law,	where	normative	acts
(legislation)	are	predominant;

—	the	primary	role	in	formation	of	law	belongs	to	the	lawmakers,	who
create	 general	 legal	 rules	 of	 conduct,	 while	 law	 enforcers	 (judge,
administrative	 authority)	 must	 implement	 the	 general	 rules	 into
individual	acts	of	application	of	law;

—	written	constitutions	are	of	supreme	legal	effect;

—	 regulations	 are	 of	 significance	 (acts	 issued	 by	 the	 government,
instructions,	etc.);

—	the	system	of	law	is	divided	into	branches;

—	legal	custom	and	 legal	precedent	play	a	supplementary	role	 in	the
system	of	sources	of	law;

—	 human	 rights	 are	 of	 first	 and	 utmost	 significance,	 as	 opposed	 to
obligations;



—	 legal	 doctrine	 is	 important,	 since	 it	 explains	 the	 principles	 of
formation	and	operation	of	this	legal	family.

The	Anglo-Saxon	legal	family	involves	national	legal	systems	of	Great
Britain,	the	USA,	Canada,	Australia,	New	Zealand,	etc.

This	legal	family	can	be	characterised	with	the	following	features:

—	judicial	precedent	is	the	primary	source	of	law	(rules	of	conduct	laid
down	by	 judges	 in	 their	decisions	 in	certain	cases	and	applicable	 to	all
analogous	cases);

—	court	acts	as	the	primary	lawmaker,	which	makes	courts	significant
body	in	the	system	of	state	agencies;

—	 human	 rights	 are	 of	 first	 and	 utmost	 significance,	 as	 opposed	 to
obligations;	 the	 former	 are	 enforced	 primarily	 through	 judicial
proceedings;

—	procedural	 law	 is	 important	 and	 in	many	ways	 predetermines	 the
substantive	law;

—	law	is	uncodified;

—	legal	doctrines	are	action-oriented.

The	 religious	 legal	 family	 involves	 legal	 systems	 of	 Muslim	 states,
such	as	 Iran,	 Iraq,	Pakistan,	Sudan,	etc.,	 as	well	 as	Hindu	 law	of	 India,
Singapore,	Burma,	Malaysia,	etc.

The	following	are	the	features	of	this	legal	family:

—	God	is	the	lawmaker,	and	not	the	society	or	the	state,	therefore	legal
prescriptions	are	deemed	eternal	and	must	be	trusted	and	strictly	abided
by;

—	 religious	 norms	 and	 values	 are	 sources	 of	 law	 (set	 forth	 in	 the
Koran,	Sunnah,	Ijma,	or	in	the	Shastras,	Vedas,	laws	of	Manu,	etc.);



—	 legal	 prescriptions	 are	 closely	 related	 to	 religious,	 philosophical,
and	ethical	rules,	as	well	as	to	local	customs;

—	legal	scholars’	works	are	of	great	significance,	since	they	are	able	to
construe	the	primary	sources	and	underlying	decisions;

—	normative	legal	acts	(legislation)	are	secondary;

—	judicial	practice	per	se	is	not	a	source	of	law;	it	is	based	on	the	idea
of	obligations,	not	rights	(as	opposed	to	the	Romano-Germanic	and	the
Anglo-Saxon	legal	families).

The	family	of	 traditional	 law	includes	 legal	systems	of	Madagascar,	a
number	of	African	and	Far	East	countries.

This	legal	family	is	characterised	with	the	following	features:

—	customs	and	traditions	are	dominant	sources	of	law,	they	are	non-
written	and	are	handed	down	from	generation	to	generation;

—	customs	and	traditions	are	mixtures	of	 legal,	ethical,	and	mythical
prescriptions	which	formed	naturally	and	were	sanctioned	by	the	state;

—	 customs	 and	 traditions	 govern	 relations	 between	 groups	 and
communities,	and	not	individuals;

—	 normative	 acts	 (written	 laws)	 are	 secondary,	 although	 their
significance	has	been	increasing;

—	judicial	practice	(legal	precedent)	is	not	a	primary	source	of	law;

—	the	judiciary	bases	on	the	idea	of	reconciliation	and	maintenance	of
agreement	in	the	community,	its	unity;

—	legal	doctrine	is	non-significant;

—	many	customs	and	traditions	are	out	of	date.

Thus,	 legal	 families	 are	 unlike	 each	 other.	 Each	 of	 the	 above	 named



legal	systems	has	unique	features,	as	well	as	universal	characteristics	of
any	 legal	 system.	 One	 should	 remember	 that	 combination	 of	 national
legal	systems	into	legal	families	is	quite	relative.

Test	questions	and	tasks

1.	Please	give	your	definition	of	law.

2.	Please	list	the	features	of	law.

3.	Please	give	examples	of	dynamic	and	static	regulatory	functions	of
law.

4.	Which	elements	of	the	legal	system	do	you	think	are	crucial?

5.	Please	list	advantages	and	disadvantages	of	primary	legal	systems.

Chapter	6.	Individual,	Law,	and	State
6.1.	Legal	Status	of	an	Individual:	Definition	and	Types

The	 manifold	 relations	 between	 the	 law	 and	 the	 individual	 may	 be
characterised	via	the	definition	of	individual's	legal	status,	which	reflects
the	 primary	 aspects	 of	 the	 individual’s	 interaction	 with	 law:	 their
interests,	needs,	relations	with	state,	labour,	social	and	political	activity,
social	needs.

Thus,	the	legal	status	of	an	individual	is	a	cumulative	term	reflecting
legal	position	of	an	individual	in	the	society,	their	rights	and	obligations.

The	 structure	 of	 individual’s	 legal	 status	 includes	 the	 following
elements:	 rights	 and	 obligations,	 legitimate	 interests,	 legal	 capacity,
citizenship,	liability,	etc.

Several	types	of	legal	status	are	distinguished:

1)	 general,	 or	 constitutional	 (status	 of	 an	 individual	 as	 a	 citizen,	 as
envisaged	by	the	Constitution.	It	remains	the	same	for	all	citizens	of	the
Russian	Federation);



2)	special,	or	generic	 (status	or	 legal	position	of	certain	categories	of
citizens	—	students,	retired,	military	officers,	etc.);

3)	individual	(shows	the	specific	position	of	a	certain	individual,	their
rights	and	obligations,	specific	nature	of	their	job,	gender,	age,	etc.);

4)	status	of	individuals	and	entities;

5)	status	of	aliens,	stateless	persons,	dual	nationals,	refugees;

7)	branch-specific	status:	in	civil	law,	in	administrative	law,	etc.

It	is	worth	underlining	that	the	state	and	the	society	should	constantly
improve	one’s	legal	status	by	optimising	the	manner	of	their	interaction.

6.2.	Correlation	and	Interaction	of	State	and	Law

State	 and	 law	 are	 interrelated	 social	 institutions	 which	 emerged	 in-
parallel	 and	 for	 the	 same	 reasons.	 They	 are	 both	 designed	 to	 organise
social	relations,	align	various	and	sometimes	conflicting	social	interests,
and	provide	satisfactory	living	conditions	for	people.

Nevertheless,	 state	 and	 law	 are	 self-sufficient	 enough	 to	 have
differences	as	well	as	similarities.

State	and	law	are	united	because:

—	they	emerge	and	develop	jointly;

—	they	act	as	means	of	management	and	regulation	of	social	relations;

—	they	are	designed	to	align	various	 interests	of	 individuals,	society,
and	the	state	itself;

—	 they	 are	 defined	 through	 economic,	 social,	 spiritual,	 ethic,	 and
religious	factors.

State	and	law	are	separate	because:



—	state	is	an	organisation	of	political	power,	and	law	is	an	instrument
of	regulating	social	relations;

—	 state	 expresses	 its	 authority,	 and	 law	 is	 a	 compromise	 between
various	actors	of	social	relations;

—	state’s	primary	element	is	an	agency,	and	law’s	primary	element	is	a
norm	(rule).

Modern	 literature	 indicates	 three	 possible	 models	 of	 state-law
interaction:	1)	 totalitarian	 (state	 ranks	above	 law	and	 is	not	 connected
thereto);	 2)	 liberal	 (law	 ranks	 above	 state);	 and	 3)	 pragmatic	 (state
creates	law	and	is	bound	by	it).

The	most	 rational	 solution	 can	only	be	 achieved	when	 state	 and	 law
cooperate	in	a	mutually	beneficial	way,	which	is	the	usual	way.

6.3.	Rule	of	Law	State:	Essence	and	Principles

Rule	 of	 law	 is	 a	 manner	 of	 organisation	 of	 political	 power	 which
creates	 conditions	 for	 fullest	 enforcement	 of	 citizens’	 rights	 and
freedoms	and	for	consistent	binding	of	state	authority	by	law	so	that	the
former	does	not	abuse	its	power.

To	sum	up,	the	essence	of	a	rule	of	law	state	is	based	on	two	primary
aspects:	 1)	 enforcement	 of	 an	 individual’s	 rights,	 freedoms,	 and
legitimate	interests;	2)	binding	of	the	state	by	law.

Law	 limits	 state’s	discretion	and	does	not	 allow	depersonalisation	of
an	individual	and	its	total	compelling	to	state’s	will.	It	is	the	individual’s
rights	 and	 freedoms	 set	 forth	 in	 laws	 that	 balance	 the	 state	 authority
hindering	its	abuse	by	bureaucratic	apparatus.	Individuals,	their	life	and
freedom	are	the	core	of	the	political	system	and	its	primary	landmark.

Apart	 from	the	abovesaid,	a	 rule	of	 law	state	can	be	characterised	by
the	following	principles:

—	 separation	 of	 power	 into	 the	 legislative,	 the	 executive,	 and	 the
judiciary	(the	legislative	is	elected	by	the	people	and	is	designed	to	work



out	 a	 strategy	of	 social	 development	 through	 laws;	 the	executive	deals
with	 enforcement	 of	 laws	 and	 economic	 activity;	 the	 judiciary	 delivers
justice,	 sees	 for	 recovery	 of	 violated	 rights	 and	 punishment	 of
wrongdoers.	 The	 essence	 of	 the	 separation	 of	 powers	 principle	 is	 the
system	 of	 checks	 and	 balances,	 rather	 than	 formal	 self-sufficiency	 of
governmental	agencies);

—	 federalism	 (so-called	 vertical	 separation	 of	 authority	 between
federal	and	regional	governmental	agencies	 is	an	additional	element	 in
the	system	of	checks	and	balances.	If	this	mechanism	is	in	place,	various
state	agencies	and	branches	will	control	one	another	and	hinder	abuse	of
power.	However,	 it	 does	not	mean	 that	unitary	 states	 cannot	 be	 called
rule	of	law	states);

—	 supremacy	 of	 law	 (law	 is	 equally	 binding	 upon	 citizens	 and	 state
agencies);

—	equality	before	law	and	court;

—	mutual	liability	of	state	and	individual;

—	high	level	of	legal	awareness	and	legal	culture	in	the	society;

—	 existence	 of	 civil	 society	 and	 its	 control	 over	 the	 enforcement	 of
laws	by	all	legal	subjects;

—	 operation	 of	 the	 principle	 “what	 is	 not	 forbidden	 by	 law,	 is
permitted”;

—	openness	of	government’s	activity;

—	freedom	of	speech	and	political	pluralism.

In	a	rule	of	law	state,	both	the	state	and	the	individual	are	equal	legal
subjects.

6.4.	Civil	Society:	Definition,	Characteristics,	and	Structure

The	term	“civil	society”,	just	like	the	idea	of	rule	of	law,	took	centuries



to	be	 formed	by	 such	philosophers	 as	Aristotle,	Cicero,	Hobbes,	 Locke,
Hegel,	Marx,	and	many	others.

There	are	several	similar	definitions	of	civil	society.

Civil	society	is	a	complex	of	socioeconomic,	moral,	religious,	national,
family	 relations	and	 institutes	which	serves	 the	 interests	of	 individuals
and	their	groups.

Civil	 society	 can	 also	 be	 briefly	 defined	 as	 a	 system	 of	 non-state
organisations,	 unions,	 enterprises,	 institutions,	 political	 parties,
professional	 and	 other	 unions,	 other	 non-governmental	 bodies	 which
interact	with	the	official	authority	on	egalitarian	basis.

The	 essence	 of	 civil	 society	 which	 operates	 relatively	 independently
from	the	state	is	the	naturally	evolving	social	relations	which	help	cater
to	individuals’,	their	groups’	or	associations’	needs.

It	is	fairly	rightly	believed	that	the	state	should	be	accountable	to	the
civil	society	and	should	serve	it.

However,	 it	 is	motiveless	 to	contradistinguish	civil	 society	and	state,
as	well	as	to	believe	that	the	two	are	absolutely	independent.	No	social
relations	are	possible	without	the	state’s	influence	and	interference.	On
the	one	hand,	civil	society	is	a	solid	social	sphere	which	values	free	will,
on	 the	 other	 hand	 civil	 society	 represents	 relations	 which	 the	 state
provides	and	maintains.

There	is	a	number	of	common	ideas	and	principles	underlying	any	civil
society,	regardless	of	the	country.	They	are	the	following:

1)	economic	freedom,	variety	of	ownership	forms,	market	relations;

2)	unconditional	recognition	and	protection	of	human	and	civil	rights;

3)	legitimacy	and	democratic	nature	of	authority;

4)	 universal	 equality	 before	 law	 and	 justice,	 legal	 security	 of	 an
individual;



5)	rule	of	 law	state	which	is	based	on	the	principle	of	separation	and
cooperation	of	powers;

6)	 political	 and	 ideological	 pluralism,	 operation	 of	 legal	 opposition
and	multi-party	system;

7)	 freedom	 of	 expression,	 speech,	 and	 press,	 independency	 of	 mass
media;

8)	 non-interference	 of	 state	 into	 citizens’	 private	 lives,	 mutual
obligations	and	liability;

9)	peace	among	classes,	partnership,	and	national	amity;

10)	efficient	social	policy	which	maintains	adequate	standard	of	living.

One	must	 remember	 that	 civil	 state	 rises	 from	 the	 citizens	and	 their
freedom.	 Civil	 society	 is	 an	 open,	 democratic,	 anti-totalitarian,	 self-
evolving	society	which	is	centered	on	an	individual,	a	citizen,	a	person.	It
is	 non-compatible	with	 command	 economy	 and	 coercive	 imposition	 of
styles	of	life	and	activity.	Free	individuals-owners	unite	for	joint	catering
to	their	needs	and	for	serving	the	common	good.

The	elements	of	civil	society	(its	structure)	are:

1)	individual;

2)	family;

3)	school;

4)	church;

5)	ownership	and	entrepreneurship;

6)	social	groups	and	classes;

7)	private	life	and	its	warranties;



8)	democratic	institutions;

9)	social	unions,	political	parties,	and	movements;

10)	impartial	justice;

11)	system	of	education;

12)	free	mass	media;

13)	non-governmental	socioeconomic	relations,	etc.

Civil	 society	 and	 rule	 of	 law	 state	 are	 interconnected	 and
interdependent	institutions	which	are	not	identical.

6.5.	Legal	Awareness	and	Legal	Culture

Legal	awareness	is	one	of	social	awareness	forms	and	exists	alongside
with	political,	ethical,	academic,	artistic,	philosophic,	and	other	forms	of
awareness.	Legal	awareness	is	a	form	of	consciousness	which	focuses	on
law	and	legal	reality.

Legal	awareness	is	a	system	of	judgments,	ideas,	impressions,	feelings,
emotions,	 and	 experiences	 which	 relate	 to	 operating	 or	 desired
(hypothetic)	 law	 and	 other	 legal	 phenomena.	 It	 is	 about	 how	 people
understand	and	perceive	law,	how	they	recognize	it,	and	how	they	would
like	it	ideally.

Thus,	 it	 is	 obvious	 that	 legal	 awareness	 embodies	 two	 elements
making	up	its	structure:

1.	legal	ideology	(a	system	of	legal	ideas,	opinions,	theories,	outlooks,
and	 doctrines;	 perception	 of	 law	 and	 its	 influence	 on	 social	 relations,
recommendations	as	to	improve	the	legal	system,	etc.);

2.	 legal	psychology	 (experiences,	moods,	 and	emotions	which	people
feel	towards	law	and	regarding	its	operation).

Legal	awareness	may	be	classified	as	follows:



—	 individual	 (individual	 judgments	 concerning	 law	 and	 approach
towards	law);

—	mass	(ideas,	judgments,	and	evaluations	of	the	existing	legal	system
based	on	mere	life	experience);

—	professional	 (judgments,	 feelings,	 and	 beliefs	 of	 lawyers	 based	 on
their	expertise);

—	 scientific	 (ideas,	 doctrines,	 and	 concepts	 reflecting	 academic
research	as	to	the	essence	of	law	and	its	operation).

Law	and	legal	awareness	in	some	way	are	mutually	determined.	Legal
awareness	evolves	along	with	law	and	depends	on	its	manifestations	 in
the	society.	In	their	turn,	legal	subjects	can	not	ignore	the	level	of	legal
awareness	of	the	people.

Legal	culture	of	an	individual	is	knowledge	and	understanding	of	law,
as	 well	 as	 acting	 accordingly.	 Legal	 culture	 of	 an	 individual	 is	 closely
connected	with	 legal	 awareness	 and	 is	 based	 thereupon.	However,	 it	 is
wider	 than	 legal	 awareness,	 since	 legal	 culture	 involves	 legally
significant	behavior	apart	from	psychological	and	ideological	elements.

Not	every	 individual	who	knows	and	understands	 legal	norms	can	be
deemed	 legally	 cultured.	 An	 individual	 possessing	 legal	 culture	 is	 the
one	 who	 not	 only	 knows	 legal	 norms	 but	 also	 has	 a	 need	 to	 abide	 by
them	and	conforms	to	them	in	their	everyday	life.

Thus,	 the	 structure	 of	 an	 individual’s	 legal	 culture	 consists	 of	 the
following	elements:

—	psychological	element	(legal	psychology);

—	ideological	element	(legal	ideology);

—	behavioral	aspect	(legally	significant	acts).

Legal	culture	is	a	part	of	general	culture	and	is	characterised	with	the
state	 of	 legitimacy	 and	 justice	 in	 the	 society,	 actual	 need	 for	 law,



availability	of	legal	knowledge	and	expertise,	etc.

Test	questions	and	tasks

1.	What	is	meant	under	the	term	“legal	status	of	an	individual”?

2.	 Please	 name	 common	 features	 and	 differences	 between	 state	 and
law.

3.	How	are	rule	of	law	and	civil	society	related?

4.	What	is	the	difference	between	legal	awareness	and	legal	culture?

Chapter	7.	Norm	of	Law.	Forms	(Sources)	of	Law
7.1.	Definition	and	Characteristics	of	a	Norm	of	Law

Law	 is	 a	 complex	 or	 a	 system	 of	 legal	 norms,	 rules	 of	 conduct
applicable	to	a	wide	range	of	persons	and	situations	and	operating	for	a
relatively	long	period	of	time.

Norm	of	law	(legal	norm)	is	one	of	the	most	important	types	of	social
norms	—	it	operates	jointly	with	the	latter	(such	as	morals,	religious	and
ethical	norms,	etc.).

However,	a	 legal	norm	has	 its	unique	features.	For	 instance,	 it	sets	a
standard	 of	 legality	 of	 subjects’	 behavior,	 and	 this	 standard	 is	 quite
distinct	 and	 clear.	 Norm	 of	 law	 is	 a	 model	 of	 behavior	 and	 it	 clearly
defines	 the	 boundaries	 of	 allowed	 and	 obligatory	 actions	 in	 various
situations,	thereby	securing	one’s	boundaries	of	freedom.

Norms	are	designed	to	fix,	encourage	and	protect	those	relations	that
are	 required	 and	 desired	 by	 the	 society	 and	 the	 state	 and	 discourage,
confine	those	relations	that	are	undesirable	for	the	society.

Thus,	a	norm	of	 law	is	a	universally	binding,	formally	defined	rule	of
behavior	 set	 or	 sanctioned	 by	 the	 state	 and	 directed	 at	 regulation	 of
social	relations.



Legal	norm	is	a	primary	cell	of	 law,	basic	element	of	 its	system.	 It	 is
natural	 therefore	 that	 this	 norm	 possesses	 characteristics	 of	 law	 as	 a
special	social	phenomenon.

The	following	is	qualified	as	characteristics	of	norm	of	law:

1)	general	binding	nature	—	a	norm	of	law	is	universally	binding	on	its
addressees.	The	generally	binding	character	is	enforced	by	the	power	of
state.	 Alongside	 with	 that,	 a	 norm	 of	 law	 is	 an	 impersonal	 rule	 of
behavior	which	 applies	 to	 the	majority	 of	 life	 situations	 and	 to	 a	wide
range	of	persons;	the	state	addresses	the	norm	of	law	to	all	persons	and
entities,	not	 to	certain	 individuals.	 In	other	words,	norm	of	 law	always
has	 its	 addressee	—	 a	 certain	 group	 of	 persons,	 a	 category	 of	 citizens
(judges,	 students,	 retired,	 shareholders,	 investment	 companies,
agricultural	manufacturers),	but	a	rule	of	law	never	identifies	anyone	out
of	that	group,	i.e.	a	norm	of	law	can	never	contain	obligatory	instruction
exclusively	for	Mr.	Ivanov	or	Mr.	Petrov.

2)	formal	certainty	—	a	norm	of	law	is	expressed	in	a	certain	form	as
prescribed	by	state	 (as	a	 rule,	 in	writing)	 in	official	documents,	 so	 that
the	norm	clearly	defines	the	boundaries	of	subjects’	actions;

3)	 connection	 with	 the	 state	 —	 a	 norm	 of	 law	 is	 set	 forth	 by	 state
agencies	 or	 social	 organisations	 (provided	 that	 the	 latter	 do	 not
contradict	 the	 law)	 and	 is	 enforced	 by	 state’s	 power	 —	 coercion,
punishment,	encouragement;

4)	 granting-binding	 nature	 —	 a	 norm	 of	 law	 is	 an	 imperious
instruction	by	state	indicating	allowed	and	obligatory	behavior.	A	norm
of	 law	 is	a	bilateral	 rule	which,	on	the	one	hand,	grants	 rights	 to	some
subjects	and,	on	the	other	hand,	imposes	obligations	on	other	subjects,
since	no	rights	can	be	enforced	without	obligations,	and	vice	versa.	The
granting-binding	 nature	 allows	 to	 cater	 to	 the	 authorised	 subjects’
interests	 through	 the	 obligated	 subjects’	 actions.	 Consequently,
subjective	 rights	 and	 legal	 obligations	 set	 forth	 in	 a	 legal	 norm	match
each	 other:	 the	 performance	 of	 one	 party’s	 obligations	 leads	 to
enjoyment	of	rights	by	the	other	party.



Alongside	with	 that,	 the	granting-binding	nature	 is	not	 expressed	 in
the	same	way	in	all	legal	norms.	For	instance,	in	protective,	declarative,
definitive	 norms	 this	 nature	 is	 hardly	 expressed,	 since	 their	 tasks	 are
different.

5)	microsystem	feature	—	a	norm	of	law	acts	as	a	special	microsystem
which	encompasses	three	interrelated	elements:	hypothesis,	disposition,
and	sanction.

7.2.	Structure	of	a	Norm	of	Law

Structure	of	a	norm	of	law	is	its	internal	composition,	the	existence	of
interrelated	elements.	The	structure	of	a	norm	of	law	is	an	ordered	unity
of	necessary	elements	which	provide	its	functional	sufficiency.

A	norm	of	law	consists	of	three	interdependent	elements.

1.	 Hypothesis	 is	 an	 element	 of	 a	 norm	 of	 law	 which	 indicates	 the
prerequisites	to	its	operation	(time,	location,	parties)	which	are	defined
through	 legal	 facts.	 Thus,	 hypothesis	 is	 indication	 in	 the	 norm	 of	 law
when,	where,	to	whom	and	on	what	conditions	the	norm	is	applicable.

2.	Disposition	is	an	element	of	a	norm	of	law	which	defines	the	model
of	subjects’	behavior	by	setting	forth	rights	and	obligations	which	arise
when	 legal	 facts	 indicated	 in	 the	 hypothesis	 are	 in	 place;	 disposition
operates	 as	 the	 primary	 regulating	 element	 of	 the	 norm,	 as	 its	 core.
Essentially,	disposition	is	the	rule	of	behavior,	the	definition	of	what	is
demanded	from	the	subjects	and	what	their	behavior	should	be,	in	each
given	 situation.	 However,	 disposition	 should	 not	 be	 equalised	 to	 the
norm	of	law.	One	must	remember	that	it	is	a	part	of	legal	prescription.

3.	 Sanction	 is	 an	 element	 of	 a	 norm	 of	 law	 which	 sets	 forth	 the
consequences	 for	a	 subject	 carrying	out	 the	disposition.	Sanctions	may
be	 negative,	 unfavorable	 (measures	 of	 punishment)	 and	 positive
(measures	of	encouragement).

The	above	named	elements	of	 a	norm	of	 law	are	 interconnected	and
may	 be	 represented	 as	 the	 following	 logical	 chain:	 “if	 (hypothesis)	 —



then	(disposition)	—	otherwise	(sanction)”.

7.3.	Classification	of	Norms	of	Law

Classification	 allows	 precise	 definition	 of	 the	 place	 and	 role	 of	 legal
norms	 in	 the	 legal	 regulation	system,	as	well	as	deep	understanding	of
their	nature	and	designation.

The	following	types	of	legal	norms	are	distinguished:

1)	based	upon	the	content:

—	 source	 norms	 which	 determine	 the	 basics	 of	 legal	 regulation	 of
social	 relations,	 its	 purposes,	 tasks,	 boundaries,	 and	 directions	 (for
instance,	 declarative	 norms	 which	 declare	 principles,	 and	 definitive
norms	which	define	certain	legal	terms,	etc.);

—	 general	 norms	 incidental	 to	 the	 majority	 of	 branches	 of	 law	 and
applicable	to	the	majority	of	its	institutions;

—	special	norms	relating	to	specific	institutions	of	a	branch	of	law	and
regulating	a	certain	kind	of	 social	 relations	based	on	 their	peculiarities
(these	 norms	 detalize	 common	 conditions	 and	 modify	 timeframes	 of
their	implementation);

2)	based	upon	the	subject	matter	of	legal	regulation	(depending	on	the
branch	of	law)	—	constitutional,	civil,	administrative,	land,	etc.;

3)	based	upon	 their	nature	—	substantive	 (criminal,	 land,	 ecological,
etc.)	and	procedural	(criminal	procedure,	civil	procedure);

4)	based	upon	the	method	of	legal	regulation:

—	imperative	(containing	authoritative	orders);

—	dispositive	(allowing	discretion);

—	encouraging	(stimulating	socially	useful	behavior);



—	 advisory	 (offering	 the	most	 tolerable	 option	 of	 behavior	 for	 state
and	society);

5)	 based	 upon	 scope	 in	 time	 —	 permanent	 (set	 forth	 by	 laws)	 and
temporary	 (Presidential	 decree	 imposing	 a	 state	 of	 emergency	 due	 to
natural	disaster);

6)	 based	 upon	 scope	 of	 action	 —	 federal	 (operating	 at	 the	 whole
territory	 of	 a	 state,	 for	 instance,	 norms	 of	 Criminal	 Execution	Code	 of
the	 Russian	 Federation),	 regional	 (operating	 at	 the	 territories	 of
regions	 —	 in	 republics	 and	 regions	 etc.),	 municipal	 (adopted	 by	 the
municipal	 authorities),	 and	 local	 (operating	 at	 the	 territory	 of	 certain
enterprise,	organisation,	or	institution);

7)	based	upon	legal	force	—	legal	norms	of	laws	and	regulations;

8)	based	upon	the	manner	of	 legal	 regulation	—	enabling	 (giving	 the
opportunity	 to	 perform	 certain	 actions,	 e.g.	 accept	 a	 will,	 demand
performance	 of	 obligations),	 obliging	 (prescribing	 to	 perform	 certain
positive	actions,	e.g.	pay	damages,	pay	rent,	return	books	to	the	library),
and	 prohibiting	 (disallowing	 certain	 actions,	 e.g.	 breaking	 traffic	 rules,
committing	larceny),	etc.

7.4.	Definition	and	Types	of	Forms	(Sources)	of	Law

Formal	 certainty	 is	one	of	 characteristics	of	 law.	Legal	norms	 should
be	exteriorised	and	set	forth	in	a	respective	official	act.	They	should	be
embodied	 in	 certain	 forms	 which	 are	 their	 forms	 of	 life.	 Without	 this
feature,	 norms	 of	 law	 cannot	 perform	 their	 task	 of	 regulating	 social
relations.	 Without	 this	 feature,	 people	 will	 be	 unable	 to	 distinguish	 a
legal	norm	from	any	other	social	norm.

Consequently,	forms	of	 law	are	a	manner	of	exteriorising	state’s	will,
formal	rules	of	behavior,	a	manner	of	laying	down	these	rules.

Before	 analyzing	 the	 various	 forms	 of	 law,	 one	 should	 study	 the
relation	between	the	terms	“form	of	law”	and	“source	of	law”.



If	 one	 relies	 upon	 the	 common	meaning	 of	 the	 word	 “source”	 as	 of
“any	inception	or	basis,	root	or	reason,	starting	point	or	origin”,	then	for
legal	purposes,	three	factors	comprise	the	source	of	law:

1)	 source	 in	 the	 substantive	 meaning	 (material	 living	 conditions,
peoples’	interests	and	needs	which	lead	to	origin	and	existence	of	law);

2)	 source	 in	 the	 ideological	 meaning	 (legal	 theories	 and	 doctrines,
legal	awareness,	etc.).	One	must	 take	 into	account	that	 the	way	we	see
and	perceive	law	is	in	a	large	part	determined	by	the	legal	doctrine	of	the
state,	by	the	existing	system	of	mindset,	and	by	the	respective	ideology;

3)	source	in	the	formal	legal	sense	which	is	at	the	same	time	the	form
of	 law,	 i.e.	 the	 way	 the	 law	 is	 institutionalised	 and	 established	 in	 the
society.	There	are	four	primary	forms	of	law.

1.	 Normative	 act	 is	 an	 act	 containing	 norms	 of	 law	 and	 aimed	 at
regulating	 certain	 social	 relations	 (the	 Constitution,	 laws,	 regulations,
etc.).	 Normative	 act	 is	 one	 of	 the	most	 common	 and	 perfect	 forms	 of
modern	 continental	 law	 (in	 Germany,	 France,	 Italy,	 Russia,	 and	 many
other	countries).

2.	Legal	custom	is	a	historically	established	rule	of	behavior	which	 is
fixed	in	people’s	consciousness	and	leads	to	legal	consequences.	Russian
legal	 system	 acknowledges	 legal	 custom,	 but	 its	 role	 is	 not	 too
significant.

3.	Legal	precedent	is	a	judicial	or	administrative	decision	with	regard
to	a	specific	legal	case.	Said	decision	has	the	same	legal	force	as	a	norm
of	 law,	 and	 it	 determines	 future	 decisions	 with	 regard	 to	 analogous
cases.	This	 form	of	 law	 is	widespread	 in	 the	 countries	of	 common	 law.
Court	reports	are	published	in	those	countries,	where	one	can	obtain	all
the	 information	 about	 the	 precedents.	 The	 acknowledgment	 of	 legal
precedent	 as	 a	 source	 of	 law	 means	 the	 acknowledgment	 of	 courts’
lawmaking	function	(this	form	of	 law	is	common	for	England,	the	USA,
Canada,	New	Zealand,	etc.).

4.	Lawmaking	treaty	 is	a	contract	between	lawmaking	entities,	which



results	in	creating	a	new	norm	of	law.	Nowadays,	the	significance	of	such
treaties	 in	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 is	 increasing.	 They	 are	 becoming
widespread	 in	 constitutional,	 labour,	 civil,	 administrative,	 and	 other
branches	of	law	(e.g.,	a	collective	labour	agreement).	As	opposed	to	civil
and	 other	 contracts	 (deals),	 lawmaking	 treaties	 are	 not	 individually
binding,	but	create	a	norm	of	law	designed	for	multiple	application.

7.5.	Normative	Acts:	Definition	and	Types

Normative	 act	 is	 a	 legal	 act	 adopted	 by	 the	 entitled	 entity	 and
containing	legal	norms,	i.e.	universal	and	perpetual	rules.

Normative	acts	are	only	 issued	by	entities	with	respective	 lawmaking
authority,	 and	 are	 made	 in	 strict	 form.	 A	 normative	 act	 is	 an	 official
document,	an	instrument	setting	forth	legally	significant	information.

One	must	distinguish	a	normative	act	 from	other	written	documents
which	 are	 binding	 on	 its	 parties	 (e.g.,	 court	 rulings	 which	 are	 only
binding	upon	the	parties	to	the	matter,	or	civil	contracts,	etc.).

All	normative	acts	can	be	classified	based	on	their	legal	force:	laws	and
regulations.

Law	is	a	normative	act	adopted	by	a	lawmaking	state	authority	or	at	a
referendum.	A	 law	 is	 a	 document	 of	 highest	 legal	 power	 and	 regulates
the	most	crucial	social	relations.

Characteristics	of	a	law:

1)	it	is	adopted	by	a	legislative	agency	or	at	a	referendum;

2)	the	manner	of	its	preparation	and	enactment	is	determined	by	the
Constitution	of	the	Russian	Federation	and	by	other	official	documents;

3)	ideally,	it	should	express	the	will	and	interests	of	the	people;

4)	 it	possesses	 the	highest	 legal	power;	all	 regulations	must	conform
to	it	and	not	contradict	it;



5)	it	regulates	the	most	important,	key	social	relations.

These	 features	 characterize	 law	 in	 the	 system	 of	 normative	 acts,
distinguish	 law	 in	 the	system	of	other	normative	acts	and	assign	 it	 the
quality	of	 supremacy.	The	only	authority	which	can	change	or	cancel	a
law	is	the	authority	that	adopted	the	law,	and	in	accordance	with	strictly
established	procedure.

Types	of	laws:

1)	the	Constitution	(fundamental,	prevailing	political-legal	act	setting
forth	constitutional	order,	human	rights	and	freedoms,	defining	the	form
of	 government	 and	 state	 structure,	 establishing	 federal	 governmental
agencies);

2)	federal	constitutional	laws	(they	are	adopted	to	address	matters	set
forth	in	the	Constitution	and	are	organically	bound	with	it);

3)	federal	laws	(current	legislation	regulating	various	spheres	of	social
life);

4)	laws	of	the	subjects	of	the	Russian	Federation	(they	are	adopted	by
the	 respective	 representative	 (legislative)	 agencies	 and	 apply	 to	 the
respective	subject’s	territory	only.

Regulations	 are	 acts	 adopted	 on	 the	 basis	 and	 in	 pursuance	 of	 laws.
Regulations	also	contain	legal	norms.

The	 legal	 power	 of	 regulations	 is	 lower	 than	 that	 of	 laws.	 However,
although	 the	 latter	 play	 the	most	 important	 role	 in	 the	 governance	 of
social	 relations,	 regulations	 are	 still	 significant	 due	 to	 their	 accessory
function.

These	are	the	types	of	regulations,	sorted	by	hierarchy:

1)	 decrees	 of	 the	 President	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation.	 These	 are
binding	 on	 the	 territory	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 they	 must	 not
contradict	 the	 Constitution	 and	 federal	 laws.	 Presidential	 decrees	 are
prepared	 within	 the	 presidential	 authority	 as	 provided	 for	 by



constitutional	and	statutory	norms.

2)	regulations	of	the	Government	of	the	Russian	Federation.	These	are
binding	on	the	territory	of	the	Russian	Federation.	Their	special	feature
is	 that	 they	may	be	adopted	on	the	basis	and	 in	pursuance	of	 laws	and
presidential	decrees.

3)	orders,	instructions,	charters,	and	policies	of	ministries.	These	acts
are	adopted	on	the	basis	and	in	pursuance	of	laws,	presidential	decrees,
and	 governmental	 regulations.	 They	 govern	 social	 relations	within	 the
scope	of	authority	of	a	particular	ministry.

4)	decisions,	regulations,	and	orders	of	agencies	of	the	subjects	of	the
Russian	 Federation	 (e.g.,	 territorial	 or	 regional	 administrations,
governors,	etc.);

5)	normative	 acts	 of	 local	 authorities.	These	 acts	 are	 adopted	within
the	scope	of	authority	of	the	respective	agencies	and	are	binding	at	the
territory	of	cities,	districts,	rural	communities,	etc.;

6)	 local	 normative	 acts.	 These	 are	 rules	 adopted	 at	 the	 level	 of
particular	enterprises	or	organisations	and	governing	the	internal	affairs
(e.g.,	internal	labour	rules,	various	corporate	norms,	etc.).

Besides,	normative	acts	may	be	classified	based	on	other	criteria.

Depending	on	the	peculiarities	of	legal	status	of	the	lawmaking	body,
all	normative	acts	are	divided	into:

—	acts	of	state	agencies;

—	 acts	 of	 other	 social	 institutions	 (municipal	 bodies,	 labour	 unions,
companies,	partnerships,	etc.);

—	acts	of	joint	nature	(adopted	by	both	state	agencies	and	other	social
institutions);

—	acts	adopted	at	a	referendum.



Depending	on	their	scope	of	action,	acts	are	divided	into:

—	federal;

—	normative	acts	of	the	subjects	of	the	Russian	Federation;

—	normative	acts	of	municipal	agencies;

—	local	normative	acts.

Depending	on	the	time	frames,	acts	are	divided	into:

—	permanent	acts;

—	temporary	acts.

One	must	 note	 that	 the	 legal	 force	 of	 normative	 acts	may	 vary,	 but
they	are	still	binding	upon	all	parties	to	legal	relations.

Test	questions	and	tasks

1.	What	is	understood	by	granting-binding	nature	of	a	legal	norm?

2.	 In	what	cases	can	 the	 terms	“source	of	 law”	and	“form	of	 law”	be
equalised?

3.	Please	describe	 the	 classification	of	normative	 acts	based	on	 their
legal	force.

4.	What	is	the	difference	between	a	law	and	a	regulation?

Chapter	8.	Law-Making	and	Realisation	of	Law
8.1.	Definition,	Principles,	and	Types	of	Law-Making

Law-making	 embodies	 adopting,	 amending,	 and	 cancelling	 legal
norms.	 Lawmakers	 are	 state	 agencies,	 non-governmental	 structures
vested	with	 respective	 authority,	 as	well	 as	 the	 people	 (citizens)	when
adopting	laws	at	referenda.



Law-making	 is	 a	 compound	 element	 and	 the	 final	 stage	 of	 a	 greater
process	—	law	formation	(the	natural	historic	process).

The	 essence	 of	 law-making	 lies	 within	 transforming	 individual
interests,	 those	 of	 the	 society	 and	 of	 the	 state	 into	 legal	 norms,	 i.e.
universally	binding	legal	prescriptions.

Law-making	is	carried	out	within	set	procedural	norms	(provided	for	in
the	Constitution,	rules	of	procedure,	charters,	etc.).

The	most	important	features	of	law-making	are	as	follows:

—	it	is	an	active,	creative	acnivity	which	is	exercised	or	sanctioned	by
the	state;

—	the	result	of	law-making	is	legal	norms	set	forth	in	normative	acts
(as	well	as	in	normative	treaties,	legal	customs,	legal	precedents);

—	law-making	is	a	crucial	means	of	governing	the	society;	it	forms	the
strategy	of	social	development	and	adopts	essential	rules	of	conduct;

—	 the	 level	 and	 culture	 of	 law-making,	 along	 with	 the	 quality	 of
normative	acts	 indicate	the	degree	of	civilisation	and	democracy	 in	the
society.

Law-making	is	governed	by	the	following	principles:

—	 scientific	 nature	 (while	 drafting	 legal	 acts	 one	 should	 study	 the
socioeconomic,	 political,	 and	 other	 situations,	 objective	 social	 needs,
etc.);

—	 expertise	 (lawmakers	 should	 be	 educated	 and	 qualified	 lawyers,
managers,	economists,	etc.	However,	law	sets	no	certain	criteria	towards
their	education	or	job	seniority);

—	legality	(this	activity	should	be	based	solely	on	the	Constitution	of
the	 Russian	 Federation,	 other	 laws	 and	 regulations,	 and	 in	 accordance
with	the	established	procedure);



—	 democratic	 nature	 (it	 characterizes	 the	 degree	 of	 citizens’
participation	and	involvement	into	this	process);

—	 transparency	 (meaning	 openness	 and	 publicity	 of	 the	 law-making
process	to	the	society,	regular	circulation	of	information);

—	 promptness	 (meaning	 the	 timeliness	 of	 adopting	 normative	 acts.
Law	 has	 to	 promptly	 react	 to	 social	 changes.	 The	 following	 principle
works:	“A	stitch	in	time	saves	nine”).

The	following	types	of	law-making	are	distinguished:

Based	on	lawmakers:

1)	 direct	 public	 law-making	 through	 a	 referendum	 (nation-wide	 vote
on	crucial	matters	of	state	and	social	life);

2)	law-making	of	state	agencies	(e.g.,	by	parliament,	government);

3)	law-making	of	certain	officials	(e.g.,	by	the	President,	minister);

4)	law-making	of	municipal	agencies;

5)	local	law-making	(e.g.,	by	a	corporation,	enterprise,	organisation);

6)	law-making	of	social	organisations	(e.g.,	labour	unions).

Based	on	the	significance:

1)	legislative	law-making	is	law-making	by	legislative	(representative)
state	 authority	 where	 normative	 acts	 of	 higher	 legal	 power	 are
adopted	—	these	are	laws,	and	they	are	enacted	according	to	a	complex
procedure;

2)	delegated	law-making	is	law-making	activity	of	the	executive	bodies
which	is	exercised	by	way	of	delegation	by	the	parliament.	This	form	of
law-making	is	determined	by	the	need	for	prompt	handling	the	matter	of
adopting	normative	acts	within	the	scope	of	authority	of	a	representative
agency;



3)	subordinate	law-making	means	that	norms	of	 law	are	adopted	and
implemented	 by	 entities	 which	 are	 not	 legislative	 bodies	 —	 by	 the
President,	Government,	ministries,	governors,	heads	of	administrations,
heads	 of	 enterprises,	 organisation,	 and	 institutions.	 Not	 every	 legal
norm	needs	to	be	established	through	legislative	law-making.	There	is	a
whole	spectrum	of	situations	where	it	is	more	practicable	to	adopt	legal
norms	 as	 regulations,	 normative	 treaties,	 and	 other	 forms,	 because
subordinate	law-making	is	far	more	time	efficient	and	far	less	formalised
than	law-making.

8.2.	Systematisation	of	Legal	Acts:	Definition	and	Types

Normative	 acts	 are	 adopted	 by	 various	 agencies	 in	 various	 time
periods,	 in	 various	 spatial	 frames	 and	 on	 various	 occasions.	 Said
situation	 is	 bound	 to	 influence	 the	 nature	 of	 operating	 laws	 and
regulations,	which	can	sometimes	contradict	one	another.	Therefore,	in
order	to	regulate	social	relations,	one	must	organise	normative	acts	and
bring	them	into	a	respective	system.

Thus,	 systematisation	 is	 alignment	 and	 organisation	 of	 normative
acts.	 It	 is	 required	 to	 ensure	 that	 legislation	 is	 easy	 to	 access	 and	 to
apply,	that	obsolete	and	inefficient	legal	norms	are	eliminated,	that	legal
discrepancies	are	settled,	and	that	gaps	in	law	are	filled.

The	following	types	of	systematisation	are	distinguished:

1)	incorporation	is	a	form	of	systematisation	where	normative	acts	are
combined,	 but	 their	 content	 remains	 unchanged.	 The	 result	 of
incorporation	is	a	compilation	of	normative	acts,	each	of	which	remains
legally	 valid.	 Principles	 of	 incorporation	 are	 as	 follows:	 chronological
(depending	on	 the	 time	of	adoption),	 topic-based,	etc.	 Incorporation	 is
the	 simplest	way	of	 systematisation.	 Incorporation	 can	be	both	official
and	 non-official,	 the	 former	 being,	 for	 instance,	 official	 gazette	 of	 the
Russian	Federation,	the	 latter	being	digests	of	normative	acts	compiled
by	 branch	 of	 law	 which	 are	 issued	 for	 academic	 and	 educational
purposes.

2)	consolidation	is	a	form	of	systematisation	where	normative	acts	are



combined,	 their	 content	 remains	 unchanged,	 but	 each	 of	 the	 acts
becomes	 legally	 invalid.	With	consolidation,	normative	acts	are	unified
based	on	their	relevance	to	a	certain	type	of	activity	(nature	protection,
education,	 etc.).	 Consolidation	 is	 special	 because	 it	 represents
“compromised”	systematisation,	meaning	that	 it	combines	the	 features
of	both	incorporation	and	codification.	Consolidation	is	often	employed
as	an	interim	measure	where	codification	appears	impossible.

3)	 codification	 is	 a	 form	 of	 systematisation	 by	 way	 of	 combining
normative	 acts	 into	 one	 logically	 integral	 act,	 where	 their	 content	 is
changed.	 Codification	 presumes	 elimination	 of	 obsolete	 legal	material,
discrepancies	between	norms.	New	rules	of	conduct	are	created,	and	they
are	 uniform	 and	 logical.	 Therefore,	 codification	 is	 a	 manner	 of	 law-
making	 and	 the	 most	 complex	 type	 of	 systematisation.	 Codification
means	refining	norms	of	law	based	on	their	content	into	a	systematised
and	academically	determined	summary	in	a	new	law	(code,	restatement
of	laws,	rules,	regulations,	etc.).

Specific	 features	 of	 codification:	 first,	 only	 respective	 agencies	 are
entitled	 to	 carry	 it	 out;	 second,	 the	 result	 is	 a	 new	 normative	 act	—	 a
code;	 and	 third,	 a	 codified	 act	 operates	 as	 the	 primary	 one	 among	 all
other	acts	in	the	given	sphere.

Currently,	 electronic	 systems	 of	 classification	 are	 becoming
increasingly	 popular,	 which	 provide	 legal	 awareness	 of	 all	 interested
individuals.	Establishment	of	automated	search	engines	 is	undoubtedly
more	 advantageous	 than	 traditional	 systems	 of	 record	 keeping.
Electronic	 systems	 can	 embody	 almost	 unlimited	 amount	 of	 normative
information	(legislation	of	various	countries,	bills,	court	decisions,	etc.),
which	can	be	retrieved	at	any	time	in	no	time.

8.3.	Realisation	of	Law:	Definition	and	Forms

Law	 is	 created	 to	 be	 exteriorised	 and	 to	 help	 achieve	 the	 objectives
which	the	lawmaker	meant	to	be	achieved.	Mere	adopting	of	numerous
legal	norms	 cannot	possibly	have	 the	desired	 social	 effect	—	one	must
pursue	 actual	 substantiation	 and	 virtual	 influence	 onto	 governed
relations.



Realisation	 of	 law	 means	 the	 process	 of	 implementation	 of	 legal
prescription	 in	 individuals’,	 agencies’,	 organisations’,	 enterprises’,
officials’,	 and	 other	 actors’	 rightful	 actions.	 Realisation	 of	 law	 is
impossible	outside	social	relations.

One	 can	 enjoy	 perfect	 legislation,	 fair	 laws,	 but	 if	 these	 are	 not
perceived	 and	 enforced,	 they	 turn	 into	 a	 corpus	 of	 wishful	 thinking;
lawmakers’	 efforts	 will	 be	 cancelled	 out.	 Law	 is	 at	 its	 best	 when	 it
actually	operates.

Realisation	of	law	is	transformation	of	legal	prescriptions	into	rightful
conduct.	 If	 this	 does	 not	 take	 place,	 the	 state	 finds	 itself	 unable	 to
provide	stability	and	order	in	the	society.

There	are	four	primary	forms	of	realisation	of	law.

1)	 Adherence	 to	 law,	 which	 is	 a	 type	 of	 rightful	 conduct	 where
individuals	 refrain	 from	 committing	 offenses,	 in	 other	 words,	 they
adhere	to	the	norms	of	law.

Adherence	to	law	is	the	simplest	form	of	substantiation	of	law	which	is
carried	 out	 through	 individuals’	 passive	 conduct	 and	 abidance	 by	 legal
bans	(individual	“merely”	does	not	break	any	legal	bans:	they	do	not	kill
or	steal	or	abuse	authority).

2)	Fulfillment	of	law.	Individuals	perform	their	obligations,	functions,
and	powers,	thereby	fulfilling	respective	legal	norms.	Fulfillment	of	law
is	 related	 to	binding	norms	and	presumes	active	 conduct.	This	 form	of
realisation	 of	 law	 is	 characterised	 by	 imperativeness	 and	 mandatory
nature,	since	non-performance	of	legal	prescriptions	leads	to	imposition
of	penalties	 (obligations	 including	paying	 taxes,	doing	military	 service,
attending	as	witness,	etc.).

3)	Enjoyment	of	law.	Individuals	at	their	sole	discretion	and	will	enjoy
granted	rights	and	possibilities	and	satisfy	their	legitimate	interests.	No
one	can	coerce	a	citizen	to	enjoy	their	right.	Here,	permissive	rules	are
substantiated	(individual	votes,	uses	their	vacation,	gets	married,	quits	a
job,	etc.).



4)	 Enforcement	 of	 law	 which	 is	 a	 special	 form	 of	 realisation	 of	 law,
since	 it	 is	 related	 to	 commanding	 actions	 of	 justice	 authorities	 and
officials.	They	act	on	behalf	of	the	state	and	perform	the	functions	and
authority	which	 they	are	 vested	with.	This	 is	 one	of	 the	 forms	of	 state
activity	aimed	at	carrying	out	legal	prescriptions.

Enforcement	of	law	is	required	when	individuals	are	unable	to	enforce
their	rights	and	perform	their	obligations	without	state’s	interference	or
coercion.

Legal	norms	need	to	be	enforced	in	the	following	circumstances:

1)	where	an	offense	is	committed,	and	a	penalty	must	be	imposed	onto
the	wrongdoer	to	hold	them	liable;

2)	 where	 an	 obligation	 is	 not	 performed	 voluntarily	 (repayment	 of
debt,	payment	of	fines,	taxes,	adherence	to	terms	of	contract);

3)	 where	 an	 obstacle	 exists	 to	 enjoyment	 of	 one’s	 right	 (e.g.,	 an
individual	is	entitled	to	enter	the	premises	but	is	unable	to	because	it	is
arbitrarily	occupied	by	another);

4)	where	a	legal	issue	exists,	and	parties	are	unable	to	settle	(division
of	property,	taking	custody	of	children,	estate	issues);

5)	where	legally	significant	actions	should	be	controlled	by	the	state	in
order	to	ensure	their	rightfulness,	legality,	and	authenticity	(registration
of	a	will	by	the	notary	public);

6)	where	certain	rights	and	obligations	cannot	arise	from	individuals’
unilateral	 actions,	 and	 a	 competent	 authority	 should	 issue	 an	 act	 of
enforcement	 of	 law	 (recommendation	 for	 a	 reward,	 admission	 to
pension,	entry	into	service,	job	transfer,	receipt	of	award);

7)	where	law	prescribes	to	officially	(sometimes	via	court	proceeding)
establish	 the	 existence	 or	 lack	 of	 some	 fact,	 event,	 or	 state	 (e.g.,
declaration	of	an	individual	to	be	missing	or	presumed	dead;	acquisition
or	loss	of	citizenship).



As	a	result	of	enforcement	of	law,	a	competent	state	agency	adopts	a
respective	legal	act	containing	an	individually	binding	legal	prescription.
This	act	is	of	mandatory	nature	but	is	not	a	normative	act.

As	opposed	to	a	normative	act,	an	act	of	enforcement	of	law	is	adopted
based	on	a	normative	act	and	elaborates	the	legal	norm	set	forth	in	such
normative	 act,	 adjusting	 it	 to	 the	 individual	 situation.	 An	 act	 of
enforcement	of	law	is	personified.

Test	questions	and	tasks

1.	Who	are	lawmakers?

2.	What	is	the	difference	between	law-making	and	law	formation?

3.	Please	list	the	primary	manners	of	legislative	systematisation.

4.	What	is	the	difference	between	enforcement	of	law	and	other	forms
of	its	realisation?

Chapter	9.	Legal	Offence	and	Legal	Liability
9.1.	Definition,	Characteristics	and	Types	of	Legal	Offence

A	legal	offence	is	a	culpable,	punishable,	socially	harmful	violation	of
law	of	a	sane	person	which	inflicts	damage	to	the	interests	of	a	person,
society	and	state.

Not	any	violation	of	 law	 is	a	 legal	offence,	since	the	 latter	must	be	a
result	of	a	person’s	free	will,	i.e.	culpable.	E.g,	a	wrongdoing	committed
by	an	infant,	or	a	mentally	disabled	person,	or	any	other	person	without
legal	capacity,	 is	not	a	 legal	offence	and	therefore	does	not	give	rise	to
legal	liability.

A	 legal	 offence	 has	 several	 compulsory	 characteristics	 (elements)
forming	its	corpus	delicti.	Thus,	a	corpus	delicti	is	a	system	of	elements
of	 legal	 offence,	 which	 are	 necessary	 and	 sufficient	 for	 imposing	 legal
liability.



Determining	 a	 corpus	 delicti	 is	 required	 for	 legal	 qualification	 of	 a
deed.

If	corpus	delicti	is	in	place,	it	gives	rise	to	legal	liability	of	a	person.	If
at	least	one	element	of	corpus	delicti	is	missing,	it	is	not	complete,	and
therefore	there	is	no	legitimate	ground	for	initiation	of	proceedings	and
holding	 the	 respective	 person	 accountable.	 It	 is	 notable	 that	 many
criminal	cases	fail	to	materialise	due	to	lack	of	corpus	delicti.

Corpus	delicti	has	four	elements:

1)	object	of	offence;

2)	offender;

3)	 actus	 reus	 (guilty	 act)	 —	 which	 is	 called	 in	 Russia	 “objective
element”;

4)	 mens	 rea	 (offender’s	 state	 of	 mind)	 —	 which	 is	 called	 in	 Russia
“subjective	element”.

Object	of	offence	is	the	object	that	the	offence	(and	offender)	inflicts
damage	 to.	Objects	may	be	 general	 and	 special,	 or	 concrete.	A	 general
object	 is	 legal	 order,	 interests	 of	 public	 policy	 and	 society,	 social	 and
political	 order	 (regime),	 other	 relations	which	 exist	 in	 a	 given	 society.
Special	objects	are	the	goods,	benefits,	valueable	items	(life,	reputation,
health,	 property,	 ownership	 rights,	 security,	 etc.).	 Any	 legal	 offence
causes	injury	to	both	general	and	specific	objects.

Offender	 is	 a	 person	 or	 entity	 with	 legal	 capability	 which	 has
committed	an	offence.	Infants	and	mentally	disabled	persons	may	not	be
offenders,	since	they	may	not	be	criminally	or	tortially	liable.	The	same
applies	to	the	state	of	insanity.

It	 is	 a	 considered	 that	 an	 individual	 begins	 to	 fully	 realise	 the
magnitude	and	consequences	of	his	or	her	actions	only	once	he	or	she	is
16	 years	 old.	 Only	 in	 some	 specific	 cases	 when	 a	 deed	 is	 clearly	 a
wrondgoing	 (which	 applies	 to	 severe	 crimes)	 a	 14-year-old	 individual



may	be	held	leable	for	his	or	her	actions.

Actus	 reus	 (objective	 element)	 of	 a	 legal	 offence	 encompasses	 its
external	 characteristics	 and	 answers	 the	 question:	 what	 happened,
where,	when	and	how.	Actus	reus	includes:

а)		Wilful	deed	in	the	form	of	either	act	or	inaction	(omission).	An	act
is	 characterised	 by	 active	 will	 of	 the	 perpetrator	 (e.g.	 theft,	 burglary,
robbery,	 vandalism,	 etc.)	 An	 inaction	 (omission)	 is	 characterised	 by
passiveness	(failure	to	provide	medical	treatment,	non-payment	of	taxes,
absence	from	court).

A	 person	 may	 have	 any	 thoughts	 he	 likes,	 but	 he	 or	 she	 may	 not
behave	in	any	way	that	he	or	she	desires.	Legal	liability,	therefore,	arises
out	of	acts,	but	never	—	thoughts.

b)	Unlawfullness	means	that	an	act	or	omission	violates	the	law,	i.	e.	a
certain	 legal	 provision.	 	 Unless	 it	 violates	 the	 law,	 even	 the	 most
dangerous	 act	may	not	 be	 declared	unlawful,	 and	 therefore	 punishable
(e.g.	a	surgeon	performing	a	complicated	surgery	creates	danger	with	his
actions,	but	they	are	lawful	and	not	contrary	to	any	legal	norm);

c)	Damage,	harmful	effect,	social	danger.	Without	such	consequences
an	 act	 is	 not	 considered	 an	 offence.	 See	 Section	 2	 Article	 14	 of	 the
Russian	Criminal	Code:	“The	commission	of	an	act,	or	inaction,	although
formally	containing	the	indicia	of	any	act	provided	for	by	this	Code,	but
which,	by	reason	of	its	insignificance,	does	not	represent	a	social	danger,
which	 caused	 no	 harm	 and	 has	 not	 created	 a	 threat	 of	 damage	 to	 a
person,	society,	or	the	state,	shall	not	be	deemed	a	crime”.

d)	 Direct	 causal	 link	 between	 the	 act/inaction	 (omission)	 and	 its
consequences.	An	 indirect	causality	does	not	constitute	an	offence	and
does	 not	 give	 rise	 to	 legal	 liability.	 E.g.	 a	 doctor	 prescribed	 someone
medication.	 The	 nurse	 contaminated	 the	 vaccine	 with	 a	 contageious
infection	which	 spread	 to	 the	 patient’s	 body	 leading	 to	 his	 death.	 The
nurse	 shall	 bear	 liability,	 but	 not	 the	 doctor,	 although	 without	 his
prescription	 there	 would	 probably	 be	 no	 contagion	 and	 death.	 Here,
there	is	a	causal	link,	but	only	an	indirect	one.



In	order	to	fully	characterise	the	actus	reus	(objective	element),	some
other	 optional	 indicia	 and	 conditions	 may	 be	 analysed:	 time,	 place,
methods	of	committing	an	act.

Mens	 rea	 (subjective	 element)	 is	 a	 combination	 of	 indicia	 which
determine	the	subjective	attutude	of	the	person	towards	his	or	her	deed
and	its	consequences.

Mens	rea	includes	goals,	motives,	mindset	of	the	perpetrator	which	he
had	while	planning	and	committing	his	misdeed.	All	 this	demonstrates
antisocial	 tendencies	 of	 the	 offender	 and	 illustrates	 a	 socio-
psychological	 mechanism	 of	 committing	 the	 punishable	 act.	 Mens	 rea
also	 includes	 a	 conspiracy,	 greedy	motives,	 strong	mental	 disturbance,
perpetrator’s	 behaviour	 after	 the	 crime	 has	 been	 committed.	 It	 is
important	 to	 answer	 the	 following	 questions:	 what	 does	 the	 offender
think	about	the	act,	what	were	its	reasons?	The	main	concern	here	is	not
about	what	happened,	but	why.

All	the	above	is	denoted	by	the	notion	of	“guilt”	or	“culpability”	(state
of	mind	of	the	offender,	attitude	towards	the	misdeed	committed).

Offences	may	be	characterised	on	the	basis	of	culpability	as:	1)	wilful;
2)	 negligent.	 A	wilful	 offence	may	 be	 characterised	 by	 either	 direct	 or
indirect	intent.	Negligent	culpability	is	also	classified	into	two	types:	a)
criminal	presumption,	or	reckless	misconduct;	b)	criminal	negligence.

Direct	 intent	 is	present	when	 the	offender	contemplates	 the	harmful
effects	 of	 his	 actions,	 foresees	 the	 possibility	 or	 inevitability	 of	 such
effects	and	intends	to	cause	such	damage.

Indirect	intent	is	present	when	the	offender	contemplates	the	harmful
effects	 of	 his	 actions,	 foresees	 the	 possibility	 or	 inevitability	 of	 such
effects	and	does	not	desire	to	cause	such	damage,	but	lets	them	happen
or	connives	with	them.

Reckless	misconduct	is	present	when	a	person	foresees	the	possibility
of	 socially	 harmful	 effects	 of	 his	 actions,	 but,	 without	 sufficient
justification	recklessly	counts	on	preventing	or	avoiding	them.



Negligence	is	present	when	the	offender	did	not	foresee	the	possibility
of	socially	harmful	effects	of	his	actions,	although	he	should	and	could
have	done	 it	 if	he	had	exercised	due	precautions	and	paid	attention	 to
them.

Legal	 offences,	 depending	 on	 the	 degree	 of	 their	 social	 danger,	 are
classified	into	crimes	and	misdemeanours.

Crimes,	 the	 list	 of	 which	 is	 provided	 in	 the	 Criminal	 Code,	 are
particularly	dangerous	and	detrimental	for	the	society.	They	infringe	on
the	 most	 important	 social	 benefits	 and	 lead	 to	 the	 strictest	 sanctions
(penalties)	—	e.g.	imprisonment,	life	sentence.

Misdemeanours	 and	 their	 consequences	 are	 less	 dangerous	 by	 their
nature	 than	 crimes.	 They	 are	 not	 subject	 to	 the	 regulation	 of	 criminal
code	 and	 are	 committed	 not	 by	 criminals,	 but	 by	 ordinary	 citizens	 in
various	 spheres	of	 economic,	 business,	 labour,	 administrative,	 cultural,
industrial	 activity,	 family	 life,	 etc.	 They	 lead	not	 to	 criminal	 penalties,
but	to	other	sanctions	which	are	less	strict.

There	are	the	following	types	of	misdemeanours:

1)	 civil	 misdemeanours	 (unlawfully	 inflicting	 damage	 to	 personal
rights	 or	 property	 of	 a	 person	 or	 legal	 entity,	 violation	 of	 contractual
obligations,	conclusion	of	an	unlawful	contract,	etc.).	Sanctions	for	such
offences	include	compensation	of	damages,	restitution	of	rights,	a	bound
over,	debt	recovery,	etc.);

2)	 administrative	 misdemeanours	 (violation	 of	 administrative	 law
provisions	which	secure	the	public	order,	the	system	of	administration,
the	 environment,	 the	 historic	 or	 cultutal	 monuments,	 sanitary	 and
hygienic	norms,	fire	safety,	road	rules,	etc.	The	typical	sanctions	are	fine,
driving	 ban,	 divestiture,	 detainment	 for	 fifteen	 days	 (for	 petty
hooliganism),	community	works,	hunting	ban,	etc.);

3)	disciplinary	misdemeanours	 (violation	of	 labour,	military,	 student,
financial	discipline,	internal	code	of	conduct,	corporate	labour	policy	of
various	 institutions,	 organisations,	 government	 agencies,	 etc.).	 The



principal	sanctions	are	admonition,	admonitory	address,	deprivation	of	a
bonus,	downgrading,	and	termination	of	employment);

4)	 financial	 misdemeanours	 (inflicting	 financial	 damage	 to	 your
employing	 organisation	 or	 institution.	 The	 main	 sactions	 are
restituonary:	deduction	of	 salary,	duty	 to	 repair	a	damage,	compensate
the	price	of	damaged	property,	etc.);

5)	procedural	misdemeanours	(failure	to	appear	 in	court	or	to	appera
before	a	criminal	investigator,	failure	to	cooperate	in	providing	physical
evidence,	etc.	The	sanction	is	compulsory	process	or	attachment).

9.2.	Notion,	Grounds	and	Types	of	Legal	Liability

Legal	liability	is	the	neccessity	to	subject	an	offender	to	enforcement
measures.	Legal	liability	is	always	associated	with	breach	of	legal	norms,
laws	which	are	enforced	by	the	powers	of	state.

In	 practice,	 legal	 liability	 may	 manifest	 as	 undesired	 (adverse)
consequences	 for	 the	 perpetrator:	 monetary,	 moral,	 personal,
organisational,	physical	(imprisonment	or	restraint,	correctional	labour,
confiscation	of	property,	fine,	apprehension,	deprivation	of	right	to	take
certain	positions,	etc.).

The	main	purpose	of	legal	liability	is	to	ensure	the	rights	and	freedoms
of	persons	and	to	secure	and	protect	public	order	and	polilcy.

Legal	 liability	 differs	 from	 other	 forms	 of	 social	 liability	 in	 the
following	respects	(characteristics):

1)	 it	 is	 envisaged	 by	 the	 legislation	 in	 force	 (criminal,	 civil,
administrative,	etc.);

2)	 it	 arises	 out	 of	 legal	 offence	 when	 there	 is	 a	 full	 and	 complete
corpus	delicti;

3)	it	is	enforced	by	the	state;

4)	it	manifests	in	certain	consequences	unfavourable	for	the	offender,



deprivation	 of	 certain	 social	 benefits	 (freedom,	 property,	 other	 rights,
etc.);

5)	 it	 is	 imposed	and	realised	 in	a	certain	procedural	 forms	set	out	by
law,	while	their	violation	also	leads	to	legal	liability;

6)	the	offender	is	punished	in	the	name	of	the	state,	as	opposed	to,	e.g,
moral	responsibility,	the	source	of	which	is	the	society	and	not	the	state
apparatus;

7)	 it	 is	 exercised	 by	 authorised	 state	 bodies	 and	 officials	 under	 a
strictly	determined	procedure	within	their	competence	only.

The	 main	 types	 of	 legal	 liability	 are:	 1)	 criminal;	 2)	 civil;
3)	 administrative;	 4)	 disciplinary;	 5)	 financial;	 6)	 procedural;
7)	constitutional.

The	main	principles	of	legal	liability	include:

1)	 the	 principle	 of	 legality	 (liability	 should	 be	 imposed	 and	 realised
within	 the	 frames	 established	 by	 the	 law,	 no	 discretion	 or	 arbitrary
treatment	should	be	allowed);

2)	 the	 principle	 of	 justifiability	 (liability	 should	 be	 a	 result	 of	 an
offence);

3)	the	principle	of	inevitability	(no	offence	should	go	unpunished);

4)	the	principle	of	fairness	(the	punishment	should	correspond	to	the
gravity	of	the	misdeed,	circumstances	under	which	it	was	committed	and
the	offender’s	state	of	mind,	noone	should	be	persecuted	twice	 for	one
and	the	same;	everyone	should	be	equal	in	the	eyes	of	the	law);

5)	 the	principle	of	humanism	(penalty’s	aim	 is	not	 to	 inflict	physical
suffering	or	humiliate	the	offender’s	dignity);

6)	the	principle	“benefit	of	the	doubt”	(everyone	is	presumed	innocent
until	otherwise	is	proven	in	court).



Test	questions	and	tasks

1.	What	is	the	corpus	delicti	and	what	are	its	elements?

2.	Please	name	forms	of	mens	rea.

3.	What	is	the	difference	between	a	crime	and	a	misdemeanour?	Please
name	types	of	misdemenours.

4.	 Please	 name	 the	 general	 characteristics	 and	 principles	 of	 legal
liability.

Chapter	10.	System	of	Russian	Law
10.1.	Definition	and	Structural	Elements	of	a	System	of	Law

A	 system	 of	 law	 is	 its	 internal	 structure	 (composition,	 organisation)
which	 is	 built	 up	 as	 an	 objective	 reflection	 of	 existing	 and	 developing
social	relations.	A	system	of	law	shows	which	parts	and	elements	law	is
made	up	of	and	how	they	are	related	to	each	other.

The	structural	elements	of	a	system	of	law	are:	a)	norm	of	law;	b)	sub-
institution	of	law;	c)	institution	of	law;	d)	sub-branch	of	law;	e)	branch
of	law.

Norm	 of	 law	 is	 the	 primary	 element	 of	 a	 system	 of	 law.	 It	 is	 a
universally	 binding	 rule	 of	 conduct	 established	 or	 sanctioned	 by	 the
state.

An	 institution	 of	 law	 is	 a	 relatively	 small	 and	 stable	 group	 of	 legal
norms	 which	 govern	 a	 certain	 type	 of	 social	 relations	 (institution	 of
justifiable	 defense,	 statute	 of	 limitations,	 gift,	 transaction,	 sale,
marriage,	etc.).	These	institutions	operate	in	close	interrelation.

A	 complex	 legal	 institution,	 being	 a	 larger	 formation,	 consists	 of
smaller	 sub-institutions.	 For	 instance,	 the	 institution	 of	 municipal
finances	includes	the	institution	of	municipal	budget,	taxes,	fees,	etc.



A	 branch	 of	 law	 is	 an	 isolated	 system	 of	 homogenous	 legal	 norms
which	 govern	 a	 certain	 area	 (sphere)	 of	 social	 relations	 (constitutional
law,	 criminal	 law,	 and	 civil	 law).	 The	 following	 conditions	 matter	 to
determine	 whether	 a	 branch	 of	 law	 exists:	 a)	 the	 degree	 of
distinctiveness	 of	 certain	 relations;	 b)	 their	 relative	 share;	 c)	 the
impossibility	of	governing	these	relations	with	norms	of	other	branches
of	law;	d)	the	necessity	to	apply	a	specific	method	of	regulation.

A	 branch	 of	 law	 is	 not	 “made	 up”,	 but	 it	 originates	 from	 social	 and
practical	needs.

Despite	the	fact	that	branches	of	law	are	organically	interrelated,	they
are	not	equal	in	their	significance,	volume,	and	role	in	influencing	social
relations.	 This	 phenomenon	 takes	 place	 due	 to	 the	 unequal	 broadness
and	composition	of	various	social	relations.

Therefore,	 larger	 branches	 of	 law	 are	 divided	 into	 sub-branches,	 for
instance,	 copyright,	 patent,	 housing,	 and	 inheritance	 law	 in	 civil	 law;
electoral	law	in	constitutional	law;	mining,	water	use,	and	forest	law	in
land	law,	etc.

Two	 criteria	 underlie	 the	 division	 of	 law	 into	 branches	 and
institutions:	subject	matter	and	method	of	legal	regulation.

Subject	matter	is	the	certain	types	of	social	relations	regulated	by	law.
Subject	matter	includes	all	that	which	is	covered	by	legal	norms.	In	other
words,	it	is	the	sphere	covered	and	governed	by	law.

Method	represents	certain	ways,	manners,	and	means	with	which	law
influences	 social	 relations.	 Method	 answers	 the	 question	 how	 law
performs	its	regulatory	function.	Method	in	large	part	predetermines	the
efficiency	of	legal	regulation	and	achievement	of	set	objectives.

Subject	matter	is	the	chief,	the	material	criterion	of	dividing	law	into
branches,	 since	 it	 is	 objectively	 rich	 in	 content	 and	 determined	 by	 the
very	nature	of	social	relations.

Method	acts	as	the	supplementary	criterion	which	is	derived	from	the



subject	matter.	Method	is	not	significant	per	se,	but	in	conjunction	with
the	subject	matter	it	promotes	more	exact	gradation	of	law	into	branches
and	institutions.

10.2.	Brief	Description	of	Primary	Branches	of	Russian	Law

Legal	branches	are	the	primary	units	of	system	of	law,	governing	large
spheres	(areas)	of	social	relations.	These	should	be	characterised	briefly.

1.	 Constitutional	 law.	 A	 leading	 branch	 of	 Russian	 law	 defined	 as	 a
body	 of	 legal	 norms	 and	 institutions	 attending	 to	 the	 crucial	 state
relations.	 They	 include	 formation	 and	 structure	 of	 the	 representative,
the	 executive,	 and	 the	 judicial	 powers,	 principles	 of	 their	 operation,
political	 system,	 economic	 foundation,	 forms	 of	 property,	 federative
system,	 administrative	 territorial	 structure,	 electoral	 system,	 citizens’
legal	status,	their	rights,	freedoms,	and	obligations,	fabric	of	the	society,
etc.

The	 key	 normative	 act	 in	 constitutional	 law	 is,	 naturally,	 the
Constitution	of	the	state,	as	the	foundation	of	all	current	law-making.	It
is	 the	 subject	 matter	 of	 this	 branch.	 The	 method	 is	 described	 as
constitutive-consolidating,	combined	with	general	(basic)	governance.

2.	 Civil	 law.	 The	 largest	 branch	 of	 law	 governing	 a	 broad	 area	 of
property	and	personal	non-property	 relations	 (name,	goodwill,	 dignity,
authorship).	 The	 whole	 stream	 of	 commerce,	 economic	 activity	 of
enterprises,	 organisations,	 and	 institutions	 (possession,	 use,	 and
disposition	of	property,	buying	and	selling,	donating,	inheriting,	leasing,
lien,	transporting,	shipment	of	raw	material)	are	regulated	by	civil	law.

However,	 not	 all	 of	 property	 relations	 are	 governed	 by	 civil	 law,	 but
only	 those	 parties	 to	 which	 are	 legally	 equal	 (plaintiff	 —	 defendant;
debtor	—	creditor;	client	—	contractor)	and	which	are	not	based	on	the
principle	 of	 authority	 (as,	 for	 instance,	 the	 case	 is	 for	 administrative,
financial,	 or	 land	 law).	 The	 latter	 also	 govern	 property	 relations
somehow,	but	use	different	methods.

Due	 to	 its	 breadth	 and	 complexity,	 civil	 law	 as	 a	 branch	 of	 law	 has



numerous	 sub-branches:	 inheritance	 (probate)	 law,	 invention	 law,
patent	law,	housing	law,	transportation	law,	etc.	The	primary	normative
act	is	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation.	The	significance	of	civil
law	 increases	 as	 market	 relations	 evolve.	 The	 primary	 method	 is
dispositive.

3.	 Civil	 procedure	 law.	 Represents	 a	 body	 of	 norms	 governing	 the
operation	 of	 the	 judiciary	 and	 parties	 to	 a	 proceeding	 in	 civil,	 labour,
family,	personal,	financial,	and	other	disputes.	This	branch	also	includes
norms	 governing	 the	 operation	 of	 Arbitrazh	 (commercial)	 courts	 and
notary	public.	The	primary	normative	acts	are	the	Civil	Procedure	Code
of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 and	 the	 Arbitrazh	 Procedure	 Code	 of	 the
Russian	Federation.

4.	 Criminal	 law.	 Represents	 a	 body	 of	 norms	 determining	 which
socially	 harmful	 deeds	 shall	 be	 punishable	 and	 considered	 as	 crimes;
powers	 of	 competent	 authorities	 towards	 wrongdoers,	 grounds	 and
conditions	 for	 imposing	 criminal	 liability,	 corpus	 delicti,	 actus	 reus,
forms	 and	 degree	 of	 mens	 rea,	 etc.	 The	 primary	 normative	 act	 is	 the
Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation.	 Method	 of	 governance	 –is
imperative-prohibitive.

5.	Criminal-executive	(correctional)	 law.	It	 involves	norms	regulating
the	 course	 of	 serving	 sentence	 by	 those	 found	 guilty	 by	 court,	 and
operation	 of	 respective	 state	 authorities	 and	 agencies	 in	 correctional
education	 of	 criminals.	 The	 method	 of	 governance	 is	 education	 and
encouragement	combined	with	imperious-coercive	method.	The	primary
normative	act	is	the	Correctional	(Penal	Execution)	Code	of	the	Russian
Federation.

6.	Criminal	procedure	law.	This	branch	of	law	governs	the	operation	of
court,	 prosecutor’s	 office,	 investigation	 and	 law	 enforcement	 bodies,
defines	procedural	forms	of	investigating	and	solving	crimes,	rights	and
obligations	of	 its	participants	 (party	charged	with	the	crime,	witnesses,
experts,	 the	 injured	 party,	 counsels	 for	 the	 defense	 and	 for	 the
prosecution),	 and	 their	 legal	 status.	 The	 primary	 normative	 act	 is	 the
Criminal	 Procedure	 Code.	 Main	 methods	 of	 governance	 are	 the
imperative	and	the	method	of	procedural	equality	of	parties.



7.	 Administrative	 law.	 It	 governs	 the	 sphere	 of	 regulatory,
administrative,	 and	 executive	 activity	 of	 state	 agencies,	 social
organisations,	 and	 officials	 (the	 government,	 ministries,	 presidential
offices,	enterprises,	municipal	administrations).	The	actors	 in	 this	 field
are	 vested	with	 the	 necessary	 authority.	 The	 objects	 of	 administration
are:	economy,	education,	health	care,	human	rights	protection,	etc.	The
primary	method	 is	 coercion,	 imperative	 orders,	 instructions,	 hierarchy
and	subordination,	personal	responsibility	for	the	entrusted	location.

8.	Municipal	law.	It	is	a	complex	branch	of	Russian	law	which	is	a	body
of	legal	norms	governing	social	relations	in	the	course	of	organisation	of
municipal	governance	and	solving	local	matters	by	population	directly	or
through	representative	bodies.

Methods	of	legal	governance	are	authorisation	and	prohibition.

9.	 Financial	 law.	 Subject	 matter	 of	 this	 branch	 is	 composed	 by
financial	 relations,	 formation	 and	 administration	 of	 the	 state	 budget,
money	 flows,	 bank	 operations,	 loans,	 and	 taxes.	 The	 actors	 in	 these
relations	are	represented	by	all	legal	entities	and	individuals.	Methods	of
governance	are	control,	audit,	and	imperative	prescriptions.	However,	as
market	 economy	 develops	 further,	 the	 method	 becomes	 increasingly
dispositive.

10.	Land	law.	This	branch	is	designed	to	govern	the	matters	of	 land–
use	and	land-utilisation,	maintenance	and	distribution	of	the	land	fund,
definition	of	various	legal	regimes	for	various	types	of	land	according	to
their	administrative	and	economic	purpose	(state,	kolkhoz	(communal),
sovkhoz	(state-owned),	farm,	leased,	municipal,	and	other	categories	of
land).	The	sub-branches	are:	forest	law,	water	use,	and	mining	law.	The
primary	 normative	 act	 is	 the	 Land	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation.
Methods	 of	 governance	 are	 permissions,	 authorisations,	 and
prohibitions.

11.	 Labour	 law.	 The	 subject	 matter	 of	 this	 branch	 is	 the	 sphere	 of
labour	 relations	 (forms	 of	 rational	 labour	 organisation,	 its	 evaluation
and	 remuneration,	 setting	 occupational	 and	 salary	 rates;	 hiring	 and
firing;	 manner	 of	 entering	 into	 collective	 agreements).	 The	 actors	 in



labour	 relations	 are	 workers	 and	 employees,	 state,	 social,	 and
cooperative	 organisations,	 and	 labour	 unions.	 Methods	 of	 governance
are	 encouragement,	 stimulation,	 and	 enactment	 of	 respective
agreements.

12.	 Family	 law.	 This	 branch	 is	 closely	 connected	 to	 civil	 law.
Nevertheless,	 it	 is	 distinguished	 as	 a	 separate	 branch	 governing	 the
manner	 of	 entering	 into	 and	 dissolving	 marriage,	 relations	 between
spouses,	 parents	 and	 children,	 matters	 of	 foster	 care,	 adoption,	 and
curatorship,	property	status	of	family	members,	and	their	mutual	rights
and	 obligations.	 The	 primary	 normative	 act	 is	 the	 Family	 Code	 of	 the
Russian	Federation.	The	leading	methods	are	the	method	of	equality	of
parties	and	the	dispositive	method.

13.	 International	 law.	 Strictly	 speaking,	 it	 is	 detached	 from	 national
systems	 of	 law,	 therefore	 none	 of	 the	 states	 can	 deem	 it	 theirs.
International	law	occupies	a	special	(supranational)	position,	due	to	the
fact	 that	 it	 governs	 international,	 and	 not	 intra-national	 relations.	 It
expresses	 the	 collective	will	 of	 nations,	which	 are	 its	 actors.	 Its	 norms
and	 institutions	are	set	 forth	 in	various	 international	 treaties,	charters,
conventions,	 declarations,	 and	 UN	 documents.	 These	 acts	 list	 mutual
rights	and	obligations	of	the	states	as	actors	on	the	international	stage,
the	 principles	 of	 their	 communication	 and	 conduct.	 Russia	 recognised
the	 priority	 of	 international	 law	 over	 the	 national,	 especially	 in	 the
human	 rights	 sphere.	 The	 Russian	 Constitution	 envisages	 that
universally	 recognised	 norms	 of	 international	 law	 and	 international
treaties	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 shall	 be	 a	 component	 of	 its	 legal
system.

Scholars	 also	 define	 the	 following	 branches	 of	 law:	 commercial,
ecological,	 military,	 trade,	 prosecutor’s	 supervision	 law	 and	 other
branches	 combining	 the	 various	 norms	 and	 institutions	 governing
complex	relations.

Test	questions	and	tasks:

1.	 What	 is	 the	 difference	 between	 the	 terms	 “legal	 system”	 and



“system	of	law”?

2.	Please	list	the	primary	structural	elements	of	a	system	of	law.

3.	Please	briefly	characterize	the	key	branches	of	Russian	law.



Part	2.	Basics	of	constitutional	law
Chapter	11.	Constitutional	Law	of	the	Russian

Federation...	Basics	of	Constitutional	Order	of	the
Russian	Federation

11.1.	Constitutional	Law	of	the	Russian	Federation	as	a	Branch	of
Law:	General	Description

Constitutional	 law	is	the	backbone	branch	of	Russian	law.	It	 includes
legal	 norms	which	 set	 forth	 and	 provide	 for	 the	 primary	 human	 rights
and	 freedoms	 and	 establish	 a	 certain	 system	 of	 government	 bodies	 to
this	end.

The	 evolution	 of	 constitutional	 law	 as	 a	 branch	 of	 law	 illustrates
democratisation	 of	 the	 state,	 actual	 efforts	 to	 maintain	 the	 necessary
balance	between	freedom	and	authority,	since	if	the	former	“finds	itself
outside	 of	 stable	 statehood,	 it	 can	 degenerate	 into	 anarchy	 and
overindulgence,	 and	 if	 statehood	 is	 based	 on	 denial	 of	 freedom,	 an
individual	is	burdened	with	totalitarian	chains”2.

Thus,	one	may	conclude	that	the	main	meaning	of	constitutional	law
is	finding	the	balance	of	authority	and	freedom	in	the	society	to	ensure
its	 well-balanced	 development.	 Constitutional	 law	 establishes	 clear
framework	 for	 various	 conflicting	 political	 powers,	 it	 creates	 just
principles	 for	 carrying	 out	 political	 authority,	 thereby	 creating
prerequisites	for	maintaining	civil	peace	and	accord.

Thus,	constitutional	law	is	a	unique	form	of	constituting	democracy	in
the	society.

Subject	matter	of	constitutional	law	encompasses	two	aspects:

—	 establishment	 and	 protection	 of	 human	 rights	 and	 freedoms,
relations	 between	 individual	 and	 the	 state	 (constitutional	 law	 contains
basic	norms	concerning	an	individual’s	 legal	status,	their	 freedoms	and
boundaries	thereto,	and	obligations);

—	constitution	of	state	and	its	authority	(not	only	does	constitutional



law	 set	 forth	 the	basic	 political	 structures,	 but	 it	 also	determines	 their
relationships,	 legal	 mechanisms	 of	 coherent	 and	 efficient	 cooperation
among	all	state	authorities).

Method	of	constitutional	law	is	a	corpus	of	manners	and	ways	of	legal
influence	 onto	 social	 relations	 constituting	 the	 subject	 matter	 of
constitutional	law.

The	basic	methods	are	imperative	(this	method	allows	no	discretion	at
the	part	of	an	individual)	and	dispositive	(this	method	leaves	discretion
to	 an	 individual	 as	 to	 whether	 to	 enjoy	 or	 refrain	 from	 enjoying	 the
rights	and	to	choose	the	optimal	conduct).

The	 source	 of	 constitutional	 law	 is	 a	 certain	 form	 through	 which
norms	of	constitutional	law	are	expressed.	One	believes	that	the	sources
of	 constitutional	 law	 can	 be	 either	written	 or	 non-written	 and	 include
natural,	as	well	as	positive	law.

Natural	 law	 is	 a	 sum	 of	 rights	 and	 freedoms	 which	 have	 been
historically	 recognised	 as	 indispensable,	 independent	 from	 the	 will	 of
state	and	its	rulers,	such	rights	and	freedoms	not	being	a	gift,	but	rather
a	 foundation	 of	 normal	 existence	 and	 operation	 of	 any	 community	 of
people.	 “The	 state	 is	 bound	 with	 these	 primary	 ethical	 and	 rational
imperatives	and	must	recognise,	observe,	and	warranty	these”3.

One	must	admit	that	in	many	civilised	states,	natural	law	is	reflected
in	 positive	 law	 (coming	 from	 the	 state).	 In	 Russia,	 for	 instance,	 the
concept	 of	 natural	 rights	 is	 set	 forth	 in	 section	 2	 Article	 17	 of	 the
Constitution,	 which	 declares	 that	 “fundamental	 human	 rights	 and
freedoms	are	inalienable	and	shall	be	enjoyed	by	everyone	since	the	day
of	birth”.

The	sources	of	positive	constitutional	law	include:

1)	 the	 Constitution	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 (adopted	 at	 national
voting	on	December	12,	1993)	and	Constitutions	of	Republics	which	are
part	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation),	 charters	 of	 other	 constituent	 entities
(subjects)	of	the	Russian	Federation;



2)	 federal	 constitutional	 laws	 (all	 of	 which	 are	 sources	 of
constitutional	law)	and	federal	laws	(those	which	govern	the	application
of	human	rights	and	freedoms,	system	of	state	authority);

3)	treaties	and	agreements:	international	(entered	into	by	and	between
the	Russian	 Federation	 and	 other	 states)	 and	 internal	 (entered	 into	 by
and	between	the	Federation	and	its	territories);

4)	declarations;

5)	 rules	 of	 the	 chambers	 of	 the	 Federal	 Assembly	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation;	rules	of	the	legislative	(representative)	bodies	of	subjects	of
the	Russian	Federation;

6)	normative	decrees	and	orders	issued	by	the	President	of	the	Russian
Federation,	acts	of	higher	officials	of	subjects	of	the	Russian	Federation;

7)	 normative	 regulations	 and	 decrees	 of	 the	 Government	 of	 the
Russian	 Federation,	 executive	 bodies	 of	 subjects	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation;

8)	 court	 decisions	 (resolutions	 of	 the	 Constitutional	 court	 of	 the
Russian	 Federation,	 decisions	 of	 the	 Supreme	 court	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation	 related	 to	 constitutional	 rights	 and	 freedoms,	 as	 well	 as
clarifications	in	court	practice);

9)	legal	acts	of	the	USSR	and	RSFSR,	which	are	applicable	insofar	they
do	 not	 conflict	 with	 the	 current	 Constitution;	 as	 new	 laws	 and	 other
normative	 acts	 are	 adopted,	 the	 legal	 acts	 of	 the	 USSR	 and	 RSFSR
decrease	in	number;

10)	normative	acts	of	municipal	authorities;

11)	customs	of	constitutional	law.

The	 system	 of	 Russian	 constitutional	 law	 consists	 of	 the	 following
instututions:	1)	fundamentals	of	constitutional	order;	2)	basic	rights	and
freedoms	 of	man	 and	 citizen;	 3)	 the	 federal	 structure;	 4)	 the	 electoral
system	 (electoral	 law);	 5)	 presidential	 power;	 6)	 legislative	 power;	 7)



executive	 power;	 8)	 state	 authority	 of	 the	 subjects	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation;	 9)	 judiciary	 power	 and	 prosecutor’s	 office;	 10)	 local	 self-
government;	11)	manner	of	amending	and	reviewing	the	Constitution.

11.2.	Definition	and	Legal	Features	of	a	Constitution

Constitution	is	a	legal	document,	the	foundation	of	statehood,	rule	of
law,	 and	 public	 order	 in	 a	 given	 society.	 Due	 to	 its	 legal	 nature,	 a
constitution	is	a	political	document,	too,	since	it	is	the	foundation	of	all
political	processes	in	the	society.

A	constitution	is	the	fundamental	law	of	a	state	which	is	characterised
with	 the	 highest	 legal	 force	 and	 provides	 for	 the	 basic	 rights	 and
freedoms	of	man	and	citizen,	the	system	and	form	of	interaction	of	state
authorities.	One	might	say	that	the	constitution	sets	forth	the	framework
for	interaction	between	an	individual,	society	and	the	state.

A	constitution	performs	the	following	functions:

1)	 integrative	 (constitution	 is	 meant	 to	 integrate	 the	 society	 and	 to
bring	 its	citizens	 together	based	on	generally	acknowledged	values	and
principles);

2)	 continuity	 in	 the	 evolution	 of	 statehood	 (constitution	 envisages
continuity	of	state	authority	and	firmness	of	statehood	and	historically
forged	national	unity);

3)	maintenance	of	national	sovereignty	(it	is	the	constitution	that	sets
forth	that	the	people	are	the	only	source	of	power	and	that	their	right	to
decide	their	destiny	is	inalienable);

4)	 combatting	 extremism,	 separatism,	 and	 violent	 forms	 of	 social
reformations	(constitution	ensures	repression	of	radicalism,	observance
of	declared	rights,	and	decent	life	that	no	antidemocratic	revolution	can
threaten);

5)	 territorial	 integrity	 of	 the	 state	 (constitution	 must	 prevent
territorial	 disintegration	 and	 must	 ensure	 state’s	 indivisibility	 and



independence	at	the	international	stage).

Basic	legal	features	of	a	constitution	are	as	follows.

1)	Supremacy	of	constitution	(which	is	expressly	declared	in	section	2
Article	4	of	the	Constitution	of	the	Russian	Federation).

Supremacy	of	constitution	means:

—	subordination	and	binding	character	upon	the	state;

—	necessary	coordination	of	all	subjects’	activities	with	constitutional
norms;

—	highest	legal	force,	i.e.	predominant	position	in	the	national	system
of	 law.	 Laws	 and	 regulations	 which	 are	 adopted	 in	 the	 Russian
Federation	 must	 not	 conflict	 with	 the	 Constitution,	 and	 state	 and
municipal	 authorities,	 officials,	 citizens,	 and	 their	 unions	must	 strictly
abide	 by	 the	 Constitution	 and	 other	 laws	 (section	 2	 Article	 15	 of	 the
Constitution	of	the	Russian	Federation);

—	direct	application	of	the	Constitution	set	forth	in	section	1	Article
15	of	thereof	which	means	that	the	concerned	individual	may	apply	for
judicial	relief	of	their	rights,	referring	to	their	constitutional	wording.

2)	Key	 role	 in	 the	 legal	 system	of	 a	 state	which	 does	 not	 only	mean
formal	congruence	between	various	normative	acts	and	the	Constitution,
but	 also	 assumes	 creation	 of	 a	 legal	 system	 which	 would	 facilitate
enforcement	 of	 all	 constitutional	 norms	 and	 declarations	 and	 which
would	provide	 efficient	 governance	of	 social	 relations	 according	 to	 the
principles	and	spirit	of	the	basic	law.

3)	 Special	 manner	 of	 protection,	 adoption,	 review,	 amending,	 and
modifying	the	Constitution	which	is	established	due	to	the	fact	that	the
entire	 system	 of	 state	 authority	 is	 aimed	 at	maintaining	 supremacy	 of
the	Constitution	and	protecting	its	norms.	A	special	role	is	given	to	the
Constitutional	 Court	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation.	 Almost	 any	 state’s
legislation	 envisages	 elaborate	 manner	 of	 reviewing	 or	 amending	 the



constitution.	This	does	not	necessarily	 imply	 impossibility	of	reviewing
of	amending	the	constitution	(see,	for	instance,	Articles	134–137	of	the
Constitution	of	the	Russian	Federation).

11.3.	Fundamentals	of	the	Constitutional	Order	of	the	Russian
Federation

One	must	understand	clearly	that	constitutional	order	does	not	merely
lie	in	the	existence	of	constitution	or	its	formal	(mechanical)	observance.
Constitutional	 order	 is	 a	 special	 characteristic	 of	 social	 order,	whereby
the	state	enforces	human	rights	and	freedoms,	acting	in	accordance	with
a	truly	democratic	constitution.

Other	 definitions	 of	 constitutional	 order	 are	 present	 in	 academic
literature.	For	instance,	in	a	narrow	sense,	constitutional	order	means	a
way	 of	 state	 organisation	 which	 is	 set	 forth	 in	 its	 constitution	 and	 is
further	elaborated	in	current	legislation.	In	a	wide	sense,	constitutional
order	 is	 a	 sum	 of	 economic,	 social,	 political,	 legal,	 and	 ideological
relations	which	arise	 in	connection	with	organisation	(legal	 furnishing)
of	 higher	 state	 authorities,	 state	 structure,	 and	 legal	 bonds	 among	 the
state,	the	society,	and	the	individual4.

In	any	event,	to	establish	constitutional	order	means	to	clearly	define
principles	 of	 state	 organisation	 with	 regard	 to	 individuals	 and	 civil
society.

Chapter	1	of	the	Russian	Constitution	is	devoted	to	the	fundamentals
of	 constitutional	 order	 and	 is	 titled	 respectively.	 It	 consists	 of	 16
chapters,	which	constitute	a	certain	system	and	conventionally	may	be
divided	into	four	primary	groups.

1.	Humanitarian	fundamentals	of	constitutional	order.

Humanitarian	 fundamentals	 of	 constitutional	 order	 underline	 the
most	crucial	postulate	—	the	state	is	created	to	serve	the	individual,	and
not	 vice	 versa.	 The	 state	 refuses	 to	 apply	 totalitarian	 approach	 in
governing	 social	 relations,	 whereby	 an	 individual	 is	 disregarded	 and
deprived	of	many	possibilities	to	fulfil	their	potential.



The	essence	of	 this	approach	 is	expressed	 in	Article	2	of	 the	Russian
Constitution:	“Man,	his	rights	and	freedoms	are	the	supreme	value.	The
recognition,	 observance,	 and	 protection	 of	 the	 rights	 and	 freedoms	 of
man	and	citizen	shall	be	the	obligation	of	the	state”.	All	of	the	following
articles	of	the	Constitution	and	the	entire	system	of	normative	acts	are
subordinate	to	this	super-principle.

The	 humanism	 of	 the	 constitutional	 order	 is	 also	 illustrated	 by
sovereignty	 of	 the	 people.	 Article	 3	 of	 the	Constitution	 of	 the	Russian
Federation	declares:	“1.	The	bearer	of	sovereignty	and	the	sole	source	of
power	in	the	Russian	Federation	shall	be	its	multinational	people.	2.	The
people	shall	exercise	their	power	directly,	as	well	as	through	the	bodies
of	 state	 power	 and	 municipal	 self-government.	 3.	 The	 supreme	 direct
expression	 of	 the	 power	 of	 the	 people	 shall	 be	 referenda	 and	 free
elections”.

People’s	 sovereignty	 is	 the	 foundation	 and	 source	 of	 power,	 and
people’s	will	expressed	through	constitutional	forms	is	the	foundation	of
any	democratic	state.

2.	Constitutional	characteristics	of	the	Russian	Federation.

Article	1	of	the	Constitution	of	the	Russian	Federation	envisages	that
the	Russian	Federation	is	a	democratic,	federative,	rule	of	law	state	with
republican	form	of	government.	Article	7	sets	forth	that	Russia	is	a	social
state,	and	Article	14	declares	that	it	is	a	secular	state.	These	are	the	basic
constitutional	characteristics	of	Russia	as	a	state.

The	term	“democratic	state”	emphasizes	Russia’s	orientation	towards
creation	of	a	mechanism	of	authority	which	is	aligned	with	people’s	will
and	 universally	 acknowledged	 rights	 and	 freedoms.	 In	 a	 democratic
state,	 civil	 society	 is	 developed,	 as	 well	 as	 representative	 forms	 of
people’s	 authority	 (for	 greater	 detail,	 please	 see	 para.	 3.4.	 of	 the
textbook).

State	structure	of	the	Russian	Federation	is	based	on	the	principle	of
federalism,	 meaning	 that	 the	 state	 consists	 of	 a	 number	 of	 equal
subjects	—	there	are	currently	85	(for	greater	detail	on	federalism,	please



see	para.	3.3	of	the	textbook).	Article	5	of	the	Constitution	of	the	Russian
Federation	sets	 forth	 that	 the	Russian	Federation	consists	of	 republics,
territories,	regions,	cities	of	federal	importance,	an	autonomous	region,
and	 autonomous	 areas	 —	 equal	 subjects	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation.
Article	 5	 also	 prescribes	 that	 the	 federal	 structure	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation	is	based	on	its	state	integrity,	the	unity	of	the	system	of	state
authority,	and	the	division	of	powers	between	the	bodies	of	state	power
of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 and	 those	 of	 the	 subjects	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation	(section	3	Article	5).

Russia	is	a	rule	of	law	state,	i.e.	one	whose	activity	is	subordinated	to
law	 and	 is	 aimed	 at	 observance	 of	 human	 rights	 and	 freedoms	 (for
greater	detail	on	a	rule	of	law	state,	please	see	para.	6.3.	of	the	textbook).

A	social	state	is	one	designed	to	maintain	social	justice,	social	welfare,
and	social	security.	As	opposed	to	a	socialist	state,	a	social	state	does	not
strive	to	make	citizens	“equally	free”.	Instead,	a	social	state	supports	the
most	vulnerable	social	groups,	creates	prerequisites	for	full	employment,
and	ensures	affordability	of	education	and	proper	medical	services.

Section	 1	 Article	 7	 of	 the	 Constitution	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation
declares	 that	 social	 state’s	 policy	 is	 aimed	 at	 creating	 conditions	 for	 a
worthy	life	and	free	development	of	people.	Labour	and	health	of	people
are	 protected,	 a	 guaranteed	 minimum	 wages	 are	 established,	 state
support	 is	 ensured	 to	 the	 family,	 maternity,	 paternity,	 and	 childhood,
system	 of	 social	 services	 is	 developed,	 state	 pensions,	 allowances,	 and
other	social	security	guarantees	are	established	(section	2	Article	7).

Secular	state	means	that:

а)	no	religion	may	be	established	as	a	state	or	obligatory	one	(section	1
Article	14);

б)	religious	associations	shall	be	separated	from	the	state	and	shall	be
equal	before	the	law	(section	2	Article	14).

These	rules	are	not	universal	for	all	states,	even	democratic	ones.	For
instance,	 Great	 Britain	 officially	 declares	 the	 predominance	 of	 the



Anglican	 church,	 and	 Scandinavian	 states	—	 the	 predominance	 of	 the
Lutheran	church.	Nevertheless,	this	does	not	mean	that	these	countries
reject	freedom	of	belief.

The	secular	character	of	the	state	means	that	officials	of	the	state	are
entitled	 to	 profess	 any	 religion,	 but	 are	 prohibited	 to	 grant	 privileges
thereto	or	to	create	obstacles	to	those	professing	a	different	religion.

The	republican	form	of	government	(for	greater	detail,	please	see	para.
3.2.	 of	 the	 textbook)	 underlines	 appointment	 by	 election	 of	 a	 head	 of
state	and	replaceability	of	certain	officials.

3.	Fundamentals	of	state	authority	organisation	in	Russia

The	fundamentals	of	state	authority	organisation	in	Russia	are,	above
all,	state	sovereignty	and	separation	of	powers.

Article	4	of	 the	Constitution	declares	 that	“1.	The	sovereignty	of	 the
Russian	 Federation	 shall	 cover	 the	 whole	 of	 its	 territory.	 2.	 The
Constitution	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 and	 federal	 laws	 shall	 have
supremacy	 in	 the	 whole	 territory	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation.	 3.	 The
Russian	 Federation	 shall	 ensure	 the	 integrity	 and	 inviolability	 of	 its
territory”.

State	sovereignty	 is	derivative	 from	people’s	sovereignty.	The	former
is	defined	as	supremacy	and	independence	of	state	authority	 inside	the
country	and	in	international	relations.

Thus,	 the	 primary	 features	 of	 Russia’s	 sovereignty	 are	 supremacy	 of
state	 authority	 (its	 unboundedness	 by	 anything	 but	 the	 Constitution,
natural	 law,	 and	 state	 laws),	 independence	 of	 state	 authority	 (it	 is
entitled	 to	enact	 laws	and	regulations	and	rule	over	 its	 territory),	 state
integrity	 (separation	 of	 territories	 infringes	 the	 Constitution	 and	 is
inadmissible),	and	inviolability	of	its	territory.

Article	10	of	the	Constitution	underlines	that	“the	state	power	in	the
Russian	 Federation	 shall	 be	 exercised	 on	 the	 basis	 of	 its	 division	 into
legislative,	 executive,	 and	 judicial	 power.	 The	 bodies	 of	 legislative,



executive,	and	judicial	power	shall	be	independent”.	Article	11	provides
for	the	system	of	federal	bodies	of	state	power	in	the	Russian	Federation.
According	 to	 this	Article,	 the	 state	 power	 in	 the	Russian	 Federation	 is
exercised	 by	 the	 President	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 the	 Federal
Assembly	 (the	 Council	 of	 the	 Federation	 and	 the	 State	 Duma),	 the
Government	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 and	 the	 courts	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation.	 State	 authority	 in	 subjects	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 is
exercised	by	bodies	of	state	authority	created	by	these	subjects.

The	obvious	democratic	achievement	of	modern	Russia	is	recognition
of	 municipal	 (local)	 self-governance	 as	 a	 form	 of	 exercising	 people's
authority.	 Article	 12	 of	 the	 Constitution	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation
indicates	that	local	self-governance	shall	be	recognised	and	guaranteed.
Local	self-government	is	independent	within	the	limits	of	its	authority,
and	the	bodies	of	local	self-government	shall	not	be	part	of	the	system	of
bodies	of	state	authority.

4.	Economic	and	political	foundations	of	constitutional	order.

The	Constitution	of	the	Russian	Federation	does	not	expressly	contain
the	term	“market	economy”,	but	the	analysis	of	economic	foundations	of
constitutional	order	 leaves	no	room	for	doubt	that	the	state	safeguards
market	economy	and	its	primary	principles.

Pursuant	 to	 Article	 8	 of	 the	 Constitution	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,
the	following	are	guaranteed:

—	integrity	of	economic	space;

—	free	flow	of	goods,	services,	and	financial	resources;

—	support	for	competition	and	freedom	of	economic	activity.

The	most	important	feature	of	economic	foundation	of	constitutional
order	is	that	in	the	Russian	Federation,	recognition	and	equal	protection
is	 given	 to	 private,	 state,	 municipal,	 and	 other	 forms	 of	 ownership
(Article	8	of	the	Constitution	of	the	Russian	Federation).



The	Russian	state	recognises	ideological	and	political	pluralism,	which
is	 directly	 connected	 to	 one’s	 right	 to	 express	 their	 opinion	 and
participate	in	political	activities.	Section	2	Article	14	of	the	Constitution
of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 underlines	 that	 no	 ideology	 may	 be
established	as	state	or	obligatory.

One	defines	ideology	as	a	system	of	political,	philosophical,	and	other
approaches	 to	 social	 evolution	 patterns	 and	 primary	 ways	 of	 its
perfection.	 Not	 only	 does	 any	 civilised	 society	 set	 forth	 ideological
pluralism,	 but	 it	 is	 actually	 interested	 in	 it,	 since	 it	 expands	 social
horizons,	 creates	 competition	 among	 opinions	 regarding	 fair	 world
order,	 and	 reveals	 hidden	 dangers	 of	 various	 development	 paths.	 The
principle	of	 ideological	pluralism	guards	 the	society	 from	stagnation	 in
many	spheres	of	science	and	art.

The	 logical	 consequence	of	 ideological	diversity	 is	political	diversity.
Article	 13	 of	 the	 Constitution	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 recognises
political	diversity	and	pluralism.

In	 democratic	 states,	 multi-party	 and	 two-party	 systems	 can	 exist,
maintaining	 the	 required	 level	 of	 political	 competition	 in	 the	 society.
One-party	system,	however,	is	an	indicium	of	a	totalitarian	state.

Alongside	with	that,	section	5	of	Article	13	of	the	Constitution	of	the
Russian	Federation	is	aimed	at	constraining	destructive	consequences	of
ideological	and	political	pluralism:	“The	creation	and	activities	of	public
associations	whose	aims	and	actions	are	aimed	at	a	forced	change	of	the
fundamental	 principles	 of	 the	 constitutional	 order	 and	 at	 violating
integrity	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 at	 undermining	 its	 security,	 at
setting	 up	 armed	 units,	 and	 at	 instigating	 social,	 racial,	 national,	 and
religious	strife	shall	be	prohibited”.

All	 the	 rules	 listed	 in	 Chapter	 1	 of	 the	 Constitution	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation	 “The	 Fundamentals	 of	 the	 Constitutional	 order”	 are	 of
fundamental	 nature,	 and	 none	 of	 the	 other	 norms	 of	 the	 Constitution
may	contradict	them.

Test	questions	and	tasks



1.	What	is	the	specific	nature	of	Russian	constitutional	law?

2.	Please	analyze	the	primary	differences	between	natural	and	positive
law.

3.	Please	name	the	basic	legal	features	of	a	constitution.

4.	What	is	understood	by	“constitutional	order”?

Chapter	12.	Rights,	Freedoms	and	Obligations	of	Man	and
Citizen	in	the	Russian	Federation

12.1.	Notion	of	Rights	and	Freedoms	of	Man	and	Citizen

Rights	 and	 freedoms	 of	 man	 and	 citizen	 are	 the	 cornerstone	 of
constitutional	 law	which	 provides	 basic	 safeguard	 against	 tyranny	 and
abuse	 of	 power	 to	 society	 and	 individuals	 alike.	 Rights	 of	 man	 and
citizen	 are	 not	 limited	 to	 constitutional	 rights	 and	 freedoms,	 but	 the
latter	represent	the	most	important	and	fundamental	part	of	the	former.

By	 all	 accounts,	 the	 freedom	 of	 a	 person	 means	 being	 able	 to	 do
anything	which	does	not	 cause	harm	 to	others	and,	 therefore,	 freedom
may	 not	 be	 absolute.	 Freedom	 does	 not	mean	 all-permissiveness.	 The
boarders	 of	 freedom	may	 only	 be	 drawn	 by	 law,	which	 determines	 the
limits	 of	 freedom	 as	 well	 as	 the	 consequences	 for	 overstepping	 them.
According	to	the	formal	legal	doctrine,	human	and	civil	freedoms	are	the
same	 notion	 as	 human	 and	 civil	 rights,	 the	 only	 difference	 being	 that
possessing	 a	 right	 means	 being	 allowed	 to	 do	 something	 whereas	 a
freedom	means	not	being	burdened	by	any	hurdles	or	constraints.

According	 to	 section	 1	Article	 17	 of	 the	 Constitution	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation,	 recognition	and	guarantees	 shall	be	provided	 for	 the	 rights
and	freedoms	of	man	and	citizen	according	to	the	universally	recognised
principles	 and	 norms	 of	 international	 law.	 Fundamental	 human	 rights
and	freedoms	are	inalienable	and	shall	be	enjoyed	by	everyone	since	the
day	of	birth	(section	2	Article	17).

These	 constitutional	 provisions	 are	 based	 on	 the	 doctrine	 of	 natural



rights	which	 declares	 that	 the	 state	 of	 liberty	 is	 not	 granted	 by	 public
authorities	but	belongs	to	a	person	from	the	very	birth.

It	is	worth	noting	that	rights	of	man	and	citizen	are	two	closely	related
notions,	but	not	 the	same.	Rights	of	man	(human	rights)	descend	from
natural	 law,	rights	of	citizen	(civil	rights)	—	from	positive	law,	 i.e.	 laws
emanating	 from	the	state.	Human	rights	are	 inherent	 to	any	person	by
virtue	of	human	nature,	regardless	of	its	citizenship,	whereas	civil	rights
are	the	benefits	to	be	enjoyed	only	by	citizens	of	a	certain	state.

In	 contrast	 to	 rights	 of	 citizen,	 rights	 of	man	 are	 not	 always	 a	 legal
category,	 but	 often,	 only	 a	moral	 and	 social	 category	 which	may	 exist
independently	of	state	and	legal	recognition,	regardless	of	the	legal	tie	of
a	person	to	any	certain	country.

The	 fundamental	 international	 normative	 acts	 which	 include
provisions	on	rights	and	freedoms	of	man	and	citizen	include:

1.	 The	 Universal	 Declaration	 of	 Human	 Rights	 (adopted	 by	 the	 UN
General	Assembly	on	10	December	1948);

2.	 European	 Convention	 for	 the	 Protection	 of	 Human	 Rights	 and
Fundamental	Freedoms	(adopted	in	Rome	on	4	November	1950);

3.	International	Covenant	on	Economic,	Social	and	Cultural	Rights	and
International	 Covenant	 on	 Civil	 and	 Political	 Rights	 (both	 adopted	 by
the	UN	General	Assembly	in	1966).

12.2.	Classification	of	the	Fundamental	Rights	and	Freedoms	of
Man	and	Citizen

Fundamental	rights	and	freedoms	of	man	and	citizen	may	be	classified
according	to	various	criteria.

E.g.,	based	on	the	stages	of	declaration	of	the	fundamental	rights	and
freedoms,	they	are	conventionally	classified	into	three	generations:

—	the	first	generation	includes	civil	and	political	rights	declared	as	a
result	 of	 XVII–XVIII	 cc.	 revolutions,	which	 are	 often	 called	 “negative”



rights.	That	means	that	they	demonstrate	the	independence	of	a	person
from	 the	 power	 of	 state	 in	 certain	matters,	which	 denote	 the	 limits	 of
state	 intervention	 into	 the	 domain	 of	 individual	 freedom	 and	 self-
expression	 (e.g.	 they	 include	 right	 to	 life,	 freedom	and	personal	 safety,
inviolability	of	house,	equality	before	the	law,	election	rights,	freedom	of
thought	and	religious	liberty,	freedom	of	print	and	speech);

—	 the	 second	 generation	 is	 linked	 to	 social,	 economic	 and	 cultural
rights,	which	had	been	established	as	such	by	 the	mid-XX	century	as	a
result	 of	 people’s	 strife	 for	 better	 socio-economic	 conditions,	 higher
level	 of	 living	 and	 basic	 welfare	 standards.	 These	 rights	 are	 called
“positive”,	since	their	realisation,	contrary	to	the	first-generation	rights,
requires	goal-oriented	and	active	actions	 from	 the	 state	without	which
such	 rights	 would	 be	 merely	 a	 senseless	 declaration	 (right	 to	 labour,
right	 to	 rest	 and	 leisure,	 education,	 protection	 of	 motherhood	 and
childhood,	healthcare,	social	security,	participation	in	cultural	life	of	the
society);

—	 third	 generation	 of	 rights	 is	 linked	 to	 collective	 rights	 as	 well	 as
joint	 and	 several	 rights	 which	 have	 received	 full	 support	 due	 to	 the
global	problems	of	modern	age	(right	to	peace,	favourable	environment,
self-determination,	information,	social	and	economic	development	etc.).
This	 generation	of	 rights	 started	 forming	 after	 the	 end	of	WWII,	when
many	 countries	 and	 peoples	 were	 freeing	 themselves	 from	 colonial
dependence	 and	 against	 the	 background	 of	 worsening	 ecological	 and
humanitarian	 issues.	 These	 rights	 are	 in	 most	 respects	 only	 emerging
now.

Based	 on	 their	 essence,	 constitutional	 rights	 and	 freedoms	 may	 be
classified	as	follows.

1.	Personal	rights	and	freedoms.

These	include:

—	 right	 to	 life	 (Article	 20	 of	 the	 Constitution	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation);



—	right	to	human	dignity	(Article	21	of	the	Constitution	of	the	Russian
Federation).	 Section	 2	 Article	 21	 of	 the	 Constitution	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation	envisages	that	no	one	shall	be	subject	to	torture,	violence,	or
other	 severe	 of	 humiliating	 treatment	 or	 punishment.	 No	 one	may	 be
subject	 to	medical,	 scientific,	and	other	experiments	without	voluntary
consent;

—	 right	 to	 freedom	 and	 personal	 immunity	 (Article	 22	 of	 the
Constitution	of	the	Russian	Federation),	which	implies	the	capability	to
commit	 any	 legal	 actions	 and	 implies	warranties	 provided	 by	 the	 state
regarding	immunity	of	life,	health,	dignity,	and	reputation;

—	 right	 to	 inviolability	 of	 private	 life,	 personal	 and	 family	 secrets,
protection	of	honor	and	good	name;

—	right	to	privacy	of	correspondence,	telephone	conversations,	postal,
telegraph,	 and	 other	 messages	 (Article	 23	 of	 the	 Constitution	 of	 the
Russian	Federation);

—	right	to	inviolability	of	home	(Article	25	of	the	Constitution	of	the
Russian	Federation).	The	Constitution	specifically	envisages	that	no	one
has	 the	 right	 to	 enter	 a	 house	 against	 the	 will	 of	 its	 dwellers,	 unless
otherwise	prescribed	by	federal	law	or	court	decision;

—	right	to	determine	and	indicate	one’s	nationality;

—	right	to	use	of	one’s	native	language,	to	free	choice	of	the	language
of	communication,	upbringing,	education,	and	creative	work	(Article	26
of	the	Constitution	of	the	Russian	Federation);

—	 right	 to	 free	 travel,	 free	 choice	 of	 place	 of	 stay	 or	 residence
(Article	 27	 of	 the	 Constitution	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation).	 The	 state
warrants	 everyone's	 right	 to	 freely	 leave	 the	 territory	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation	and	citizens'	right	to	freely	return	to	the	Russian	Federation.

Pursuant	 to	Article	28	of	 the	Constitution	of	 the	Russian	Federation,
everyone	 is	 guaranteed	 the	 freedom	 of	 conscience	 and	 religion,
including	 the	 right	 to	 profess	 individually	 or	 together	 with	 others	 any



religion	 or	 to	 profess	 no	 religion	 at	 all,	 to	 freely	 choose,	 possess,	 and
disseminate	religious	and	other	views	and	act	according	to	them.

While	 freedom	 of	 conscience	 implies	 one’s	 right	 either	 to	 believe	 in
God	or	 to	 be	 an	 atheist,	 freedom	of	 religion	 implies	 the	 right	 to	 freely
choose	one’s	religious	doctrine	and	free	religious	practices.

Everyone	 in	 Russia	 is	 guaranteed	 the	 freedom	 of	 ideas	 and	 speech
(Article	 29	 of	 the	 Constitution	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation).	 Alongside
with	 that,	 one	must	 understand	 that	 ideas	 are	 by	 default	 free,	 since	 a
person	can	be	made	to	say	what	they	are	not	thinking,	but	the	thought
itself	is	out	of	control.

No	 one	 may	 be	 forced	 to	 express	 their	 views	 and	 convictions	 or	 to
reject	them.

2.	Political	rights	and	freedoms.

As	 opposed	 to	 personal	 rights	 which	 belong	 to	 each	 person
individually,	political	rights	are	granted	to	citizens	exclusively.

The	most	 important	 political	 rights	 listed	 in	 the	 Constitution	 of	 the
Russian	Federation	are:

—	right	to	freely	look	for,	receive,	transmit,	produce,	and	disseminate
information	 in	 any	 legal	 manner,	 which	 naturally	 implies	 the	 basic
constitutional	warranty	of	 freedom	of	mass	 communication	and	ban	of
censorship;

—	 right	 to	association,	 including	 the	 right	 to	 create	 trade	unions	 for
the	 protection	 of	 one’s	 interests	 (Article	 30	 of	 the	 Constitution	 of	 the
Russian	Federation);

—	 right	 to	 assemble	 peacefully,	 without	 weapons,	 hold	 rallies,
meetings	 and	 demonstrations,	 marches	 and	 pickets	 (Article	 31	 of	 the
Constitution	of	the	Russian	Federation);

—	 right	 to	 participate	 in	 managing	 state	 affairs	 both	 directly	 and
through	representatives;



—	 right	 to	 elect	 and	 to	 be	 elected	 to	 state	 bodies	 and	 local	 self-
government	bodies,	as	well	as	to	participate	in	referenda;

—	right	to	equal	access	to	state	service	(Article	32	of	the	Constitution
of	the	Russian	Federation).

3.	Economic,	social	and	cultural	rights	and	freedoms.

Respect	for	such	rights	signifies	that	not	only	is	the	principle	of	rule	of
law	adhered	to,	but	also	that	a	state	is	a	social	state.	A	social	state	does
not	 solve	 all	 the	 problems	 of	 its	 citizens	 for	 them,	 but	 creates	 an
environment	to	realise	their	right	to	a	dignified	life.

The	fundamental	constitutional	rights	in	the	economic	sphere	include:

—	 right	 to	 freely	 make	 use	 of	 one’s	 capabilities	 and	 property	 for
business	and	other	economic	activities	not	prohibited	by	 law	(section	1
Article	 34	 of	 the	 Constitution	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation).	 Besides,	 the
Constitution	 establishes	 a	 direct	 prohibition	 of	market	monopolisation
and	non-good	faith	competition	(section	2	Article	34	of	the	Constitution
of	the	Russian	Federation);

—	 right	 to	 private	 property	 and	 inheritance	 (Article	 35	 of	 the
Constitution	of	the	Russian	Federation);

—	right	to	labour	and	rest;

—	 right	 to	 protection	 against	 unemployment	 (Article	 37	 of	 the
Constitution	of	the	Russian	Federation).

Article	 7	 of	 the	Constitution	of	 the	Russian	 Federation	declares	 that
the	 Russian	 Federation	 ensures	 state	 support	 of	 family,	 motherhood,
fatherhood	 and	 childhood,	 disabled	 and	 senior	 citizens,	 as	 well	 as
develops	 a	 system	 of	 social	 services,	 pays	 state	 pensions,	 social
allowances,	and	other	guarantees	of	social	security.

This	means	that	a	number	of	social	and	cultural	rights	exist,	the	most
important	of	which	include:



—	 right	 to	 social	 security,	 state	 pensions	 and	 social	 allowances?
(Article	39	of	the	Constitution	of	the	Russian	Federation);

—	 right	 to	 housing	 (Article	 40	 of	 the	 Constitution	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation);

—	right	to	healthcare	and	medical	aid	(Article	41	of	the	Constitution	of
the	Russian	Federation;

—	 right	 to	 favourable	 environment	 and	 reliable	 information	 on	 its
state	(Article	41	of	the	Constitution	of	the	Russian	Federation);

—	 right	 to	 education	 (Article	 43	 of	 the	 Constitution	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation);

—	 right	 to	 freedom	 of	 expression	 and	 participation	 in	 creative
activities	(Article	44	of	the	Russian	Federation).

Everyone	is	guaranteed	judicial	remedy	of	rights	and	freedoms.	Under
international	 treaties	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 every	 person	 may
appeal	 to	 international	 human	 rights	 organisations,	 if	 all	 relief
mechanisms	 in	 Russia	 have	 been	 exhausted.	 Besides,	 a	 person	 is	 fully
entitled	to	protect	one’s	rights	and	freedoms	by	oneself,	 including	with
the	use	of	arms	(in	certain	cases)5.

12.3.	Obligations	of	Man	and	Citizen	under	the	Constitution	of	the
Russian	Federation

Human	 rights	 and	 freedoms	 are	 inconceivable	 without	 certain
obligations.	Unity	of	rights	and	obligations	is	one	of	the	most	important
principles	of	the	operation	of	civilised	legal	regulation.

Section	2	Article	6	of	the	Constitution	of	the	Russian	Federation	sets
forth	that	every	citizen	of	the	Russian	Federation	enjoys	in	its	territory
all	 the	rights	and	freedoms	and	bears	equal	obligations	set	 forth	 in	the
Constitution	of	the	Russian	Federation.	This	underlines	the	fact	that	no
citizen	can	be	exempt	from	or	can	evade	performance	of	constitutional
duties	—	this	burden	 is	borne	by	all	 the	citizens	of	our	state.	However,



obligations	of	man	and	citizen	in	the	territory	of	the	Russian	Federation
may	be	different.

Constitutional	obligations	include:

—	obligation	 to	observe	 the	Constitution	 (section	2	Article	15	of	 the
Constitution),	which	is	binding	upon	bodies	of	state	authority,	bodies	of
local	self-government,	officials,	private	citizens	and	their	associations;

—	 respect	 for	 rights	 and	 freedoms	 of	 other	 people	 (section	 3
Article	17);

—	care	for	children	and	disabled	parents	(section	2	and	3	Article	38);

—	receipt	of	basic	general	education	(Article	43);

—	 care	 for	 the	 preservation	 of	 cultural	 and	 historical	 heritage
(section	3	Article	44);

—	payment	of	taxes	and	dues	(Article	57);

—	preservation	of	nature	and	the	environment	(Article	58);

—	defence	of	the	Fatherland	(Article	59).

Test	questions	and	tasks

1.	 What	 are	 the	 principle	 distinctive	 features	 of	 each	 of	 the	 three
generations	of	human	and	civil	rights?

2.	 Please	 provide	 a	 classification	 of	 human	 and	 civil	 rights.	 Which
rights	and	freedoms	do	you	believe	to	be	the	most	important?

3.	Do	you	think	that	it	is	reasonable	to	provide	a	list	of	civil	obligations
in	the	constitution?

Chapter	13.	Federal	Structure	of	the	Russian	Federation
13.1.	General	Description	of	Modern	Russian	Federalism



Federal	structure	is	a	type	of	state	structure,	which	assumes	a	certain
manner	of	decentralisation	of	powers	taking	into	consideration	specific
features	of	a	given	state.

A	 federative	 state	 is	 a	 union	 of	 state-like	 formations	 possessing
certain	independence,	equal	rights,	and	equal	legal	status.	As	a	rule,	all
federative	states	legally	declare	the	voluntariness	of	its	subjects’	union,
but	do	not	provide	for	a	right	to	secession.	Due	to	this	factor	federations
disintegrate,	as	a	rule,	through	non-legal	forms	(revolutions,	rebellions,
outer	unsanctioned	influence).

Experience	 shows	 that	 the	 most	 acute	 problem	 of	 federative	 state
structure	 is	 optimal	 and	 efficient	 distribution	 of	 powers	 between	 the
federal	 and	 territorial	 authorities.	 This	 problem	 is	 to	 a	 great	 extent
solved	by	the	Russian	Constitution	of	1993	which	continues	the	long	and
controversial	 process	 of	 Russian	 federalism’s	 and	 federative	 relations’
improvement.

The	Constitution	of	the	Russian	Federation	is	a	serious	obstacle	in	the
way	 of	 two	 extreme	 tendencies:	 separatism	 (the	 will	 of	 particular
subjects	 to	 secede	 Russia),	 and	 return	 to	 unitarianism	 (severe
centralisation	 of	 power	 and	 annihilation	 of	 subjects’	 political	 and
economic	independency).

Thus,	 the	 modern	 state	 of	 federative	 relations	 in	 Russia	 can	 be
characterised	 as	 “democratic	 federalism”	 with	 the	 following	 innate
features:

—	integrity	and	inviolability	of	the	territory	of	the	Russian	Federation;

—	equality	of	all	subjects	of	the	Russian	Federation;

—	construction	and	development	of	 the	Russian	Federation	based	on
two	 equally	 important	 foundations:	 national-territorial	 and	 strictly
territorial;

—	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 possesses	 state	 sovereignty,	 and	 not	 its
subjects.	Subjects	of	the	Russian	Federation,	including	republics,	are	not



independent	 states	 or	 subjects	 of	 international	 law.	 In	 this	 case,	 their
union	 would	 not	 have	 been	 a	 federation,	 but,	 rather,	 a	 confederation
(with	a	right	to	secession);

—	Russia	is	not	a	national	state,	it	is	a	multinational	state;

—	one	of	the	types	of	subjects	of	the	Russian	Federation	—	republics	—
are	deemed	national	states	(i.e.	a	form	of	statehood	of	a	certain	nation	as
part	of	Russia),	but	de	facto	they	are	multinational;

—	the	Russian	nation	as	a	component	of	the	Russian	Federation	does
not	have	its	own	national	statehood,	which	leads	to	the	conclusion	that
the	Russian	nation	sees	enforcement	of	its	national	interests	in	forming
a	multinational	democratic	rule-of-law	state.

The	development	of	federative	relations	in	modern	Russia	is	intended
to	 solve	 a	 rather	 complex	 problem:	 asymmetry	 of	 rights	 and
opportunities	 of	 economically	 inhomogeneous	 subjects	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation,	which	is	often	complicated	by	the	national	problem.

Alignment	 of	 rights	 and	 obligations	 of	 the	 subjects	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation	is	the	primary	direction	of	evolution	of	Russian	federalism.

13.2.	Constitutional	Status	of	the	Russian	Federation

The	foundation	of	the	constitutional	status	of	the	Russian	Federation
is	 its	 Constitution,	 whose	 analysis	 allows	 highlighting	 the	 primary
elements	thereof,	which	are	the	following.

1.	 Sovereignty	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 and	 supremacy	 of	 state
authority,	which	are	the	foundation	of	state’s	constitutional	order.

2.	Integrity	and	inviolability	of	the	territory	of	the	Russian	Federation.

All	the	subjects	of	the	Russian	Federation	are	listed	in	Article	65	of	the
Constitution	 alphabetically,	 which	 is	 meant	 to	 underline	 the	 subjects’
equal	 mutual	 obligations.	 Despite	 the	 fact	 that	 the	 territory	 of	 the
Russian	 Federation	 includes	 all	 of	 its	 subjects,	 the	 Federation	 is	 not
entitled	 to	modify	 the	 boundaries	 of	 its	 subjects	—	 those	 can	 only	 be



modified	at	their	mutual	consent.

3.	State	language,	which	is	Russian,	pursuant	to	section	1	Article	68	of
the	Constitution.

4.	Single	citizenship,	which	 is	acquired	and	terminated	pursuant	to	a
federal	 law.	 The	 citizenship	 is	 single	 and	 equal,	 irrespective	 of	 the
grounds	 of	 acquisition	 (Article	 6	 of	 the	 Constitution	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation).	Article	61	of	the	Constitution	of	the	Russian	Federation	sets
forth	that	a	citizen	of	the	Russian	Federation	cannot	be	exiled	outside	of
the	 Russian	 Federation	 or	 extradited	 to	 another	 state,	 and	 that	 the
Russian	 Federation	 warrants	 protection	 and	 patronage	 to	 its	 citizens
outside	of	its	territory.

5.	Single	customs,	monetary,	and	tax	systems,	which	are	an	important
warranty	of	single	economic	space	of	the	country	and	free	movement	of
goods,	services,	and	finances.

6.	Common	federative	governmental	authorities.

6.	Single	judiciary	and	prosecutor’s	office.

7.	 Single	 federal	 system	 of	 law.	 Alongside	 with	 that,	 subjects	 of	 the
Russian	Federation	are	entitled	to	exercise	their	own	legal	governance	in
the	spheres	which	comprise	their	jurisdiction.

8.	Single	Armed	Forces.

9.	Right	to	foreign	affairs	with	other	states,	through	which	the	Russian
Federation	 represents	 and	 protects	 the	 whole	 country’s,	 as	 well	 as
individual	subjects’	interests.

10.	National	symbols:	flag,	emblem,	and	anthem.

The	most	 important	 feature	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 is	 division	 of
jurisdiction	 and	 authority	 between	 the	 federal	 center	 and	 subjects,	 —
Federation	cannot	possess	unlimited	authority	in	ruling	the	country.

In	 connection	 therewith,	 the	 Constitution	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation



sets	 forth	 the	 jurisdiction	 and	 the	 authority	 attributable	 to	 the
Federation,	attributable	to	both	the	Federation	and	the	subjects	jointly,
and	 residual	 matters	 which	 comprise	 the	 exclusive	 jurisdiction	 of	 the
subjects.

Pursuant	 to	Article	71	of	 the	Constitution	of	 the	Russian	Federation,
let	 us	 list	 some	 of	 the	matters	which	 are	 under	 the	 jurisdiction	 of	 the
Russian	Federation:

—	 adoption	 and	 modification	 of	 the	 Constitution	 and	 federal	 laws,
supervision	over	their	performance;

—	the	federative	structure	and	the	territory	of	the	Russian	Federation;

—	 governance	 and	 protection	 of	 rights	 and	 freedoms	 of	 man	 and
citizen,	 citizenship	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation;	 governance	 and
protection	of	national	minorities’	rights;

—	formation	of	federal	governmental	authorities;

—	establishment	of	foundations	of	federal	policy	and	federal	programs
in	 the	 state,	 economic,	 ecologic,	 social,	 cultural,	 and	 national
development	spheres	of	the	Russian	Federation;

—	 establishment	 of	 legal	 foundation	 of	 common	 market;	 financial,
currency,	customs	regulation,	money	emission;

—	federal	budget;	federal	taxes	and	fees;

—	 external	 policy	 and	 foreign	 relations	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,
international	treaties	of	the	Russian	Federation;	war	and	peace	matters;

—	defense	and	security;	defense	industry;

—	judicial	system;	prosecutor’s	office.

Common	 jurisdiction	 means	 that	 the	 matters	 are	 handled	 by	 the
Federation	 and	 its	 subjects	 jointly.	 Pursuant	 to	 Article	 72	 of	 the
Constitution,	let	us	list	some	of	these	matters:



—	seeing	forth	that	all	normative	acts	of	the	subjects	conform	to	the
Constitution	and	federal	laws;

—	protection	of	rights	and	freedoms	of	man	and	citizen;

—	matters	of	possession,	usage,	and	disposition	of	land,	subsoil,	water,
and	other	natural	resources;

—	natural	resources	management;	protection	of	the	environment	and
ecologic	security;

—	general	matters	of	nurturing,	 education,	 science,	 culture,	physical
education,	and	sports;

—	 coordination	 of	 health	 care	 services;	 protection	 of	 family,
motherhood,	and	childhood;	social	services,	including	social	security;

—	administrative,	administrative	procedural,	 labour,	 family,	housing,
land,	 water,	 forest	 legislation,	 subsoil	 legislation,	 environment
protection	legislation;

—	 coordination	 of	 international	 and	 foreign	 economic	 relations	 of
subjects	of	the	Russian	Federation,	performance	of	international	treaties
of	the	Russian	Federation.

13.3.	Constitutional	Status	of	the	Subjects	of	the	Russian
Federation

Pursuant	 to	 Article	 5	 of	 the	 Constitution	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,
the	 latter	 consists	 of	 republics,	 territories,	 regions,	 cities	 of	 federal
importance,	 an	 autonomous	 region,	 and	 autonomous	 areas	 —	 equal
subjects	of	the	Russian	Federation	(currently,	there	are	85).

Based	on	the	Constitution	and	pursuant	thereto,	as	well	as	to	federal
laws,	 subjects	 of	 the	Russian	 Federation	 adopt	 their	 own	 constitutions
and	charters,	laws,	and	other	normative	acts.

The	 equality	 of	 the	 subjects	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 is	 also
demonstrated	 by	 the	 equal	 representation	 of	 the	 subjects	 in	 the



Federation	Council	of	the	Federal	Assembly	of	the	Russian	Federation,	as
well	as	by	the	manner	of	 formation	of	the	State	Council	of	 the	Russian
Federation,	which	consists	of	the	high	officials	of	all	the	subjects	of	the
Russian	Federation.

Alongside	 with	 that,	 one	 can	 also	 speak	 about	 the	 asymmetry	 of
Russian	 federalism,	 due	 to	 the	 fact	 that	 the	 republics	 in	 the	 Russian
Federation	are	declared	states	(section	2	Article	5	of	the	Constitution	of
the	Russian	Federation),	while	other	subjects	of	the	Russian	Federation
do	not	possess	this	status.	Constitutions	of	the	republics	may	be	adopted
by	 their	 legislative	 assemblies,	 as	 well	 as	 via	 referenda,	 while	 other
subjects’	charters	are	only	adopted	by	legislative	assemblies.

The	subjects	of	the	Russian	Federation	have	their	territories,	and	the
boundaries	between	them	can	only	be	modified	at	their	mutual	consent.
The	economic	 foundation	of	 the	subjects’	activity	 is	 their	property,	 the
budget	and	non-budget	fund	finances,	and	their	property	rights.

The	 subjects	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 also	 possess	 these
characteristics:	 a)	 they	 do	 not	 have	 state	 sovereignty;	 b)	 they	 do	 not
have	a	right	to	secession;	c)	any	subject’s	citizens	have	equal	rights	and
obligations	 at	 the	 territory	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation;	 d)	 a	 law	 of	 a
subject	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 may	 not	 contradict	 a	 federal	 law
(unless	 the	 former	 is	 adopted	 to	 govern	 the	 matters	 which	 are
exclusively	the	subject’s	jurisdiction).

Republics,	as	opposed	to	other	subjects	of	the	Russian	Federation,	are
considered	states,	but	their	authority	is	not	sovereign,	and	they	are	only
independent	 in	 the	boundaries	 set	 forth	 in	 the	Constitution.	Republics
may	 not	 infringe	 Russia’s	 territorial	 integrity	 and	 declare	 themselves
independent	states.

Republics	are	free	to	define	their	own	system	of	governmental	bodies.
These	bodies	are	accountable	 to	 the	population	of	 the	 republic	 and,	 in
some	cases,	to	the	state	authorities	of	the	Russian	Federation.	Republics
are	 free	 to	 establish	 their	 state	 languages	 and	 are	 subjects	 of
international	 law,	 but	 in	 a	 limited	 way,	 which	 cannot	 contradict	 the
Constitution	 and	 the	 laws	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 and	 it	 is



coordinated	 by	 the	 federal	 authority	 jointly	 with	 the	 republican.
Republics	are	also	entitled	to	state	symbols.

Russian	Federation	includes	one	autonomous	region	(Jewish)	and	four
autonomous	districts.	Alongside	with	that,	the	Jewish	nation	comprises
less	than	1%	of	the	Jewish	autonomous	region.	The	name	is	of	traditional
nature,	 and	 this	 autonomous	 district	 is	 the	 only	 region	 (with	 the
exception	of	Israel)	which	is	Jewish	and	has	corresponding	official	legal
status.

These	 subjects	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 are	 entitled	 to	 adopt	 their
own	 charters,	 laws,	 and	 other	 normative	 acts,	 address	 all	 regional
matters,	 have	 state	 symbols,	 administrative	 center,	 form	 legislative,
executive,	and	 judicial	bodies	which	operate	based	on	 the	Constitution
of	the	Russian	Federation.

Territories,	 regions,	and	cities	of	 federal	 importance	also	possess	 full
authority	within	their	territory	and	as	defined	by	the	Constitution	of	the
Russian	Federation.

Test	questions	and	tasks

1.	Please	name	the	most	acute	and	widespread	problems	of	federalism.

2.	Please	 list	the	most	 important	elements	of	constitutional	status	of
the	Russian	Federation.

3.	 What	 is	 the	 difference	 between	 the	 jurisdiction	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation	and	that	of	its	subjects?

4.	What	is	the	asymmetry	of	the	Russian	model	of	federalism?

Chapter	14.	State	and	Municipal	Authorities	of	the
Russian	Federation

14.1.	The	President	of	the	Russian	Federation

Pursuant	 to	Article	80	of	 the	Constitution	of	 the	Russian	Federation,



the	President	 of	 the	Russian	 Federation	 is	 the	head	of	 state.	He	 is	 not
directly	 included	 in	any	of	 the	branches	of	authority,	which	underlines
his	special	status.

The	primary	functions	of	the	President	are	defined	in	Article	80	of	the
Constitution	of	the	Russian	Federation,	pursuant	to	which	he:

—	 is	 the	 guarantor	 of	 the	 Constitution	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,
human	and	civil	rights;

—	 takes	 measures	 to	 protect	 the	 sovereignty	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation,	 its	 independence	 and	 state	 integrity,	 ensure	 concerted
functioning	and	interaction	of	bodies	of	state	power;

—	 defines	 the	 basic	 domestic	 and	 foreign	 policy	 guidelines	 of	 the
state;

—	 represents	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 inside	 the	 country	 and	 in	 its
foreign	relations.

The	authority	of	the	President	of	the	Russian	Federation	is	extensive
and	may	be	divided	into	several	spheres.

1.	 Authority	 in	 formation	 and	 maintenance	 of	 normal	 operation	 of
federal	governmental	bodies.

The	President	of	the	Russian	Federation:

—	 appoints	 Chairman	 of	 the	 Government	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation
subject	to	consent	of	the	State	Duma;

—	has	the	right	to	preside	over	the	meetings	of	the	Government	of	the
Russian	Federation;

—	 decides	 on	 resignation	 of	 the	 Government	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation;

—	 introduces	 to	 the	 State	Duma	a	 candidacy	 for	 appointment	 to	 the
office	of	the	Chairman	of	the	Central	Bank	of	the	Russian	Federation	and



submits	to	the	State	Duma	the	proposal	on	relieving	the	Chairman	of	the
Central	Bank	of	the	Russian	Federation	of	his	duties;

—	appoints	and	dismisses	deputy	chairmen	of	the	Government	of	the
Russian	Federation	and	federal	ministers	as	proposed	by	the	Chairman	of
the	Government	of	the	Russian	Federation;

—	 submits	 to	 the	 Federation	 Council	 candidates	 for	 appointment	 to
the	 office	 of	 judges	 of	 the	 Constitutional	 Court	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation,	the	Supreme	Court	of	the	Russian	Federation;	for	Prosecutor
General	of	 the	Russian	Federation,	appoints	the	 judges	of	other	 federal
courts	and	prosecutors	of	the	subjects	of	the	Russian	Federation;

—	 appoints	 the	 representatives	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 in	 the
Federation	Council	and	relieves	them	of	their	duties;

—	 forms	 the	 Administration	 of	 the	 President	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation;

—	call	elections	to	the	State	Duma	and	may	dissolve	it	as	prescribed	by
the	Constitution	of	the	Russian	Federation.

2.	Law-making	authority.

The	President	of	the	Russian	Federation:

—	introduces	draft	laws	in	the	State	Duma;

—	has	the	right	to	veto;

—	signs	and	publishes	federal	laws;

—	issues	decrees	and	orders	which	are	binding	at	 the	territory	of	 the
Russian	Federation.	These	are	equal	to	regulations	in	their	legal	power.

3.	 Authority	 in	 the	 sphere	 of	 external	 policy,	 defense,	 and	 national
security.

The	President	of	the	Russian	Federation:



—	supervises	the	foreign	policy	of	the	Russian	Federation;

—	 conducts	 negotiations	 and	 signs	 international	 treaties	 of	 the
Russian	Federation;

—	signs	instruments	of	ratification;

—	 accept	 credentials	 and	 instruments	 of	 recall	 of	 diplomatic
representatives	 accredited	with	him	 in	 foreign	 states	 and	 international
organisations;

—	 is	 the	 Supreme	 Commander-in-Chief	 of	 the	 Armed	 Forces	 of	 the
Russian	Federation;

—	introduces	martial	law	on	the	territory	of	the	Russian	Federation	or
in	particular	territories	thereof;

—	forms	and	heads	the	Security	Council	of	the	Russian	Federation;

—	endorses	the	military	doctrine	of	the	Russian	Federation;

—	appoints	and	dismisses	the	Supreme	Command	of	the	Armed	Forces
of	the	Russian	Federation.

4.	Authority	in	the	sphere	of	specification	of	individual	legal	status.

The	President	of	the	Russian	Federation:

—	 resolves	 issues	 of	 citizenship	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 and	 of
granting	political	asylum;

—	 awards	 state	 decorations	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 confers
honorary	titles	of	the	Russian	Federation	and	top	military	ranks	and	top
specialised	titles;

—	grants	pardon.

Pursuant	 to	Article	81	of	 the	Constitution	of	 the	Russian	Federation,
the	President	of	the	Russian	Federation	is	elected	for	a	term	of	six	years



by	the	citizens	of	the	Russian	Federation	on	the	basis	of	general,	equal,
and	direct	vote	by	secret	ballot.	A	citizen	of	the	Russian	Federation	not
younger	than	35,	who	has	resided	in	the	Russian	Federation	for	not	less
than	10	years,	may	be	elected	President	of	the	Russian	Federation.

No	one	shall	hold	the	office	of	the	President	of	the	Russian	Federation
for	more	than	two	terms	in	succession.

The	 grounds	 for	 termination	 of	 the	 powers	 of	 the	 President	 of	 the
Russian	Federation	are	his	resignation	or	sustained	inability	to	exercise
his	authority	due	 to	health	 condition	or	discharge	of	his	powers	 in	 the
event	of	impeachment.

14.2.	The	Federal	Assembly	(Parliament)	of	the	Russian	Federation

Pursuant	 to	Article	94	of	 the	Constitution	of	 the	Russian	Federation,
the	Federal	Assembly	—	Parliament	of	the	Russian	Federation	—	shall	be
the	 supreme	 representative	 and	 legislative	 body	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation.

This	 body	 of	 legislative	 power	 operates	 as	 the	 key	 element	 of	 the
system	 of	 separation	 of	 powers	 and	 is	 independent.	 The	 Federal
Assembly	 represents	 (expresses)	 the	 interests	 of	 the	 multinational
people	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 which	 is	 provided	 through	 the
democratic	 electoral	 system,	 election	 of	 deputies	 from	 all	 the	 regions
and	from	all	political	parties.

Scholars	fairly	note	that	the	Federal	Assembly	(being	a	representative
body)	can	act	on	behalf	of	the	whole	nation	even	when	the	Parliament’s
will	is	based	on	the	majority,	and	not	on	all	the	deputies6.

The	Federal	Assembly,	being	a	legislative	body,	possesses	an	exclusive
right	to	adopt	laws,	i.e.	normative	acts	of	the	highest	legal	power,	which
all	other	legal	acts	shall	conform	to.

The	 Federal	 Assembly	 consists	 of	 two	 chambers:	 the	 Federation
Council	 and	 the	 State	 Duma.	 The	 bicameral	 system	 of	 the	 Russian
Parliament	 is	 designed	 both	 to	 represent	 the	 whole	 nation’s	 interests



and	 to	 represent	 the	 subjects	 of	 the	Russian	 Federation	 in	 the	 highest
legislative	body	of	the	state.

The	 Federal	 Assembly	 is	 a	 permanent	 body.	 The	 Federation	 Council
and	 the	 State	 Duma	 sit	 separately	 and	 their	 sessions	 are	 open,	 unless
otherwise	envisaged	by	their	rules	(Article	100	of	the	Constitution	of	the
Russian	Federation).

The	Chambers	of	the	Federal	Assembly	are	equal;	they	are	both	parts
of	a	single	Parliament,	though	they	have	different	authority.	The	primary
workload	in	adopting	federal	laws	is	borne	by	the	State	Duma.

The	State	Duma	is	elected	for	the	term	of	five	years	and	consists	of	450
deputies.	 Pursuant	 to	 Article	 3	 of	 the	 Federal	 Law	 “On	 election	 of
deputies	 of	 the	 State	 Duma	 of	 the	 Federal	 Assembly	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation”7,	 225	 deputies	 are	 elected	 in	 single-seat	 electoral	 districts
(“one	 district	 —	 one	 deputy”	 principle)	 and	 other	 225	 deputies	 are
elected	 in	one	 federal	 electoral	 district	 in	proportion	 to	 the	number	of
votes	cast	for	the	federal	lists	of	candidates	for	the	State	Duma	(federal
lists	of	candidates,	or	so-called	“system	of	party	lists”).

Any	 citizen	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 aged	 21	 and	 older	 may	 be
elected	 deputy	 to	 the	 State	 Duma.	 One	 and	 the	 same	 person	may	 not
concurrently	 be	 a	 deputy	 to	 the	 Federation	 Council	 and	 to	 the	 State
Duma	 (section	 2	 Article	 97	 of	 the	 Constitution	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation).	 A	 deputy	 to	 the	 State	 Duma	may	 not	 be	 a	 deputy	 to	 any
other	 representative	 body	 of	 state	 power	 or	 bodies	 of	 local	 self-
government,	may	not	be	employed	in	the	civil	service	or	engage	in	any
activities	 for	 remuneration	 other	 than	 teaching,	 research	 or	 other
creative	 activities	 (section	 3	 Article	 97).	 This	 ban	 is	 designed	 to
underline	 the	special	 status	of	a	deputy	 to	a	 state	 legislative	body	who
works	on	a	permanent	professional	basis.

Pursuant	to	Article	103	of	the	Constitution	of	the	Russian	Federation,
the	jurisdiction	of	the	State	Duma	includes:

—	granting	consent	to	the	President	of	the	Russian	Federation	for	the
appointment	 of	 the	 Chairman	 of	 the	 Government	 of	 the	 Russian



Federation;

—	 decision	 on	 confidence	 in	 the	 government	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation;

—	 hearing	 of	 annual	 reports	 of	 the	 Government	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation;

—	appointment	and	dismissal	of	the	Chairman	of	the	Central	Bank	of
the	Russian	 Federation,	 the	Chairman	of	 the	Accounting	Chamber	 and
half	of	its	staff	of	auditors,	the	Plenipotentiary	for	Human	Rights.

The	Constitution	of	 the	Russian	Federation	allows	dissolution	of	 the
State	Duma.	This	can	be	done	by	the	President	of	the	Russian	Federation
in	 the	 following	 cases:	 1)	 triple	 rejection	 by	 the	 State	 Duma	 of
candidates	 for	Chairman	of	 the	Government	 of	 the	Russian	 Federation
nominated	by	the	President	of	the	Russian	Federation	(section	4	Article
111	of	the	Constitution	of	the	Russian	Federation);	2)	double	expression
within	 3	months	 of	 non-confidence	 in	 the	Government	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation	by	the	State	Duma,	if	the	President	of	the	Russian	Federation
disagrees	 to	 announce	 resignation	 of	 the	 Government	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation	 (section	 3	 Article	 117	 of	 the	 Constitution	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation);	 3)	 the	 non-confidence	 vote	 by	 the	 State	 Duma	 in	 the
Government	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 if	 the	 Chairman	 of	 the
Government	of	 the	Russian	Federation	puts	 the	question	of	confidence
in	 the	Government	 of	 the	Russian	 Federation	 (section	 4	Article	 117	 of
the	 Constitution	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation).	 When	 the	 State	 Duma	 is
dissolved,	 the	President	of	 the	Russian	Federation	calls	a	new	election,
so	that	the	newly	elected	State	Duma	would	assemble	within	4	months
after	the	dissolution.

Pursuant	to	Article	117	of	the	Constitution	of	the	Russian	Federation,
the	 State	 Duma	 may	 not	 be	 dissolved:	 a)	 within	 one	 year	 after	 its
election;	 b)	within	 six	months	 before	 the	 expiration	 of	 the	 President’s
powers;	c)	after	the	State	Duma	advances	charges	against	the	President
of	the	Russian	Federation;	d)	within	the	period	of	action	of	martial	law	or
state	of	emergency.



The	 Federation	 Council	 is	 formed	 as	 follows.	 It	 involves	 two
representatives	 from	 each	 of	 the	 subjects	 of	 the	Russian	 Federation	—
one	 from	 the	 legislative	 (representative)	 and	 one	 from	 the	 executive
body,	as	well	as	representatives	of	the	Russian	Federation	appointed	by
the	 President	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation.	 The	 number	 of	 the
representatives	appointed	by	 the	President	cannot	comprise	more	 than
10%	 of	 the	 members	 of	 the	 Federation	 Council	 (Article	 95	 of	 the
Constitution	of	the	Russian	Federation).

Pursuant	to	Article	95	of	the	Constitution,	a	member	of	the	Federation
Council	who	 is	 a	 representative	 from	a	 legislative	or	 executive	body	of
subject’s	authority	is	vested	with	the	authority	for	the	term	of	authority
of	the	subject’s	respective	body.

Article	102	of	the	Constitution	of	the	Russian	Federation	sets	forth	the
jurisdiction	of	the	Federation	Council:

—	approval	of	changes	of	borders	between	the	subjects	of	the	Russian
Federation;

—	approval	of	the	decree	of	the	President	of	the	Russian	Federation	on
the	introduction	of	martial	law;

—	making	decisions	on	the	possibility	of	the	use	of	the	Armed	Forces
of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 outside	 of	 the	 territory	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation;

—	calling	of	elections	of	 the	President	of	 the	Russian	Federation	and
impeachment	of	the	President	of	the	Russian	Federation;

—	 appointment	 of	 judges	 of	 the	Constitutional	Court	 of	 the	Russian
Federation,	the	Supreme	Court	of	the	Russian	Federation,	the	Prosecutor
General	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 and	 his	 deputies,	 the	 deputy
Chairman	of	the	Accounting	Chamber	and	half	of	its	staff	of	its	auditors.

The	members	of	the	Federation	Council	and	the	deputies	of	the	State
Duma	are	immune	within	the	term	of	service.	They	cannot	be	detained,
arrested,	or	searched	except	when	detained	 in	the	act	of	perpetrating	a



crime.	 However,	 their	 immunity	 may	 be	 stripped	 based	 on	 the
recommendation	of	the	Prosecutor	General	of	the	Russian	Federation	by
the	 corresponding	 chamber	 of	 the	 Federal	 Assembly	 (Article	 98	 of	 the
Constitution	of	the	Russian	Federation).

Each	 chamber	 adopts	 its	 own	 rules	 and	 solves	 questions	 of	 internal
organisation.

14.3.	Law-Making	Procedure	in	the	Russian	Federation

Adoption	of	law	is	the	most	important	power	of	the	Federal	Assembly
of	 the	 Russian	 Federation.	 The	 law-making	 (legislative)	 procedure	 in
Russia	consists	of	a	number	of	consecutive	stages.

1.	 Legislative	 initiative	 is	 a	 right	 to	 introduce	 a	 draft	 law	 to	 the
Parliament,	which	obliges	the	Parliament	to	consider	this	initiative.

Right	to	legislative	initiative	is	vested	in	the	President	of	the	Russian
Federation,	 the	 Federation	 Council	 and	 its	 members,	 deputies	 of	 the
State	Duma,	legislative	(representative)	bodies	of	subjects	of	the	Russian
Federation,	 as	 well	 as	 to	 the	 Constitutional	 Court	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation	and	the	Supreme	Court	of	the	Russian	Federation	within	their
jurisdiction	 (section	 1	 Article	 104	 of	 the	 Constitution	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation).

Draft	 bill	 are	 introduced	 in	 the	 State	 Duma	 accompanied	 by	 an
explanatory	 note	 where	 the	 concept	 of	 the	 draft	 bill	 is	 described.	 A
number	 of	 other	 documents	 must	 be	 enclosed	 (financial-economic
reasoning,	 list	of	normative	acts	 subject	 to	amendment,	annulment,	or
complement	in	connection	with	the	adoption	of	the	draft	law).

2.	Consideration	of	draft	laws	and	their	adoption.

Consideration	 of	 draft	 laws	 is	 performed	 in	 three	 hearings	 (unless
otherwise	provided	by	the	legislation	or	by	the	rules	of	the	State	Duma).
In	the	first	hearing,	the	concept	of	the	draft	bill	is	discussed	and	general
evaluation	 is	 performed.	 As	 a	 result,	 after	 the	 first	 hearing	 the	 State
Duma	may:



a)	adopt	the	draft	 law	in	the	first	hearing	and,	respectively,	continue
working	 on	 it	 in	 the	 next	 hearings	 (taking	 into	 account	 the	 comments
received);

b)	reject	the	draft	law;

c)	adopt	the	draft	law.

Should	 the	draft	 law	be	adopted	 in	 the	 first	hearing,	 the	State	Duma
sets	forth	the	timeframes	for	initiating	modifications	thereto.

In	 the	 second	 hearing,	 the	 draft	 law	 is	 improved	 based	 on	 the
comments.	 The	 incorporation	 or	 rejection	 of	 each	 modification	 is
decided	by	vote.	Upon	completion	of	the	voting,	the	proposal	is	brought
up	to	adopt	the	entire	draft	law	in	the	second	hearing.

The	draft	law,	if	adopted	in	the	second	hearing,	is	once	again	analyzed
by	 the	 respective	 competent	 committee	 of	 the	 State	Duma	 in	 order	 to
eliminate	possible	discrepancies	and	proof-read	the	document.	It	is	then
forwarded	for	the	third	hearing,	during	which	the	deputies	vote	 for	the
entire	draft	bill	(with	no	modifications	initiated	or	discussed).

Federal	 laws	are	adopted	by	a	majority	of	votes	of	all	deputies	to	the
State	Duma.

The	laws	adopted	by	the	State	Duma	shall	be	passed	to	the	Federation
Council	for	review	within	five	days.

A	 federal	 law	 is	considered	passed	by	 the	Federation	Council	 if	more
than	half	of	its	members	vote	for	it	or	if	within	fourteen	days	it	has	not
been	 considered	 by	 the	 Federation	 Council.	 Should	 the	 Federation
Council	 reject	 the	 federal	 law,	 the	 chambers	may	 set	 up	 a	 conciliatory
commission	to	settle	the	discrepancies,	whereupon	the	federal	law	shall
be	again	considered	by	the	State	Duma.

Should	 the	 State	Duma	 disagree	with	 the	 decision	 of	 the	 Federation
Council,	 the	 federal	 law	 shall	 be	 considered	 adopted	 if,	 in	 the	 second
voting,	at	 least	 two-thirds	of	 the	 total	number	of	deputies	 to	 the	State



Duma	vote	for	it.

Alongside	 with	 that,	 Article	 106	 of	 the	 Constitution	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation	sets	forth	mandatory	consideration	by	the	Federation	Council
of	 a	 federal	 law	 adopted	 by	 the	 State	Duma	 if	 such	 law	 deals	with	 the
issues	of:

а)	federal	budget;

b)	federal	taxes	and	fees;

c)	 financial,	 monetary,	 credit,	 and	 customs	 regulations	 and	 money
emission;

d)	 ratification	 and	 denunciation	 of	 international	 treaties	 of	 the
Russian	Federation;

e)	status	and	protection	of	the	state	border	of	the	Russian	Federation;

е)	war	and	peace.

The	 adopted	 federal	 law	 is	 sent	 to	 the	 President	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation	for	signing	and	publication	within	five	days.	The	President	of
the	 Russian	 Federation	 signs	 a	 federal	 law	 and	 publishes	 it	 within
fourteen	days.	If	the	President	rejects	a	federal	law	within	fourteen	days
since	 it	 was	 sent	 to	 him,	 the	 State	 Duma	 and	 the	 Federation	 Council
again	consider	the	law	in	accordance	with	the	procedure	established	by
the	 Constitution	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation.	 If,	 during	 the	 second
hearings,	the	federal	law	is	approved	in	its	earlier	draft	by	a	majority	of
not	less	than	two	thirds	of	the	total	number	of	deputies	of	the	Federation
Council	 and	 the	State	Duma,	 it	 shall	 be	 signed	by	 the	President	of	 the
Russian	Federation	within	seven	days	and	published	(Article	107	of	 the
Constitution	of	the	Russian	Federation).

Adoption	of	a	federal	constitutional	law	requires	stricter	procedure.	A
federal	constitutional	 law	is	considered	adopted	if	 it	was	approved	by	a
majority	of	at	least	three	quarters	of	the	total	number	of	representatives
of	the	Federation	Council	and	at	least	two	thirds	of	the	total	number	of



deputies	 to	 the	 State	 Duma.	 The	 adopted	 federal	 constitutional	 law	 is
signed	by	the	President	of	 the	Russian	Federation	within	fourteen	days
and	 is	 published	 (Article	 108	 of	 the	 Constitution	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation).	 The	 President	 may	 not	 veto	 an	 adopted	 federal
constitutional	law.

3.	Publishing	of	the	law.	Only	officially	published	laws	are	valid	at	the
territory	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation.	 Federal	 constitutional	 laws	 and
federal	 laws	 are	 subject	 to	 official	 publication	 within	 seven	 days	 after
signing	by	the	President	of	the	Russian	Federation.	They	enter	into	force
after	 ten	days	upon	 their	official	publishing,	unless	otherwise	provided
by	the	law	itself.

14.4.	The	Government	of	the	Russian	Federation	and	the
Structure...	of	Federal	Executive	Bodies	of	the	Russian	Federation

The	 executive	 branch	 of	 power	 of	 any	 state	 is	 designed	 to	 organise
people’s	 lives,	 perform	 and	 enforce	 legal	 prescriptions.	 Hence,	 it
involves	a	great	number	of	officials	and	is	vested	with	vast	authority.	It	is
headed	 by	 the	 government,	 where	 either	 the	 President	 or	 the	 Prime
Minister	presides.

The	Constitution	 of	 the	Russian	 Federation	 envisages	 that	 executive
power	 in	the	Russian	Federation	is	exercised	by	the	Government	of	the
Russian	 Federation	 (section	 1	 Article	 110	 of	 the	 Constitution	 of	 the
Russian	 Federation).	 However,	 it	 does	 not	 mean	 that	 the	 Government
alone	exercises	the	executive	power.	Pursuant	to	Article	1	of	the	Federal
Constitutional	 Law	 “On	 the	 Government	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation”8,
the	 Government	 is	 a	 collegiate	 body	 heading	 the	 single	 system	 of	 the
executive	power	in	the	Russian	Federation.

In	 Russia,	 the	 Government	 consists	 of	 the	 Chairman	 of	 the
Government	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 Deputy	 Chairmen	 of	 the
Government,	and	federal	ministers.

The	 Chairman	 of	 the	 Government	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 is
appointed	by	the	President	of	the	Russian	Federation	with	the	consent	of
the	State	Duma.



The	State	Duma	considers	the	candidacy	submitted	by	the	President	of
the	Russian	Federation	within	one	week.	Should	 the	State	Duma	thrice
reject	candidates	for	Chairman	of	the	Government,	the	President	of	the
Russian	 Federation	 appoints	 a	 Chairman	 of	 the	 Government	 of	 the
Russian	 Federation,	 dissolves	 the	 State	Duma	 and	 calls	 a	 new	 election
(Article	111	of	the	Constitution	of	the	Russian	Federation).

The	Chairman	of	the	Government	of	the	Russian	Federation	not	later
than	a	week	after	appointment	submits	to	the	President	of	 the	Russian
Federation	proposals	on	the	structure	of	the	federal	bodies	of	executive
power,	candidates	for	the	office	of	Deputy	Chairmen	of	the	Government
of	the	Russian	Federation	and	federal	ministers.

The	Government	of	the	Russian	Federation	has	vast	authority.	Thus	it:

—	 develops	 and	 submits	 the	 federal	 budget	 to	 the	 State	 Duma	 and
ensures	its	implementation;

—	ensures	the	implementation	in	the	Russian	Federation	of	a	uniform
financial,	 credit,	 and	 monetary	 policy,	 policy	 in	 the	 field	 of	 culture,
science,	education,	health,	social	security,	and	ecology;

—	manages	federal	property;

—	adopts	measures	to	ensure	the	country’s	defense,	state	security,	and
implementation	of	foreign	policy	of	the	Russian	Federation;

—	 implements	 measures	 to	 ensure	 the	 reign	 of	 law,	 rights	 and
freedoms	 of	 citizens,	 protect	 property	 and	 public	 order,	 control	 crime
(Article	144	of	the	Constitution	of	the	Russian	Federation).

The	Government	of	the	Russian	Federation	issues	decrees	and	orders,
which	are	binding	at	the	territory	of	the	Russian	Federation.	However,	if
these	contradict	the	Constitution	of	the	Russian	Federation,	federal	laws
or	 presidential	 decrees,	 they	 may	 be	 repealed	 by	 the	 President	 of	 the
Russian	Federation.

The	 Government	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 is	 in	 close	 coordination



with	the	President	of	the	Russian	Federation,	as	well	as	with	the	Federal
Assembly	of	the	Russian	Federation.

Pursuant	 to	 Article	 31	 of	 the	 Federal	 Constitutional	 Law	 “On	 the
Government	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation”,	 the	 President	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation	may	preside	at	meetings	of	the	Government.	He	must	ensure
coordinated	operation	and	interaction	of	the	Government	of	the	Russian
Federation	and	other	state	governmental	bodies.

Alongside	 with	 that,	 the	 President	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation
coordinates	 the	 operation	 of	 federal	 state	 authorities	 of	 the	 executive
branch,	which	address	the	matters	of	defense,	security,	 internal	affairs,
justice,	 foreign	 affairs,	 prevention	 of	 emergencies	 and	 elimination	 of
consequences	of	natural	disasters,	endorses,	upon	the	recommendation
of	the	Chairman	of	the	Government	of	the	Russian	Federation,	standing
orders	 of	 such	 bodies,	 appoints	 the	 directors	 and	 deputy	 directors	 of
these	 bodies,	 and	 exercises	 other	 powers	 as	 the	 Supreme	Commander-
in-Chief	of	the	Armed	Forces	of	the	Russian	Federation	and	as	the	Head
of	 the	 Security	 Council	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 (Article	 32	 of	 the
Federal	 Constitutional	 Law	 “On	 the	 Government	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation”).	 Thus,	 a	 number	 of	 ministries	 and	 services	 are	 directly
accountable	to	the	President	of	the	Russian	Federation.

The	 interaction	 between	 the	 Government	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation
and	 the	 Federal	 Assembly	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 is	 based	 on	 the
principle	 that	 the	Government	of	 the	Russian	Federation	has	a	 right	 to
legislative	initiative.	Besides,	the	Government	of	the	Russian	Federation
submits	written	 opinions	 on	 draft	 laws	which	 deal	with	 the	matters	 of
imposing	 and	 abolishing	 taxes,	 issuing	 state	 obligations,	 restructuring
state’s	financial	obligations	and	if	such	laws	provide	for	expenses	to	be
covered	by	the	federal	budget.	In	many	cases,	these	opinions	are	decisive
when	a	draft	law	is	adopted	or	rejected.

The	members	of	 the	Government	of	 the	Russian	Federation	must,	 at
the	 invitation	 of	 the	 chambers	 of	 the	 Federal	 Assembly,	 be	 present	 at
their	sessions	and	answer	the	representatives’	in	the	Federative	Council
and	 the	 deputies’	 to	 the	 State	 Duma	 questions.	 Members	 of	 the
Government	of	the	Russian	Federation,	at	the	invitation	of	the	chambers



of	 the	 Federal	 Assembly,	 give	 speeches	 at	 their	 sessions	 addressing
matters	of	extreme	importance	(Article	38	of	the	Federal	Constitutional
Law	“On	the	Government	of	the	Russian	Federation”).

The	interaction	of	the	Government	of	the	Russian	Federation	with	the
judicial	bodies	is	limited	to	the	fact	that	the	Government	of	the	Russian
Federation	 effects	 financing	 of	 courts	 from	 the	 federal	 budget	 and
ensures	full	and	independent	delivery	of	justice.

Pursuant	 to	 Article	 10	 of	 the	 Federal	 Constitutional	 Law	 “On	 the
Government	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation”,	 all	 the	 members	 of	 the
Government	must	annually	 file	a	 statement	of	 income	and	expenses	of
their	own,	their	spouses,	and	minor	children.

The	Constitution	of	the	Russian	Federation	does	not	set	forth	the	term
of	 office	 of	 the	 Government	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation.	 However,
pursuant	 to	 Article	 116	 of	 the	 Constitution	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,
the	 Government	 shall	 lay	 down	 its	 powers	 before	 the	 newly	 elected
President	of	the	Russian	Federation.

The	 resignation	 of	 the	 Government	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 is
closely	 connected	 to	 the	 position	 of	 the	 President	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation.	For	instance,	Section	1	Article	117	of	the	Constitution	of	the
Russian	 Federation	 declares	 that	 the	 Government	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation	may	hand	in	its	resignation,	which	is	accepted	or	rejected	by
the	 President	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation.	 The	 President	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation	may	take	a	decision	on	the	resignation	of	the	Government	of
the	Russian	Federation.

The	State	Duma	may	also	express	non-confidence	in	the	Government
of	 the	 Russian	 Federation.	 In	 that	 case,	 the	 President	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation	may	announce	the	resignation	of	the	Government	of	disagree
with	the	State	Duma.	Should	the	State	Duma	within	three	months	once
again	 express	 non-confidence	 in	 the	 Government	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation,	 the	 President	 either	 announces	 the	 resignation	 of	 the
Government	or	dissolves	the	State	Duma.

The	President	of	the	Russian	Federation	is	thrown	into	a	dilemma	due



to	the	fact	that	the	higher	state	governmental	authorities	must	work	in
alignment	and	trust	one	another.	If	there	is	persistent	imbalance	in	their
relationships,	the	President	of	the	Russian	Federation,	being	the	head	of
state,	must	solve	the	conflict	in	a	radical	manner.

A	 faster	 development	 of	 the	 situation	 connected	 with	 confidence	 in
the	 Government	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 may	 take	 place	 if	 the
Chairman	 of	 the	 Government	 raises	 the	 question	 of	 confidence	 in	 the
Government	of	the	Russian	Federation.	If	the	State	Duma	expresses	non-
confidence,	 the	 President	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	within	 seven	 days
takes	decision	to	either	announce	resignation	of	the	Government	of	the
Russian	Federation	or	to	dissolve	the	State	Duma	and	call	a	new	election.

Pursuant	to	the	Order	of	the	President	of	the	Russian	Federation	“On
the	System	and	Structure	of	the	Federal	Bodies	of	Executive	Power”9,	the
system	 of	 federal	 executive	 bodies	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 includes
federal	ministries,	federal	services,	and	federal	agencies.

A	 federal	 ministry	 is	 a	 federal	 executive	 body	 which	 exercises
authority	in	policy	formulation	and	normative	regulation	in	a	particular
field.	A	ministry	effects	coordination	and	control	over	 the	operation	of
federal	services	and	agencies	which	are	accountable	to	it	(item	3	of	the
Decree	of	the	President	of	the	Russian	Federation).	The	ministry’s	head
is	 a	 federal	 minister.	 Currently,	 there	 are	 21	 ministries	 in	 Russia
(Ministry	of	defense,	Ministry	of	foreign	affairs,	Ministry	of	justice	etc.).

A	federal	service	is	a	federal	executive	body	which	exercises	authority
in	 control	 and	 supervision	 over	 a	 particular	 field,	 as	 well	 as	 special
functions	 in	 the	 spheres	 of	 defense,	 state	 security,	 protection	 and
safeguarding	 of	 the	 state	 border	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 combating
crime,	 and	 in	 the	 sphere	 of	 social	 order.	A	 federal	 service’s	 head	 is	 its
director	 (item	 9	 of	 the	 Decree	 of	 the	 President	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation).

As	 opposed	 to	 a	 ministry,	 a	 federal	 service	 is	 not	 entitled	 to	 effect
normative	 regulation	 in	 its	 sphere,	 but	 it	 can	 solely	 adopt	 its	 own
individual	 acts	 (law-enforcing	 acts).	 Currently,	 there	 are	 29	 services	 in



Russia	 (Federal	 Antimonopoly	 Service,	 Federal	 Migration	 Service,
Federal	Tax	Service,	etc.).

A	federal	agency	is	a	federal	body	of	executive	power	which	exercises
functions	in	rendering	state	services,	managing	state	property	and	law-
enforcing	 functions	 except	 for	 control	 and	 supervision.	 A	 federal
agency’s	head	is	its	director.

A	federal	agency	may	not	adopt	normative	acts.	Currently,	there	are	22
agencies	 in	 Russia	 (Federal	 Space	 Agency,	 Federal	 Agency	 in	 National
Matters,	Federal	Road	Agency,	etc.).

Normative	acts	adopted	by	federal	executive	bodies	must	be	published
and	enter	into	force	upon	within	10	days	after	their	publication,	unless
otherwise	set	forth	in	the	act	itself.

14.5.	Judicial	Power	and	the	Prosecutor’s	Office

Independent	and	efficient	judicial	power	is	one	of	the	main	features	of
a	rule	of	law	state,	the	most	important	warranty	of	protection	of	rights,
freedoms	 and	 legitimate	 interests	 of	 man	 and	 citizen,	 of	 uniform
perception	 and	 implementation	 of	 legal	 requirements	 at	 the	 entire
territory	of	the	state.

Pursuant	 to	 Articles	 10	 and	 11	 of	 the	 Constitution	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation,	 the	 judiciary	 is	one	of	 the	 types	of	 state	power	 (along	with
the	 legislative	 and	 the	 executor),	 and	 its	 bodies	 possess	 full
independency.

Article	118	of	 the	Constitution	of	 the	Russian	Federation	establishes
that	 justice	 is	 executed	 exclusively	 by	 court,	 and	 the	 judicial	 power	 is
exercised	 in	 the	 forms	 of	 constitutional,	 civil,	 administrative,	 and
criminal	proceedings.	The	creation	of	extraordinary	 (emergency)	courts
at	the	territory	of	the	state	is	strictly	prohibited.

The	primary	task	of	the	judiciary	is	execution	of	justice.	Justice	is	the
courts’	 efforts	 to	 consider	 civil,	 administrative,	 and	 criminal	 cases	 in
judicial	proceedings,	 and	 to	 solve	 them	 in	a	 legal,	 reasonable,	 and	 just



manner	in	strict	accordance	with	the	Constitution	and	legislation	of	the
Russian	Federation.

The	 most	 important	 principles	 of	 justice	 include	 the	 following:
legality,	administration	of	 justice	by	court	exclusively,	 independence	of
judges	and	their	submission	to	law	only;	irremovability	and	immunity	of
judges,	administration	of	justice	based	on	equality	before	law	and	court;
judicial	 remedy	 of	 rights;	 maintenance	 of	 legality,	 expertise,	 and
impartiality	 of	 court;	 the	 benefit	 of	 the	 doubt;	 ensuring	 the	 convict’s
right	to	defense;	controversy	and	equality	of	parties;	openness	of	judicial
proceeding;	 right	 to	 use	 national	 language	 in	 judicial	 proceedings;
participation	of	citizens	in	administration	of	justice;	protection	of	one’s
dignity	and	reputation;	explicit	and	oral	nature	of	judicial	proceeding.

Pursuant	 to	 Article	 4	 of	 the	 Federal	 Constitutional	 Law	 “On	 the
Judicial	System	of	the	Russian	Federation”10,	the	courts	that	operate	in
Russia	 include	federal	courts,	constitutional	(charter)	courts,	and	peace
justices	 of	 the	 subjects	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 who	 comprise	 the
judicial	system	of	the	Russian	Federation.

Federal	 courts	 include:	 the	 Constitutional	 Court	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation,	 the	 Supreme	 Court	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 supreme
courts	 of	 republics,	 courts	 of	 other	 subjects	 of	 the	Russian	 Federation,
military	 and	 specialised	 courts,	 which	 comprise	 the	 system	 of	 federal
courts	 of	 general	 jurisdiction;	 arbitrazh	 courts	 of	 districts,	 arbitrazh
appellate	 courts,	 arbitrazh	 courts	 of	 the	 subjects	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation,	and	specialised	arbitrazh	courts,	which	comprise	the	system
of	federal	arbitrazh	courts.

Courts	 of	 the	 subjects	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 include:
constitutional	(charter)	courts,	and	peace	 justices,	which	are	 justices	of
general	jurisdiction	of	the	subjects	of	the	Russian	Federation.

Citizens	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 over	 25	 of	 age	 with	 a	 higher
education	in	law	and	a	law	service	record	of	not	less	than	five	years	can
become	 judges	 (Article	 119	 of	 the	 Constitution	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation).



Judges’	 legal	status	 is	characterised	with	 the	 following	constitutional
principles:

—	judges	are	independent	and	submit	only	to	the	Constitution	and	the
federal	law;

—	judges	are	irremovable	and	immune;

—	a	judge’s	powers	cannot	be	ceased	or	suspended,	and	a	judge	cannot
be	held	criminally	liable	otherwise	than	according	to	the	rules	set	by	the
federal	law.

Article	 123	 of	 the	 Constitution	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 sets	 forth
that	 examination	 of	 cases	 in	 all	 courts	 is	 open,	 and	 closed	 or	 default
proceedings	are	allowed	only	as	prescribed	by	the	federal	law.

The	most	 important	warranty	of	 independency	of	 the	 judiciary	 is	 the
fact	 that	 courts	are	only	 financed	 from	the	 federal	budget,	and	 it	must
ensure	 the	 possibility	 of	 complete	 and	 independent	 administration	 of
justice	pursuant	to	the	federal	law	(Article	124	of	the	Constitution	of	the
Russian	Federation).

The	 Prosecutor’s	 office	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 is	 a	 single	 federal
centralised	system	of	bodies	which	exercise	supervision	over	abidance	by
the	laws	operating	at	the	territory	of	the	Russian	Federation,	on	behalf	of
the	Russian	Federation.

The	Prosecutor’s	office	bodies	are	not	included	into	the	judicial	system
of	Russia,	and	service	therein	is	one	of	categories	of	federal	civil	service.

Alongside	with	other	 governmental	 bodies,	 the	Prosecutor’s	 office	 is
designed	 to	 ensure	 supremacy	 of	 law	 and	 maintenance	 of	 legality,
protection	of	rights	of	man	and	citizen,	as	well	as	of	society’s	and	state’s
interests	envisaged	by	law.

For	these	purposes,	pursuant	to	Article	1	of	 the	Federal	Law	“On	the
Prosecutor’s	Office	of	the	Russian	Federation”11,	the	Prosecutor’s	office
exercises:



—	supervision	over	 execution	of	 laws	 in	 force	within	 the	 territory	of
the	Russian	Federation	by	 federal	bodies	of	 the	executive,	by	bodies	of
the	legislative	(representative)	and	the	executive	power	of	the	subjects	of
the	Russian	Federation,	by	bodies	of	local	self-government,	and	by	other
individuals	and	entities;

—	supervision	over	protection	of	human	and	civil	rights;

—	 criminal	 prosecution	 in	 accordance	 with	 powers	 set	 forth	 by
criminal	procedure	legislation	of	the	Russian	Federation;

—	coordination	of	law	enforcement	bodies’	fight	against	crime;

—	 initiation	 of	 administrative	 cases	 and	 conduct	 of	 administrative
investigation.

The	 Prosecutor’s	 office	 bodies	 exercise	 their	 powers	 independently
from	the	federal	state	authorities,	the	authorities	of	the	subjects	of	the
Russian	 Federation,	 the	 local	 self-governments,	 social	 unions	 and	 in
strict	 accordance	with	 the	operating	 laws	 (Article	 4	of	 the	Federal	 Law
“On	the	Prosecutor’s	Office	of	the	Russian	Federation”).

The	 system	 of	 the	 Prosecutor’s	 office	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation
involves:	 Office	 of	 the	 Prosecutor	 General	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,
Prosecutor’s	offices	of	the	subjects	of	the	Russian	Federation,	equivalent
military	 and	 other	 specialised	 Prosecutor’s	 offices,	 scientific	 and
educational	 institutions	 which	 are	 legal	 entities,	 as	 well	 as	 city	 and
district	 Prosecutor’s	 offices,	 other	 territorial,	 military,	 and	 other
specialised	Prosecutor’s	offices.

The	 Prosecutor	 General	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 is	 appointed	 and
removed	from	office	by	the	Federation	Council	of	the	Federal	Assembly
of	the	Russian	Federation	upon	the	recommendation	of	the	President	of
the	Russian	Federation.

The	 Prosecutor	 General	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 presents	 the
chambers	 of	 the	 Federal	 Assembly	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 and	 the
President	of	the	Russian	Federation	with	an	annual	report	on	the	current



state	of	rule	of	law	and	law	and	order	in	the	Russian	Federation	and	on
the	efforts	made	to	strengthen	them.

14.6.	Local	Self-Government	in	the	Russian	Federation

Local	 self-government	 is	 an	 indispensable	 attribute	 of	 democracy,	 a
proof	 of	 decentralisation	 of	 power	 and	 the	 ability	 of	 local	 residents	 to
solve	certain	issues	autonomously.	European	Local	Government	Charter
of	1985	sets	forth	that	local	government	is	a	mandatory	attribute	for	all
countries.

In	Russia,	local	self-government	is	one	of	the	constitutional	pillars;	it
is	recognised,	protected	and	exercised	throughout	all	of	the	territory	of
the	state.

According	 to	 Article	 1	 of	 the	 Federal	 Law	 “On	General	 Principles	 of
Local	 Self-Government	 in	 the	 Russian	 Federation”12	 local	 self-
government	 is	 a	 manifestation	 of	 democracy	 which	 ensures	 that	 local
residents	 independently	 and	 self-responsibly	 solve	 issues	 of	municipal
importance	 directly	 or	 through	 municipal	 authorities,	 taking	 into
account	the	interests	of	the	people,	historic	and	other	local	traditions.

Fundamental	democratic	principles	of	local	self-government	include:

1.	 Supremacy	 of	 the	 Constitution	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 federal
constitutional	and	federal	laws.

2.	 Legality	 in	 organisation	 and	 realisation	 of	 local	 self-government
(this	 principle	 should	 be	 considered	 not	 only	 by	municipal	 authorities
but	also	by	state	authorities).

3.	Respect	for	rights	and	freedoms	of	man	and	citizen	(which	are	the
priority	in	all	acts	of	local	self-government).

4.	Transparency	of	local	self-government.

5.	Distinction	between	the	system	of	state	agencies	and	the	system	of
local	 self-government.	 (Although	 this	 does	 not	 imply	 isolation	 of



municipal	 agencies	 from	 state	 agencies	 within	 the	 system	 of	 public
authorities.	 In	 terms	of	organisation,	 it	means	 that	municipal	 agencies
are	 established	 without	 the	 participation	 or	 interference	 of	 state
agencies	and,	acting	on	a	legal	basis,	possess	full	autonomy	within	their
competence).

6.	 Independence	 of	 local	 self-government.	 Municipal	 agencies
independently	 manage	 municipal	 property,	 form,	 adopt	 and	 enact
municipal	 budget,	 enact	 local	 taxes	 and	 charges.	 Municipal	 entities
independently	 establish	 universally	 binding	 rules	 within	 their
competence	 and	 adopt	 plans	 and	municipal	 development	 programmes.
However,	 this	 independence	may	not	be	 treated	as	complete	autonomy
from	the	state	and	uncontrollability.	State	agencies	may	exercise	control
over	 the	 activities	 of	 municipal	 agencies.	 That	 said,	 the	 important
guarantee	 of	 independence	 of	 municipal	 agencies	 is	 a	 prohibition	 on
repeal	of	municipal	legal	acts	without	a	court	decision.

7.	Non-interference	of	 state	 agencies	 into	 the	activities	of	municipal
agencies	 (state	agencies	may	not	 interfere	with	the	operational	activity
of	local	self-government).

8.	 Requirement	 to	 the	 system	 of	 local	 self-government	 to	 include
elected	 agencies	 (representative	 authority	 and	 elected	 head	 of	 a
municipal	entity).

9.	 Accountability	 of	 local	 self-government,	 municipal	 agencies	 and
their	officials	before	the	state,	individuals	and	legal	entities.

10.	 Insubordination	 of	 municipal	 entities	 to	 each	 other	 (which
characterizes	 administrative	 and	 territorial	 insulation	 of	 different
municipal	entities).

11.	State	support	of	local	self-government	(which	serves,	for	example,
to	ensure	the	minimal	volume	of	municipal	budgets).

12.	Cooperation	of	municipal	and	state	agencies.

Examples	of	expression	of	local	residents’	will	include	local	referenda;



local	 elections;	 voting	 on	 recall	 of	 an	 elected	 official	 or	 member	 of	 a
representative	 local	 authority;	 voting	 on	 changes	 to	municipal	 entity’s
borders;	 citizens’	 meetings	 and	 gatherings;	 law-making	 initiatives;
public	hearings;	public	polling;	public	appeals	to	municipal	agencies.

The	most	 important	 issues	of	 local	 importance	 include:	management
and	 operation	 of	 municipal	 property,	 local	 finance	 and	 budget,	 local
housing,	 residential	 and	 socio-cultural	 development,	 organisation	 of
healthcare	 and	 education,	 urban	 planning	 and	 real	 estate,	 energy,
heating,	 gas	 supply	 to	 the	 population;	 urban	 improvement;	 providing
public	 transport	 services;	 preservation	 of	 historic	 and	 cultural
monuments;	 organisation	 of	 leisure	 activities	 and	 creation	 of
environment	for	sport	and	fitness	development,	etc.

The	structure	of	local	self-government	should	include	a	representative
body,	head	of	a	municipal	entity	and	local	administration.	This	structure
may	 also	 include	 a	 supervising	 municipal	 authority,	 other	 bodies	 and
elected	officials.	The	procedure	for	the	staffing	of	municipal	authorities,
term	 of	 office	 and	 various	 other	 issues	 are	 resolved	 by	 the	 respective
municipal	charters.

Test	questions	and	tasks

1.	Which	powers	does	the	President	of	the	Russian	Federation	possess?

2.	Please	list	the	main	stages	of	law-making	procedure	in	the	Russian
Federation.

3.	What	is	the	role	of	Federation	Council	within	the	structure	of	state
agencies	of	the	Russian	Federation?

4.	 Please	 describe	 the	 structure	 of	 federal	 executive	 bodies	 in	 the
Russian	Federation.

5.	Which	authority	does	the	President	of	the	Russian	Federation	have
over	the	Government	of	the	Russian	Federation?



6.	How	is	the	judicial	system	organised	in	the	Russian	Federation?

7.	 What	 is	 the	 role	 and	 distinctive	 features	 of	 the	 local	 self-
government	in	the	Russian	Federation?



Part	3.	Basics	of	civil	law
Chapter	15.	Civil	Law	as	a	Branch	of	Russian	Law

15.1.	The	Definition	and	the	System	of	Civil	Law

Civil	 law	 is	of	great	 importance	not	only	 in	 the	system	of	basic	 legal
sciences,	but	also	within	the	branches	of	Russian	law.

As	a	science,	civil	law	is	deeply	rooted	—	it	goes	back	to	Roman	private
law.	Originally,	 the	term	“civil	 law”	(Lat.	 jus	civile)	emerged	 in	ancient
Rome	and	signified	the	law	which	encircled	the	dwellers	of	Rome	as	city-
state	at	the	time.	Gradually,	jus	civile	(civil	law)	occupied	the	sphere	of
private	 law	 and	 was	 identified	 as	 private	 law.	 Later,	 as	 a	 result	 of
reception	of	Roman	private	law	in	European	states,	this	term	entrenched
itself	in	many	states’	legal	systems.

The	 division	 of	 law	 into	 private	 and	 public	 also	 emerged	 in	 ancient
Rome.	According	to	the	classic	definition	given	by	ancient	Roman	lawyer
Ulpian,	public	 law	 regards	 the	position	of	 the	Roman	 state	 (i.e.,	 public
authority),	whereas	private	law	relates	to	individuals.

The	main	point	of	the	said	division	lies	in	the	fact	that	each	system	of
law	 contains	 norms	 designed	 to	 ensure	 common	 (public)	 interests,	 i.e.
society’s	 and	 state’s	 interests	 (constitutional	 law,	 criminal	 law,
administrative	law,	etc.)	and	norms	ensuring	private	interests	(civil	law,
labour	law,	family	law,	etc.).

Public	 law	 is	 connected	 to	 public	 authority,	 which	 is	 borne	 by	 the
state.	Private	law	“attends	to”	private	needs	(individuals’	and	entities’)?,
who	do	not	possess	power	and	who	act	as	free	and	equal	proprietors.

Civil	 law	 is	 a	 branch	 of	 private	 law,	 governing	 initiative	 activity	 of
participants	 of	 social	 relations	 and	 aimed	 at	 catering	 to	 their	 own
(private)	needs13.

There	are	primary	principles	of	civil	law	regulation,	which	allow	one	to
deem	civil	law	a	part	of	private	law.	These	include:



1)	 legal	 equality	 of	 the	 parties	 to	 civil	 law	 relations	 (there	 is	 no
imperativeness);

2)	autonomy	of	the	parties’	will	(they	take	decisions	independently,	at
their	own	risk	and	at	their	own	material	liability);

3)	 material	 independence	 of	 the	 parties	 (they	 should	 have	 separate
and	isolated	property	which	they	incur	personal	liability	for).

There	are	also	other	principles	of	civil	law	as	a	specific	branch	of	law.

For	 instance,	 Article	 1	 of	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,
apart	 from	 listing	 the	 above	 named	 principles,	 addresses	 the	 issues	 of
inviolability	 of	 property,	 freedom	 of	 contract,	 inadmissibility	 of
anybody’s	 arbitrary	 interference	 into	private	 affairs,	 necessity	 to	 freely
exercise	the	civil	rights,	guarantee	of	reinstatement	of	civil	rights	in	case
of	their	violation,	and	judicial	remedies.

Subject	matter	 of	 the	 civil	 law	 branch	 involves	 two	 groups	 of	 social
relations:

1)	material	 (property)	 relations	which	emerge	between	 individuals	 in
connection	with	property	—	material	 and	other	 assets	which	appear	 in
the	 form	of	 goods	 and	 can	be	 evaluated	 (land,	 subsoil,	 houses,	money,
negotiable	instruments);

2)	personal	non-property	 relations	which	emerge	 in	 connection	with
non-material	 assets	 (name,	 dignity,	 goodwill,	 right	 of	 authorship	 to
scientific,	 literary	 and	 artistic	 works,	 etc.).	 These	 are	 of	 non-property,
non-tangible	 nature,	 but	 can	 be	 connected	 to	 property	 relations
(invention	rights)	or	not	(one’s	health,	life,	etc.).

The	 method	 of	 civil	 law	 is	 dispositive,	 i.e.	 it	 primarily	 uses
authorisation	of	individuals	to	act	at	their	sole	discretion	and	initiative.
The	 employment	 of	 this	 method	 is	 predetermined	 by	 the	 equality	 of
parties	 in	 civil	 relations,	 their	 economic	 independence	 and	 autonomy.
Therefore,	one	of	the	most	important	grounds	for	the	origination	of	civil
laws	 and	 obligations	 is	 contract	 (voluntary	 agreement	 between



individuals).

Section	 1	 Article	 2	 of	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation
envisages	 that	 civil	 legislation	 governs	 property	 and	 personal	 non-
property	 relations,	 based	 on	 equality,	 autonomy	 of	 will	 and	 property
independence	 of	 the	 participants.	 It	 also	 means	 that	 other	 property
relations	(tax,	financial,	administrative)	do	not	comprise	subject	matter
of	civil	legislation.

Thus,	 civil	 law	may	be	defined	as	a	 system	of	 legal	norms	governing
property	and	non-property	relations	connected	thereto,	which	are	based
on	 equality	 and	 property	 independence	 of	 the	 participants,	 its	 main
purpose	being	granting	opportunities	to	 individuals	for	full	satisfaction
of	their	needs	and	interests.

Pursuant	to	Article	2	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation,	civil
law	 governs	 the	 relations	 between	 persons	 engaged	 in	 business
activities.

The	 system	 of	 civil	 law	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 is	 represented
through	the	following	elements.

General	part	of	civil	law	includes	norms	dedicated	to	the	nature	of	the
branch,	the	subjects	and	objects	of	civil	relations,	the	grounds	for	their
coming	into	existence,	the	timeframes	of	exercising	and	protecting	civil
rights,	etc.

Special	part	of	civil	law	includes	the	majority	of	legal	norms	which	can
be	grouped	into	sub-branches:

—	 law	 of	 things	 (including	 property	 rights	 and	 limited	 proprietary
rights);

—	 law	 of	 obligations	 (certain	 types	 of	 contractual	 obligations	 to
transfer	the	right	to	property,	to	perform	works	and	render	services);

—	 law	of	 intellectual	property	 (right	of	authorship,	 invention,	patent
law,	etc.);



—	law	of	succession.

15.2.	Sources	of	Civil	Law

Sources	of	civil	law	are	those	forms	of	expression	of	binding	norms	of
civil	law	which	are	acknowledged	by	state.

There	is	a	vast	number	of	normative	acts	which	contain	norms	of	civil
law.	These	include:

1.	The	Constitution	of	the	Russian	Federation;

2.	The	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation	and	federal	 laws	adopted
in	line	therewith,	designed	to	govern	civil	relations;

3.	Decrees	of	the	President	of	the	Russian	Federation;

4.	Regulations	of	the	Government	of	the	Russian	Federation;

5.	Acts	 issued	by	ministries	and	other	bodies	of	the	executive	branch
of	power	(Article	3	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation).

Section	 1	 Article	 4	 of	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 sets
forth	a	principle	whereby	acts	of	civil	legislation	are	not	retroactive	and
are	applied	to	relations	which	arose	after	these	acts	entered	into	force.

Pursuant	to	Article	7	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation,	the
generally	 recognised	 principles	 and	 norms	 of	 international	 law	 and
international	treaties	of	the	Russian	Federation	are	a	component	part	of
the	Russian	Federation	 legal	 system	and	are	directly	 applicable	 to	 civil
relations.	 The	 exception	 is	 where	 the	 treaty	 itself	 envisages	 that	 an
intra-state	act	shall	be	issued	for	it	to	apply.

If	an	international	treaty	of	the	Russian	Federation	sets	forth	different
rules	than	those	stipulated	by	civil	legislation,	the	former	shall	apply.

The	 content	 of	Article	 5	 of	 the	Civil	 Code	 of	 the	Russian	 Federation
illustrates	that	custom	is	also	considered	a	source	of	civil	law.	A	custom
is	 a	 rule	 of	 behavior	which	 has	 taken	 shape	 and	 is	widely	 applied	 in	 a



certain	sphere	of	business	activities,	and	which	has	not	been	stipulated
by	legislation,	regardless	of	whether	it	has	or	has	not	been	fixed	in	any
document.	However,	section	2	Article	5	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian
Federation	 expressly	 envisages	 that	 those	 customs	 which	 are
contradictory	to	the	provisions	of	legislation	or	agreement	do	not	apply.

Academic	writers	note	that	the	acknowledgment	of	custom	as	a	source
of	 law	 is	 risky,	 since	 customs	 are	 not	 formalised	 or	 fixed	 in	 a	 strict
manner,	which	can	lead	to	abuse	of	discretion	of	those	who	apply	the	law
and	 to	 unrecoverable	 discrepancies	 when	 applicable	 law	 is	 identified.
Therefore,	 ethical	 and	moral	 norms	 cannot	 be	 deemed	 a	 source	 of	 law
(although	they	do	underlie	law)14.

Customs	 should	 not	 be	 confused	 with	 business	 practices	 which	 are
widespread	 but	 not	 obligatory.	 Business	 practices	 apply	 to	 parties’
relations	if	it	is	expressly	stipulated.

Russian	legal	doctrine	does	not	recognise	legal	precedent	as	source	of
law.	 However,	 clarifications	 in	 application	 of	 various	 normative	 acts
issued	by	the	Plenary	of	the	Supreme	Court	of	the	Russian	Federation	do
contain	 the	 official	 interpretation	 of	 legal	 norms	 and	 are	 binding	 on
lower	judicial	bodies.

Test	questions	and	tasks

1.	 Please	 describe	 the	 key	 principles	 of	 civil	 regulation	 of	 social
relations.

2.	What	is	the	system	of	civil	law?

3.	Please	list	the	primary	sources	of	civil	law.

Chapter	16.	Civil	Relations
16.1.	Definition,	Structure	and	Types	of	Civil	Relations

In	Russian	legal	doctrine,	there	is	a	twofold	approach	to	the	notion	of
“legal	relation”.	According	to	one	approach,	legal	relation	is	a	process	of



a	 legal	 norm	 influencing	 on	 and	 regulating	 already	 existing	 social
relations,	according	to	the	second	approach,	legal	relations	are	a	specific
type	of	social	relations	which	arises	only	on	the	basis	of	a	norm	of	law.

Nevertheless,	 despite	 the	 differences	 between	 the	 above	 two
approaches,	 it	 is	undoubted	 that	any	 legal	 relation	arises	as	a	 result	of
legal	norms	influencing	social	relations.

Civil	 relations	 are	 a	 type	 of	 legal	 relations	 arising	 between	 the
participants	 of	 social	 relations,	 regulated	 by	 civil	 law.	 Civil	 relation	 is
characterised	by	legal	rights	and	obligations	of	its	participants.

Civil	 relation	 is	 a	 system	 of	 interrelated	 elements	 which	 is	 called
structure	of	civil	relations.	It	includes	the	following	elements:

1.	 Subjective	 element	 of	 legal	 relations	 denotes	 their	 participants
(persons).	 The	 number	 of	 such	 participants	 is	 not	 limited,	 but	 there
should	be	at	least	two	of	them	—	the	creditor	and	the	debtor.

Under	Section	1	Article	2	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation,
citizens	 and	 legal	 persons	 may	 act	 as	 participants	 of	 civil	 relations.
Besides,	the	Russian	Federation,	subjects	of	the	Russian	Federation	and
municipal	 entities	may	 participate	 in	 some	 civil	 relations	 regulated	 by
the	civil	legislation.

A	participant	of	civil	relations	must	have	legal	capacity,	including	the
capacity	 to	 have	 rights	 and	 fulfill	 obligations	 in	 civil-law	 transactions
(that	is,	passive	and	active	legal	capacity).

2.	Subject	matter	of	legal	relations,	which,	as	a	rule,	denotes	material
as	well	as	immaterial	goods	which	are	capable	of	satisfying	the	needs	of
the	 individual	 and	 in	 regard	 of	which	 a	 legal	 relation,	 legal	 rights	 and
obligations	arise.

3.	 Nature	 of	 legal	 relations	 denotes	 the	 interaction	 of	 their
participants	 which	 is	 defined	 by	 their	 legal	 rights	 and	 obligations.	 In
other	words,	the	nature	of	a	legal	relation	is	the	aggregate	of	legal	rights
and	obligations	of	the	participants	of	such	relation.



4.	 Grounds	 for	 creation,	 alteration	 and	 cessation	 of	 legal	 relations,
which	 are	 called	 juridical	 facts.	 Juridical	 facts	 are	 life	 circumstances
connected	with	creation,	alternation,	and	cessation	of	a	legal	relation.

Under	Article	8	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation,	civil	rights
and	obligations	arise	as	a	result	of:

1)	contracts	and	other	transactions;

2)	acts	of	state	and	municipal	agencies;

3)	judicial	decision	which	establishes	legal	rights	and	obligations;

4)	acquisition	of	property	on	any	basis	allowed	by	law;

5)	 creation	 of	 objects	 of	 art,	 science,	 literature,	 inventions	 or	 other
intellectual	property;

6)	infliction	of	damage	to	another	person;

7)	unjust	enrichment;

8)	other	actions	of	individuals	or	legal	entities;

9)	events	which	create	civil	relations	according	to	the	legislation.

The	wide	 variety	 of	 juridical	 facts	 demands	 a	 classification.	 Juridical
facts	 may	 be:	 a)	 events	 	 —	 circumstances	 which	 do	 not	 objectively
depend	on	 the	will	or	mindset	of	 individuals	 (e.g.	natural	disasters);	b)
deeds	—	facts	which	depend	on	the	will	of	 individuals	since	individuals
commit	them.	Deeds,	in	their	turn,	may	be	classified	into	legal	(contract
execution,	marriage	registration)	and	illegal	(all	kinds	of	legal	offences).

Legal	 deeds	 may	 be:	 а)	 legal	 actions	 —	 which	 lead	 to	 legal
consequences	 regardless	 of	 the	 individual’s	 intent	 (e.g.	 creation	 of	 a
scientific	 work	 authomatically	 leads	 to	 creation	 of	 copyright);	 b)	 legal
acts	—	which	are	specifically	committed	to	create,	change	or	end	a	civil
relation	(sale	and	purchase,	lease,	donation,	etc.).



There	are	the	following	types	of	civil	relations:

1.	 pecuniary	 and	 non-pecuniary	 (depending	 on	 whether	 they	 have
material	goods	as	their	subject	matter);

2.	 absolute	 (an	 individual	 has	 a	 right	 which	 is	 relevant	 to	 all	 other
individuals	and	entities	—	ownership	rights,	copyright)	and	relative	(an
individual’s	 right	 is	 relevant	 only	 to	 a	 certain	 obligee	 —	 sale	 and
delivery,	loan,	etc.);

3.	 in	 rem	 (a	 property	 right	 belonging	 to	 an	 individual	 —	 ownership
right,	 servitude,	 etc.)	 and	 in	 personam	 (dynamics	 of	 pecuniary	 legal
relations	 which	 arise	 when	 an	 individual	 has	 the	 right	 to	 demand
transfer	of	property,	performance	of	works,	etc.	from	another	person).

16.2.	Citizens	(Individuals)	as	Participants	of	Legal	Relations
16.2.1.	Specific	Features	of	a	Citizen.	Active	and	Passive	Legal	Capacity	of	a	Citizen

Participants	of	civil	relations	are	called	persons.	Civil	law	(as	opposed
to	many	other	branches	of	Russian	law)	provides	the	same	set	of	rights	to
all	 individuals	regardless	of	 their	citizenship	(whether	they	are	Russian
citizens	or	not).	Therefore,	the	terms	“citizen”	and	“man/individual”	are
used	as	synonyms	in	civil	law.

An	individual	has	a	number	of	characteristics	which	concretize	his	or
her	legal	status:	name,	age,	sex,	place	of	residence,	etc.

Under	 Article	 19	 of	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 an
individual	acquires	and	exercises	rights	and	obligations	under	his	or	her
name,	 which	 includes	 first	 name	 and	 last	 (family)	 name,	 as	 well	 as
middle	 (paternal)	 name	 unless	 otherwise	 provided	 by	 law	 or	 national
custom	 (the	 notion	 of	 paternal	 name	 is	 not	 known	 to	 some	 national
customs).

In	some	cases	provided	by	law	an	individual	may	use	a	pseudonym	(an
assumed	name).

An	 individual	 may	 change	 their	 name	 in	 accordance	 with	 the



procedure	provided	by	law.	Such	a	change	does	not	give	rise	to	cessation
or	 alteration	 of	 their	 rights	 and	 obligations	 accrued	 under	 the	 former
name	(Paragraph	2	Article	19	of	the	Civil	Code).

A	 place	 of	 residence	 is	 a	 place	 where	 an	 individual	 lives	 on	 a
permanent	 basis	 or	most	 of	 the	 time.	 A	 place	 of	 residence	 of	 a	minor
under	fourteen	years	old	or	wards	is	the	place	of	residence	of	their	legal
guardian,	parent	or	adoptive	parent.	Only	persons	with	full	legal	capacity
may	 freely	 choose	 their	 place	 of	 residence.	 Minors	 aged	 fourteen	 to
eighteen	 may	 choose	 their	 place	 of	 residence	 at	 the	 consent	 of	 their
parents	or	legal	guardians.

Other	factors	which	are	important	for	civil	relations	and	which	lead	to
creation	and	development	of	certain	 legal	relations	are	sex,	age,	health
condition	and	other	factors.	Reaching	a	certain	age	is	necessary	to	fully
exercise	 a	number	of	 rights	 and	perform	obligations;	 a	 sex	of	 a	person
should	be	considered	when	providing	housing	on	the	basis	of	a	lease,	etc.

A	citizen’s	legal	status	is	based	on	his	legal	capacity	and	competence,
which	consist	of	passive	and	active	legal	capacity.

Pursuant	to	Article	17	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation,	civil
passive	 legal	 capacity	 is	 defined	 as	 the	 capability	 to	 possess	 the	 civil
rights	 and	 to	 perform	 duties	 and	 is	 equally	 due	 to	 all	 the	 citizens.	 A
citizen’s	 passive	 legal	 capacity	 arises	 at	 the	 moment	 of	 his	 birth	 and
ceases	with	his	death.

Therefore,	passive	 legal	 capacity	which	 is	 equally	due	 to	 all	 citizens,
represents	 his	 capability	 to	 possess	 civil	 rights	 and	 to	 perform
obligations	 set	 forth	by	 law.	Passive	 legal	 capacity	 is	 intrinsic	with	 the
man,	who	 possesses	 it	 from	 his	 birth	 and	 till	 death,	 regardless	 of	 age,
state	of	health	(mental	included),	and	other	characteristics.	Law	may	set
limits	on	the	citizen	exercising	certain	rights,	but	passive	legal	capacity
may	not	be	limited.

Civil	active	capacity	is	the	citizen’s	capability	to	acquire	and	exercise
by	 his	 actions	 civil	 rights,	 to	 create	 for	 himself	 civil	 duties,	 and	 to
discharge	 them.	Active	capacity	arises	 in	 full	 volume	with	 the	citizen’s



coming	 of	 age,	 i.e.	 upon	 reaching	 the	 age	 of	 18	 years.	 In	 case	 it	 is
admitted	by	law	to	enter	into	marriage	before	the	citizen’s	reaching	the
age	of	18	years,	such	citizen	acquires	the	active	capacity	in	full	volume
from	 the	moment	of	his	 entering	 into	marriage	 (Article	 21	of	 the	Civil
Code	of	the	Russian	Federation).

Legal	 active	 capacity	 designates	 the	 citizen’s	 capability	 to	 perform
various	 legally	 binding	 actions	 (transactions)	 independently	 —	 the
capacity	 to	 contract	 (enter	 into	 a	 contract),	 acquire	 and	 dispose	 of
property	 and	 be	 personally	 liable	 for	 property	 damage	 inflicted	 —
delictual	 capacity	 (inflicting	 damage	 upon	 or	 destruction	 of	 other’s
property).

As	opposed	to	civil	passive	capacity	which	is	equally	attributable	to	all
the	citizens,	civil	active	capacity	is	unequal,	and	its	volume	depends	on
one’s	 age.	 Based	 on	 this	 criterion,	 full	 and	 partial	 active	 capacity	 are
distinguished.

Full	active	capacity	arises	from	the	moment	of	coming	of	age	(reaching
the	age	of	18	years),	entering	into	marriage,	or	recognising	a	citizen	fully
capable	(emancipation).	Thus,	pursuant	to	Article	27	of	the	Civil	Code	of
the	Russian	Federation,	a	minor	who	has	reached	the	age	of	16	years	may
be	declared	to	have	full	active	capacity	if	he	is	employed	under	a	labour
contract,	or	if	he	engages	in	business	activities	upon	the	consent	of	his
parents,	adopters,	or	 trustee.	The	minor	 is	declared	as	having	acquired
full	active	capacity	(is	emancipated)	by	the	decision	of	the	guardianship
and	 trusteeship	 body	 —	 upon	 the	 consent	 of	 both	 of	 his	 parents,
adopters,	 or	 trustee,	 or,	 in	 the	 absence	 of	 such	 consent	 —	 by	 court
decision.

Minors	possess	partial	active	capacity.	The	Civil	Code	of	 the	Russian
Federation	distinguishes	between	the	active	capacity	of	minors	aged	14
to	18	years	and	the	active	capacity	of	minors	aged	6	to	14	years	(active
capacity	of	young	minors).

Pursuant	 to	 Article	 26	 of	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,
minors	 aged	 14	 to	 18	 years	 have	 the	 right	 to	 perform	 the	 following
actions	independently:



1)	to	dispose	of	their	earnings,	student’s	allowance,	or	other	incomes;

2)	to	exercise	the	author’s	rights	to	a	work	of	science,	literature	or	art;

3)	to	make	deposits	into	credit	institutions	and	dispose	of	these;

4)	to	effect	petty	everyday	deals	and	other	deals	as	set	forth	by	law.

In	other	cases,	deals	effected	by	such	minors	shall	be	effected	upon	the
written	 consent	 of	 their	 legal	 representatives	 —	 parents,	 adopters,	 or
trustee.

Minors	aged	6	to	14	years	(young	minors)	have	the	right	to	perform	the
following	actions	independently:

1)	petty	everyday	deals;

2)	 deals	 aimed	 at	 deriving	 free	 profit,	 which	 are	 not	 subject	 to	 the
notary’s	certification	or	to	state	registration;

3)	 deals	 involving	 disposal	 of	 means	 provided	 by	 their	 legal
representatives	 or,	 upon	 the	 latter’s	 consent,	 by	 a	 third	 person	 for	 a
definite	purpose	or	for	free	disposal.

In	other	cases,	only	young	minors’	parents,	adopters,	or	guardians	may
perform	transactions	on	the	formers’	behalf.

Article	 30	 of	 the	Civil	 Code	 of	 the	Russian	 Federation	 sets	 forth	 the
possibility	 of	 restricting	 active	 capacity	 of	 citizens	 who,	 as	 a	 result	 of
their	 abuse	 of	 alcohol	 or	 drug	 addiction	 have	 put	 their	 families	 into	 a
precarious	 financial	 position.	 Trusteeship	 is	 established	 over	 such
citizens.	They	are	entitled	to	effect	petty	everyday	deals	independently,
while	other	transactions	may	be	effected	upon	the	trustee’s	consent.	The
trustee	 receives	 and	 spends	 wages,	 pension,	 and	 other	 incomes	 of	 the
citizen	restricted	in	active	capacity	by	court.

A	citizen	who,	as	a	result	of	a	mental	derangement,	can	neither	realise
the	meaning	of	his	actions	nor	control	them,	may	also	be	recognised	by
court	as	legally	incapable.



If	the	grounds,	by	force	of	which	the	citizen	was	recognised	as	legally
incapable,	have	ceased	to	exist,	 the	court	shall	 repeal	 the	restriction	 in
active	 capacity	 (section	 2	 Article	 30	 of	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation).

A	citizen	who,	as	a	result	of	a	mental	derangement,	can	neither	realise
the	meaning	of	his	actions	nor	control	them,	may	also	be	recognised	by
court	as	legally	incapable.	All	the	transactions	on	his	behalf	are	effected
by	 a	 guardian	 (Article	 29	 of	 the	Civil	 Code	 of	 the	Russian	 Federation).
Should	the	citizen’s	capability	to	understand	the	meaning	of	his	actions
and	 to	 control	 them,	 restore,	 the	 court	 shall	 recognise	 him	 as	 legally
capable.

It	is	worth	emphasising	that	a	citizen	may	be	exclusively	recognised	as
legally	 incapable	 as	 a	 result	 of	 a	 mental	 derangement,	 and	 not	 any
physical	impairment,	mutilation,	illness,	etc.

16.2.2.	Business	Activities	of	a	Citizen

A	 citizen’s	 business	 activities	 are	 one	 of	 the	 elements	 of	 their	 civil
capacity.

Business	 activity	 is	 an	 independent	 activity,	 performed	 at	 one’s	 own
risk,	 aimed	 at	 systematically	 deriving	 a	 profit	 from	 the	 use	 of	 the
property,	 the	 sale	 of	 commodities,	 the	 performance	 of	 work	 or	 the
rendering	 of	 services	 by	 the	 persons,	 registered	 in	 this	 capacity	 in
conformity	with	the	law-established	procedure	(section	1	Article	2	of	the
Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation).

Any	 citizen	 is	 entitled	 to	 conduct	 business	 without	 forming	 a	 legal
entity,	 starting	 from	 the	 moment	 of	 registration	 as	 individual
entrepreneur.

Any	 legally	 binding	 actions	 an	 entrepreneur	 commits	 are	 on	 their
behalf	and	at	their	own	risk.

Pursuant	to	Article	8	of	the	Federal	Law	“On	the	state	registration	of
legal	entities	and	individual	entrepreneurs”15,	state	registration	shall	be



effected	 within	 five	 business	 days	 upon	 submitting	 the	 necessary
documents	to	the	registering	authority.

An	 individual	 entrepreneur	 who	 is	 unable	 to	 settle	 creditors’	 claims
arising	 from	 the	 former’s	 business	 activities	may	 be	 deemed	 insolvent
(bankrupt)	by	court.	Once	such	a	decision	is	taken	by	court,	an	individual
entrepreneur’s	 state	 registration	 becomes	 invalid.	 During	 the
implementation	of	bankruptcy	proceeding,	an	individual	entrepreneur’s
creditors	 by	 obligations	 not	 related	 to	 his	 performance	 of	 business
activities,	 are	 also	 entitled	 to	 file	 their	 claims	 (Article	 25	 of	 the	 Civil
Code	of	the	Russian	Federation).

Pursuant	 to	 section	4	Article	 134	of	 the	 Federal	 Law	 “On	 insolvency
(bankruptcy)”16,	 an	 individual	 entrepreneur’s	 creditors’	 claims,	 should
he	be	deemed	bankrupt,	are	met	with	the	property	he	owns	according	to
the	following	priority	ranking:

—	the	first	priority	ranking	is	for	settlements	relating	to	the	claims	of
the	 citizens	 to	whom	 the	debtor	 is	 liable	 for	 a	harm	 inflicted	 to	 life	or
health;

—	 the	 second	 priority	 ranking	 is	 for	 settlements	 relating	 to
disbursement	of	 severance	benefits	and	 remuneration	 for	 the	 labour	of
the	 persons	 who	 are	 working	 or	 have	 been	 working	 under	 a	 labour
contract;

—	the	third	priority	ranking	is	for	settlements	with	other	creditors.

Article	 24	 of	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 sets	 forth	 a
principle	whereby	a	citizen	bears	 responsibility	 for	his	obligations	with
his	entire	property,	with	the	exception	of	that	property,	upon	which,	in
conformity	with	the	law,	no	penalty	may	be	imposed.

An	 individual	 entrepreneur	 has	 both	 personal	 property	 as	 well	 as
property	which	 is	 solely	 used	 for	 business	 purposes.	 However,	 the	 law
does	not	 distinguish	 between	 the	 two.	 It	means	 that,	 regardless	 of	 the
fact	whether	 an	 individual	 entrepreneur	 uses	 his	 property	 for	 business
purposes	 or	 personal	 affairs,	 he	will	 bear	 responsibility	with	 his	 entire



property.

16.2.3.	The	Guardianship,	the	Trusteeship,	the	Patronage

Not	 every	 citizen	 is	 able	 to	 exercise	 their	 rights	 and	 perform
obligations,	 due	 to	 partial	 capacity	 or	 incapacity.	 Therefore,
guardianship	 and	 trusteeship	 are	 established	 to	 protect	 the	 rights	 and
interests	of	 legally	incapable	or	partially	capable	citizens.	Guardianship
and	 trusteeship	 over	 minors	 are	 also	 established	 for	 educational
purposes	(Article	31	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation).

Guardianship	 is	 established	 over	minors	 (aged	 6	 to	 14)	 and	 citizens
who	 have	 been	 recognised	 by	 court	 as	 legally	 incapable	 as	 a	 result	 of
mental	 derangement.	 Guardians	 are	 representatives	 of	 their	 wards	 by
operation	of	law	and	effect	all	the	necessary	transactions	on	the	latter’s
behalf	and	in	their	interests	and	are	liable	for	their	actions.

Trusteeship	is	established	over	minors	aged	from	14	to	18,	as	well	as
citizens	who	have	 been	 restricted	 in	 their	 legal	 capacity.	 Trustees	 give
their	 consent	 for	 effecting	 those	 transactions	which	 the	 citizens	under
their	trusteeship	are	not	entitled	to	effect	independently.

Trustees	 render	 assistance	 to	 their	 wards	 in	 their	 exercising	 their
rights	and	duties,	and	protect	 them	from	possible	maltreatment	on	the
part	 of	 third	 persons.	 Trustees’	 obligations	 are	 more	 limited	 in
comparison	with	those	of	guardians.

Guardianship	 and	 trusteeship	 bodies	 are	 the	 executive	 bodies	 of
subjects	of	the	Russian	Federation.	A	guardian	or	a	trustee	is	appointed
by	the	guardianship	and	trusteeship	body	by	the	place	of	residence	of	the
person	 in	need	of	 guardianship	or	 trusteeship,	within	one	month	 from
the	 moment	 when	 the	 said	 bodies	 have	 become	 aware	 of	 the	 need	 to
establish	guardianship	or	trusteeship	over	the	citizen.

If	 no	 guardian	 or	 trustee	 is	 appointed	 for	 the	 person	 in	 need	 of
guardianship	or	trusteeship,	the	execution	of	the	duties	of	a	guardian	or
a	trustee	is	temporarily	imposed	upon	the	guardianship	and	trusteeship
body	(Article	35	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation).



A	 guardian	 or	 a	 trustee	 can	 be	 only	 appointed	 upon	 such	 body’s
consent,	and	their	duties	are	executed	free	of	charge.

Guardians,	 as	 well	 as	 trustees,	 are	 obliged	 to	 take	 care	 of	 the
maintenance	 of	 their	wards,	 to	 provide	 them	 all	 essential	 services	 and
medical	treatment,	and	to	protect	their	rights	and	interests.

Pursuant	 to	Article	37	of	 the	Civil	Code	of	 the	Russian	Federation,	a
guardian	or	a	trustee	are	entitled	to	dispose	of	the	incomes	of	their	ward,
including	 the	 sums	 of	 social	 disbursements	 provided	 for	 their
subsistence,	except	 for	 income	which	the	ward	 is	entitled	to	dispose	of
on	their	own.	Such	disposal	shall	be	effected	exclusively	in	the	interests
of	 the	ward	 and	with	 preliminary	 consent	 of	 the	 body	 of	 guardianship
and	trusteeship.

On	the	contrary,	patronage	is	a	special	form	of	guarding	the	interests
of	 adult	 legally	 capable	 citizens,	 who	 cannot	 exercise	 their	 rights	 and
perform	 their	 obligations	on	 their	 own	due	 to	 the	 state	of	 their	health
(ill,	elderly,	handicapped).

An	aid	of	such	a	person	may	be	appointed	on	their	consent,	as	well	as
on	that	person’s	consent.	The	aid	performs	actions	in	the	interests	of	the
citizen	who	is	under	patronage,	on	the	basis	of	a	contract	entered	into	by
and	 between	 these	 two	 persons.	 Therefore,	 the	 aid’s	 and	 the	 citizen’s
relations	are	of	contractual	nature.

16.2.4.	Recognising	the	Citizen	as	Missing	for	an	Unknown	Reason	and	Declaring	the
Citizen	as	Dead

A	citizen’s	long-term	absence	in	their	place	of	residence	or	lack	of	any
information	on	their	whereabouts	is	not	a	matter	of	indifference	for	their
family	and	counterparties	(creditors,	employer).	Moreover,	such	citizen’s
property	is	left	unattended	and	may	be	damaged	or	embezzled.

In	 order	 to	 eliminate	 legal	 uncertainty,	 the	 lawmaker	 created	 the
institute	 of	 missing	 for	 an	 unknown	 reason	 (absence	 in	 a	 place
unknown).

Article	42	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation	sets	forth	that	a



citizen	may	 be	 recognised	 as	missing	 for	 an	 unknown	 reason	 if	 at	 the
place	of	his	residence	there	is	no	information	on	the	place	of	his	stay	in
the	course	of	one	year.

The	 property	 belonging	 to	 the	 citizen	 who	 has	 been	 recognised	 as
missing	 for	 an	 unknown	 reason,	 should	 it	 require	 permanent
management,	 is	 transferred	 by	 a	 court	 decision	 to	 a	 person	 who	 is
appointed	by	the	guardianship	and	trusteeship	body	and	who	acts	based
on	a	contract	of	confidential	management,	entered	into	with	this	body.

Allowance	is	paid	out	of	this	property	to	the	citizens	whom	the	person
recognised	 missing	 for	 an	 unknown	 reason	 is	 obliged	 to	 support,	 and
debts	by	other	obligations	of	the	said	person	are	serviced	(Article	43	of
the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation).

Should	the	citizen	recognised	missing	for	an	unknown	reason	appear
or	should	his	place	of	stay	be	discovered,	the	court	repeals	its	decision	on
recognising	 the	 citizen	 as	 missing	 for	 an	 unknown	 reason.	 On	 the
grounds	of	this	court	decision,	the	management	of	this	citizen’s	body	is
recalled.

As	opposed	to	absence	in	the	place	of	stay,	declaring	citizen	as	dead	is
based	on	the	presumption	(assumption)	of	his	death.	Declaring	citizen	as
dead	 is	 irrespective	 of	 the	 fact	 whether	 he	 had	 previously	 been
recognised	as	missing	for	an	unknown	reason.

Pursuant	 to	Article	45	of	 the	Civil	Code	of	 the	Russian	Federation,	a
citizen	 may	 be	 declared	 by	 the	 court	 as	 dead,	 if	 there	 has	 been	 no
information	 at	 his	 place	 of	 residence	 about	 his	 place	 of	 stay	 within	 5
years.	Should	the	citizen	disappear	under	life-threatening	circumstances
or	 under	 such	 circumstances	 which	 give	 one	 a	 reason	 to	 assume	 his
death	of	an	accident,	the	time	period	comprises	6	months.

A	military	man	or	other	 citizen	who	has	been	missing	 in	 connection
with	military	operations	cannot	be	declared	as	dead	until	 the	expiry	of
two	years	from	the	day	of	cessation	of	military	operations.

Should	 the	 citizen	 who	 had	 been	 declared	 dead	 appear,	 the	 court



repeals	its	respective	decision.

Regardless	 of	 the	 time	 of	 his	 showing	 up,	 the	 citizen	 is	 entitled	 to
claim	 return	 of	 surviving	 property	 which	 was	 transferred	 to	 other
persons	free	of	charge	after	declaring	the	citizen	dead.

If	 the	 citizen’s	 property	 was	 transferred	 to	 other	 persons	 on	 legal
grounds	for	consideration	(for	value),	it	shall	not	be	returned,	unless	it	is
shown	that	persons	obtaining	such	property	were	aware	of	the	fact	that
the	citizen	who	had	been	declared	dead	is,	in	fact,	alive.

16.3.	Legal	Entities	as	Parties	to	Civil	Relations
16.3.1.	The	Definition	and	Legal	Capacity	of	a	Legal	Entity

Legal	 entities	 (organisations	 established	 for	 express	 participation	 in
business	 transactions)	 are	 equal	 parties	 to	 civil	 relations	 along	 with
citizens	(persons).

A	 legal	 entity	 is	 an	 organisation	 which	 possesses	 set-apart	 property
and	 is	 liable	 by	 its	 obligations	 with	 such	 property,	 can	 bear	 civil
obligations,	 sue,	 and	 be	 sued.	 A	 legal	 entity	must	 be	 registered	 in	 the
State	Register	of	Legal	Entities.

Thus,	one	may	list	the	following	features	of	legal	entities:

1.	organisational	structure	set	forth	in	the	constituent	document	(the
legal	entity’s	bodies,	their	scope	of	authority);

2.	 property	 severalty,	 i.e.	 having	 set-apart	 property	 which	 is
distinguished	 from	 the	 entity’s	 shareholders’	 property.	 The	 severalty
feature	 is	 illustrated	by	 the	 registered	 capital,	 balance	 sheet,	 and	bank
account;

3.	independent	participation	in	civil	commerce,	which	is	epitomised	by
the	capability	to:

—	acquire	and	exercise	civil	rights	on	the	entity’s	own	behalf;

—	be	liable	with	its	property	by	its	obligations;



—	sue	and	be	sued.

A	 legal	 entity	 also	 has	 its	 name	 and	 registered	 office,	 which	 are
indicated	on	its	constituent	documents.

A	 legal	 entity’s	 capacity	 lies	 in	 the	 fact	 that	 it	 can	 enjoy	 civil	 rights
which	 correspond	 to	 its	 business	 purposes	 set	 forth	 in	 the	 constituent
document,	 as	 well	 as	 bear	 obligations	 connected	 therewith.	 A	 legal
entity’s	 rights	 may	 only	 be	 restricted	 as	 prescribed	 by	 law.	 Such	 a
decision	may	be	disputed	in	court.

A	legal	entity	is	liable	by	its	obligations	with	the	entire	property	in	its
possession.	 Article	 56	 of	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation
expressly	envisages	that	the	shareholder	(participant)	of	a	legal	entity	is
not	 liable	by	 the	 entity’s	obligations,	 and	 the	 entity,	 in	 its	 turn,	 is	not
liable	 by	 the	 obligations	 of	 its	 shareholder	 (participant),	 unless
otherwise	prescribed	by	law.

A	 legal	 entity	 acquires	 civil	 rights	 and	 undertakes	 civil	 obligations
through	its	bodies	operating	in	accordance	with	law.	A	body	is	a	part	of	a
legal	 entity,	 the	 former	 not	 being	 an	 independent	 subject	 of	 civil
transactions,	but	merely	expressing	the	legal	entity’s	will	and	acting	on
its	behalf.

16.3.2.	Establishment	and	Termination	of	Legal	Entities.	Bankruptcy

One	 distinguishes	 between	 two	manners	 of	 establishment	 of	 a	 legal
entity:	 licensing	 (preliminary	 permission	 required)	 —	 meaning	 that	 a
license	(authorisation)	by	a	special	government	body	is	required	for	the
establishment	 of	 a	 legal	 entity	 (insurance	 companies,	 banks)	 and	non-
licensing	 (no	 preliminary	 permission	 required)	 —	 meaning	 that	 mere
compliance	 with	 legal	 norms	 (and	 no	 license	 by	 a	 special	 government
body)	is	required	for	the	establishment	of	a	legal	entity.

Pursuant	to	Article	50.1	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation,	a
legal	 entity	 may	 be	 established	 by	 a	 respective	 shareholder’s
(shareholders’)	decision,	in	the	former	case	such	a	decision	having	been
taken	single-handedly,	and	in	the	latter	—	unanimously.



Said	 decision	must	 indicate	 the	 data	 on	 establishment	 of	 the	 entity,
confirmation	 of	 its	 charter,	 on	 the	 amount,	 manner	 and	 timeframe	 of
raising	 the	 entity’s	 property,	 on	 the	 election	 (appointment)	 of	 the
entity’s	bodies,	as	well	as	other	information	as	prescribed	by	law.

A	legal	entity	is	subject	to	obligatory	state	registration	(which	function
is	exercised	by	the	Federal	Tax	Service	of	the	Russian	Federation	and	its
territorial	 divisions).	 The	 state	 registration	 data	 are	 entered	 into	 the
unified	 state	 register	 of	 legal	 entities,	 which	 is	 publicly	 accessible.	 A
legal	entity	is	deemed	established	as	of	the	day	of	entering	a	respective
record	into	the	register	of	legal	entities.

Pursuant	 to	Article	8	of	 the	Federal	 law	“On	the	state	 registration	of
legal	entities	and	individual	entrepreneurs”17,	state	registration	must	be
effected	 within	 5	 business	 days	 upon	 submitting	 the	 necessary
documents	to	the	registering	body,	unless	otherwise	prescribed	by	law.

Failure	 to	 submit	or	non-timely	 submitting	of	necessary	 information
to	 be	 entered	 into	 the	 state	 registers,	 as	 well	 as	 submitting	 scienter
inaccurate	information	is	considered	criminal	and	administrative	offence
and	is	punishable	under	respective	Russian	legislation	(Article	25	of	the
said	Federal	law).

Termination	of	a	legal	entity	may	be	effected	by	reorganisation	or	by
liquidation.

Reorganisation	 of	 a	 legal	 entity	 is	 effected	 by	 the	 decision	 of	 its
shareholders	 (participants)	 or	 of	 its	 body	 authorised	 therefor	 by	 the
entity’s	constituent	document,	and	can	be	effected	in	the	following	ways
(forms):

—	merger	(the	rights	and	duties	of	each	of	the	legal	entities	transfer	to
the	newly	emerged	legal	entity);

—	affiliation	(the	rights	and	duties	of	the	affiliated	legal	entity	transfer
to	another	legal	entity);

—	division	(the	rights	and	duties	of	a	legal	entity	transfer	to	the	newly



emerged	legal	entities	pursuant	to	the	transfer	deed);

—	branching	off	from	the	structure	of	the	legal	entity	(the	rights	and
duties	 of	 the	 reorganised	 legal	 entity	 transfer	 to	 each	 of	 the	 newly
emerged	legal	entities	pursuant	to	the	transfer	deed);

—	 transformation	 (the	 organisational	 form	 of	 the	 legal	 entity	 is
changed,	 but	 the	 rights	 and	 duties	 of	 the	 reorganised	 legal	 entity
towards	third	parties	remain	unchanged).

Within	 three	 business	 days	 after	 the	 date	 of	 a	 decision	 of	 its
reorganisation,	 the	 legal	 entity	must	 provide	 information	 in	writing	 to
the	 state	 body	 responsible	 for	 the	 state	 registration	 of	 legal	 entities,
about	the	commencement	of	a	reorganisation	procedure	and	the	form	of
reorganisation	 (Article	60	of	 the	Civil	Code	of	 the	Russian	Federation).
This	requirement	is	designed	to	guarantee	the	rights	of	creditors	of	the
reorganised	 legal	 entity.	 The	 creditors	 are	 entitled	 to	 claim	 early
performance	 of	 the	 debtor’s	 obligations;	 should	 such	 performance	 be
inconceivable,	the	creditors	are	entitled	to	termination	of	the	obligation
and	suing	for	damages.

Liquidation	of	a	legal	entity	results	in	its	termination	with	no	transfer
of	rights	and	duties	to	other	entities	by	way	of	universal	succession.

A	 legal	 entity	may	 be	 terminated	 by	 the	 decision	 of	 its	 shareholders
(participants)	or	its	body	authorised	therefor	by	the	entity’s	constituent
document,	or	by	court	decision.

Said	court	decision	is	taken	in	the	event	of	gross	violation	of	law	or	of
exercise	 of	 activity	 prohibited	 by	 law	 or	 without	 a	 proper	 permit
(license).

Section	 4	 Article	 61	 of	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation
specifically	underlines	that	from	the	moment	of	decision	on	liquidation
of	a	legal	entity,	its	obligations	towards	its	creditors	are	deemed	mature.

The	shareholders	(participants)	of	a	legal	entity	or	a	body	which	have
taken	 a	 decision	 on	 its	 liquidation	 shall	 appoint	 a	 liquidation



commission	 (liquidator)	 and	 establish	 the	 procedure	 and	 the	 term
thereof,	as	prescribed	by	 law.	From	the	moment	of	appointment	of	 the
liquidation	commission,	it	assumes	the	authority	in	the	management	of
the	 legal	entity’s	affairs,	 including	the	authority	 to	settle	 the	creditor’s
claims.

Should	 the	 liquidation	 commission	 determine	 insufficiency	 of	 the
entity’s	property	to	satisfy	the	creditor’s	claims,	further	liquidation	may
only	be	effected	as	set	forth	by	the	insolvency	(bankruptcy)	legislation.

The	procedure	of	liquidation	of	a	legal	entity	is	set	forth	in	Article	63
of	 the	Civil	Code	of	 the	Russian	Federation.	First	of	all,	 the	 liquidation
commission	 publishes	 the	 information	 on	 the	 liquidation	 of	 the	 legal
entity	in	mass	media,	also	indicating	the	procedure	and	the	term	for	the
claims	to	be	filed	by	the	creditors.	The	minimum	term	is	2	months	upon
the	publishing	of	the	advertisement	on	liquidation.

Then,	 the	 liquidation	 commission	 compiles	 an	 interim	 liquidation
balance	 containing	 information	 on	 the	 structure	 of	 the	 legal	 entity’s
property,	on	the	list	of	the	creditors’	claims,	and	on	the	results	of	their
examination.

If	 the	 monetary	 means	 at	 the	 disposal	 of	 the	 legal	 entity	 under
liquidation	 prove	 to	 be	 insufficient	 to	 satisfy	 the	 creditors’	 claims,	 the
liquidation	 commission	 shall	 organise	 the	 sale	 of	 the	 legal	 entity’s
property.

Should	 the	property	of	 the	 legal	entity	under	 liquidation	prove	 to	be
insufficient	 to	 satisfy	 the	 creditor’s	 claims,	 the	 liquidation	 commission
must	file	an	insolvency	application	with	an	arbitrazh	(commercial)	court.

The	payment	of	monetary	amounts	 to	 the	creditors	of	 the	 liquidated
legal	entity	shall	be	effected	by	the	liquidation	commission	according	to
the	following	order	of	priority:

—	 first,	 claims	of	 citizens	are	 satisfied,	 to	whom	 the	 liquidated	 legal
entity	is	liable	for	harm	inflicted	to	their	life	or	health;



—	 second,	 settlements	 are	 effected	 for	 the	 payment	 of	 retirement
allowances	and	remuneration	for	the	labour	of	persons	who	work	or	have
been	working	under	a	labour	contract;

—	 third,	 settlements	 are	 effected	 for	 compulsory	 payments	 to	 the
budget	and	non-budget	funds;

—	fourth,	other	creditors’	claims	are	satisfied.

After	 the	 settlements	 with	 the	 creditors	 have	 been	 completed,	 the
liquidation	commission	compiles	the	liquidation	balance,	the	remaining
property	being	transferred	to	the	shareholders	of	the	legal	entity.

The	 bankruptcy	 proceeding	 is	 governed	 by	 the	 Federal	 Law	 “On
insolvency	(bankruptcy)”18.

Pursuant	 to	Article	 2	 thereof,	 a	 legal	 entity	 is	 deemed	 insolvent	 if	 it
has	proven	incapable	to	satisfy	the	claims	of	 its	creditors	 in	relation	to
monetary	 obligations	 and/or	 to	 execute	 the	 duty	 of	making	mandatory
payments	within	3	months	upon	the	due	date.

A	bankruptcy	proceeding	may	be	commenced	by	an	arbitrazh	court	if
the	claims	to	a	legal	entity	add	up	to	300,000	rubles	(Section	2	Article	6
of	the	Federal	Law	“On	insolvency	(bankruptcy)”).

Pursuant	to	Article	51	of	the	said	Federal	Law,	a	bankruptcy	case	shall
be	considered	at	an	arbitrazh	court	hearing	within	a	term	not	exceeding
seven	months	after	the	receipt	by	the	court	of	a	bankruptcy	application.
As	 a	 result	 of	 consideration	 of	 a	 bankruptcy	 case,	 the	 arbitrazh	 court
adopts	one	of	the	following	decisions:

—	 a	 decision	 to	 declare	 the	 debtor	 bankrupt	 and	 to	 commence
liquidation	 proceedings	 (proceedings	 applicable	 to	 the	 debtor	 which	 is
deemed	insolvent,	designed	to	satisfy	the	creditors’	claims	accordingly);

—	a	decision	to	refuse	to	declare	the	debtor	bankrupt;

—	 a	 ruling	 on	 the	 establishment	 of	 financial	 rehabilitation



(proceedings	 applicable	 to	 the	 debtor	 which	 is	 deemed	 insolvent,
designed	to	restore	the	debtor’s	solvency	and	have	the	debt	repaid	under
a	debt	repayment	schedule);

—	 a	 ruling	 on	 the	 establishment	 of	 external	 administration
(proceedings	also	designed	to	restore	the	debtor’s	solvency);

—	a	ruling	on	termination	of	bankruptcy	proceedings;

—	a	ruling	on	dismissing	the	bankruptcy	application;

—	 a	 ruling	 on	 approving	 a	 settlement	 agreement	 (voluntary
arrangement	between	the	debtor	and	the	creditor).

16.4.	Types	of	Legal	Entities
16.4.1.	Corporate	Legal	Entities

A	great	number	of	various	legal	entities	take	part	in	civil	transactions.
These	legal	entities	can	be	distinguished	based	on	various	criteria.

Russian	 civil	 legislation	 which	 was	 drastically	 amended	 in	 the	 year
2014	upholds	the	position	that	 legal	entities	can	either	be	corporate	or
unitary	 (Article	 65.1	 of	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation),	 and
constructs	further	classification	of	legal	entities	based	on	this	criterion.

For	 instance,	 legal	 entities	 whose	 participants	 have	 the	 right	 to
membership	and	appoint	that	entity’s	supreme	body	are	called	corporate
legal	entities	(corporations).

The	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation	lists	the	following	corporate
legal	 entities	 (corporations):	 economic	 partnerships	 and	 companies,
peasant	 (farmer)	 households,	 production	 and	 consumer	 cooperatives,
social	 organisations,	 social	 movements,	 associations	 (unions),
homeowners	 association,	 Cossack	 societies	 and	 indigenous	 minorities’
societies	of	the	Russian	Federation.

The	participants	of	the	corporation	(shareholders,	members,	etc.)	are
entitled	 to	 take	 part	 in	 managing	 the	 corporate	 affairs,	 obtain	 the
information	 on	 the	 corporation’s	 activity	 and	 familiarize	 themselves



with	 its	 books	 and	 other	 documentation,	 dispute	 legally	 binding
corporation’s	 bodies’	 decisions,	 claim	 damages	 on	 behalf	 of	 the
corporation	and	dispute	its	transactions.

General	meeting	of	shareholders	is	the	higher	body	of	the	corporation
(Article	 65.3	 of	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation).	 A	 one-man
executive	 body	 is	 formed	 (director,	 general	 director,	 chairman,	 etc.),
along	with	a	collegiate	executive	body	(optional,	 it	can	be	called	board,
directorate,	etc.)	A	collegiate	managing	body	may	also	be	formed	along
with	 the	 executive	 body	 (supervisory	 council),	 which	 monitors	 the
executive	bodies’	 activity	and	performs	other	 functions	as	provided	 for
by	law	or	charter.

Corporate	 legal	 entities	 may	 either	 be	 commercial	 (seeing	 deriving
profits	as	the	chief	goal	of	their	activity)	or	non-commercial	(not	seeing
deriving	 profits	 as	 such	 a	 goal	 and	 not	 distributing	 the	 derived	 profit
among	their	participants).

Commercial	corporate	organisations	are	the	following.

1.	 General	 partnership.	 Pursuant	 to	 section	 1	 Article	 69	 of	 the	 Civil
Code	of	 the	Russian	Federation,	general	partnership	 is	 the	partnership,
whose	 participants	 (general	 partners)	 are	 engaged,	 according	 to	 the
agreement	signed	between	them,	 in	business	activities	on	behalf	of	the
partnership	 and	 are	 liable	 by	 its	 obligations	with	 the	 property	 in	 their
possession.

General	 partnership	 is	 created	 and	 operates	 based	 on	 a	 constituent
agreement.	Each	participant	to	a	general	partnership	is	entitled	to	act	on
behalf	 of	 the	 partnership,	 unless	 the	 constituent	 agreement	 prescribes
joint	management	of	affairs	or	specific	distribution	of	authority	therein
between	the	participants.

The	 profits	 and	 losses	 of	 the	 general	 partnership	 are	 distributed
among	 its	 participants	 proportionately	 to	 their	 shares	 in	 the	 joint
capital,	 unless	 otherwise	 prescribed	 by	 the	 constituent	 agreement	 or
other	arrangement	between	the	participants.	No	agreement	on	exclusion
of	any	participant	from	the	distribution	of	profits	and	losses	is	permitted



(Article	74	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation).

The	 participants	 of	 the	 general	 partnership	 jointly	 bear	 subsidiary
liability	by	the	partnership’s	obligations	with	their	entire	property.

2.	Limited	(commandite)	partnership	is	a	partnership	where,	alongside
with	the	participants	engaged	in	the	performance	of	business	activity	on
behalf	of	the	partnership	and	liable	by	its	obligations	with	their	property
(the	general	partners),	there	is	(are)	one	or	several	investor	participants
(commanditaires)	 who	 bear	 the	 risk	 of	 losses	 in	 connection	 with	 the
partnership’s	 activity	within	 the	 amount	 of	 their	 investments	 and	who
do	 not	 take	 part	 in	 the	 performance	 of	 the	 partnership’s	 business
activity.

The	 number	 of	 investor	 participants	 in	 a	 commandite	 partnership
cannot	 exceed	 20	 persons,	 otherwise	 that	 partnership	 must	 be
reorganised	into	an	economic	company.

A	commandite	partnership’s	affairs	are	managed	by	general	partners.
The	investors	are	not	entitled	to	partake	in	managing	and	administering
the	partnership’s	affairs,	to	dispute	the	general	partners’	actions	therein,
but	 they	 are	 entitled	 to	 receive	 part	 of	 the	 partnership’s	 profits
proportionate	 to	 their	 investment,	 as	 prescribed	 by	 the	 constituent
agreement.

3.	 Peasant	 (farm)	 household	 is	 a	 voluntary	 association	 of	 citizens
based	on	membership	for	joint	production	or	other	economic	activity	in
the	 agrarian	 field,	which	 is	 based	 on	 personal	 input	 and	 unification	 of
property	 investments	 (Article	 86.1	 of	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation).

The	property	of	a	peasant	(farm)	household	belongs	to	it	on	the	basis
of	the	right	of	ownership,	but	the	members	thereof	(the	household	being
established	as	a	legal	entity)	bear	subsidiary	liability	by	its	obligations.

4.	Limited	liability	company	is	a	company	whose	authorised	capital	is
divided	into	shares.



As	 opposed	 to	 the	 above	 organisations,	 the	 participants	 of	 a	 limited
liability	 company	 are	 not	 liable	 by	 its	 obligations	 and	 bear	 the	 risk	 of
losses	 in	 connection	 with	 the	 company’s	 activity	 within	 the	 cost	 of
shares	 they	hold	 (section	 1	Article	 87	 of	 the	Civil	 Code	 of	 the	Russian
Federation).

The	 number	 of	 participants	 in	 a	 limited	 liability	 company	 cannot
exceed	 fifty,	 otherwise	 it	 must	 be	 reorganised	 into	 a	 joint	 stock
company.	It	follows	from	the	above	said	that	a	limited	liability	company
can	have	a	sole	participant	thereto.

The	founders	of	a	limited	liability	company	enter	into	an	agreement	in
writing	on	the	company’s	establishment	defining	the	procedure	for	their
joint	activities	aimed	at	the	company’s	establishment,	the	amount	of	the
company’s	authorised	capital,	the	rates	of	their	shares	in	the	company’s
authorised	capital,	and	other	terms.

5.	 Joint	 stock	 company	 is	 an	 economic	 company	 whose	 authorised
capital	is	divided	into	a	definite	number	of	shares.	The	participants	of	a
joint	stock	company	are	not	liable	by	its	obligations	and	bear	the	risk	of
losses	 in	 connection	with	 its	 activity	within	 the	 cost	 of	 shares	 in	 their
possession.

A	 joint	 stock	 company	 is	 deemed	 public	 if	 its	 shares	 and	 negotiable
instruments	convertible	 into	shares	are	publicly	offered	or	 listed	 in	the
manner	 prescribed	 by	 negotiable	 instruments	 laws	 (Article	 66.3	 of	 the
Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation).

Pursuant	 to	 section	 5	 Article	 97	 of	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation,	a	number	of	shares	in	possession	of	one	shareholder,	as	well
as	 the	maximum	number	of	votes	at	one	shareholder’s	disposal	 cannot
be	limited.	Therefore,	a	joint	stock	company	may	include	(or	be	founded
by)	single	person.

A	joint	stock	company’s	constituent	document	is	its	charter	approved
by	the	founders.

A	 joint	 stock	 company’s	 charter	must	 indicate	 the	name	of	 the	 legal



entity	and	the	place	of	its	location,	the	terms	on	the	categories	of	shared
issued	by	 the	company,	on	 their	 face	value	and	number,	on	 the	size	of
the	company’s	authorised	capital,	on	the	rights	of	 the	shareholders,	on
the	 structure	 and	 scope	 of	 authority	 of	 the	 company’s	 management
bodies,	on	the	procedure	of	decision-making	(section	3	Article	98	of	the
Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation).

6.	Production	cooperative	is	a	voluntary	association	of	citizens,	based
on	 membership	 and	 established	 for	 joint	 production	 or	 other	 kind	 of
economic	 activity	 (manufacture,	 processing,	 and	 sale	 of	 industrial,
farming,	 and	 other	 type	 of	 produce,	 performance	 of	 works,	 trade,
rendering	of	everyday	and	other	services),	based	on	their	personal	labour
and	other	input	and	on	unification	of	property	participation	shares	of	its
members	(Article	106.1	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation).

The	members	of	a	production	cooperative	bear	 subsidiary	 liability	by
the	cooperative’s	obligations.

A	 production	 cooperative’s	 constituent	 document	 is	 its	 charter
approved	 by	 the	 general	meeting	 of	 its	members,	 whose	 quantity	may
not	be	less	than	five.

The	property	in	possession	of	a	production	cooperative	is	divided	into
shares	of	its	members	as	provided	for	by	the	charter.

The	 profit	 of	 a	 production	 cooperative	 is	 distributed	 among	 its
members	 in	 accordance	 with	 their	 labour	 input,	 unless	 otherwise
provided	for	by	the	law	and	by	the	charter.

Non-commercial	 corporate	 organisations	 include	 the	 following	 legal
entities:

1.	 Consumer	 cooperative	 is	 a	 voluntary	 association	 of	 persons	 or
entities	 based	 on	 membership,	 established	 for	 satisfying	 the
participants’	material	and	other	needs	by	 its	members	putting	together
their	property	participation	shares	(Article	123.2	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the
Russian	Federation).



As	opposed	to	a	production	cooperative,	the	consumer	cooperative	is	a
non-profit	 organisation,	 and	 its	members	 have	no	 obligation	 of	 labour
input.	 Consumer	 cooperatives	 include	 house-hold	 and	 dacha
cooperatives;

2.	 Social	 organisation	 is	 a	 voluntary	 association	of	 citizens	 based	on
the	 community	 of	 their	 interests	 for	 the	 purpose	 of	 satisfying	 their
spiritual	or	other	non-material	needs,	for	representation	and	protection
of	 their	 common	 interests	 and	 for	 achieving	 other	 legitimate	 goals
(architecture,	science,	patriotic	societies,	etc.).

Pursuant	 to	 section	 2	 Article	 123.4	 of	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation,	 a	 social	 organisation	 is	 the	 owner	 of	 its	 property.	 Its
participants	 (members)	 do	 not	 retain	 the	 right	 to	 property	which	 they
have	 transferred	 into	 the	 possession	 of	 these	 organisations,	 including
membership	fees.	The	participants	of	a	social	organisation	are	not	liable
by	its	obligations,	and	vice	versa;

3.	 Social	 movement	 is	 a	 mass,	 non-membership	 based	 social
association	 pursuing	 socially	 useful	 purposes	 supported	 by	 its
participants19;

4.	Association	(union)	is	a	community	of	legal	entities	and	(or)	citizens
based	on	voluntary	or,	as	prescribed	by	law,	obligatory	membership	and
established	 for	 the	 representation	 and	 protection	 of	 common	 interests
(including	professional),	for	the	achievement	of	socially	useful	purposes,
as	well	as	of	other	legitimate	and	non-profit	purposes.

Such	an	organisational	legal	form	is	utilised	by	associations	of	persons
pursuing	 the	 aim	 of	 coordination	 of	 their	 entrepreneurial	 activities,
representation	 and	 protection	 of	 common	 property	 interests,	 by
professional	 unions	 of	 persons	 who	 do	 not	 aim	 for	 protecting	 labour
rights	and	interests;

5.	 Partnership	 of	 housing	 owners	 is	 a	 voluntary	 association	 of	 real
property	owners	(office	in	a	building,	apartment	in	a	condo,	dacha	land
plot,	 etc.)	 established	 for	 joint	 ownership	 and	 enjoyment	 of	 property
(chattels)	which	are	by	operation	of	law	in	their	community	property	or



common	use.

Non-profit	 corporate	 organisations	 also	 include	 Cossack	 societies,
indigenous	 minorities’	 societies	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 legal
chambers	and	legal	practices.

16.4.2.	Unitary	Legal	Entities

As	 opposed	 to	 the	 above	 commercial	 and	 non-profit	 corporate	 legal
entities,	the	founders	of	unitary	legal	entities	are	not	their	participants
and	do	not	acquire	the	right	of	membership	therein.

Commercial	unitary	legal	entities	include	state	and	municipal	unitary
enterprises.

Pursuant	to	Article	113	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation,	a
unitary	 enterprise	 is	 a	 commercial	 organisation,	 not	 endowed	with	 the
right	 of	 ownership	 to	 the	 property	 allotted	 thereto	 by	 its	 owner.	 The
property	of	a	unitary	enterprise	 is	 indivisible	and	cannot	be	distributed
according	to	instalments	(participation	shares,	shares),	including	among
its	employees.

The	 property	 of	 a	 state-run	 or	 municipal	 enterprise	 remains	 in	 the
state	or	municipal	ownership,	and	it	belongs	to	the	respective	enterprise
by	the	right	of	economic	or	operative	management.

Section	2	Article	2	of	the	Federal	Law	of	November	14,	2002	“On	state-
run	 and	 municipal	 unitary	 enterprises”	 lists	 the	 following	 types	 of
unitary	enterprises	established	and	operating	in	Russia:

—	unitary	enterprises	established	on	the	basis	of	the	right	of	economic
management	(federal	state	enterprise,	state	enterprise	of	a	subject	of	the
Russian	Federation,	and	municipal	enterprise);

—	unitary	enterprises	established	on	the	basis	of	the	right	of	operative
management	(federal	treasury	enterprise,	treasury	enterprise	of	a	subject
of	the	Russian	Federation,	and	municipal	treasury	enterprise)20.

Article	295	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation	sets	forth	that



the	owner	of	the	property	in	economic	management	in	conformity	with
law	resolves	the	issues	involved	in	the	establishment	of	the	enterprise,	in
defining	the	objective	and	goals	of	its	activity,	in	its	reorganisation	and
liquidation,	appoints	the	director	(head)	of	the	enterprise,	exerts	control
over	 the	 use	 in	 conformity	 with	 the	 stipulated	 purpose	 and	 over	 the
maintenance	of	 the	property	assigned	thereto.	The	owner	has	the	right
to	 a	 share	 of	 profit	 derived	 from	 the	 use	 of	 the	 property	 in	 economic
management	 of	 the	 enterprise.	 The	 enterprise	 is	 entitled	 overall	 to
dispose	of	the	profit	derived.

Alongside	with	that,	an	enterprise	is	not	entitled	to	sell	the	immovable
property	which	belongs	to	it	by	the	right	of	economic	management,	nor
is	 it	 entitled	 to	 rent	 it	out,	mortgage	 it,	 contribute	 it	 as	an	 investment
into	authorised	(joint)	capital	of	economic	companies	and	partnership	or
otherwise	 dispose	 of	 it	 without	 the	 owner’s	 consent.	 However,	 an
enterprise	is	entitled	to	independent	disposal	of	movable	property.

An	 enterprise	 and	 treasury	 enterprise	which	possess	 property	 by	 the
right	 of	 operative	management	 solely	 possess	 and	use	 this	 property	 as
prescribed	by	law,	in	strict	accordance	with	the	purposes	of	their	activity
and	 designation	 of	 that	 property.	 They	 are	 entitled	 to	 dispose	 of	 such
property	with	the	owner’s	consent.

The	 owner	 of	 the	 property	 has	 the	 right	 to	 withdraw	 excessive
property,	property	not	used	or	used	not	to	the	purpose.	The	owner	of	this
property	determines	the	manner	of	distribution	of	profits.

Non-profit	unitary	legal	entities	include:

1.	 fund	 is	 a	 unitary	 non-profit,	 non-membership	 based	 organisation
established	by	 citizens	 and	 (or)	 legal	 entities	 on	 the	basis	 of	 voluntary
property	 contributions	 and	 pursuing	 public,	 charity,	 cultural,
educational	or	other	socially	useful	goals;

2.	 institution	 is	 a	 unitary	 non-profit	 organisation	 established	 by	 the
owner	 for	 the	 performance	 of	 managerial,	 sociocultural	 or	 other
functions	of	non-profit	nature;



3.	 autonomous	 non-profit	 institution	 is	 a	 unitary	 non-profit,	 non-
membership	 based	 organisation	 established	 on	 the	 basis	 of	 property
contributions	 made	 by	 citizens	 or	 legal	 entities	 for	 the	 purpose	 of
rendering	 services	 in	 non-profit	 spheres:	 education,	medicine,	 culture,
science,	etc.;

4.	 religious	 organisation	 is	 a	 voluntary	 association	 of	 citizens	 and
other	individuals	who	reside	permanently	and	lawfully	at	the	territory	of
the	Russian	Federation,	 established	 for	 the	purpose	of	 joint	 confession
and	amplification	of	faith	and	duly	registered	as	a	legal	entity.

16.5.	Objects	of	Civil	Rights

Objects	of	 civil	 rights	 include	material	 and	non-material	 benefits	 (or
the	 process	 of	 their	 creation)	 which	 are	 the	 reason	 for	 the	 subject’s
engagement	 in	civil	 relations.	An	object	of	civil	 rights	and	an	object	of
civil	relations	are	synonymous.

It	is	quite	natural	that	not	every	benefit	can	become	an	object	of	civil
relations,	but	only	those	that	can	satisfy	the	subjects’	interests.

Article	 128	 lists	 the	 objects	 of	 civil	 rights.	 They	 include	 items,
including	money	and	documentary	securities,	other	property,	 including
noncash	money,	non-documentary	securities,	property	rights;	results	of
works	and	rendering	of	services;	protected	results	of	intellectual	activity
and	means	of	individualisation	which	are	equated	to	them;	non-material
benefits.

Some	 of	 the	 mentioned	 objects	 of	 civil	 rights	 can	 be	 restricted	 in
circulation,	 i.e.	 transactions	 with	 such	 objects	 are	 allowed	 only	 by
authorisation	of	competent	authorities	(land,	subsoil,	weapons,	precious
metals,	etc.).

The	 primary	 share	 of	 objects	 of	 civil	 rights	 is	 property,	 which
represents	a	total	of	items,	property	rights,	and	obligations.

Items	 include	means	of	production	and	consumer	goods,	 they	can	be
movable	or	 immovable	 (such	objects	cannot	be	shifted	without	causing



disparate	damage	to	their	purpose).	Items	can	be	represented	in	the	form
of	 a	 unified	 property	 complex	 (enterprise),	 be	 divisible	 and	 indivisible
(whose	 division	 is	 impossible	 without	 destructing,	 damaging,	 or
changing	 their	 purpose).	 Money	 and	 securities	 are	 a	 special	 type	 of
items.

Non-material	 values	 (benefits)	 as	 objects	 of	 civil	 rights,	 pursuant	 to
Article	150	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation,	include	life	and
health,	personal	dignity	and	immunity,	honor	and	good	name,	business
reputation,	immunity	of	private	life,	personal	and	family	secret,	right	to
free	 movement	 and	 choice	 of	 place	 of	 residence,	 right	 to	 name,
authorship	rights,	and	other	non-material	values.

The	 lawmaker	 underlines	 that	 non-material	 values	 which	 belong	 to
the	 citizen	 since	 his	 birth	 or	 by	 operation	 of	 law	 are	 inalienable	 and
cannot	be	transferred	to	another	person.

Article	151	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation	sets	forth	that
if	moral	damage	(physical	or	moral	sufferings)	is	inflicted	upon	a	citizen
by	 actions	 violating	 his	 personal	 non-property	 rights,	 the	 court	 may
impose	upon	the	culprit	the	duty	to	pay	out	monetary	compensation	for
said	damage.

The	means	of	protecting	non-material	values	also	include	the	citizen’s
right	to	claim	in	court	to	refute	the	information	discrediting	his	honor,
dignity	or	business	reputation,	unless	the	person	who	has	disseminated
that	information	can	show	that	such	information	is	authentic.	Pursuant
to	Article	152	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation,	the	refutation
shall	 be	 effected	 in	 the	 same	 or	 analogous	 manner	 in	 which	 it	 was
disseminated.

In	 2013,	 Article	 152.2	 was	 introduced	 into	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the
Russian	Federation,	devoted	to	the	protection	of	a	citizen’s	private	life.
The	article	sets	forth	that	collection,	keeping,	dissemination	or	usage	of
any	private	 life	related	information	is	disallowed	without	such	citizen’s
consent,	namely	information	on	his	descent,	place	of	residence	or	stay,
personal	and	family	life.



16.6.	Deals	and	their	Invalidity

One	of	the	primary	grounds	for	arising	of	civil	relations	 lies	 in	deals,
which	 are	 actions	 performed	 by	 citizens	 and	 legal	 entities	 (including
public	 formations	 —	 the	 state,	 subjects	 and	 municipal	 entities	 of	 the
Russian	Federation)	aimed	at	establishment,	modification	or	cessation	of
civil	 rights	 and	 obligations.	 Therefore,	 a	 deal	 is	 a	 willful	 action
committed	with	a	certain	intention	—	induce,	change,	or	terminate	some
legal	relation.	A	legal	purpose	which	is	pursued	by	the	deal	is	called	the
ground	of	a	deal.

In	 the	 meaning	 of	 Article	 154	 of	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation,	 a	 deal	 can	 be	 either	 unilateral	 (one	 party’s	will	 is	 required
and	 sufficient	 for	 its	 performance	 —	 e.g.,	 last	 will	 and	 testament)	 or
bilateral,	or	multilateral	(such	deals	are	contracts).

Thus,	 expression	 of	 concerted	 will	 is	 required	 for	 entering	 into	 a
contract	 (either	 of	 two	 parties	 —	 bilateral	 deal,	 or	 three	 or	 more
parties	—	multilateral	deal).

Apart	from	the	above,	deals	can	be:

—	consensual	 (these	give	rise	to	civil	 rights	and	obligations	from	the
moment	 of	 the	 parties’	 achieving	 agreement	 on	 all	 the	 terms	 of	 the
deal	 —	 sale	 and	 purchase,	 lease,	 work	 contract)	 and	 real	 (mere
agreement	between	the	parties	does	not	suffice;	transfer	of	the	 item	or
commission	of	other	action	is	required	—	donation,	loan,	warehousing);

—	non-gratuitous	(one	party’s	obligation	to	provide	some	material	or
other	 benefit	 corresponds	 to	 the	 other	 party’s	 obligation	 to	 perform
some	 other	 action	—	 lease,	 sale	 and	 delivery,	 etc.)	 and	 gratuitous	 (no
obligation	of	consideration);

—	causal	 (the	purpose	of	 the	deal,	 along	with	 the	parties’	 rights	and
obligations	 are	 clear	 —	 sale	 and	 purchase,	 lease,	 sale	 and	 delivery,
freight,	 etc.)	 and	 abstract	 (the	 parties’	 rights	 and	 obligations	may	 not
correspond	to	the	ground,	or	the	purpose	of	the	deal	—	issuance	of	a	bill
of	 exchange,	 transfer	 of	 securities.	 The	 following	 textbook	 case



epitomizes	the	above:	a	buyer	issued	a	bill	of	exchange	to	the	seller.	The
latter	failed	to	deliver	the	goods	and	transferred	the	bill	of	exchange	to	a
third	party.	Even	though	the	goods	were	never	delivered	and	the	sale	and
delivery	contract	was	considered	invalid,	the	buyer	may	not	dishonor	the
bill	of	exchange,	since	it	is	a	non-stipulated	obligation	of	the	drawer	of
the	 bill	 to	 pay	 to	 the	 payee	 the	 sum	 indicated	 on	 the	 bill	 at	 the	 time
specified21);

—	fixed-term	(the	term	of	the	contract	is	specified	—	sale	and	delivery,
performance	 of	 works)	 and	 open-end	 (lease	 contract	 concluded	 for	 an
indefinite	term);

—	fiduciary	(trust-based	relations	—	agency,	etc.)	and	non-fiduciary.

Deals	 can	 be	 concluded	 orally	 or	 in	 writing	 (simple	 written	 or
notarised	forms).

Pursuant	to	Article	159	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation,	a
deal	for	which	no	written	(simple	or	notarised)	form	is	stipulated	by	law
or	by	agreement	of	the	parties,	can	be	effected	orally.

All	 deals	 may	 be	 effected	 orally	 which	 are	 performed	 at	 their
execution,	with	the	exception	of	deals	for	which	notarised	form	has	been
established	 and	of	 deals	 the	non-observance	 of	 simple	written	 form	of
which	causes	their	invalidity.

Article	 161	 of	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 lists	 the
requirements	under	which	simple	written	form	is	obligatory	for	the	deals
of	 legal	 entities	 between	 themselves	 and	 with	 citizens,	 the	 deals	 of
citizens	between	themselves	for	the	sum	exceeding	10	thousand	rubles,
and,	if	stipulated	by	law,	regardless	of	the	sum	of	the	deal.

The	non-observance	of	the	simple	written	form	of	the	deal	shall,	in	the
case	of	a	dispute,	deprive	the	parties	of	the	right	to	refer	to	testimony	for
confirmation	of	the	deal	and	of	its	terms,	but	does	not	deprive	them	of
the	right	to	show	written	or	other	evidence.	In	cases	expressly	provided
for	 by	 law	 or	 by	 the	 parties’	 agreement,	 non-observance	 of	 the	 simple
written	 form	 of	 the	 deal	 entails	 its	 invalidity	 (Article	 162	 of	 the	 Civil



Code	of	the	Russian	Federation).

Notarial	certification	of	deals	is	required	if	expressly	stipulated	by	law
(e.g.,	 life	 estate	 agreement)	 or	 by	 the	 parties’	 agreement	 (even	 though
not	obligatory	by	operation	of	law).

If	 state	 registration	 is	 stipulated	 by	 law	 for	 certain	 deals,	 such	 deals
entail	legal	consequences	upon	such	registration	(sale	of	real	property).

Invalidity	of	a	deal	means	that	it	does	not	possess	the	properties	of	a
legal	 fact	 entailing	 civil	 consequences	 anticipated	 by	 the	 subjects.	 In
other	words,	 invalid	 deals	 do	not	 entail	 legal	 consequences,	 except	 for
those	connected	to	their	invalidity.

Pursuant	 to	Article	 166	 of	 the	Civil	 Code	 of	 the	Russian	 Federation,
invalid	deals	can	be	divided	into	disputable	and	void.

A	disputable	deal	is	one	that	has	been	deemed	invalid	by	court	on	the
grounds	 set	 forth	 by	 law	 (deals	 made	 by	 a	 person	 restricted	 in	 legal
capacity).

A	 void	deal	 is	 a	 deal	 that	 is	 invalid	on	 the	grounds	 set	 forth	by	 law,
regardless	of	the	fact	of	being	deemed	invalid	by	court	(a	deal	made	by	a
young	minor).

A	claim	for	 recognising	a	disputed	deal	 invalid	may	be	 filed	with	 the
court	 by	 a	 party	 to	 the	 deal	 or	 by	 other	 person	 indicated	 by	 law.	 A
disputable	 deal	 may	 be	 deemed	 invalid	 if	 it	 infringes	 the	 rights	 and
legitimate	 interests	 of	 the	 claimant	 or	 entailed	 unfavorable
consequences	for	him.

A	claim	for	application	of	the	consequences	of	a	void	deal	may	be	filed
with	the	court	by	a	party	to	the	deal	or	by	other	person	indicated	by	law.

Pursuant	 to	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 the	 following
deals	are	deemed	invalid:

—	violating	legal	or	other	lawful	requirements	(Article	168	of	the	Civil
Code	of	the	Russian	Federation);



—	 aimed	 at	 a	 goal	 contrary	 to	 the	 foundations	 of	 law	 and	 order	 or
morality	(Article	169	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation);

—	sham	and	feigned	deals.	A	sham	deal	is	one	effected	for	the	form’s
sake,	 without	 an	 intention	 to	 induce	 respective	 legal	 consequences
(void);	 feigned	deal	 is	one	effected	 for	 the	purpose	of	covering	another
deal,	including	a	deal	on	other	terms	(void)	(Article	170	of	the	Civil	Code
of	the	Russian	Federation);

—	effected	by	a	person	recognised	as	legally	incapable	as	a	result	of	a
mental	 derangement	 (Article	 171	 of	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation);

—	 effected	 by	 minors	 under	 fourteen	 years	 (Article	 172	 of	 the	 Civil
Code	of	the	Russian	Federation);

—	 effected	 by	 legal	 entities	 contrary	 to	 purposes	 of	 their	 activity
(Article	173	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation);

—	 effected	 without	 required	 by	 operation	 of	 law	 prior	 consent	 of	 a
third	party,	a	legal	entity’s	body,	a	state	or	municipal	body	(Article	173.1
of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation);

—	 effected	 by	 citizens	 whose	 legal	 capacity	 has	 been	 restricted	 by
court	(Article	176	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation);

—	 effected	 by	 citizens	 who	 are	 incapable	 of	 understanding	 the
meaning	 of	 their	 actions	 or	 of	 keeping	 them	 under	 control,	 or	 under
misrepresentation	(Articles	177	and	178	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian
Federation);

—	 effected	 as	 a	 result	 of	 fraud,	 coercion,	 threat	 or	 ill-intentioned
agreement	(Article	179	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation).

16.7.	Enjoyment	and	Protection	of	Civil	Rights

Enjoyment	of	a	civil	right	is	fulfilment	by	an	entitled	person	of	those
opportunities	 that	 comprise	 the	 essence	 of	 the	 right,	 for	 satisfying	 his
material	and	spiritual	needs.



Pursuant	 to	 section	 1	 Article	 9	 of	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation,	 citizens	 and	 legal	 entities	 exercise	 the	 civil	 rights	 at	 their
sole	 discretion,	 i.e.	 they	 take	 independent	 decisions	 on	 enjoyment	 of
their	subjective	rights	and	fulfilment	of	their	legal	obligations.

Alongside	with	that,	the	principle	of	personal	discretion	in	enjoyment
of	rights	by	the	subjects	of	legal	relations	is	not	absolute,	since	current
Russian	legislation	established	reasonable	restrictions	thereto.

Despite	 the	 fact	 that	 bona	 fide	 feature	 of	 the	 participants	 and
rationality	of	 their	actions	are	assumed,	Article	10	of	 the	Civil	Code	of
the	 Russian	 Federation	 prohibits	 enjoyment	 of	 civil	 rights	 exclusively
with	 the	aim	to	 inflict	damage	onto	another	person	 (nuisance),	actions
pursuing	a	wrongful	aim,	as	well	as	abuse	of	civil	rights.

Abuse	 of	 civil	 rights	 for	 the	 purpose	 of	 restricting	 competition	 and
abuse	of	the	dominating	position	on	the	market	are	also	prohibited.

Should	the	abuse	of	rights	have	led	to	infringement	to	another’s	right,
the	latter	is	entitled	to	claim	for	damages	caused	(section	4	Article	10	of
the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation).

Generally,	 parties	 to	 civil	 relations	 exercise	 their	 rights	 and	 perform
their	 obligations	 independently.	 However,	 in	 some	 cases,	 their
representatives	may	act	on	their	behalf.

A	 deal	 can	 be	 effected	 by	 a	 person	 (the	 representative)	 on	 behalf	 of
another	person	(the	principal)	by	operation	of	a	power	of	attorney,	law,
or	act	of	a	competent	state	or	municipal	body.

The	remedies	for	civil	rights	are	listed	in	Article	12	of	the	Civil	Code	of
the	Russian	Federation	and	include:

—	recognition	of	right;

—	restoration	of	state	which	existed	prior	to	the	infringement	of	right
or	creation	of	such	threat;

—	 recognition	 of	 a	 disputed	 deal	 invalid	 and	 application	 of	 the



respective	consequences,	application	of	the	consequences	of	invalidity	of
a	void	deal;

—	recognition	as	invalid	of	a	board	act	(in	corporate	relations);

—	 recognition	 as	 invalid	 an	 act	 of	 a	 state	 or	 municipal	 body	 which
contradicts	 the	 law	 or	 other	 legal	 acts	 and	 violates	 civil	 rights	 and
protected	legal	interests	of	a	person	or	an	entity;

—	self-defense	(the	respective	means	should	be	reasonable	and	should
not	exceed	the	actions	necessary	for	prevention	of	violation);

—	granting	damages;

—	claiming	for	penalty;

—	compensation	of	moral	damage;

—	 termination	 or	 modification	 of	 a	 legal	 relation,	 as	 well	 as	 other
means	stipulated	by	law.

Thus,	 the	 lawmaker	 provides	 for	 two	 forms	 of	 protection	 or	 rights:
jurisdictional	 (the	aggrieved	person	seeks	protection	 in	a	state	or	other
competent	 body)	 and	non-jurisdictional	 (the	 aggrieved	person	protects
their	rights	on	their	own	—	self-defense).

Test	questions	and	tasks

1.	What	is	a	civil	legal	relation	and	what	is	its	structure?

2.	What	are	the	grounds	for	arising	of	civil	rights	and	obligations?

3.	 What	 is	 the	 difference	 between	 a	 citizen’s	 passive	 and	 active
capability?

4.	What	is	an	individual	entrepreneur’s	insolvency?

5.	 What	 is	 the	 difference	 between	 patronage	 and	 guardianship,



trusteeship?

6.	Please	name	the	primary	features	of	a	legal	entity.

7.	How	is	a	legal	entity	liquidated?

8.	What	is	the	difference	between	corporate	and	unitary	legal	entities?

9.	Can	a	unitary	legal	entity	be	a	commercial	organisation?

10.	 Please	 list	 the	 types	 of	 deals	 and	 name	 the	 grounds	 for	 their
invalidity.

11.	 What	 are	 the	 remedies	 of	 civil	 rights	 set	 forth	 by	 current
legislation?

Chapter	17.	Right	of	Ownership	and	Other	Rights	in	Rem
17.1.	Notion	of	Right	of	Ownership	and	its	Holders

“Rights	 in	 rem”	 is	 a	 complex	 civil	 law	 notion	 which	 includes	 a
combination	 of	 norms	 governing	 the	 legal	 relations	 of	 persons	 which
possess	any	material	goods.	In	other	words,	a	right	in	rem	is	a	legal	form
of	acquiring	material	goods.

Depending	 on	 the	 degree	 of	 the	 authority	 to	 possess	 any	 material
good,	rights	in	rem	are	divided	into:	(a)	the	right	of	ownership;	and	(b)
other	rights	in	rem.

According	 to	 section	 1	 Article	 209	 of	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation,	 the	 right	 of	 ownership	 includes	 the	 following	 legal	 titles:
possession,	use	and	disposal.	“Possession”	denotes	the	authority	to	hold
the	 property,	 “use”	 denotes	 the	 right	 to	 enjoy	 various	 uses	 of	 the
property	at	the	discretion	of	the	owner,	and	“disposal”	means	the	right
to	determine	the	fate	of	the	property	and	alienate	it.

The	 owner	 carries	 the	 burden	 of	maintenance,	 as	well	 as	 the	 risk	 of
accidental	loss	or	damage	to	the	property	owned	by	him.

Article	 212	of	 the	Civil	Code	of	 the	Russian	Federation	 sets	 out	 that



the	Russian	Federation	acknowledges	private,	state,	municipal	and	other
forms	of	ownership.

Thus,	the	holders	of	ownership	right	may	be	classified	into:

1.	citizens	and	legal	entities,	which	may	own	any	property	apart	from
some	 types	 of	 property	 specified	 by	 law.	 The	 amount	 and	 cost	 of
property	 which	 citizens	 and	 legal	 entities	may	 own	 are	 not	 limited	 by
law;

2.	 state.	 The	 property	 owned	 by	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 is	 federal
property,	 and	 the	 property	 owned	 by	 the	 subjects	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation,	is	the	property	of	the	respective	subject;

3.	municipal	entities.	Local	self-governments	exercise	the	rights	of	the
owner	on	behalf	of	their	municipal	entities.

Section	4	Article	212	of	 the	Civil	Code	of	 the	Russian	Federation	has
established	a	principle	of	equal	protection	of	all	owners.

17.2.	Acquisition	and	Cessation	of	Ownership

Ownership	 may	 arise	 in	 various	 ways,	 which	 are	 conventionally
divided	 into	 primary,	 i.e.	 not	 depending	 on	 the	 right	 of	 the	 previous
owner	to	the	property,	and	secondary,	in	which	the	ownership	arises	by
will	of	the	previous	owner	(under	a	contract	or	otherwise).	Thus,	in	case
of	 the	 secondary	 type,	 acquiring	 ownership	 by	 one	 person	 occurs
simultaneously	with	cessation	of	this	right	of	another	person,	 i.e.	there
is	a	transfer	of	rights	and	obligations	from	the	previous	owner	to	the	new
one.

Primary	types	of	acquiring	ownership	include:

—	 creation	 of	 new	material	 goods	 (which	 is	 created	 by	 a	 person	 for
himself	 or	 herself,	 subject	 to	 the	 requirements	 of	 laws	 and	 other	 legal
acts.	We	 note	 that,	 under	Article	 219	 of	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation,	 the	 right	of	ownership	 to	 immovable	property	arises	at	 the
moment	of	its	registration);



—	 collection	 of	 fruits,	 manufacture	 of	 products,	 generation	 of
revenues,	appropriation	of	items	commonly	available	for	collection.	The
latter	 denotes	 cases	 when	 it	 is	 allowed	 by	 law,	 by	 permit	 of	 the	 land
plot’s	 owner,	 or	 a	 local	 custom,	 to	 pick	 berries,	 catch	 fish,	 etc.	 on	 a
certain	territory	(Article	221	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation);

—	 acknowledgement	 by	 a	 court	 of	 a	 right	 to	 unauthorised
constructions.	That	said,	courts	acknowledge	such	a	right	not	always,	but
only	 subject	 to	 compliance	 to	 a	number	of	 requirements:	 if	 the	person
which	 has	 performed	 construction	 has	 the	 rights	 to	 the	 land	 plot
allowing	 the	 construction	 of	 the	 facility;	 if	 the	 facility	 at	 the	 date	 of
application	 to	 court	 corresponds	 to	 the	 parameters	 set	 out	 in	 the
territorial	 planning	 documentation,	 etc.	 (section	 3	 Article	 222	 of	 the
Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation);

—	processing	(recycling).	As	set	out	by	Article	220	of	the	Civil	Code	of
the	Russian	Federation,	 the	 right	of	ownership	 to	a	new	movable	 item,
which	the	person	has	manufactured	by	processing	the	materials	he	does
not	own,	shall	be	acquired	by	the	owner	of	the	materials.

However,	 if	 the	cost	of	 the	processing	essentially	exceeds	the	cost	of
the	materials,	 the	right	of	ownership	to	the	new	item	shall	be	acquired
by	 the	 person	 who,	 while	 acting	 in	 good	 faith,	 has	 performed	 the
processing	for	their	own	purposes.

Mutual	 obligations	 of	 the	 owner	 and	 processor	 are	 regulated	 as
follows:	the	owner	of	materials	who	has	acquired	the	right	of	ownership
to	 the	 processed	 item,	 reimburses	 the	 cost	 of	 processing;	 and	 if	 the
processor	acquires	the	right	of	ownership,	he	compensates	to	the	owner
of	the	materials	their	cost;

—	appropriation	of	a	derelict	(an	item	without	an	owner,	the	owner	of
which	is	either	unknown	or	has	renounced	their	ownership).

Under	section	2	Article	218	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation
secondary	 types	 of	 acquiring	 ownership	 include:	 sale	 and	 purchase
agreement,	barter,	gift	or	other	 transactions	 for	alienation	of	property;
inheritance	 (by	 law	 or	 by	 will);	 reorganisation	 of	 a	 legal	 entity	 and



transfer	of	ownership	rights	to	its	successor(s).

Under	 the	 current	 legislation,	 the	 grounds	 for	 cessation	 of	 the
ownership	 right	 may	 be	 classified	 into	 two	 types:	 cessation	 by	 the
owner’s	will	(voluntarily)	and	regardless	of	the	owner’s	will	(compulsory
cessation).

In	the	former	case	the	right	of	ownership	terminates:

—	if	the	owner	alienates	their	property	to	other	person(s);

—	if	the	owner	renounces	their	ownership;

—	 in	 case	 of	 a	 loss	 or	 destruction	 of	 the	 property	 and	 in	 case	 of
forfeiture	of	ownership	rights	 in	other	cases	specified	by	 law	(section	1
Article	235	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation);

—	in	case	of	privatisation,	 i.e.	transfer	of	state	or	municipal	property
into	 the	ownership	of	 citizens	or	 legal	 entities	 (Article	217	of	 the	Civil
Code	of	the	Russian	Federation).

Under	a	general	 rule	of	section	2	Article	235	of	 the	Civil	Code	of	 the
Russian	 Federation,	 compulsory	 expropriation	 of	 property	 from	 the
owner	is	not	allowed.	However,	there	are	several	grounds	for	cessation	of
ownership	regardless	of	the	owner’s	will:

—	turning	of	a	penalty	onto	the	property	by	the	owner's	obligations;

—	 cessation	 of	 the	 right	 of	 ownership	 to	 the	 property	 of	 the	 person
who	may	not	own	it;

—	alienation	of	the	realty	in	connection	with	the	expropriation	of	the
land	plot	due	to	its	undue	use	or	for	state	or	municipal	purposes;

—	redemption	of	mismanaged	cultural	valuables	or	domestic	animals
(in	case	of	their	mishandling);

—	 requisition	 (under	 Article	 242	 of	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation,	 any	 property	 may	 be	 expropriated	 in	 case	 of	 natural



disasters,	 accidents	 and	 other	 circumstances	 of	 extraordinary	 nature,
under	 the	 procedure	 and	 on	 conditions	 set	 out	 by	 law,	 subject	 to	 the
payment	of	compensation	to	the	owner);

—	confiscation	(Article	243	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation
sets	 out	 that	 property	may	 be	 gratuitously	 confiscated	 from	 the	 owner
under	a	court	order	as	a	sanction	for	committing	a	crime	or	other	 legal
offence);

—	expropriation	to	the	budget	of	the	Russian	Federation	of	property,
in	 relation	 to	which	 there	 is	 no	 proof	 of	 acquisition	 for	 lawful	 income
under	the	anti-corruption	laws	of	the	Russian	Federation	or	under	other
circumstances	stipulated	by	law.

17.3.	Common	Property

Common	property	is	the	property	owned	by	two	or	more	persons.

Under	Article	244	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation	common
property	may	 be	 shared	 (if	 each	 of	 the	 owners	 has	 a	 defined	 share)	 or
joint	(if	the	owners’	shares	are	not	defined).

As	a	general	rule,	common	ownership	to	property	is	shared,	except	for
the	 cases	 where	 the	 law	 explicitly	 stipulates	 that	 the	 joint	 property
arises.	 That	 said,	 by	 an	 agreement	 between	 the	 participants	 in	 joint
ownership	(and	if	no	agreement	can	be	reached	—	by	a	court	decision),
shared	ownership	to	the	common	property	may	be	established.

Unless	otherwise	provided	by	law	or	contract,	the	shares	of	owners	of
the	shared	property	are	deemed	equal	(section	1	Article	245	of	the	Civil
Code	of	the	Russian	Federation).	However,	an	agreement	between	all	the
holders	of	shared	ownership	may	establish	the	order	of	determining	and
changing	their	shares,	depending	on	the	contribution	of	each	of	them	to
the	formation	and	the	increment	of	the	common	property.

Shared	property	may	be	disposed	of	by	the	agreement	of	all	its	owners.

Participants	of	shared	ownership	may	at	their	discretion	sell,	donate,



bequeath,	pledge	their	shares	or	otherwise	dispose	of	them	subject	to	the
requirements	of	Article	250	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation
(in	 case	 of	 non-gratuitous	 alienation).	 Under	 the	 above	 mentioned
article,	in	case	of	a	sale	of	a	share	in	common	property	to	a	third	party,
other	 participants	 of	 shared	 ownership	 have	 a	 preferential	 right	 to
purchase	a	share	to	be	sold	at	the	price	of	its	offering.

Participants	 of	 joint	 ownership,	 unless	 otherwise	 stipulated	 by	 an
agreement	 between	 them,	 use	 and	 dispose	 of	 their	 common	 property
together.	Disposal	of	such	common	property	 is	exercised	subject	to	the
consent	of	the	participants	of	joint	ownership,	which	is	presumed	if	any
one	of	 them	carries	out	a	 transaction	 for	 the	disposal	of	 such	property
(section	2	Article	253	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation).

For	the	division	of	common	property	between	joint	owners,	or	setting
apart	of	a	share	of	one	of	them,	it	is	necessary	to	determine	the	amount
of	each	of	the	participants’	shares	in	the	common	property.	The	amounts
of	 such	 shares	 may	 either	 be	 determined	 on	 the	 basis	 of	 the	 law	 or
contract	(in	certain	cases)	or	are	deemed	equal.

The	Civil	Code	of	 the	Russian	Federation	provides	 two	 types	of	 joint
property:	joint	property	of	spouses	and	joint	property	of	a	peasant	(farm)
household.

Under	 Article	 256	 of	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 the
property	acquired	by	spouses	during	the	period	of	their	marriage	shall	be
deemed	their	 joint	property,	unless	a	contract	between	them	stipulates
another	regime	of	such	property.	However,	the	property	owned	by	each
of	the	spouses	before	the	marriage,	and	the	property	received	by	one	of
the	 spouses	 as	 a	 gift	 or	 inheritance	 during	 the	 period	 of	 the	marriage,
shall	be	such	spouse’s	own	property.

Besides,	an	exclusive	right	to	the	intellectual	property	created	by	one
of	 the	 spouses,	 is	 not	 considered	 joint	 property.	 However,	 revenues
obtained	 while	 using	 such	 intellectual	 property,	 are	 deemed	 joint
property	 of	 the	 spouses,	 unless	 a	 contract	 between	 them	 provides
otherwise.



The	 property	 of	 a	 peasant	 (farm)	 household	 is	 also	 joint	 property	 of
the	 household	 members,	 unless	 otherwise	 provided	 by	 law	 or	 by	 a
contract	among	them.

Russian	civil	laws	provide	that	a	contract	as	a	result	of	free	expression
of	 parties’	 will	 plays	 a	 crucial	 role	 in	 practically	 all	 cases,	 when
determining	the	amount	of	shares	in	common	property.

17.4.	Limited	Rights	in	Rem

Apart	 from	 the	 right	 of	 ownership,	 Russian	 civil	 legislation
acknowledges	other	(limited	or	secondary)	rights	in	rem.	Such	rights	may
arise	in	respect	of	property	which	already	has	an	owner	and	are,	by	their
nature,	 more	 “limited”	 than	 the	 right	 of	 ownership	 since	 they	 do	 not
entitle	their	holder	to	all	of	the	owner’s	rights.

Under	Article	216	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation	rights	in
rem	of	non-owners	include:

1.	right	of	inheritable	life	possession	of	a	land	plot.	Such	a	plot	may	be
in	state	or	municipal	ownership,	and	a	citizen	may	obtain	such	freehold
in	 accordance	 with	 the	 land	 laws	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation.	 Under
Article	266	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation,	a	person	enjoying
such	freehold	shall	have	the	right	of	the	possession	and	of	the	use	of	the
land	 plot,	 which	 shall	 be	 passed	 by	 the	 right	 of	 succession.	 However,
there	are	no	other	options	for	disposal	of	such	land	plot	(it	may	not	be
sold,	gifted,	etc.).	However,	the	possessor	of	such	land	plot	is	entitled	to
construct	 buildings	 and	 other	 realty	 on	 it	 and	 obtain	 the	 right	 of
ownership	to	such	facilities;

2.	right	of	permanent	(perpetual)	use	of	a	land	plot.	Under	Article	39.9
of	the	Land	Code	of	Russian	Federation,	land	plots	which	are	in	state	or
municipal	 ownership	 may	 be	 granted	 on	 the	 basis	 of	 the	 right	 of
permanent	(perpetual)	use	only	to:

1)	state	or	municipal	agencies;

2)	state	or	municipal	entities	(budget	or	autonomous);



3)	budget	enterprises;

4)	 centers	 of	 historical	 heritage	 of	 ex-presidents	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation.

The	above	entities	may	not	dispose	of	such	land	plots;

3.	 servitudes.	Article	274	of	 the	Civil	Code	of	 the	Russian	Federation
sets	out	 that	an	owner	of	a	 land	plot	or	other	 realty	may	demand	from
the	 owner	 of	 the	 adjacent	 land	 plot	 the	 right	 of	 limited	 use	 of	 the
adjacent	land	plot	(servitude).

A	 servitude	 may	 be	 established	 for	 the	 right	 of	 passage	 or	 drive-
through	through	the	adjacent	 land	plot,	 for	other	actions	which	do	not
hinder	the	use	of	the	land	plot	under	its	permitted	use	category,	and	for
other	 needs	 of	 the	 owner	 of	 realty	 which	 cannot	 be	 satisfied	 without
establishing	a	servitude.

The	owner	of	the	land	plot	encumbered	by	servitude	retains	the	rights
of	 possession,	 use	 and	 disposal	 of	 this	 land	 plot.	Moreover,	 in	 certain
cases	 he	 or	 she	 may	 demand	 payment	 for	 establishing	 servitude.
Servitude	may	 be	 established	 under	 an	 agreement	 between	 the	 person
demanding	servitude	and	the	owner	of	the	adjacent	land	plot.	Servitude
is	 subject	 to	 registration	 under	 the	 procedure	 established	 for	 the
registration	of	rights	to	immovable	property.

4.	 rights	 of	 economic	 management	 and	 operative	 management,
described	in	para.	16.4.2	hereof.

17.5.	Ownership	Protection

The	 right	 of	 ownership	 is	 acknowledged	 by	 the	 Constitution	 of	 the
Russian	 Federation	 as	 well	 as	 by	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation.	The	mechanisms	of	its	protection	are	also	clearly	established
by	the	legislator.

The	mechanism	of	protection	of	the	ownership	right	(and	other	rights
in	 rem)	 includes	 a	 complex	 of	 forms,	 means	 and	 methods	 aimed	 at



restitution	of	the	proprietary	interests	if	their	holders22.

Forms	of	protection	of	rights	in	rem	include	jurisdictional	(protection
under	a	court	or	administrative	procedure)	and	non-jurisdictional	forms.

Means	 and	methods	 of	 protection	 of	 rights	 in	 rem	may	 be	 classified
into	the	following	groups:

1.	In	rem	means	of	protection	—	measures	specifically	established	by
the	legislator	against	various	infringements	on	rights	in	rem,	which	are
aimed	at	 either	 restitution	of	 the	owner’s	possession,	use	 and	disposal
rights	 to	 their	 property,	 or	 eliminate	 the	 obstacles	 or	 doubts	 in
exercising	 such	 rights.	 These	 matters	 are	 resolved	 by	 courts	 once	 the
respective	lawsuit	has	been	filed.

In	rem	lawsuits	(claims)	include:

а)	reclamation	lawsuit	—	a	claim	of	the	owner	demanding	reclamation
of	 their	 property	 from	 adverse	 possession	 of	 another	 person.	 In	 other
words,	a	non-possessing	owner	files	a	lawsuit	against	a	possessing	non-
owner.

Under	 Article	 302	 of	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 if
property	has	been	purchased	from	a	person	who	had	no	right	to	alienate
it,	and	the	acquirer	has	been	unaware	and	could	not	have	been	aware	of
it	 (bona	 fide	 acquirer),	 the	 owner	 shall	 have	 the	 right	 to	 reclaim	 this
property	from	the	acquirer	only	if	the	said	property	has	left	the	owner’s
possession	contrary	to	their	will.

If	the	property	has	been	acquired	gratuitously,	the	owner	is	entitled	to
demand	its	reclaim	even	from	a	bona	fide	acquirer;

b)	 elimination	 lawsuit	 —	 is	 a	 claim	 of	 elimination	 of	 violations	 of
owner’s	 rights	 not	 entailing	 the	 loss	 of	 possession.	 Such	 lawsuits	 are
regulated	 by	 Article	 304	 of	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,
which	 sets	 out	 that	 the	 owner	 may	 demand	 the	 elimination	 of	 any
violations	of	their	rights	even	if	such	violations	do	not	entail	the	loss	of
possession.;



c)	lawsuit	for	the	recognition	of	the	right	of	ownership.

2.	 In	 personam	 means	 of	 protection.	 Such	 means	 of	 protection	 are
relevant	when	the	owner	and	the	infringing	person	participate	not	only
in	 legal	 relations	 in	 rem,	 but	 also	 in	 personam	 (under	 a	 contract	 or
otherwise).	 Such	means	 of	 protection	 include,	 e.g.	 claims	 to	 reimburse
damages	 inflicted	 upon	 the	 owner;	 lawsuits	 for	 the	 reclamation	 of
unjustly	 acquired	 or	 saved	 property,	 reclamation	 of	 the	 property
provided	under	a	contract.

3.	 Other	 means	 of	 protection	 (related	 to	 neither	 in	 rem	 nor	 in
personam	 means	 of	 protection	 —	 those	 means	 which	 arise	 out	 of
different	civil	law	institutes).	They	include,	e.g.	provisions	on	of	rights	of
the	 owner	 who	 has	 been	 pronounced	 missing	 or	 dead,	 in	 case	 of
protecting	the	interests	of	parties	when	declaring	a	transaction	null	and
void,	etc.

Other	means	 of	 protecting	 rights	 in	 rem	which	 belong	 to	 this	 group
include:

—	lawsuits	against	state	or	municipal	agencies;

—	compulsory	payment	of	compensation	established	by	law	in	case	of
requisition	of	property	in	the	interests	of	society	under	circumstances	of
extraordinary	nature	in	accordance	with	a	public	agency’s	decision;

—	or	in	case	of	requisition	of	a	land	plot	for	state	or	municipal	needs,
etc.

Test	questions	and	tasks

1.	Please	differentiate	between	the	notions	of	“right	in	rem”	and	“right
of	ownership”.

2.	What	is	the	difference	between	the	primary	and	secondary	types	of
acquiring	ownership?

3.	Please	list	limited	rights	in	rem	and	provide	their	brief	description.



Chapter	18.	General	Provisions	on	Obligations	and
Contracts

18.1.	The	Definition	of	an	Obligation	and	Its	Performance

An	obligation	is	a	type	of	civil	relation	by	operation	of	which	one	party
(the	debtor)	is	obliged	to	perform	in	favor	of	another	party	(the	creditor)
a	 certain	action:	 transfer	property,	perform	works,	 render	 services,	 etc.
or	to	abstain	from	taking	a	certain	action,	while	the	creditor	is	entitled	to
claim	for	discharge	of	that	obligation	(section	1	Article	307	of	the	Civil
Code	of	the	Russian	Federation).

As	opposed	to	legal	relations	governed	by	the	norms	of	property	law,
obligations	 bind	 certain	 persons.	 Therefore	 these	 legal	 relations	 are
characterised	 as	 relative	 (as	 opposed	 to	 absolute	 legal	 relations,	where
the	owner	of	an	item	is	opposed	by	an	indefinite	number	of	persons;	in
obligations,	the	scope	of	parties	is	strictly	limited).

An	obligation	can	arise	on	the	following	grounds:

—	from	contracts	or	unilateral	deals	(transfer	of	property,	performance
of	works,	rendering	of	services,	etc.);

—	as	a	result	of	infliction	of	harm;

—	as	a	result	of	unjust	enrichment,	as	well	as	other	grounds	set	forth
by	civil	legislation.

An	object	of	 an	obligation	 is	 a	 certain	benefit	 for	which	 the	 subjects
enter	 into	a	 legal	 relation.	Subjects	of	an	obligation	are	 the	debtor	and
the	creditor,	and	their	number	is	unlimited.	As	a	result,	obligations	with
plurality	 of	 persons	 can	 be	 in	 place	 (with	 joint	 debtors	 and	 (or)
creditors).

Obligations	may	be	arranged	by	other	criteria.

If	 an	 obligation	 is	 structured	 in	 such	 a	 manner	 that	 one	 debtor	 is
present,	who	has	only	obligations,	and	one	creditor,	who	has	only	rights,
such	 an	 obligation	 is	 unilateral	 (e.g.,	 a	 loan	 agreement,	 tortious



obligations).	However,	 it	 is	more	 frequent	 that	one	encounters	mutual,
or	 bilateral	 obligations,	where	 both	parties	 have	 rights	 and	obligations
(e.g.,	sale	and	purchase,	lease,	etc.).

Pursuant	to	Articles	308.1	and	308.2	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian
Federation,	obligations	can	be	divided	into	alternative	and	optional.	For
instance,	 an	 obligation	 is	 alternative	 if	 a	 debtor	 therein	 is	 obliged	 to
perform	or	abstain	from	performing	one	of	two	or	several	actions	which
he	may	choose	as	prescribed	by	contract.	An	obligation	 is	optional	 if	 a
debtor	 therein	 is	 entitled	 to	 substitute	 the	 primary	 performance	 by	 an
optional	(facultative)	one	as	prescribed	by	the	terms	of	the	obligation.

If	 an	 obligation	 may	 be	 performed	 in	 parts	 it	 is	 deemed	 divisible
(delivery	of	goods	by	instalments);	if	it	involves	an	obligation	to	transfer
to	a	debtor	a	 specified	 item	 (specific	equipment),	 such	an	obligation	 is
deemed	indivisible.

Obligations	 may	 also	 be	 divided	 into	 primary	 and	 subsidiary
(accessory),	the	latter	providing	proper	performance	of	the	former	(bank
loan	 being	 the	 primary	 obligation	 and	 payment	 of	 penalty	 being	 the
accessory	obligation).

Russian	 civil	 legislation	 sets	 forth	 a	 number	 of	 principles	 and
requirements	connected	with	the	performance	of	obligations.

Article	 309	 of	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 sets	 forth	 a
provision	pursuant	to	which	obligations	shall	be	discharged	in	a	proper
manner	in	conformity	with	the	terms	of	the	obligation	and	requirements
of	the	law,	other	legal	acts,	and,	in	the	absence	thereof	—	in	conformity
with	the	customs	of	business	turnover	or	with	other	normally	presented
demands.

An	 obligation	 is	 deemed	 performed	 in	 a	 proper	 manner	 if	 it	 is
performed	 to	a	proper	person,	 in	 a	 timely	manner,	 in	 a	 specified	place
and	in	a	proper	way.

For	instance,	pursuant	to	section	1	Article	312	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the
Russian	Federation,	a	debtor	is	entitled	while	discharging	an	obligation



to	demand	proof	of	the	fact	that	the	discharge	is	accepted	by	the	creditor
himself	 or	 by	 an	 authorised	 person,	 and	 shall	 take	 the	 risk	 of	 the
consequences	of	his	failure	to	present	such	a	demand.

A	 definition	 of	 “proper	 term”	 follows	 from	 Article	 314	 of	 the	 Civil
Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 which	 envisages	 that	 if	 an	 obligation
stipulates	or	allows	to	stipulate	the	day	of	its	discharge	or	the	period	of
time	within	which	it	shall	be	discharged,	the	obligation	shall	be	subject
to	 discharge	 on	 that	 particular	 day	 or,	 accordingly,	 at	 any	 moment
within	that	period.

If	an	obligation	does	not	stipulate	the	term	of	its	discharge,	it	shall	be
discharged	 within	 seven	 days	 after	 the	 creditor	 has	 demanded	 such
discharge.	 A	 debtor	 has	 the	 right	 to	 discharge	 an	 obligation	 early	 (in
advance)	 unless	 otherwise	 stipulated	 by	 law	 or	 contract,	 and	 if	 the
parties	 are	 involved	 in	 business	 activity	 —	 only	 if	 early	 discharge	 is
expressly	stipulated	by	the	parties.

The	place	of	discharge	of	an	obligation	is	defined	by	Article	316	of	the
Civil	 Code	 of	 the	Russian	 Federation.	 For	 instance,	 in	 an	 obligation	 to
transfer	a	land	plot,	a	building,	a	structure,	or	other	immovable	property,
the	obligation	is	discharged	at	the	place	of	location	of	such	property;	in
an	obligation	to	transfer	goods	or	other	property	which	is	to	be	shipped,
the	obligation	 is	discharged	at	 the	place	of	 transferring	the	property	to
the	first	shipper	in	order	to	deliver	it	to	the	creditor.

Manner	of	discharging	obligations	means	a	way	of	committing	actions
directed	 at	 satisfying	 creditor’s	 claims.	 Current	 legislation	 sets	 forth	 a
rule	whereby	the	debtor	bears	costs	of	performing	an	obligation,	unless
otherwise	prescribed	by	law	or	contract	(Article	309.2	of	the	Civil	Code	of
the	Russian	Federation),	and	unilateral	refusal	to	discharge	an	obligation
is	generally	prohibited.

A	 creditor	 is	 also	 entitled	 not	 to	 accept	 discharge	 of	 obligation	 by
parts,	 unless	 otherwise	 stipulated	 by	 law,	 contract,	 and	 nature	 of
obligation	(Article	311	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation).

18.2.	Providing	for	the	Discharge	of	Obligations



Each	 obligation	 is	 based	 on	 the	 assumption	 that	 the	 debtor	 will
properly	 perform	 it.	 At	 the	 same	 time,	 certain	 measures	 are	 in	 place
providing	 for	 the	 creditor’s	 property	 interests	 by	 creating	 certain
guarantees	of	performance	by	debtor.

Pursuant	 to	Article	 329	 of	 the	Civil	 Code	 of	 the	Russian	 Federation,
the	performance	of	obligations	may	be	provided	for	by	the	following:

1.	forfeit	(fine,	penalty)	is	a	sum	of	money	defined	by	law	or	contract
which	 the	 debtor	 is	 obliged	 to	 pay	 to	 the	 creditor	 in	 case	 of	 his	 non-
discharge	or	improper	discharge	of	an	obligation,	in	particular,	in	case	of
late	 discharge	 (section	 1	 Article	 330	 of	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation).

The	 nature	 of	 this	 measure	 lies	 in	 the	 risk	 of	 creating	 undesirable
financial	 consequences	 for	 the	 debtor	 in	 case	 of	 improper	 discharge.
However,	 if	 the	 debtor	 is	 not	 responsible	 for	 improper	 discharge,	 the
creditor	is	not	entitled	to	claim	payment	of	forfeit.

2.	pledge	is	a	measure	by	which	operation	the	creditor	in	an	obligation
guaranteed	by	pledge	(the	pledge	holder)	has	the	right	of	priority	before
other	creditors	of	the	owner	of	that	property	(the	pledger)	in	case	of	the
debtor’s	non-discharge	of	that	obligation	to	obtain	satisfaction	from	the
cost	of	the	pledged	property	—	section	1.	Article	334	of	the	Civil	Code	of
the	Russian	Federation.

Unless	 otherwise	 prescribed	 by	 law,	 pledge	 between	 the	 pledger	 and
the	pledge	holder	arises	based	on	a	contract	which	indicates	the	subject
matter	 of	 the	 pledge,	 the	 nature,	 amount,	 and	 term	of	 performance	 of
the	obligation	guaranteed.

Any	 property	 may	 be	 pledged,	 including	 goods	 and	 property	 rights,
with	 the	 exception	 of	 property	 prohibited	 from	 attachment	 or
foreclosure.	 Section	 2	 Article	 336	 of	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation	sets	forth	the	right	of	parties	to	a	contract	to	establish	pledge
of	future	property;

3.	retention	of	debtor’s	property.	Pursuant	to	section	1	Article	359	of



the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation,	a	creditor	who	bears	custody	of
an	item	which	is	subject	to	transfer	to	debtor	or	to	the	person	named	by
debtor,	in	the	event	of	debtor’s	failure	to	timely	discharge	the	obligation
of	 payment	 for	 that	 item	 or	 of	 compensation	 to	 the	 creditor	 of	 the
expenses	 and	 other	 losses	 he	 has	 borne	 in	 connection	 therewith,	 is
entitled	 to	 retain	 such	 item	 until	 the	 corresponding	 obligation	 is
discharged.	The	creditor	may	retain	the	item	regardless	of	the	fact	that
after	 it	 has	 passed	 into	 the	 creditor’s	 custody,	 the	 rights	 thereto	 have
been	acquired	by	a	third	party.

Participants	 of	 business	 activities	 may	 retain	 debtor’s	 items	 for
guaranteeing	 discharge	 of	 those	 obligations	 which	 are	 not	 directly
connected	to	paying	for	that	particular	item;

4.	surety	by	operation	of	which	the	surety	is	obliged	to	the	creditor	of
another	person	to	be	liable	for	the	latter’s	discharge	of	that	obligation	in
full	or	 in	part.	Contract	of	surety	may	be	concluded	to	provide	security
for	 pecuniary	 and	 non-pecuniary	 obligation,	 as	 well	 as	 for	 future
obligation	 (section	 1	 Article	 361	 of	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation).

A	surety	contract	shall	be	concluded	in	writing.	By	operation	of	Article
363	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation,	the	surety	is	liable	to	the
creditor	to	the	same	extent	as	the	debtor,	including	payment	of	interest,
compensation	of	judicial	expenses	connected	with	the	collection	of	debt,
and	 other	 losses	 borne	 by	 the	 creditor,	 which	 had	 been	 caused	 by	 the
debtor’s	 non-discharge	 or	 improper	 discharge	 of	 the	 obligation,	 unless
otherwise	stipulated	by	the	contract	of	surety.

The	 surety	 who	 has	 discharged	 the	 obligation	 obtains	 the	 creditor’s
rights	by	that	obligation,	and	he	obtains	the	right	to	claim	its	discharge
from	the	debtor,	including	compensation	of	losses;

5.	 independent	 guarantee,	 by	 operation	 of	 which	 the	 guarantor
assumes	upon	the	request	of	another	person	(the	principal)	an	obligation
to	 pay	 to	 the	 creditor	 (the	 beneficiary)	 a	 certain	 amount	 of	 money
according	 to	 the	 terms	 of	 the	 obligation	 given	 by	 the	 guarantor,
regardless	of	 the	validity	of	 the	secured	obligation	 (section	1	Article	of



the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation).	 However,	 the	 guarantor
refuses	 to	 satisfy	 the	 creditor’s	 claim	 if	 the	 latter	 or	 the	 documents
attached	 thereto	 do	 not	 conform	 to	 the	 terms	 of	 the	 independent
guarantee	 or	 are	 presented	 upon	 the	 termination	 of	 the	 independent
guarantee.

Independent	guarantees	can	be	issued	by	banks	and	other	commercial
organisations.	Pursuant	 to	Article	 379	of	 the	Civil	Code	of	 the	Russian
Federation,	the	principal	is	obliged	to	return	to	the	guarantor	the	money
paid	 under	 the	 independent	 guarantee,	 unless	 otherwise	 prescribed	 by
the	agreement	between	the	guarantor	and	the	principal;

6.	 downpayment,	 meaning	 the	 sum	 of	 money	 issued	 by	 one	 of	 the
contracting	 parties	 to	 offset	 the	 payments	 to	 the	 other	 party	 due
thereunder,	as	a	proof	that	the	contract	has	been	concluded	and	that	its
discharge	 has	 been	 secured	 against	 (section	 1	 Article	 380	 of	 the	 Civil
Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation).	 A	 downpayment	 agreement	 shall	 be
effected	in	writing.

Pursuant	to	Article	381	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation,	if
the	responsibility	for	non-performance	of	the	contract	lies	with	the	party
which	 has	 provided	 the	 downpayment	 it	 shall	 remain	 with	 the	 other
party.	If	the	responsibility	for	non-performance	of	the	contract	lies	with
the	party	which	has	received	the	downpayment,	it	shall	be	obliged	to	pay
to	the	other	party	the	double	amount	of	the	downpayment.

The	downpayment	shall	be	distinguished	from	the	advance.	The	latter
carries	no	security,	 i.e.	 if	 the	obligation	has	not	been	performed	or	has
not	arisen,	while	advance	has	been	transferred,	it	shall	be	returned;

7.	 security	 deposit,	 meaning	 the	 sum	 of	 money	 transferred	 to	 one
party	by	another	and	securing	an	obligation	to	pay	damages	or	penalty
for	 breaching	 the	 contract.	 If	 the	 circumstances	 stipulated	 by	 contract
arise,	 the	 sum	 of	 the	 security	 deposit	 is	 offset	 against	 the	 respective
obligation	(section	1	Article	381.1).

Other	measures	of	securing	performance	of	obligation	may	be	set	forth
by	parties	or	by	law.



18.3.	Liability	for	Violation	of	Obligations

Civil	liability	is	debtor’s	obligation	to	compensate	the	creditor	for	the
losses	caused	by	non-discharge	or	improper	discharge	of	the	obligations
and	(or)	to	suffer	respective	negative	consequences.

The	 grounds	 for	 civil	 liability	 lie	 within	 the	 legal	 corpus	 of	 the	 civil
violation	 (for	 greater	 detail	 on	 legal	 offence	 and	 legal	 liability,	 see
Chapter	9	of	the	textbook).

However,	civil	legal	liability	has	specific	features	set	forth	by	law.

Pursuant	 to	Article	15	of	 the	Civil	Code	of	 the	Russian	Federation,	a
person	whose	 right	 has	 been	 violated	 shall	 be	 entitled	 to	 demand	 full
recovery	of	losses,	unless	the	recovery	of	losses	in	a	smaller	amount	has
been	stipulated	by	law	or	agreement.

Full	 recovery	of	 losses	means	 that	 the	 creditor	holds	 a	position	 as	 if
the	obligation	were	properly	discharged.

Article	 401	 of	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 sets	 forth
grounds	 of	 liability	 for	 violation	 of	 obligations.	 Namely,	 a	 person	who
has	 not	 discharged	 the	 obligation	 or	 who	 has	 discharged	 it	 in	 an
improper	 way,	 shall	 bear	 responsibility	 therefor,	 if	 it	 has	 happened
through	his	fault	(willful	misconduct	or	negligence),	with	the	exception
of	cases	where	other	grounds	of	such	liability	has	been	stipulated	by	law
or	contract.

Generally,	a	person	is	recognised	as	not	guilty	if,	taking	into	account
the	extent	of	care	and	caution	which	has	been	expected	from	him	under
the	terms	of	the	obligation,	he	has	taken	all	the	necessary	measures	for
properly	discharging	the	obligation.

In	civil	 law,	the	benefit	of	the	doubt	principle	 is	not	applicable	—	on
the	contrary,	guilt	is	assumed,	i.e.	the	absence	of	guilt	shall	be	shown	by
the	person	who	is	in	breach	of	an	obligation.

Unless	otherwise	prescribed	by	law	or	contract,	a	person	who	has	not



discharged	or	has	improperly	discharged	an	obligation	while	performing
business	 activity,	 shall	 bear	 liability,	 unless	 he	 proves	 that	 the	 proper
discharge	 has	 been	 impossible	 due	 to	 force	majeure,	 i.e.	 extraordinary
circumstances	 which	 were	 impossible	 to	 avert	 under	 given	 conditions.
Such	 circumstances	 do	 not	 include,	 in	 particular,	 violations	 of
obligations	 by	 the	 debtor’s	 counterparties,	 the	 lack	 on	 the	 market	 of
necessary	 commodities,	 the	 lack	 of	 the	 necessary	 monetary	 means
(section	 3	 Article	 401	 of	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation).	 In
other	words,	the	law	sets	forth	liability	regardless	of	guilt.

Other	 cases	 of	 such	 liability	 include	 the	 debtor’s	 liability	 for	 his
employees’	 actions	 (Article	 402	 of	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation),	the	debtor’s	liability	for	the	actions	of	third	persons	(Article
403	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation)	and	other	similar	cases.

In	certain	cases,	civil	liability	may	arise	regardless	of	infliction	of	harm
(for	 instance,	 the	 creditor	 is	 not	 obliged	 to	 show	 losses	when	 claiming
penalty).

In	other	cases,	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation	sets	forth	the
possibility	 of	 reducing	 the	 amount	 of	 debtor’s	 liability.	 Pursuant	 to
section	1	Article	404	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation,	 if	 the
non-discharge	or	the	improper	discharge	of	obligation	occurred	through
the	 fault	 of	 both	 parties,	 the	 court	 shall	 have	 the	 right	 to	 reduce	 the
scope	of	the	debtor’s	responsibility	accordingly.

Civil	legal	liability	may	be	classified	by	various	criteria.

Depending	 on	 the	 grounds	 of	 arising	 it	 can	 be	 contractual	 and	non-
contractual.

Depending	on	the	participants,	liability	may	be:	a)	shared,	where	each
debtor	 is	 liable	 within	 the	 amount	 of	 his	 share;	 b)	 joint	 and	 several,
where	each	of	the	debtors	individually	and	all	of	the	debtors	collectively
are	liable	until	the	obligation	is	fully	discharged;	c)	subsidiary	(ancillary)
liability,	where	the	creditor,	if	an	obligation	has	not	been	discharged	by
the	principal	debtor,	has	 the	 right	 to	address	his	 claim	 to	 the	ancillary
debtor	(Article	399	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation).



By	its	nature,	civil	 legal	liability	may	be	non-monetary	and	monetary
(Article	 1082	 of	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation).	 Specific
performance	 means	 providing	 an	 item	 of	 identical	 type	 and	 quality,
repair	of	damaged	item,	etc.

18.4.	Termination	of	Obligations

Legal	 relations	 connected	 with	 obligations	 cannot	 be	 eternal.
Termination	 of	 an	 obligation	 is	 the	 termination	 of	 a	 legal	 bond,	 of
certain	legal	relations	between	the	parties.

An	obligation	may	be	terminated	on	the	grounds	set	forth	by	the	Civil
Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 (common	 grounds),	 as	 well	 as	 on	 the
grounds	set	forth	by	the	parties’	agreement	(specific	grounds).

Pursuant	to	the	general	rule	set	forth	in	Article	408	of	the	Civil	Code	of
the	Russian	Federation,	the	proper	discharge	terminates	the	obligation.
The	creditor,	when	accepting	discharge,	shall	be	obliged,	upon	debtor’s
claim,	to	give	him	a	receipt	for	accepting	the	discharge	in	full	or	in	the
corresponding	part	thereof.

Besides,	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 sets	 forth	 the
following	 grounds	 of	 termination	 of	 an	 obligation	 (Articles	 409-419	 of
the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation):

1.	 indemnity	—	 by	 an	 agreement	 between	 the	 parties,	 an	 obligation
may	 be	 terminated	 by	 way	 of	 paying	 an	 indemnity	 instead	 of	 being
discharged	 (payment	 of	 money,	 transfer	 of	 property).	 The	 amount	 of
money	or	property	shall	be	established	by	the	parties;

2.	offset	of	obligations	—	where	an	obligation	is	terminated	in	full	or
in	part	by	offsetting	mutual	claims.	In	this	case,	mutual	obligations	are
in	question	(where	each	party	is	both	the	creditor	and	the	debtor);

3.	 novation	 —	 the	 parties	 enter	 into	 a	 novation	 agreement	 (on
replacing	the	primary	obligation	with	another	obligation);

4.	 forgiveness	 of	 debt	 takes	 place	 if	 the	 creditor	 releases	 the	 debtor



from	performance	of	his	 obligations,	 if	 such	dismissal	 does	not	 violate
the	rights	of	other	persons	as	to	the	creditors	property;

5.	 frustration	—	where	circumstances	arise	after	the	coming	about	of
the	 obligation,	 which	 make	 its	 performance	 impossible.	 Such
circumstances	should	not	arise	through	the	fault	of	parties;

6.	 issuance	of	an	act	by	a	state	or	municipal	body.	Persons	who	have
suffered	losses	are	entitled	to	claim	recovery.	However,	section	2	Article
417	 of	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 indicates	 that	 an
obligation	is	not	deemed	terminated	if	the	issuance	of	an	act	by	a	state
or	 municipal	 body	 which	 has	 led	 to	 frustration	 is	 caused	 by	 wrongful
conduct	of	the	debtor;

7.	death	of	creditor	or	debtor	—	if	the	performance	of	an	obligation	is
directly	connected	to	the	personality	of	the	deceased;

8.	 liquidation	 of	 a	 legal	 entity	 (except	 for	 cases	 where	 law	 or	 other
legal	acts	 impose	the	discharge	of	the	obligation	of	the	liquidated	legal
entity	upon	another	person).

18.5.	Definition	and	Terms	of	Contract

A	 civil	 contract	 is	 a	 legal	 form	 of	 economic	 relations	 of	 exchange
which	have	arisen	in	the	society,	especially	in	the	market	conditions.

Pursuant	 to	 section	 1	 Article	 402	 of	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation,	 a	 contract	 is	 an	agreement	between	 two	or	 several	persons
on	the	institution,	modification,	or	termination	of	civil	rights	and	duties.

Therefore,	 a	 contract	 is	 also	 a	 form	 of	 self-regulation	 of	 market
relations,	which,	when	 instituted	 in	 a	 proper	manner,	 legally	 binds	 its
parties.

A	 contract	 is	 a	multilateral	 deal	which	 is	 the	most	 common	grounds
for	arising	of	legal	relations	and,	therefore,	obligations.

A	contract	may	be	characterised	with	the	following	primary	features:



—	coordinated	actions	of	its	parties,	which	express	their	mutual	will;

—	 direction	 of	 these	 actions	 (will)	 at	 institution,	 modification,	 or
termination	of	civil	rights	and	duties	of	the	parties.

The	principle	of	 freedom	of	 the	contract	 follows	 from	the	abovesaid,
meaning	that	persons	and	legal	entities	are	free	to	enter	 into	contracts
(section	 1	 Article	 421	 of	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation).
Compulsion	 to	 conclude	 contract	 is	 prohibited,	 with	 the	 exception	 of
cases	where	the	duty	to	conclude	the	contract	 is	stipulated	by	the	Civil
Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 other	 law	 or	 a	 voluntarily	 assumed
obligation.

The	freedom	of	contract	is	also	epitomised	by	the	fact	that	the	parties
may	enter	into	contract	which	is	or	is	not	stipulated	by	law	or	other	legal
acts,	 as	 well	 as	 into	 contract	 containing	 elements	 of	 various	 contracts
stipulated	by	law	or	other	legal	acts	(mixed	contract).

Pursuant	to	section	4	Article	421,	contractual	terms	are	defined	by	the
parties	 at	 their	 discretion.	 Also,	 if	 a	 contract	 provision	 has	 been
stipulated	 by	 the	 norm	 applied	 so	 far	 as	 it	 has	 not	 been	 otherwise
stipulated	by	the	agreement	between	the	parties	(the	dispositive	norm),
the	parties	may	by	 their	own	agreement	exclude	 its	application	or	may
introduce	 a	 provision	 which	 is	 different	 from	 that	 which	 has	 been
stipulated	by	the	dispositive	norm.

If	a	contract	provision	has	not	been	defined	either	by	the	parties	or	by
the	 dispositive	 norm,	 the	 respective	 terms	 shall	 be	 defined	 by	 the
customs	of	the	business	turnover	applicable	to	the	relationships	between
the	parties.

However,	a	contract	shall	be	in	conformity	with	the	binding	rules	set
forth	by	law	or	other	legal	acts	(imperative	norms)	which	operate	at	the
moment	of	its	conclusion	(section	1	Article	422	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the
Russian	Federation).

Terms	 of	 contract	 are	 a	 sum	 total	 of	 conditions	 of	 the	 contract	 set
forth	by	the	parties.



Essential	terms	of	contract	are	the	necessary	and	sufficient	terms	for
the	 arising	 of	 contractual	 obligation.	 Should	 the	parties	 disagree	 on	 at
least	 one	of	 these	 terms,	 the	 contract	 is	 deemed	 as	not	 concluded	 and
non-existent.	Pursuant	to	section	1	Article	432	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the
Russian	Federation,	the	following	terms	are	deemed	essential:

—	on	the	subject	matter	of	the	contract	(name	and	quantity	of	goods
to	be	shipped);

—	conditions	which	are	named	by	law	or	other	legal	acts	as	essential	or
necessary	for	the	contracts	of	such	kind	(price	in	the	retail	sale	of	goods);

—	 other	 terms	 on	which,	 by	 the	 statement	 of	 one	 of	 the	 parties,	 an
accord	shall	be	reached.

The	essential	 terms	of	contract	may	be	prescribed	by	 law	or	 initiated
by	one	of	the	parties.

The	 first	 kind	 are	 the	 conditions	 which	 are	 designated	 by	 the	 Civil
Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 or	 by	 other	 legal	 act	 as	 necessary	 for
conclusion	 of	 a	 contract	 of	 such	 kind.	 They	 shall	 be	 agreed	 on	 by	 the
parties	—	otherwise	the	contract	shall	be	deemed	as	non-concluded	(e.g.,
conditions	on	the	subject	matter	of	the	contract).

Initiated	 conditions	 are	 those	 which	 it	 is	 not	 demanded	 by	 law	 to
include	 into	 the	 contract	 but	 which	 are	 included	 at	 the	 parties'	 will
(specifying	 time	periods	or	quality	of	work	performed).	Upon	 including
these	terms	into	the	contract,	these	become	essential.

Academic	 writers	 also	 highlight	 the	 common	 (regular)	 terms	 of
contract.	They	include	the	terms	which	are	set	forth	by	dispositive	norms
and,	despite	 their	 lack	 in	 the	body	of	 the	 contract	 (including	 the	 cases
where	 the	 parties	 did	 not	 deem	 it	 rational	 to	 modify	 them),	 they	 do
govern	 the	 terms	 of	 contractual	 obligations.	 For	 instance,	 if	 a	 storage
agreement	 does	 not	 define	 the	 time	 period	 of	 storage,	 the	 keeper,
pursuant	to	Article	889	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation	shall
store	the	goods	until	called	for.



18.6.	Types	of	Contracts

There	is	a	great	deal	of	types	of	contract	which	are	distinguished	based
on	various	criteria.

Pursuant	to	Article	423	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation,	a
contract	under	which	a	party	shall	 receive	a	pay	or	other	consideration
for	the	discharge	of	her	duties,	shall	be	non-gratuitous.	On	the	contrary,
a	contract	is	deemed	gratuitous	where	a	party	assumes	an	obligation	to
provide	 something	 to	 the	 other	 party	without	 receiving	 a	 pay	 or	 other
consideration.

In	the	civil	turnover,	non-gratuitous	nature	of	contract	is	assumed,	i.e.
a	contract	is	deemed	non-gratuitous	unless	otherwise	prescribed	by	law
or	contract	itself.

Contracts	 may	 be	 typical,	 where	 their	 terms	 coincide	 with	 those
prescribed	 by	 law,	 and	mixed,	 which	 combine	 the	 elements	 of	 various
types	of	contracts.

Depending	on	 the	 distribution	of	 rights	 and	obligations	 between	 the
parties,	contracts	may	be:

—	 unilateral	—	 one	 party	 has	 solely	 rights	 and	 the	 other	 has	 solely
obligations	(loan	agreement);

—	 bilateral	 (mutually	 binding)	—	 each	 of	 the	 parties	 has	 rights	 and
obligations	(sale	and	purchase).

Based	 on	 legal	 effect,	 contracts	 may	 be	 primary	 and	 preliminary.
Pursuant	 to	 section	 1	 Article	 429	 of	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation,	 under	 a	 preliminary	 contract	 the	 parties	 shall	 assume	 an
obligation	 to	 conclude	 in	 the	 future	 a	 contract	 on	 the	 transfer	 of
property,	 on	 the	 performance	 of	 works	 or	 on	 rendering	 services	 (the
primary	 contract)	 on	 the	 terms	 stipulated	 by	 the	 preliminary	 contract.
The	preliminary	contract	shall	indicate	the	time	period	within	which	the
parties	are	obliged	to	enter	into	the	primary	contract.	If	the	time	period
is	 not	 defined,	 the	 parties	 shall	 enter	 into	 the	 primary	 contract	within



one	year	upon	concluding	the	preliminary	contract.

If	a	party	who	has	concluded	the	preliminary	contract	is	avoiding	the
conclusion	of	 the	primary	contract,	 it	may	be	coerced	to	enter	 into	the
primary	contract	by	court.

The	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation	in	Article	426	describes	the
public	 contract	which	 is	deemed	a	contract	 concluded	by	a	commercial
organisation	 and	 establishing	 its	 duties	 by	 the	 sale	 of	 goods,
performance	of	works,	rendering	services	which	such	organisation	shall
effect	in	conformity	with	the	nature	of	its	activity	with	respect	to	anyone
who	 turns	 to	 it	 (retail	 trade,	 passenger	 traffic	 in	 the	 public	 transport
vehicles,	 communications	 services,	 supply	 of	 electric	 energy,	 medical
services,	hotel	accommodation,	etc.).	A	person	who	carries	out	business
activities	 shall	 have	 no	 right	 to	 show	 preference	 to	 some	 persons	 as
opposed	to	others	as	regards	the	conclusion	of	a	public	contract	and	may
not	refuse	to	enter	into	a	public	contract.

Depending	 on	 the	 manner	 of	 coordinating	 the	 terms	 of	 contract,
contracts	may	be	mutually	agreed	upon	and	adhesion	contracts.

Pursuant	to	Article	428	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation,	an
adhesion	contract	is	a	contract	whose	terms	have	been	defined	by	one	of
the	parties	in	official	form	and	can	be	accepted	by	the	other	party	solely
by	way	of	adhesion	to	the	offered	contract	as	a	whole.

However,	the	party	which	has	joined	the	contract	shall	have	the	right
to	demand	that	the	contract	be	dissolved	or	amended,	 if	such	adhesion
contract,	while	being	in	conformity	with	law	or	other	legal	acts,	deprives
the	party	of	the	rights	which	are	usually	granted	by	the	contracts	of	such
kind,	 if	 it	 excludes	 or	 limits	 the	 liability	 of	 the	 other	 party	 for	 the
violation	 of	 the	 obligations	 or	 contains	 other	 terms	 which	 are	 clearly
onerous	for	the	party.

Depending	on	who	is	the	beneficiary	under	the	contract,	these	can	be
in	favour	of	the	parties	of	in	favour	of	third	persons.

A	 contract	 in	 favour	 of	 third	 person	 is	 a	 contract	 under	 which	 the



debtor	 shall	 discharge	 the	 obligation	 to	 a	 third	 person	 rather	 than	 the
creditor	who	has	the	right	to	claim	discharge	from	the	debtor	(section	1
Article	430	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation).

Unless	 otherwise	prescribed	by	 law	or	 contract,	 from	 the	moment	of
the	third	person	expressing	to	the	debtor	his	intention	to	avail	himself	of
his	right	by	the	contract,	the	parties	shall	have	no	right	to	terminate	or
amend	the	contract	without	the	consent	of	the	third	party.

Depending	 on	 the	 purpose,	 contracts	 may	 be	 connected	 with	 the
transfer	 of	 property	 into	 ownership	 or	 usage	 and	 connected	 with	 the
performance	of	works	or	rendering	of	services.

18.7.	Concluding	a	Contract

Concluding	a	contract	means	reaching	accord	on	the	essential	terms	as
prescribed	by	law.

Pursuant	 to	 section	 2	 Article	 432	 of	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation,	 a	 contract	 is	 concluded	 by	manner	 of	 forwarding	 the	 offer
(proposal	 to	 enter	 into	 a	 contract)	 by	 one	 of	 the	 parties	 and	 of	 its
acceptance	by	the	other	party.

The	 offer	 is	 a	 proposal	 addressed	 to	 one	 or	 several	 persons	which	 is
sufficiently	 comprehensive	 and	 expresses	 the	 intention	 of	 the	 person
who	has	made	 the	proposal,	 to	 regard	himself	as	having	concluded	 the
contract	with	the	addressee	who	will	accept	the	proposal.	The	offer	shall
contain	the	essential	terms	of	the	contract	(section	1	Article	435	of	the
Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation).

After	 the	 addressee	 has	 received	 the	 offer,	 it	 may	 not	 be	 revoked,
unless	otherwise	specified	by	law	or	the	offer	itself.

Advertisement	and	other	proposals	addressed	to	an	indefinite	circle	of
persons	shall	be	regarded	as	an	invitation	to	make	an	offer	and	not	as	an
offer	itself.	However,	if	such	proposal	contains	all	the	essential	terms	of
contract	and	directly	expresses	the	intent	to	enter	into	contract	with	any
responding	person,	such	proposal	is	deemed	as	a	public	offer.



The	acceptance	 is	 the	 response	of	 the	person,	 to	whom	the	offer	has
been	addressed,	about	the	offer	being	accepted.	Based	on	Article	438	of
the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 acceptance	 shall	 be	 full,
unconditional,	and	sent	to	the	person	who	sent	the	offer	within	set	time
period.	Generally,	 silence	 is	not	deemed	acceptance,	as	well	as	consent
to	enter	into	contract	on	different	terms.	Such	consent,	however,	may	be
deemed	a	new	offer.

Article	 434.1	 of	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 sets	 forth
provisions	 whereby	 persons	 and	 legal	 entities	 are	 free	 to	 conduct
negotiations	 on	 entering	 into	 contract,	 bear	 expenses	 connected	 with
such	negotiations,	and	are	not	liable	for	not	reaching	an	agreement.

However,	when	entering	 into	negotiations	on	conclusion	of	contract,
during	 such	 negotiations	 and	 upon	 their	 completion	 the	 parties	 are
obliged	 to	 act	 bona	 fide,	 i.e.	 they	 shall	 not	 conduct	 such	 negotiations
scienter	lacking	the	intent	to	agree.

The	following	circumstances	operate	as	the	moment	of	conclusion	of	a
contract:

—	receiving	of	acceptance	by	the	person	who	sent	the	offer;

—	 transfer	 of	 property,	 if	 it	 is	 by	 law	 required	 for	 conclusion	 of
contract;

—	the	moment	of	state	registration,	if	it	is	prescribed	for	that	type	of
contract.

If	no	place	of	its	conclusion	has	been	indicated	in	the	contract,	it	shall
be	recognised	as	concluded	at	the	place	of	residence	of	the	citizen	or	at
the	 place	 of	 location	 of	 the	 legal	 entity	 who	 has	 forwarded	 the	 offer
(Article	444	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation).

Contract	 may	 be	 concluded	 in	 any	 form	 prescribed	 for	 deals	 (for
greater	details,	see	para	16.6).

Contract	may	also	be	concluded	by	way	of	organising	a	tender,	unless



otherwise	 set	 forth	 by	 law	 or	 nature	 of	 contract.	 Tender	 (including
electronically)	may	be	 conducted	 in	 the	 form	of	 an	 auction	or	 contest.
The	winner	of	the	bidding	at	an	auction	shall	be	recognised	as	the	person
who	has	offered	the	best	price,	and	at	the	contest	—	the	person	who,	as	it
has	 been	 concluded	 by	 the	 commission	 appointed	 in	 advance	 by	 the
organiser,	has	offered	 the	best	 terms	 (section	4	Article	447	of	 the	Civil
Code	of	the	Russian	Federation).

The	right	to	define	the	form	of	tender	is	vested	with	the	owner	of	the
item	for	sale	or	with	the	owner	of	the	interest.

18.8.	Modification	and	Rescission	of	Contract

Generally,	as	prescribed	by	Article	450	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian
Federation,	 modification	 and	 rescission	 of	 contract	 is	 only	 allowed	 by
parties'	agreement,	unless	otherwise	prescribed	by	the	contract	itself	or
by	law.

Multilateral	 contracts,	 parties	 whereto	 exercise	 business	 activities,
may	 envisage	 the	 possibility	 of	 their	 modification	 or	 rescission	 by
consent	of	all	or	majority	of	the	parties.

A	 contract	may	 be	modified	 or	 rescinded	 by	 a	 party's	 claim	 only	 by
court	decision	in	the	following	cases:

1)	 in	 case	 of	 essential	 violation	 of	 the	 contract	 by	 the	 other	 party
(where	one	party's	action	inflicts	such	damage	to	the	other	party	that	the
latter	 is	deprived	of	what	 it	could	have	counted	upon	when	concluding
the	contract);

2)	in	other	cases	expressly	stipulated	by	law	or	contract.

However,	 the	 principle	 of	 freedom	 of	 contract	 suggests	 that	 the
contract	itself	may	grant	the	right	to	unilateral	modification	of	contract
to	one	party.

The	Civil	Code	of	 the	Russian	Federation	sets	 forth	the	possibility	of
modification	 or	 rescission	 of	 contract	 due	 to	 essential	 change	 of



circumstances.	The	change	of	circumstances	 is	deemed	essential	 if	 it	 is
to	such	an	extent	that	in	case	the	parties	could	have	anticipated	it,	they
would	 not	 have	 concluded	 the	 contract	 or	would	 have	 concluded	 it	 on
essentially	different	terms	(section	1	Article	451	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the
Russian	Federation).

If	 the	 parties	 could	 not	 reach	 accord	 on	 modifying	 the	 contractual
terms	 according	 to	 the	 changed	 circumstances	 or	 on	 rescinding	 the
contract,	 the	 latter	may	be	 rescinded	by	 court	 at	 the	 interested	party's
claim	where:

1)	 at	 the	 moment	 of	 concluding	 the	 contract,	 the	 parties	 have
proceeded	 from	 the	 fact	 that	 no	 such	 change	 of	 circumstances	 would
take	place;

2)	 the	 change	 of	 circumstances	 has	 been	 called	 forth	 by	 the	 causes
which	the	interested	party	could	not	overcome;

3)	 the	 performance	 of	 the	 contract	 without	 amending	 its	 provisions
would	inflict	such	damage	to	the	party	that	it	is	deprived	of	what	it	could
have	counted	upon	at	the	conclusion	of	the	contract;

4)	neither	the	customs	of	the	business	turnover	nor	the	nature	of	the
contract	suggest	that	the	risk	of	change	of	circumstances	is	borne	by	the
interested	party.

Generally,	 the	 agreement	 on	 the	 amendment	 or	 on	 the	 rescission	 of
the	 contract	 shall	 be	 executed	 in	 the	 same	 form	 as	 the	 contract	 itself
(Article	452	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation).

The	claim	for	the	amendment	or	for	the	rescission	of	the	contract	may
be	filed	by	a	party	with	the	court	after	it	has	received	the	refusal	from	the
other	party	or	if	it	has	received	no	response	within	a	30-day	term.

In	 case	 of	 amendment	 or	 rescission	 of	 a	 contract,	 the	 parties'
obligations	are	deemed	amended	or	terminated	from	the	moment	of	the
parties'	 concluding	 the	 respective	 agreement	 or	 from	 the	 moment	 of
coming	into	force	of	the	respective	court	decision.



Pursuant	 to	 section	 4	 Article	 453	 of	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation,	the	parties	have	no	right	to	claim	for	the	return	of	what	has
been	 discharged	 up	 to	 the	moment	 of	 the	 amendment	 or	 rescission	 of
the	contract,	unless	otherwise	stipulated	by	law	or	contract.

Test	questions	and	tasks

1.	Please	list	the	primary	types	of	contracts.

2.	What	is	proper	discharge	of	obligations?

3.	What	 are	 the	ways	 of	 securing	 the	 performance	 of	 obligations	 set
forth	in	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation?

4.	How	do	you	understand	the	principle	of	presumption	of	guilt	in	civil
law?

5.	What	are	the	essential	terms	of	contract?

6.	Please	list	the	primary	kinds	of	contracts.

7.	What	is	the	procedure	of	conclusion	of	contracts?

8.	 What	 are	 the	 ways	 of	 rescinding	 a	 contract,	 as	 per	 Russian	 civil
legislation?

Chapter	19.	Inheritance	Law
19.1.	General	Provisions	on	Inheritance

Inheritance	law	is	a	sub-branch	of	civil	 law	and	a	sum	total	of	norms
governing	 the	 process	 of	 succession	 of	 a	 deceased	 person’s	 rights	 and
duties	to	another	person.

Pursuant	 to	 section	 1	 Article	 1110	 of	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation,	 in	 case	 of	 succession	 the	 deceased	 person’s	 estate	 (assets)
shall	pass	to	other	persons	by	universal	succession,	i.e.	in	an	unchanged,
single	whole	at	the	same	time.



The	right	of	ownership	to	the	estate	passes	to	the	persons	indicated	in
the	will,	and	in	the	absence	thereof	—	by	operation	of	law.

The	estate	 includes	chattels,	property	rights,	and	duties	belonging	to
the	testator.

The	estate	does	not	include:

—	 rights	 and	 obligations	 closely	 connected	 to	 the	 deceased’s
personality	(right	to	alimony,	right	to	recovery	of	damage	inflicted	upon
life	or	health);

—	personal	incorporeal	rights	and	other	intangible	wealth;

—	 rights	 and	 obligations	 which	 by	 operation	 of	 law	 may	 not	 be
inherited	(Article	1112	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation).

An	 estate	 shall	 be	 opened	 on	 the	 death	 of	 a	 citizen,	 and	 the
announcement	 of	 a	 citizen’s	 death	 by	 court	 shall	 cause	 the	 same	 legal
consequences	as	the	death	of	a	citizen.

The	subjects	of	inheritance	relations	are	the	heir	and	the	testator.

While	the	testator	may	only	be	represented	by	a	person,	the	heirs	can
be	 persons	 and	 legal	 entities:	 persons	who	 are	 alive	 at	 the	moment	 of
opening	of	estate	or	who	have	been	conceived	within	the	lifetime	of	the
testator	 and	 are	 born	 alive	 after	 the	 opening	 of	 the	 estate,	 all	 legal
entities	which	exist	at	the	moment	of	opening	of	the	estate,	the	Russian
Federation,	its	subjects,	municipal	entities,	foreign	states,	international
organisations,	etc.

Russian	 civil	 law	 distinguishes	 between	 inheritance	 by	 will	 and	 by
operation	of	law.

However,	 Russian	 civil	 legislation	 does	 not	 entitle	 the	 following	 to
inherit	 either	 by	 operation	 of	 law	 or	 by	 will:	 citizens	 who	 by	 their
deliberate	 illegal	 actions	 directed	 against	 the	 deceased	 or	 any	 of	 the
deceased’s	heirs	or	against	the	exercise	of	the	deceased’s	last	intentions
expressed	in	a	will	assisted	or	attempted	to	assist	to	increase	the	share	of



the	estate	which	they	or	other	persons	were	entitled	to.

These	 persons,	 pursuant	 to	 Article	 1117	 of	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the
Russian	Federation,	are	deemed	unworthy	heirs,	and	their	actions	shall
be	shown	in	court.

However,	the	citizens	to	whom	the	deceased	has	bequeathed	property
after	they	lost	their	right	to	inherit,	shall	still	be	entitled	to	inherit	that
property.

Section	1	Article	1117	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation	sets
forth	that	parents	shall	not	be	entitled	to	inherit	from	their	children	in
respect	to	whom	the	former	had	been	deprived	of	their	parental	rights	by
court	 and	 have	 not	 been	 restored	 as	 of	 the	 date	 of	 opening	 of	 the
inheritance.	 Court	 may	 also	 (by	 claim	 of	 an	 interested	 person)	 refuse
entitlement	to	all	citizens	who	deliberately	and	persistently	evaded	from
performing	their	lawful	rights	and	duties	of	upkeep	of	the	deceased.

19.2.	Inheritance	by	Will

Under	Article	1118	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation,	a	will	is
a	disposition	of	a	citizen	for	the	case	of	his	death	of	his	property,	which
is	 produced	 personally	 by	 a	 citizen	 in	 full	 capacity.	 The	 production	 of
will	through	a	representative	is	prohibited.

A	will	may	 only	 be	 created	 by	 one	 citizen,	 “joint”	will	 is	 prohibited.
Therefore,	a	will	is	a	unilateral	deal	which	creates	rights	and	obligations
after	opening	of	the	estate.

Article	1119	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation	sets	forth	the
principle	 of	 the	 freedom	of	 the	will,	 according	 to	which	 the	 testator	 is
entitled	to:

—	bequeath	the	property	to	any	persons;

—	define	in	any	way	the	shares	of	the	heirs	in	the	estate;

—	 deprive	 of	 the	 inheritance	 several	 or	 all	 heirs	 at	 law	 without
explaining	the	reasons	for	such	deprivation,	and	in	the	cases	stipulated



by	law,	to	include	other	orders	into	the	will;

—	cancel	or	amend	the	will.

The	testator	is	not	obliged	to	inform	anybody	of	the	content,	creation,
alteration	or	revocation	of	the	will.

The	testator	is	also	entitled	to:

—	dispose	of	future	property;

—	dispose	of	property	or	a	portion	thereof;

—	produce	one	or	several	wills;

—	bequeath	 the	property	 to	one	or	 several	 persons	who	may	or	may
not	be	his	legal	heirs;

—	 indicate	another	heir	 in	 the	will	 (sub-appointment)	 for	 the	case	 if
the	 appointed	 heir	 dies	 before	 opening	 the	 state	 or	 fails	 to	 accept	 the
estate	or	refuses	to	accept	it	or	is	not	entitled	to	inherit	or	is	recognised
unworthy	heir.

However,	the	freedom	of	will	is	restricted	by	rules	of	compulsory	share
in	the	estate.

Pursuant	to	Article	1149	of	 the	Civil	Code	of	 the	Russian	Federation,
the	minor	 or	 disabled	 children	of	 the	 testator,	 his	 disabled	 spouse	 and
parents	 and	 disabled	 dependants	 of	 the	 testator	 inherit	 irrespective	 of
the	content	of	 the	will	 at	 least	half	of	 the	 share	which	each	of	 them	 is
entitled	 to	 in	 case	 of	 inheritance	 by	 operation	 of	 law	 (the	 compulsory
share).

Article	1123	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation	sets	forth	the
principle	 of	 secrecy	 of	 will,	 whereby	 a	 notary	 public,	 another	 person
attesting	to	a	will	or	having	access	to	the	unified	database	of	the	notary,
as	well	as	the	citizen	who	signs	the	will	on	the	testator’s	behalf	shall	not
disclose	 information	 concerning	 the	 content	 of	 the	 will,	 its	 creation,
alteration	or	revocation	before	opening	of	the	estate.



Generally,	a	will	 shall	be	created	 in	writing	and	certified	by	a	notary
public.	Certification	of	a	will	by	other	persons	is	admissible	as	expressly
prescribed	by	the	Civil	Code	of	 the	Russian	Federation	(the	 list	of	such
persons	is	exhaustive	and	includes,	for	instance,	chief	physician,	chief	of
a	 hospital,	 captain	 of	 a	 maritime	 vessel	 under	 the	 State	 Flag	 of	 the
Russian	Federation,	chiefs	of	expeditions,	etc.).

Non-compliance	with	these	rules	results	in	the	invalidity	of	a	will.

The	 creation	of	 a	will	 in	 a	 simple	written	 form	 is	only	 admissible	by
way	 of	 exception,	 where	 a	 citizen	 is	 in	 a	 situation	 that	 obviously
threatens	 his	 life	 and	 is	 by	 virtue	 of	 prevailing	 extraordinary
circumstances	deprived	of	an	opportunity	to	create	a	will	in	proper	form.
In	that	case,	the	citizen’s	last	wishes	set	out	in	simple	written	form	shall
be	 deemed	 his	 will,	 if	 the	 testator	 has	 written	 a	 document	 in	 his	 own
hand	 in	 the	 presence	 of	 two	witnesses,	 the	 content	whereof	 evidences
that	it	is	a	will	(Article	1129	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation).

Pursuant	to	Article	1125	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation,	a
will	attested	by	a	notary	public	shall	be	signed	by	the	testator	or	written
by	 a	 notary	 public	 on	 the	 testator’s	 words.	 A	 will	 written	 by	 a	 notary
public	on	the	testator’s	words	shall	be	read	in	full	by	the	testator	in	the
presence	of	 the	notary	public	before	 it	 is	 signed.	 If	 the	 testator	cannot
read	the	will	by	himself,	the	notary	public	shall	read	out	the	text	for	him,
and	then	the	testator	shall	sign	the	will	in	his	own	hand.

If	 a	 testator,	 due	 to	 a	 physical	 disability,	 grave	 illness	 or	 illiteracy,
cannot	 sign	 a	 will	 in	 his	 own	 hand,	 it	 can	 be	 signed	 on	 his	 behalf	 by
another	citizen	in	the	notary	public’s	presence.

A	witness	 can	 be	 present	when	 a	will	 is	 drawn	up	 and	 attested	 by	 a
notary	 public.	 The	 witness	 and	 the	 citizen	 who	 signs	 a	 will	 on	 the
testator’s	 behalf	 shall	 be	warned	by	 the	notary	 about	 the	obligation	 to
observe	the	secret	of	the	will.

However,	Article	1126	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation	sets
forth	 the	 testator’s	 right	 to	 a	 closed	 will,	 where	 no	 other	 person,
including	 the	 notary	 public,	 shall	 have	 an	 opportunity	 to	 familiarize



themselves	with	the	content	thereof.	A	closed	will	shall	be	hand-written
and	signed	by	the	testator,	passed	in	a	sealed	envelope	to	a	notary	public
in	 the	presence	of	 two	witnesses	who	 shall	put	 their	 signatures	on	 the
envelope.	The	envelope	signed	by	the	witnesses	shall	be	put	into	another
envelope	where	the	notary	public	indicates	the	testator’s	data.

The	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 sets	 forth	 that	 a	 will	 may
contain	a	testamentary	refusal	or	a	testamentary	burden.

Pursuant	to	Article	1137	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation,	a
testamentary	refusal	is	the	testator’s	right	to	vest	in	one	or	several	heirs
the	 execution	 of	 a	 duty	 of	 property	 nature	 for	 the	 benefit	 of	 one	 or
several	persons	(beneficiaries)	who	acquire	a	right	to	claim	execution	of
a	duty.	For	 instance,	a	 testator	may	vest	 in	an	heir	who	has	acquired	a
dwelling	house,	apartment,	or	other	premises,	 an	obligation	 to	provide
to	another	person	for	a	term	of	his	life	or	for	other	time	period	the	right
to	use	the	premises	or	a	part	thereof.

Testamentary	burden	is	a	testator’s	right	to	burden	his	heirs	by	law	or
by	will	to	take	some	action	aimed	at	some	socially	beneficial	purpose.

The	 testator	 is	 also	 entitled	 to	 burden	 one	 or	 several	 heirs	 with	 an
obligation	to	upkeep	and	take	care	of	his	pets,	and	the	interested	persons
as	well	as	any	of	the	heirs	are	entitled	to	claim	performance	of	that	duty
in	court.

19.3.	Inheritance	by	Operation	of	Law

Inheritance	by	operation	of	law	takes	place,	where:

—	there	is	no	will	or	a	will	is	deemed	invalid;

—	only	a	part	of	the	estate	 is	covered	by	the	will,	and	the	rest	of	the
estate	is	not	disposed	of	by	the	testator;

—	the	heir	died	prior	to	the	opening	of	the	estate	or	refuses	to	accept
it.

Heirs	 by	 law	 shall	 be	 called	 upon	 to	 inherit	 in	 compliance	 with	 the



priority	ranking,	and	the	heirs	of	each	next	category	shall	inherit	if	there
are	 no	 heirs	 of	 the	 preceding	 categories.	 Heirs	 of	 one	 category	 shall
inherit	 in	 equal	 shares,	 except	 for	 heirs	 who	 inherit	 by	 right	 of
representation	(pursuant	to	Article	1146	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian
Federation,	the	share	of	a	legal	heir	who	has	died	before	the	opening	of
the	 estate	 or	 simultaneously	 with	 the	 testator	 shall	 pass	 by	 right	 of
representation	to	his	relevant	descendants).

Legal	heirs	of	the	first	category	are	the	children,	spouse,	and	parents
of	the	testator	(Article	1142	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation).

If	there	are	no	legal	heirs	of	the	first	category,	the	heirs	of	the	second
category	 are	 the	 full	 and	 half	 brothers	 and	 sisters	 of	 the	 testator,	 his
grandmother	and	grandfather	both	on	the	side	of	the	father	and	on	the
side	 of	 the	 mother	 (Article	 1143	 of	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation).

If	there	are	no	heirs	of	the	first	and	second	category,	the	legal	heirs	of
the	third	category	are	the	full	and	half	brothers	and	sisters	of	the	parents
of	the	testator	(uncles	and	aunts	of	the	testator)	(Article	1144	of	the	Civil
Code	 of	 the	Russian	 Federation),	 and	 if	 there	 are	 no	 heirs	 of	 the	 first,
second,	and	third	categories,	the	right	to	inherit	by	law	shall	be	acquired
by	the	testator’s	relatives	of	the	third,	fourth,	and	fifth	degree	of	kinship
who	do	not	qualify	as	heirs	of	the	preceding	categories	(Article	1145	of
the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation).

The	degree	of	kinship	shall	be	determined	by	the	number	of	births	that
separate	 the	 relatives	 from	 one	 another,	 and	 the	 birth	 of	 the	 testator
does	not	count.

The	legal	heirs	also	include	citizens	who	do	not	qualify	as	the	above,
but	who	had	been	disabled	as	of	the	date	of	opening	of	the	inheritance
and	had	lived	for	at	least	one	year	with	the	testator	and	were	dependent
on	him.

If	there	are	no	legal	heirs	and	heirs	by	will	or	if	neither	of	the	heirs	has
a	right	to	inherit	or	all	heirs	have	been	deprived	of	their	right	to	inherit
or	 neither	 of	 the	 heirs	 has	 accepted	 the	 estate	 or	 all	 of	 the	 heirs	 have



refused	 their	 inheritance,	 the	 deceased’s	 estate	 is	 deemed	 escheat
(Article	1151	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation)	and	passes	into
the	 ownership	 of	 the	 municipal	 entity	 or	 the	 subject	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation	(depending	on	the	type	of	property).

19.4.	Acquisition	of	Inheritance

To	acquire	inheritance,	an	heir	shall	accept	it,	i.e.	express	his	intent	to
become	the	owner	of	the	estate.

Pursuant	to	Article	1153	of	 the	Civil	Code	of	 the	Russian	Federation,
an	 inheritance	 is	 accepted	 by	 way	 of	 the	 heir’s	 filing	 an	 inheritance
acceptance	application	or	an	application	for	a	certificate	of	the	right	to
inheritance	 with	 the	 notary	 public	 or	 other	 official	 at	 the	 place	 of
opening	of	the	inheritance.

The	fact	that	the	heir	accepted	the	inheritance	may	also	be	confirmed
with	the	following:

—	the	heir	has	commenced	possession	or	administration	of	assets	of
the	estate;

—	the	heir	has	taken	measures	for	preserving	assets	of	the	estate;

—	the	heir	has	incurred	expenses	on	his	account	towards	maintenance
of	the	estate;

—	the	heir	has	paid	the	testator’s	debts	or	received	from	third	persons
amounts	of	money	payable	to	the	testator	(section	2	Article	1153	of	the
Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation).

Generally,	estate	may	be	accepted	within	six	months	after	the	date	of
its	 opening.	 However,	 if	 there	 is	 a	 legitimate	 reason	 (the	 heir	 did	 not
know	and	was	not	supposed	 to	know	of	 the	opening	of	 the	estate),	 the
court	may	reinstate	the	term	provided	that	the	heir	filed	an	application
to	 the	 court	within	 six	months	 after	 such	 reasons	 ceased	 to	 exist.	 The
estate	may	 be	 accepted	 upon	 expiry	 of	 the	 said	 term	without	 filing	 an
application	with	the	court	if	all	other	heirs	who	had	accepted	the	estate



consent	thereto.

An	 heir	 is	 entitled	 to	 disclaim	 the	 estate	 for	 the	 benefit	 of	 other
persons	(who	qualify	as	heirs	by	will	or	by	law	of	any	category	and	who
have	not	been	deprived	of	the	estate)	or	without	indicating	a	person	for
whose	benefit	he	rejects	the	estate.

A	certificate	of	right	to	inheritance	is	issued	to	heirs	at	any	time	upon
the	expiry	of	six	months	after	the	date	of	opening	of	the	inheritance	at
the	place	of	its	opening.	However,	such	certificate	may	be	issued	before
expiry	 of	 six	 months	 after	 the	 opening	 of	 the	 inheritance	 if	 there	 is
reliable	information	evidencing	that	there	are	no	other	heirs	entitled	to
the	 estate,	 apart	 from	 the	persons	who	have	 applied	 for	 the	 certificate
(section	2	Article	1163	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation).

The	heirs	who	have	accepted	the	estate	are	jointly	and	severally	liable
by	 the	 testator’s	 debts	 within	 the	monetary	 value	 of	 the	 estate	 which
they	acquired.

Test	questions	and	tasks

1.	Who	can	qualify	as	an	heir?

2.	What	is	the	difference	between	inheritance	by	law	and	compulsory
share	in	the	estate?

3.	Please	name	the	general	rules	of	drawing	up	a	will.

4.	 What	 is	 the	 time	 period	 within	 which	 a	 citizen	 may	 accept	 the
estate?



Part	4.	Basics	of	labour	law
Chapter	20.	Labour	Law	and	its	Actors

20.1.	Definition,	Subject	Matter,	and	Method	of	Labour	Law

Labour	 law	 is	a	branch	of	Russian	 law	which	 is	a	 sum	total	of	norms
governing	 labour	 relations	 arising	 out	 of	 hired	 labour	 and	 established
through	a	 labour	contract,	as	well	as	other	 relations	directly	connected
with	labour.

Pursuant	to	Article	1	of	the	Labour	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation,	the
primary	goals	of	labour	legislation	are	as	follows:

—	the	 institution	of	state	guarantees	of	 labour	rights	and	 liberties	of
citizens;

—	the	creation	of	favorable	labour	conditions;

—	the	protection	of	rights	and	interests	of	employees	and	employers.

The	tasks	of	labour	law	as	a	branch	of	law	include:

—	the	creation	of	the	necessary	legal	conditions	to	achieve	the	optimal
coordination	of	interests	of	the	parties	of	labour	relations	and	interests
of	the	state;

—	the	 legal	governance	of	 legal	 relations	and	other	 relations	directly
connected	to	them.

The	relations	comprising	the	subject	matter	of	labour	law	include	the
relations	in:

—	organisation	of	labour	and	labour	management;

—	employment;

—	professional	 training,	 retraining,	 and	 professional	 development	 of
employees	at	the	given	employer;



—	social	partnership	in	the	labour	sphere;

—	participation	of	employees	and	trade	unions	in	the	establishment	of
working	conditions	and	application	of	labour	legislation;

—	material	liability	of	employers	and	employees	in	the	labour	sphere;

—	 state	 and	 trade	 union	 control	 over	 observation	 of	 the	 labour
legislation;

—	settlement	of	labour	disputes;

—	mandatory	social	insurance	in	the	cases	envisaged	by	federal	laws.

Thus,	the	subject	matter	of	labour	law	includes	the	sum	total	of	social
relations	arising	in	the	course	of	application	of	labour.

At	the	same	time,	some	labour	relations	are	governed	by	civil	law	(e.g.,
labour	 relations	 connected	 with	 authorship	 contracts,	 work	 contracts,
freight	 contracts,	 etc.),	 as	well	 as	by	administrative	 law	 (e.g.,	 labour	of
certain	categories	of	citizens	—	military	men,	employees	of	the	Ministry
of	Internal	Affairs	of	the	Russian	Federation,	etc.).

The	method	of	labour	law	is	the	sum	total	of	legal	measures,	ways,	and
practices	which	 facilitate	 the	 governance	 of	 labour	 relations	 and	 those
directly	connected	to	them.

The	method	of	labour	law	has	common	and	branch-specific	features.

As	well	as	many	other	branches	of	Russian	law,	the	method	of	labour
law	 is	 a	 certain	 combination	 of	 permissions,	 prescriptions,	 and
prohibitions	—	 i.e.,	 of	 imperative	 and	 dispositive	 principles.	 It	 can	 be
characterised	with	a	mix	of	public	law	(established	and	controlled	by	the
state)	 and	 private	 law	 (based	 on	 the	 equality	 of	 parties	 and	 their	 free
will)	regulation	of	labour	relations.

However,	 the	 method	 of	 labour	 law	 possesses	 its	 specific	 features
based	on	the	following:



1.	 balance	 of	 federal,	 regional,	 municipal,	 and	 local	 governance	 of
labour	relations.	The	authorities	on	all	of	the	levels	indicated,	as	well	as
the	employer	himself,	adopt	legal	acts	aimed	at	the	governance	of	labour
relations,	which	cannot	deteriorate	the	employee’s	position	as	compared
to	acts	of	higher	authority;

2.	 application	 of	 normative	 (federal,	 regional,	 municipal,	 and	 local)
and	 contractual	 governance.	 The	 contractual	 manner	 of	 regulation	 of
labour	relations	lies	in	the	conclusion	of	individual	labour	contract	with
an	 employee,	 as	well	 as	 in	 the	 conclusion	of	 collective	 labour	 contract
between	the	representatives	of	employees	and	those	of	employers;

3.	possibility	of	governance	of	legal	relations	through	the	employees’
representatives	and	organisation	(professional	unions	and	other	entitled
entities).	For	instance,	pursuant	to	Article	372	of	the	Labour	Code	of	the
Russian	Federation,	the	employers	(in	cases	expressly	stipulated	by	 law
or	by	 collective	agreement)	direct	 the	draft	 local	normative	acts	 to	 the
professional	unions	for	approval);

4.	possibility	of	 recovery	of	 the	 infringed	right	with	the	assistance	of
special	 bodies	 which	 settle	 labour	 disputes.	 In	 particular,	 there	 is	 a
certain	 procedure	 of	 resolving	 individual	 labour	 disputes	—	 addressing
the	commission	on	labour	disputes.

The	system	of	labour	law	as	a	branch	of	law	represents	the	division	of
labour	law	norms	into	general	and	special.

The	general	part	of	labour	law	contains	norms	which	anchor	the	aims,
principles,	and	tasks	of	the	legal	governance	of	the	labour	sphere,	rights
and	 obligations	 of	 employees	 and	 employers,	 mechanisms	 of	 social
partnership	in	the	labour	sphere,	etc.

The	 special	 part	 of	 labour	 law	 contains	 norms	 which	 govern	 the
conclusion	and	termination	of	a	 labour	contract,	working	time	and	rest
time,	remuneration,	labour	discipline,	employees’	material	liability,	etc.

20.2.	Principles	of	Labour	Law



Principles	 of	 labour	 law	 are	 the	 primary	 fundamentals	 and	 ideas
reflecting	the	specifics	of	legal	governance	of	the	labour	sphere.

These	fundamentals	are	based	on	the	commonly	recognised	principles
and	 norms	 of	 international	 law,	 the	 Constitution	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation,	 and	 current	 normative	 acts.	 They	 reflect	 the	 political	 and
economic	 level	 of	 the	 society’s	 development	 and	operate	 as	 landmarks
for	labour	law	evolution.

Pursuant	 to	Article	 2	 of	 the	 Labour	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,
these	principles	include:

—	freedom	of	work,	including	the	right	to	work	which	is	chosen	freely
by	everybody,	or	to	which	everybody	agrees	freely;

—	 right	 to	 be	 master	 of	 one’s	 own	 abilities	 to	 work,	 to	 choose	 a
profession	and	occupation;

—	 prohibition	 of	 forced	 labour	 and	 discrimination	 in	 the	 labour
sphere;

—	protection	against	unemployment	and	assistance	in	employment;

—	 ensuring	 the	 rights	 of	 each	 employee	 to	 fair	 working	 conditions,
including	 working	 conditions	 meeting	 the	 safety	 and	 hygiene
requirements;

—	 right	 to	 leisure,	 including	 restriction	 of	 working	 time,	 providing
daily	rest,	days-off,	holidays,	and	paid	annual	leave;

—	equality	of	rights	and	opportunities	of	employees;

—	ensuring	the	right	of	each	employee	to	the	timely	payment	in	full	of
fair	earnings	providing	for	a	humane	existence	of	the	employee	himself
and	 his	 family	 at	 no	 less	 than	 the	 minimum	 amount	 of	 labour
remuneration	fixed	by	federal	law;

—	 ensuring	 equality	 of	 opportunities	 of	 employees	 without	 any
discrimination	 in	 promotion	 taking	 into	 account	 labour	 productivity,



qualification,	 and	 tenure	 in	 the	 occupation,	 as	 well	 as	 in	 professional
training,	retraining,	and	professional	development;

—	ensuring	the	right	of	employees	and	employers	to	unite	to	protect
their	 rights	 and	 interests,	 including	 the	 right	 of	 employees	 to	 create
trade	unions	and	to	join	them,	and	the	right	of	employers	to	create	their
unions	and	to	join	them;

—	ensuring	the	right	of	employees	to	take	part	in	the	management	of
the	organisation	in	the	form	envisaged	by	legislation;

—	combination	of	state	and	contractual	regulation	of	labour	relations
and	other	relations	directly	associated	with	them;

—	social	partnership,	including	the	right	of	employees,	employers,	and
their	associations	in	contractual	regulation	of	labour	relations	and	other
relations	directly	associated	with	them;

—	obligatory	compensation	for	the	harm	incurred	by	the	employee	due
to	his	execution	of	labour	duties;

—	 institution	 of	 state	 guarantees	 to	 ensure	 the	 rights	 of	 employees
and	employers,	implementation	of	state	enforcement	of	and	control	over
their	observation;

—	ensuring	 the	 right	of	everyone	 to	protection	of	 their	 labour	 rights
and	liberties	by	the	state,	including	judicial	protection;

—	ensuring	the	right	to	resolution	of	 individual	and	collective	 labour
disputes,	 including	 the	 right	 to	 strike	 according	 to	 the	 procedure
specified	by	the	Labour	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation	and	other	federal
laws;

—	obligation	of	the	parties	to	a	labour	contract	to	observe	the	terms	of
the	concluded	contract,	 including	 the	 right	of	 the	employer	 to	demand
that	 the	 employees	 execute	 their	 labour	 duties	 and	 treat	 carefully	 the
property	of	the	employer	and	the	right	of	the	employees	to	demand	that
the	 employer	 observe	 their	 duties	 with	 respect	 to	 employees,	 labour



legislation,	and	other	acts	containing	labour	legislation	norms;

—	 ensuring	 the	 rights	 of	 the	 representatives	 of	 trade	 unions	 to
implement	trade	union	control	over	observation	of	labour	legislation	and
other	acts	containing	labour	legislation	norms;

—	 ensuring	 the	 right	 of	 employees	 to	 protect	 their	 dignity	 in	 the
course	of	work;

—	ensuring	the	right	for	obligatory	social	insurance	of	employees.

The	 fundamentals	 of	 governance	of	 labour	 relations	 also	 include	 the
prohibition	of	discrimination	in	the	labour	sphere,	providing	everyone’s
right	 to	 equal	 opportunities	 to	 implement	 their	 labour	 rights.	 For
instance,	 Article	 3	 of	 the	 Labour	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 sets
forth	 that	 nobody	 may	 be	 subject	 to	 restrictions	 in	 labour	 rights	 and
liberties	 or	 gain	 any	 advantages	 depending	 on	 sex,	 race,	 skin	 color,
nationality,	 language,	 origin,	 property,	 family,	 social	 status	 and
occupational	 position,	 and	 other	 circumstances	 not	 pertaining	 to
business	qualities	of	the	employee.

The	primary	prohibition	which	corresponds	to	the	principle	of	freedom
of	labour	is	the	prohibition	of	forced	labour	(Article	4	of	Labour	Code	of
the	Russian	Federation).

Forced	 labour	 is	 the	 carrying	 out	 of	 work	 under	 the	 threat	 of
punishment	(violence),	including:

—	to	maintain	labour	discipline;

—	as	retribution	for	participation	in	a	strike	or	as	other	punishment;

—	 as	 a	means	 of	 discrimination	 based	 on	 racial,	 social,	 national,	 or
religious	affiliation.

Pursuant	 to	Article	 4	 of	 the	 Labour	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,
forced	work	also	includes	work	which	an	employee	is	forced	to	carry	out
under	 a	 threat	 of	 punishment	 (duress),	 while,	 in	 accordance	 with
legislation,	he	is	entitled	to	refuse	to	perform	such	work.



The	 above	 and	 other	 principles	 of	 Russian	 labour	 law	 are	 closely
connected	 to	 or	 directly	 follow	 from	 the	 fundamental	 international
documents,	including:

1.	The	Universal	Declaration	of	Human	Rights	(adopted	by	the	General
Assembly	of	the	United	Nations	in	1948);

2.	 The	 International	 Covenant	 on	 Economic,	 Social,	 and	 Cultural
Rights	(adopted	by	the	General	Assembly	of	the	United	Nations	in	1966);

3.	The	Convention	on	the	Elimination	of	All	Forms	of	Discrimination
against	Women	of	1979;

4.	The	International	labour	Organisation	Declaration	on	Fundamental
Principles	and	Rights	at	Work	of	1998.

20.3.	Labour	Relations

Pursuant	to	Article	15	of	 the	Labour	Code	of	 the	Russian	Federation,
labour	 relations	 means	 relations	 based	 on	 an	 agreement	 between	 an
employee	 and	 an	 employer	 on	 the	 performance	 in	 person	 by	 the
employee	 for	 payment	 of	 a	 labour	 function,	 on	 the	 employee’s
compliance	 with	 the	 in-house	 employee	 rules,	 provided	 that	 the
employer	 ensures	 the	 working	 conditions	 envisaged	 by	 the	 labour
legislation,	 collective	 agreement,	 labour	 agreement,	 and	 other
documents.

Basically,	 this	Article	describes	 labour	 legal	 relations,	 i.e.	 the	 strictly
labour	 and	 the	 relations	 associated	 with	 them,	 which	 are	 governed	 by
labour	law	norms.

The	specific	 feature	of	governance	of	 these	 legal	 relations	 lies	 in	 the
fact	 that	 the	 lawmaker	 does	 not	 provide	 for	 conclusion	 of	 civil	 law
contracts	on	labour	relations	between	the	employee	and	the	employer.

Generally,	 labour	 relations	 arise	 between	 the	 employee	 and	 the
employer	based	on	a	labour	contract	as	a	result	of	the	following:

—	being	elected	to	a	position;



—	being	elected	to	an	appropriate	position	on	a	contest	basis;

—	being	assigned	to	or	endorsed	for	a	position;

—	being	sent	to	work	by	competent	authorities;

—	court	decision	on	conclusion	of	a	labour	contract;

—	 acknowledgment	 of	 personal	 work	 relations	 based	 on	 a	 civil	 law
contract	as	labour	relations.

Labour	 relations	between	an	employee	and	an	employer	also	emerge
on	 the	 ground	 of	 actual	 admittance	 of	 the	 employee	 to	 work	 on	 the
consent	 or	 instructions	 of	 the	 employer,	 even	 if	 a	 labour	 contract	 had
not	 been	 properly	 drawn	 up.	 Such	 relations	 may	 be	 deemed	 labour
relations	by	the	person	using	hired	work	or	by	court	at	the	application	of
the	contractor.

The	 parties	 to	 a	 labour	 contract	 are	 the	 employee	 and	 the	 employer
(Article	20	of	the	Labour	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation).

Employee	 is	a	person	who	has	entered	 into	 labour	 relations	with	 the
employer.

Generally,	a	person	may	enter	into	labour	relations	as	an	employee	if
he	has	reached	the	age	of	sixteen,	but	there	are	a	number	of	exceptions
to	this	rule.

Pursuant	to	Article	63	of	 the	Labour	Code	of	 the	Russian	Federation,
persons	who	are	receiving	general	education	and	have	reached	the	age	of
fifteen	may	enter	 into	a	 labour	contract	for	the	purpose	of	carrying	out
light	work	which	does	not	harm	their	health.	A	 labour	contract	may	be
concluded	 with	 a	 student	 who	 has	 reached	 the	 age	 of	 fourteen	 at	 the
consent	 of	 one	 of	 the	 parents	 (guardian)	 or	 at	 the	 permission	 of	 a
guardianship	 body,	 for	 the	 purpose	 of	 performing	 light	work	 that	 does
not	 harm	 the	 employee’s	 health	 and	 interfere	 with	 the	 educational
process.

In	 organisations	 of	 cinematography,	 theatre,	 theatrical	 and	 concert



organisations,	 circuses,	 it	 is	 also	 permitted	 to	 enter	 into	 a	 labour
contract	with	persons	who	have	not	reached	the	age	of	fourteen,	with	the
consent	of	one	of	the	parents	(guardian)	or	permission	of	a	guardianship
body,	for	participation	in	the	creation	and	performance	of	pieces	of	art,
provided	that	such	do	not	damage	health	and	moral	development	of	the
employee.	 In	 that	 case,	 the	 permission	 of	 the	 trusteeship	 and
guardianship	body	shall	include	an	indication	of	the	duration	of	the	daily
working	 hours	 and	 other	 conditions	 under	 which	 the	 work	 may	 be
performed.

Employers	may	be	represented	by	legal	entities	and	capable	persons	of
age,	as	well	as	minors	upon	obtaining	full	legal	capacity	(Article	20	of	the
Labour	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation).

Minors	aged	from	fourteen	to	eighteen	may	enter	into	labour	contracts
with	 employees,	 provided	 that	 they	have	 independent	 income,	 at	 their
legal	representatives’	(parents,	guardians)	written	consent.

Labour	relations	are	characterised	with	the	following	features:

—	they	are	of	personal	nature	(the	employee	is	obliged	to	perform	the
work	function	personally);

—	 they	 are	 gratuitous	 (work	 is	 performed	 for	 payment)	 and
continuous;

—	they	are	of	mutual	character,	i.e.	the	rights	and	obligations	belong
to	each	of	the	parties.

The	 above	 employees’	 and	 employers’	 mutual	 rights	 comprise	 the
content	of	labour	relations.

The	primary	rights	of	an	employee	include	his	rights	to:

—	conclusion,	modification,	and	termination	of	labour	contract;

—	being	provided	with	work	stipulated	by	the	labour	contract;

—	 a	work	 place	 corresponding	 to	 state	 labour	 protection	 regulations



and	terms	envisaged	by	the	collective	agreement;

—	timely	and	full	payment	of	earnings	according	to	his	qualification,
labour	complexity,	quantity,	and	quality	of	the	fulfilled	work;

—	rest,	providing	weekly	days-off,	public	holidays,	paid	annual	leave;

—	 full	 and	 valid	 information	 on	 the	 working	 conditions	 and	 safety
requirements	at	the	work	place;

—	professional	training	and	professional	development;

—	unification,	including	the	right	to	establish	trade	unions	and	to	join
them	to	protect	their	labour	rights,	liberties,	and	legal	interests;

—	participation	 in	 the	management	of	 the	organisation	 in	 the	 forms
envisaged	in	legislation	and	collective	contract;

	—	protection	of	 labour	 rights,	 liberties,	 and	 legal	 interests	 using	 all
methods	not	prohibited	by	law;

—	resolution	of	individual	and	collective	labour	disputes,	including	the
right	 to	 strike	 as	 prescribed	 by	 the	 Labour	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation	and	other	federal	laws;

—	recovery	of	damage	incurred	by	the	employee	due	to	his	execution
of	labour	duties,	compensation	of	moral	damage,	etc.

Pursuant	to	Article	21	of	 the	Labour	Code	of	 the	Russian	Federation,
the	employee	shall	be	obliged	to:

—	conscientiously	fulfil	his	labour	duties;

—	observe	internal	labour	rules	and	labour	discipline;

—	fulfil	specified	labour	quotas;

—	observe	safety	requirements;



—	treat	carefully	the	property	of	the	employer,	etc.

The	employer’s	rights	and	obligations	are	set	forth	in	Article	22	of	the
Labour	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation.

The	main	rights	of	the	employer	include	the	following:

—	 right	 to	 conclude,	 modify,	 and	 terminate	 labour	 contracts	 with
employees;

—	 right	 to	 conduct	 collective	 negotiations	 and	 conclude	 collective
contracts;

—	right	to	award	employees	for	efficient	conscientious	work;

—	 right	 to	 demand	 that	 employees	 fulfil	 labour	 duties	 and	 treat
carefully	the	property	of	the	employer;

—	 right	 to	 impose	 disciplinary	 and	 material	 liability	 on	 employees
according	to	legislation;

—	right	to	adopt	local	normative	acts	governing	legal	relations;

—	 right	 to	 establish	 associations	 of	 employers	 in	 order	 to	 represent
and	protect	their	interests	and	to	join	them.

The	employer	shall	be	obliged	to:

—	comply	with	the	labour	legislation;

—	provide	to	the	employees	work	stipulated	by	the	labour	contract;

—	ensure	safety	and	all	the	necessary	working	conditions;

—	ensure	 equal	 pay	 for	 equal	 labour	 and	 timely	 and	 full	 payment	 of
wages;

—	 have	 employees	 familiarise	 themselves	 with	 local	 normative	 acts
which	 are	 directly	 related	 to	 their	 working	 activities,	 against	 their



signatures;

—	 consider	 representations	 made	 by	 relevant	 trade	 union	 bodies
concerning	revealed	breaches	of	labour	legislation	and	take	measures	for
eliminating	them;

—	compensate	for	harm	inflicted	on	employees	due	to	their	execution
of	work	duties,	etc.

Test	questions	and	tasks

1.	What	is	the	main	task	of	labour	law	as	a	branch	of	law?

2.	Please	list	the	main	principles	of	labour	law.

3.	Please	list	the	grounds	for	arising	of	labour	relations.

4.	What	is	the	minimum	age	of	the	employee?

5.	Please	characterize	the	main	rights	and	obligations	of	the	employer
and	the	employee.

Chapter	21.	Labour	Contract
21.1.	Definition	of	Labour	Contract	and	Its	Conclusion

Pursuant	to	Article	56	of	the	Labour	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation,	a
labour	contract	is	an	agreement	between	an	employer	and	an	employee,
whereby	 the	 employer	 undertakes	 to	 provide	 work	 to	 the	 employee	 in
line	 with	 the	 labour	 function	 stipulated,	 to	 ensure	 the	 working
conditions	envisaged	by	 labour	 legislation	and	other	acts,	to	pay	wages
in	 due	 time	 and	 in	 full,	 and	 the	 employee	 undertakes	 to	 carry	 out	 in
person	the	labour	function	defined	by	the	agreement	and	to	observe	the
employer’s	in-house	rules.

A	 labour	 contract	 contemplates	 on	 a	 variety	 of	 factors	 and
circumstances	connected	with	the	performance	of	work.	It	must	indicate
full	 information	 about	 the	 employee	 and	 the	 employer,	 as	 well	 as	 the



information	 on	 the	 place	 of	 work;	 labour	 function;	 date	 of
commencement	 and	 ending	 of	 work	 (if	 a	 fixed-term	 contract	 is
concluded);	 the	 terms	 of	 remuneration	 for	 labour;	 working	 hours	 and
leisure	 hours;	 guarantees	 and	 compensations	 for	 work	 in	 harmful	 and
(or)	 hazardous	working	 conditions;	 terms	 of	working	 conditions	 at	 the
place	 of	 work	 and	 defining	 the	 nature	 of	 work;	 the	 clause	 on	 the
mandatory	social	insurance	of	the	employee.

A	 labour	 contract	 may	 include	 additional	 terms	 which	 do	 not
deteriorate	 the	 employee’s	 position	 in	 comparison	with	 the	 conditions
set	forth	by	labour	legislation	and	collective	agreements.

Labour	contracts	shall	be	distinguished	from	civil	contracts	connected
with	hire	(work	contract,	other	contracts	on	rendering	of	services).	The
definition	of	the	legal	nature	of	a	contract	is	necessary	in	order	to	define
the	 legal	 status	 of	 its	 parties,	 because	 if	 an	 employee	 works	 under	 a
labour	contract,	he	 is	entitled	to	annual	paid	 leave,	compensations	due
to	 sick	 leave,	 awards	 as	 per	 the	 system	 of	 remuneration	 for	 labour,	 as
well	 as	 other	 rights	 and	 guarantees	 set	 forth	 by	 labour	 legislation.
Employees	who	work	under	civil	contracts	are	not	entitled	to	such.

The	 following	 are	 the	 main	 differences	 between	 labour	 and	 civil
contracts:

1.	while	the	subject	matter	of	a	civil	contract	is	the	product	of	labour,
the	subject	matter	of	a	 labour	contract	 is	 the	 labour	 itself	according	 to
the	qualification	and	position	of	the	employee.	After	the	performance	of
a	certain	task	labour	relations	survive;

2.	 in	 the	 course	 of	 work	 under	 a	 labour	 contract,	 the	 employee	 is
obliged	to	comply	with	the	internal	work	rules,	which	is	not	the	case	for
a	civil	contract;

3.	 an	 employee	 working	 under	 a	 labour	 contract	 is	 paid	 wages,	 the
major	part	whereof	being	paid	regardless	of	the	results	of	labour	for	the
period	 due.	 An	 employee	 working	 under	 a	 civil	 contract	 receives
remuneration	for	the	product	of	his	work	or	for	a	certain	time	period.



Labour	contracts	may	be	concluded	for	an	indefinite	period	of	time	or
may	be	fixed-term	contracts.	Under	Article	58	of	the	Labour	Code	of	the
Russian	 Federation,	 a	 fixed-term	 labour	 contract	 is	 concluded	 where
labour	 relations	 cannot	be	 established	 for	 an	 indefinite	period	of	 time,
given	the	nature	of	the	work	and	the	terms	of	its	performance.

The	employer	may	not	require	the	employee	to	perform	work	which	is
not	stipulated	by	the	labour	contract.

A	labour	contract	shall	enter	into	force	from	the	day	of	its	signing	by
the	 employee	 and	 the	 employer,	 unless	 otherwise	 envisaged	 by
legislation	 or	 by	 the	 labour	 contract	 itself,	 or	 from	 the	 day	 when	 the
employee	 is	 actually	 admitted	 to	 work	 with	 the	 knowledge	 or	 at	 the
instruction	of	the	employer.

The	 employee	must	 begin	 to	 execute	 his	 labour	 duties	 from	 the	 day
specified	in	the	labour	contract,	and	if	such	day	is	not	defined	—	on	the
next	working	day	after	the	contract	enters	into	force.

Pursuant	 to	 Article	 64	 of	 the	 Civil	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,
unreasoned	 refusal	 to	 conclude	 a	 labour	 contract	 is	 prohibited.	 The
employer	 may	 not	 refuse	 to	 conclude	 a	 labour	 contract	 based	 on	 sex,
race,	 skin	 color,	 nationality,	 language,	 origin,	 and	 other	 circumstances
not	 pertaining	 to	 the	 business	 qualities	 of	 the	 employee	 (with	 the
exception	 of	 cases	 where	 a	 right	 or	 an	 obligation	 to	 set	 forth	 these
restrictions	 is	envisaged	by	federal	 law.	For	 instance,	Article	253	of	the
Labour	Code	of	 the	Russian	 Federation	 restricts	 hiring	women	 at	work
with	harmful	or	hazardous	conditions,	Article	351.1	of	the	Labour	Code
of	the	Russian	Federation	sets	forth	restrictions	on	work	in	educational
sphere	 for	 persons	 with	 criminal	 record	 for	 crimes	 against	 life	 and
health,	freedom,	honor	and	dignity	of	a	person).

It	 is	 also	 prohibited	 to	 refuse	 to	 conclude	 a	 labour	 contract	 with
women	for	reasons	associated	with	pregnancy	or	having	children.

Russian	labour	legislation	sets	forth	the	opportunity	to	appeal	in	court
the	refusal	to	conclude	a	labour	contract.



When	concluding	a	labour	contract,	the	hired	person	shall	present	to
the	 employer	 a	 certain	 number	 of	 documents	 (other	 than	 which	 the
employer	is	not	entitled	to	request):

—	passport	or	another	identification	document;

—	 labour	 book	 (except	 for	 the	 cases	 where	 a	 labour	 contract	 is
concluded	for	the	first	time);

—	insurance	certificate	of	state	pension	insurance;

—	military	 registration	 documents	—	 for	 persons	 subject	 to	military
service;

—	 educational	 record	 and	 (or)	 document	 on	 qualification	 or	 special
knowledge	—	for	persons	hired	for	work	requiring	special	knowledge	or
special	training;

—	 certificate	 on	 the	 lack	 of	 criminal	 record	 or	 a	 fact	 of	 criminal
prosecution,	or	a	certificate	on	the	termination	of	criminal	prosecution
on	rehabilitating	grounds	—	when	being	hired	for	work	connected	with
activity	which	people	who	have	or	had	a	criminal	record	are	not	admitted
to.

Article	66	of	the	Labour	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation	sets	forth	that
a	labour	book	is	the	primary	document	on	the	work	activities	and	tenure
of	 the	 employee.	 It	 contains	 the	 data	 about	 the	 employee,	 the	 work
performed	by	him,	transfers	to	other	permanent	work	positions,	as	well
as	grounds	of	termination	of	labour	contract	and	data	on	awards	for	work
achievements.	 Data	 on	 penalties	 are	 not	 indicated	 in	 the	 labour	 book,
except	for	the	fact	where	redundancy	was	the	penalty.

Pursuant	to	Article	66	of	 the	Labour	Code	of	 the	Russian	Federation,
an	 employer	 (except	 for	 employers	 who	 are	 persons	 not	 deemed
individual	 entrepreneurs)	 shall	 keep	 a	 labour	 book	 for	 each	 employee
who	has	worked	for	the	employer	for	over	five	days	if	such	work	was	the
main	 job	 for	 the	 employee	 (as	 opposed	 to	 second	 job,	 which	 may	 be
performed	 by	 the	 employee	 under	 a	 labour	 contract	 within	 time	 free



from	work	at	the	same	employer	(internal	second	job)	and	(or)	at	another
employer	(external	second	job)).

Under	Article	67	of	the	Civil	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation,	a	labour
contract	shall	be	drawn	up	 in	writing	 in	two	hard	copies,	each	of	those
signed	by	the	parties.	One	of	the	copies	is	transferred	to	the	employee;
the	other	is	for	the	employer.

After	 a	 labour	 contract	 is	 concluded,	 the	 employer	 issues	 an	 order
(decree)	on	hiring,	which	is	shown	to	the	employee	against	his	signature.

The	parties	to	a	labour	contract	may	set	forth	a	provision	on	probation
of	the	employee	to	test	his	fitness	for	the	job.	Such	probation	period	may
not	be	 established	 for	 pregnant	women	and	women	who	have	 children
younger	 than	one	and	a	half	years;	 for	minors	under	18;	 for	specialists
who	have	graduated	higher	educational	institutions	and	are	hired	for	the
first	 time	 in	 the	 trade	 acquired	 within	 one	 year	 upon	 graduation;	 for
persons	elected	to	an	office	 to	work	 for	payment,	and	other	categories.
The	 probation	 period	may	 not	 exceed	 3	months,	 and	 for	 persons	 who
apply	for	managerial	office	—	it	may	not	exceed	6	months.

In	 the	 event	 of	 an	 unsatisfactory	 result	 of	 probation,	 the	 employer
shall	have	 the	 right	 to	 terminate	 the	 labour	 contract	before	 the	end	of
the	 probation	 period	 upon	 three	 days’	 written	 notice	 indicating	 the
reasons	 that	 served	 as	 grounds	 to	 recognize	 the	 employee	 as	 having
failed	 to	 pass	 the	 probation	 period.	 The	 employee	 has	 the	 right	 to
contest	the	employer’s	decision	in	court	(Article	71	of	the	Civil	Code	of
the	Russian	Federation).

21.2.	Modification	and	Termination	of	a	Labour	Contract

The	 parties	 to	 labour	 relations	 may	 modify	 the	 terms	 of	 a	 labour
contract	by	mutual	written	agreement.

Labour	 legislation	 recognises	 transfer	 to	 another	 job	 as	 a	 form	 of
modifying	labour	relations.	Under	Article	72.1	of	the	Labour	Code	of	the
Russian	 Federation,	 transfer	 to	 another	 job	 means	 a	 permanent	 or
temporary	modification	of	the	labour	function	of	the	employee	while	the



latter	 continues	 to	 work	 for	 the	 same	 employer,	 as	 well	 as	 the
employee’s	relocation	to	another	region	together	with	the	employer.

Transfer	 to	 another	 job	 is	 only	 allowed	with	 the	 employee’s	 written
consent,	 except	 for	 the	 cases	 which	 threaten	 the	 life	 or	 regular	 living
conditions	of	the	whole	population	or	a	part	thereof	(acts	of	God,	man-
made	catastrophes,	industrial	disasters,	fires,	etc.),	as	well	as	where	it	is
necessary	 to	 prevent	 the	 destruction	 or	 damage	 of	 the	 employer’s
property	or	to	replace	another	employee	who	is	temporarily	absent	due
to	 extraordinary	 circumstances.	 In	 any	 case,	 the	 time	 period	 of	 the
extraordinary	transfer	to	another	job	may	not	exceed	one	month.

At	 the	 same	 time,	 Article	 72.1	 of	 the	 Labour	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation	prohibits	 to	transfer	or	relocate	an	employee	to	a	 job	which
he	is	not	fit	due	to	his	state	of	health.

The	terms	of	a	labour	contract	may	be	modified	at	the	initiative	of	the
employer	 due	 to	 a	 change	 in	 organisational	 or	 technological	 working
conditions,	which	the	employer	shall	notify	the	employee	of	within	two
months	before	such	change.

If	 the	 employee	 refuses	 to	 work	 in	 the	 changed	working	 conditions,
the	employer	is	obliged	to	offer	him	in	writing	another	job	the	employer
has.	 If	 there	 is	no	such	 job	or	 if	 the	employee	refuses	to	accept	the	 job
offered,	the	labour	contract	is	deemed	terminated.

Article	75	of	the	Labour	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation	envisages	that
in	 the	 case	 of	 change	 of	 proprietor	 of	 the	 organisation,	 the	 new
proprietor	 may	 within	 three	 months	 from	 the	 day	 of	 arising	 of	 his
property	 right	 terminate	 labour	 contract	 with	 the	 manager	 of	 the
organisation,	 his	 deputies,	 and	 the	 chief	 accountant.	 However,	 the
change	 of	 proprietor	 of	 the	 organisation	may	 not	 serve	 as	 grounds	 to
terminate	 labour	 contracts	 with	 other	 employees	 of	 the	 organisation.
However,	 if	 an	 employee	 refuses	 to	 continue	 to	 work	 because	 of	 the
change	 of	 the	 proprietor	 of	 the	 organisation,	 the	 labour	 contract	 is
deemed	terminated.

Termination	of	labour	contract	is	the	discontinuance	if	its	legal	force,



termination	of	the	parties’	legal	and	contractual	rights	and	duties.

Article	 77	 of	 the	 Labour	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 lists	 the
grounds	for	termination	of	a	labour	contract.	These	include:

1)	the	parties’	agreement;

2)	 the	 expiry	 of	 the	 effective	 term	of	 the	 labour	 contract	 (except	 for
cases	where	labour	relations	actually	continue,	and	neither	of	the	parties
has	demanded	that	they	be	terminated);

3)	the	rescission	of	the	labour	contract	at	the	employee’s	initiative;

4)	the	rescission	of	the	labour	contract	at	the	employer’s	initiative;

5)	 the	 transfer	of	 the	employee	at	his	 request	or	with	his	 consent	 to
another	job	with	another	employer	or	his	transfer	to	an	elected	job;

6)	the	employee’s	refusal	to	continue	working	due	to	the	change	of	the
proprietor	of	the	organisation;

7)	the	employee’s	refusal	to	continue	working	due	to	a	change	in	the
labour	contract	terms	defined	by	the	parties;

8)	the	employee’s	refusal	to	be	transferred	to	another	job	as	might	be
required	according	to	his	medical	certificate;

9)	 the	 employee’s	 refusal	 to	 be	 transferred	 to	 a	 job	 in	 another	 area
together	with	the	employer;

10)	circumstances	beyond	the	parties’	control;

11)	the	violation	of	the	rules	of	the	conclusion	of	a	labour	contract,	if
such	violation	makes	the	continuation	of	work	impossible.

Thus,	a	labour	contract	may	be	terminated	due	to	the	following:

а)	 at	 the	 parties’	 initiative	 (joint	 initiative	 or	 one	 of	 the	 parties’
initiative);



б)	circumstances	beyond	the	parties’	control.

A	 labour	 contract	 may	 be	 terminated	 at	 any	 given	 moment	 at	 the
parties’	agreement.

If	the	employee	initiates	termination	of	labour	contract,	he	shall	give
to	the	employer	a	two	weeks’	written	notice.

Article	80	of	the	Labour	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation	sets	forth	that
the	employee	may	withdraw	his	application	any	time	before	the	expiry	of
the	 time	 of	 notice.	 In	 this	 case,	 resignation	 is	 not	 effected	 if	 no	 other
employee	has	been	invited	for	this	job	that	the	employer	may	not	reject.

Upon	the	expiry	of	the	time	of	notice	of	resignation,	the	employee	may
cease	 to	 work.	 On	 his	 last	 day	 at	 work,	 the	 employer	 must	 hand	 the
labour	book	and	other	documents	pertaining	to	work,	to	the	employee	at
his	application,	and	settle	accounts	with	the	employee.

If	the	labour	contract	has	not	been	terminated	and	the	employee	does
not	insist	on	dismissal	upon	expiry	of	the	time	of	notice	of	resignation,
the	labour	contract	is	not	deemed	terminated.

Article	81	of	the	Labour	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation	sets	forth	the
following	cases	of	redundancy	at	the	initiative	of	the	employer:

—	the	liquidation	of	the	organisation	or	termination	of	the	activities	of
an	individual	entrepreneur;

—	 staff	 cuts	 at	 the	 organisation,	 individual	 entrepreneur	 (if	 it	 is
impossible	to	transfer	the	employee	at	his	written	consent	to	another	job
at	the	same	employer);

—	the	employee’s	failure	to	meet	the	requirements	associated	with	his
position	 or	 job	 due	 to	 insufficient	 qualifications	 as	 confirmed	 by	 the
results	of	attestation	(if	 it	 is	 impossible	to	transfer	the	employee	at	his
written	consent	to	another	job	at	the	same	employer);

—	the	change	of	the	proprietor	of	the	organisation	(with	respect	to	the
manager	of	the	organisation,	his	deputies,	and	chief	accountant);



—	 numerous	 failures	 by	 the	 employee	 to	 fulfil	 his	 labour	 duties
without	justifiable	reasons,	if	he	has	been	reprimanded);

—	a	single	severe	violation	by	the	employee	of	his	labour	duties.	Such
single	severe	violations	include:

а)	absenteeism,	i.e.	absence	from	the	workplace	without	a	good	reason
during	 the	 whole	 working	 day,	 irrespective	 of	 the	 duration	 thereof,	 as
well	as	in	the	event	of	absence	from	the	workplace	without	a	good	reason
for	longer	than	four	consecutive	hours	within	the	working	day;

b)	 appearance	 of	 the	 employee	 at	 the	 workplace	 in	 the	 state	 of
alcoholic,	narcotic,	or	another	intoxication;

c)	disclosure	of	a	 secret	protected	by	 law	 (state,	commercial,	 service,
and	 other)	 that	 became	 known	 to	 the	 employee	 as	 a	 result	 of	 his
execution	of	labour	duties,	including	the	disclosure	of	the	personal	data
of	another	employee;

d)	committing	larceny	at	the	place	of	work	(including	petty)	of	others’
property,	 embezzlement,	 willful	 destruction	 or	 damage	 to	 property	 as
determined	 by	 a	 court	 ruling	 that	 has	 entered	 into	 legal	 force,	 or	 by	 a
decision	of	other	competent	official;

e)	violation	by	the	employee	of	labour	protection	requirements,	if	such
has	 resulted	 in	severe	consequences	 (industrial	accident,	disaster)	or	 is
known	to	have	created	a	real	hazard	of	such	consequences;

f)	commitment	of	culpable	actions	by	an	employee	handling	money	or
valuables,	 if	such	actions	provide	grounds	to	lose	confidence	in	him	on
the	part	of	the	employer;

g)	commitment	of	an	employee	engaged	in	educational	functions	of	an
immoral	deed	that	is	incompatible	with	the	given	work;

h)	 a	 single	 severe	 violation	 by	 the	 manager	 of	 the	 organisation	 (its
branch,	representation	office)	or	his	deputies	of	their	labour	duties;

i)	presentation	of	forged	documents	by	the	employee	to	the	employer



at	the	conclusion	of	the	labour	contract;

j)	other	cases	stipulated	by	law	or	contract.

Dismissal	 of	 an	 employee	 at	 the	 employer’s	 initiative	 is	 prohibited
(except	 for	 due	 to	 liquidation	 of	 an	 organisation	 or	 termination	 of
business	activities	of	an	individual	entrepreneur)	during	the	employee’s
sick	leave	or	annual	paid	leave.

As	for	the	circumstances	beyond	the	parties’	control,	which	constitute
grounds	 for	 termination	 or	 a	 labour	 contract,	 these	 include	 (under
Article	83	of	the	Labour	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation):	the	employee
being	recruited	for	military	service;	restoration	of	an	employee	who	had
previously	 fulfilled	 this	 work	 at	 the	 decision	 of	 the	 state	 labour
inspectorate	or	court;	employee	being	sentenced	to	a	punishment	ruling
out	 the	 continuation	 of	 the	 previous	 work;	 arising	 of	 extraordinary
circumstances	hindering	the	continuation	of	labour	relations,	etc.

The	 termination	 of	 labour	 contract	 shall	 be	 established	 by	 an	 order
(decree)	of	the	employer.

The	 employee	 shall	 familiarize	 himself	 with	 the	 respective	 order
(decree)	against	his	signature.

21.3.	Social	Partnership	in	Labour	and	Collective	Agreements

Social	partnership	in	the	labour	sphere	is	the	manner	of	governance	of
the	employee-employer	relations	which	is	based	on	mutual	respect	and
taking	into	account	the	interests	of	the	parties	while	rejecting	coercion
and	any	destructive	forms	of	interaction.

Social	partnership	 is	an	instrument	which	helps	the	parties	to	 labour
relations	 to	 find	 the	 optimal	 ways	 of	 improving	 their	 relations
(economically,	socially,	and	politically	fit).

Pursuant	to	Article	23	of	 the	Labour	Code	of	 the	Russian	Federation,
social	 partnership	 in	 labour	 sphere	 is	 a	 system	 of	 relations	 between
employees,	 employers,	 bodies	 of	 state	 authority,	 municipal	 bodies,



aimed	 at	 ensuring	 coordination	 of	 the	 interests	 of	 employees	 and
employers	in	the	issues	of	governing	labour	relations	and	other	relations
directly	associated	with	them.

The	main	principles	of	social	partnership	include:	equality	of	parties,
respect	for	and	taking	into	account	the	interests	of	the	parties,	 interest
of	the	parties	in	participation	in	contractual	relations,	assistance	of	the
state	 in	 the	 strengthening	 and	 development	 of	 social	 partnership	 on	 a
democratic	basis,	observation	of	labour	legislation,	and	other	principles.

Pursuant	to	Article	25	of	 the	Labour	Code	of	 the	Russian	Federation,
the	 parties	 of	 social	 partnership	 are	 employees	 and	 employers
represented	by	authorised	persons.	Governmental	and	municipal	bodies
are	deemed	parties	to	social	partnership	when	they	act	as	employers,	as
well	as	in	other	cases	envisaged	by	labour	legislation.

Social	 partnership	 shall	 be	 implemented	 as	 collective	 negotiations
regarding	 the	 preparation	 of	 draft	 collective	 agreements;	 mutual
consultations	 (negotiations);	 the	 employees’	 and	 their	 representatives’
participation	 in	 the	 management	 of	 the	 organisation;	 labour	 dispute
resolution.

The	 main	 representatives	 of	 the	 employees	 are	 trade	 unions.	 The
employer’s	interests	are	represented	by	the	manager	or	other	authorised
persons	 during	 negotiations,	 conclusion	 or	 modification	 of	 collective
agreements,	as	well	as	during	resolution	of	collective	labour	disputes.

As	a	result	of	various	collective	negotiations,	a	collective	agreement	is
concluded,	which	 is	a	 legal	act	governing	social	 labour	relations	within
the	 organisation	 or	 of	 an	 individual	 entrepreneur	 and	 entered	 into
between	the	employees	and	employer	(Article	40	of	the	Labour	Code	of
the	Russian	Federation).

The	content	and	 structure	of	 a	 collective	agreement	 shall	be	defined
by	 the	 parties	 at	 their	 discretion.	 Pursuant	 to	Article	 41	 of	 the	 Labour
Code	of	the	Russian	Federation,	a	collective	agreement	may	include	the
employees’	and	employer’s	duties	regarding	the	following:



—	forms,	systems,	and	amounts	of	wages;

—	payment	of	allowances	and	reimbursements;

—	 mechanism	 of	 remuneration	 taking	 into	 account	 inflation	 and
increase	in	prices;

—	working	 time	 and	 leisure	 time,	 including	 the	matters	 of	 granting
annual	leave	and	its	duration;

—	 improvement	 of	 working	 conditions	 and	 labour	 protection,
including	of	that	of	women	and	minors;

—	partial	or	full	reimbursement	of	the	employees’	meals;

—	waiver	 from	strikes	 if	 respective	 terms	of	collective	agreement	are
observed,	and	other	issues.

A	collective	agreement	is	concluded	for	the	term	up	to	three	years	(it
may	be	prolonged)	and	enters	into	force	upon	its	signing	by	the	parties
or	 at	 a	 certain	 date	 set	 forth	 by	 the	 agreement	 itself.	 Breach	 of	 a
collective	 agreement	 leads	 to	 liability	 prescribed	 by	 law	 and	 labour
contract.

Thus,	 while	 a	 labour	 contract	 governs	 the	 relations	 of	 an	 employer
with	a	certain	employee,	a	collective	agreement	governs	the	employer’s
relations	with	all	of	his	employees.	While	the	effective	term	of	a	labour
contract	 depends	 on	 the	 existence	 of	 labour	 relations	 with	 a	 certain
employee,	a	collective	agreement	remains	in	force	for	three	years	and	is
a	local	legal	act.

Test	questions	and	tasks

1.	What	are	the	differences	between	a	 labour	contract	and	a	civil	 law
contract?

2.	What	is	a	probation	period?



3.	Who	may	initiate	the	modification	of	a	labour	contract?

4.	 Please	 briefly	 characterize	 the	 grounds	 for	 termination	 of	 labour
contract.

5.	 What	 shall	 be	 understood	 by	 social	 partnership	 in	 the	 labour
sphere?

6.	What	is	a	collective	agreement?

Chapter	22.	Working	Time	and	Leisure	Time
22.1.	Definition	and	Types	of	Working	Time

The	 notion	 of	 working	 time	 is	 of	 high	 social	 importance	 and	 is	 also
fiercely	debated	over	due	to	various	reasons.	First	of	all,	working	time	is
the	main	manner	of	standardising	labour,	secondly,	working	time	is	the
crucial	indicator	of	the	quality	of	life,	since	the	less	time	one	spends	at
work,	 the	more	 time	 one	 has	 to	 spend	with	 his	 family,	 devote	 to	 self-
improvement,	etc.

Pursuant	to	Article	91	of	 the	Labour	Code	of	 the	Russian	Federation,
working	time	is	the	time	when	the	employee	must	fulfil	his	labour	duties
in	 compliance	with	 the	 internal	 labour	 rules	and	with	 the	 terms	of	 the
labour	 contract,	 i.e.	 the	 time	 when	 the	 employee	 is	 at	 the	 employer’s
disposal.

The	 law	 sets	 forth	 an	 imperative	 requirement	 whereby	 the	 normal
duration	 of	 working	 time	 may	 not	 exceed	 forty	 hours	 per	 week,	 the
employer	 being	 obliged	 to	 keep	 track	 of	 time	 each	 employee	 actually
worked.

Reduced	working	hours	shall	be	established	for	a	number	of	categories
of	 citizens:	 employees	 aged	 below	 16	 (up	 to	 24	 hours	 a	 week);	 for
employees	 aged	 from	 16	 to	 18	 (up	 to	 35	 hours	 a	 week);	 for	 disabled
employees	—	disability	groups	I	or	II	(up	to	35	hours	a	week).	However,
reduced	 duration	 of	 a	 working	 week	 may	 be	 established	 for	 other
categories	 of	 employees	 by	 federal	 law.	 For	 instance,	 the	 duration	 of
working	 hours	 for	 pedagogical	 employees	 is	 set	 forth	 based	 on	 the



reduced	working	hours	(not	exceeding	36	hours	a	week).

As	 opposed	 to	 reduced	duration	of	working	 time,	which	 reduction	 is
envisaged	by	law,	the	employee	and	the	employer	may	agree	to	set	forth
part-time	 work	 regime	 for	 the	 employee.	 Said	 agreement	 may	 be
concluded	 upon	 entry	 into	 labour	 agreement	 or	 later.	 Hence,	 the
establishment	of	an	incomplete	working	day	is	the	right	of	the	parties	to
a	labour	contract,	and	the	employer	may	refuse	to	grant	that	right	to	the
employee.	However,	under	Article	93	of	the	Labour	Code	of	the	Russian
Federation,	 the	employer	 is	obliged	 to	set	 forth	an	 incomplete	working
day	at	the	request	of	an	expectant	mother,	one	of	the	parents	(trustee)	of
a	child	up	to	fourteen	years	of	age,	and	in	other	cases.

Work	under	part-time	arrangement	does	not	incur	any	restrictions	of
the	length	of	paid	annual	leave,	calculation	of	the	length	of	service,	and
other	labour	rights,	with	the	exception	of	the	wage	amount,	which	shall
be	paid	proportionally	to	the	time	spent	at	work.

Generally,	 the	 duration	 of	 a	 working	 day	 directly	 preceding	 a	 public
holiday	and	at	nighttime	(from	10	p.m.	to	6	a.m.)	shall	be	reduced	by	one
hour.

In	the	procedure	established	by	law	and	pursuant	to	Article	97	of	the
Labour	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation,	an	employer	is	entitled	to	have
an	employee	work	outside	the	working	hours	for	overtime	work.

Thus,	 overtime	 work	 is	 work	 performed	 by	 the	 employee	 at	 the
employer’s	initiative	outside	of	the	employee’s	working	hours.

An	employer	may	have	employee	work	overtime	with	the	employee’s
written	consent	in	the	following	cases:

1)	where	 there	 is	 a	 need	 to	 complete	work	 started	which,	 due	 to	 an
unforeseen	 delay	 relating	 to	 technical	 conditions,	 could	 not	 be
completed	within	the	working	hours	established	for	the	employee,	if	the
non-completion	 of	 such	 work	 can	 lead	 to	 damage	 to	 or	 peril	 of	 the
employer’s	property,	or	can	endanger	human	life	and	health;



2)	 where	 temporary	 works	 are	 carried	 out	 in	 terms	 of	 repair	 and
restoration	of	mechanisms	and	structures	in	case	their	inoperability	can
cause	termination	of	work	for	a	significant	number	of	employees;

3)	for	the	purpose	of	continuing	work	in	case	of	absence	of	the	next-
shift	 employee,	 if	 the	work	 cannot	 tolerate	 a	 break.	 In	 such	 cases,	 the
employer	 is	 to	 take	 immediate	measures	 to	 replace	 the	 employee	with
another	one.

An	 employer	 may	 have	 employee	 work	 overtime	 without	 the
employee’s	consent	in	the	following	cases:

1)	 where	 works	 are	 performed	 as	 required	 for	 the	 prevention	 of	 a
catastrophe,	 an	 industrial	 disaster,	 or	 for	 the	 elimination	 of	 the
consequences	 of	 a	 catastrophe,	 an	 industrial	 disaster,	 or	 a	 natural
calamity;

2)	 where	 works	 are	 performed	 for	 the	 public	 benefit	 to	 eliminate
unforeseen	 circumstances	 that	 disrupt	 the	 normal	 operation	 of	 water
supply,	 gas	 supply,	 heating,	 lighting,	 transport,	 and	 communication
systems;

3)	 where	 works	 are	 performed	 due	 to	 the	 declaration	 of	 a	 state	 of
emergency	 or	 martial	 law,	 as	 well	 as	 where	 necessary	 in	 emergency
situations	endangering	the	lives	or	normal	living	conditions	of	the	whole
population	or	a	part	thereof.

An	 employee	may	 perform	 his	 job	 duties	 in	 an	 unregulated	working
day	arrangement.

Unregulated	working	day	is	a	special	working	regime	where	individual
employees	may	be	engaged	in	fulfilling	their	labour	functions	from	time
to	 time	 at	 the	 order	 of	 the	 employer	 outside	 of	 their	 regular	 working
hours.	The	list	of	positions	of	employees	with	unregulated	working	day
shall	be	fixed	in	the	collective	agreement	or	a	local	normative	act	which
is	adopted	taking	into	account	the	opinion	of	the	representative	body	of
employees	(Article	101	of	the	Labour	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation).



Unregulated	working	day,	as	a	rule,	is	applicable	to	employees	engaged
in	administrative,	managerial,	creative	work	which	is	not	subject	to	strict
tracking	and	who	may	be	granted	the	opportunity	to	spread	their	time	at
their	 discretion	 (lawyers	 who	 take	 part	 in	 court	 hearings;	 employees
entering	 into	 contracts	 with	 foreign	 counterparts;	 employees	 of
scientific	research	institutions,	etc.).

Flexible	hours	are	at	 the	disposal	of	 certain	categories	of	employees,
where	the	parties	define	the	beginning,	the	end,	and	the	total	length	of
the	working	day.

In	this	case,	the	employer	provides	for	the	employee	to	work	the	total
number	of	working	hours	within	 respective	 registered	periods	 (working
day,	week,	month,	 etc.).	 Exceeding	 the	 duration	of	working	 day	within
the	said	registered	periods	may	not	be	deemed	overtime	work.

22.2.	Labour	Regulations	and	Labour	Discipline

Under	Article	189	of	the	Labour	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation,	labour
discipline	is	the	mandatory	subordination	for	all	employees	to	the	rules
of	 conduct	 determined	 under	 current	 legislation,	 collective	 agreement,
local	normative	acts,	and	labour	contract.

The	 employer	 shall	 establish	 the	 conditions	 necessary	 for	 the
observance	of	labour	discipline	by	employees.	Labour	discipline	is	more
than	 a	mere	 unilateral	 act	 of	 subordination	 to	 certain	 norms,	 but	 it	 is
also	mutual	responsibility	of	the	employer	and	the	employee,	illustrated
by	bona	fide	attitude	to	their	duties	and	the	other	party’s	rights.

Labour	discipline	primarily	 suggests	 strict	observance	of	 the	 internal
labour	 regulations	which	are	a	 local	 standard	governing,	 in	accordance
with	the	law,	the	manner	of	hiring	and	dismissal	of	employees,	the	basic
rights,	obligations,	and	accountability	of	 the	parties	to	 labour	contract,
work	 regime,	 leisure	 time,	 incentive	 and	 punitive	 measures	 applied
toward	 employees,	 as	 well	 as	 other	 issues	 of	 the	 regulation	 of	 labour
relations	with	this	employer.

It	is	obvious	that	necessary	labour	conditions	alone	cannot	guarantee



effective	use	of	 the	employee’s	work	time	and	bona	fide	attitude	to	his
job	duties.	Therefore,	 labour	 legislation	establishes	special	 legal	means
facilitating	 the	maintenance	of	 labour	discipline.	These	 include	awards
for	success	at	work	and	disciplinary	liability.

Pursuant	to	Article	191	of	the	Labour	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation,
the	 employer	 shall	 encourage	 employees	 who	 conscientiously	 perform
their	labour	duties.

Performance	 of	 labour	 duties	 is	 deemed	 conscientious	 if	 it	 strictly
conforms	to	the	requirements	set	for	the	job,	to	the	rules	and	norms	of
the	 job	 instruction,	 professional	 characteristics	 of	 the	 job,	 and	 other
standards.

Labour	 incentives	 may	 take	 the	 following	 forms:	 declaration	 of
gratitude,	 granting	 a	 bonus,	 rewarding	 with	 a	 valuable	 gift	 and	 an
honorary	 certificate,	 and	 nomination	 for	 the	 title	 of	 the	 best	 in	 the
profession.	The	internal	labour	regulations	may	set	forth	other	types	of
incentives,	 as	 well	 as	 application	 of	 several	 incentives	 (declaration	 of
gratitude	along	with	granting	a	bonus).

Employees	 may	 be	 nominated	 for	 state	 awards	 for	 particular	 labour
services.	 These	 awards	 are	 the	 ultimate	 form	 of	 incentives	 for
achievements	 in	 the	 spheres	 of	 statecraft,	 science,	 economics,	 culture,
art,	and	education,	in	the	consolidation	of	legality,	and	for	other	merits
to	the	state.

The	following	types	of	state	awards	are	in	place	in	Russia:

a)	supreme	ranks	(Hero	of	the	Russian	Federation	and	Hero	of	Labour
of	the	Russian	Federation);

b)	orders	(order	“For	Merit	to	the	Fatherland”	and	others);

c)	 badges	 of	 merit	 (badge	 of	 merit	 “For	 Honorable	 Service”	 and
others);

d)	medals	(medal	“For	bravery”	and	others);



e)	 titles	 of	 honor	 (Meritorious	 Scientist	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,
etc.).

Disciplinary	 liability	 is	 envisaged	 for	 an	 employee’s	 disciplinary
misdeed,	which	is	the	non-performance	or	improper	performance	by	an
employee	of	the	labour	duties	assigned	to	him.

Pursuant	to	Article	192	of	the	Labour	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation,
the	employer	is	entitled	to	apply	the	following	disciplinary	punishments:

1)	a	warning;

2)	a	reprimand;

3)	discharge	based	on	the	relevant	grounds.

However,	federal	laws,	by-laws,	and	regulations	on	discipline	may	also
stipulate	 other	 disciplinary	 punishments	 for	 certain	 categories	 of
employees.	Imposition	of	disciplinary	penalties	which	are	not	envisaged
by	federal	law	is	prohibited.

Article	 192	 of	 the	 Labour	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 expressly
indicates	that	while	imposing	a	disciplinary	penalty,	one	shall	take	into
account	 the	degree	of	 gravity	of	 the	misdeed	and	 the	 circumstances	 in
which	it	took	place.

According	to	Article	193	of	the	Labour	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation,
prior	 to	 the	 imposition	 of	 a	 disciplinary	 penalty,	 the	 employer	 shall
request	 explanations	 in	 writing	 from	 the	 employee.	 If	 no	 such
explanations	have	been	submitted	within	 two	business	days,	a	 relevant
report	shall	be	drawn	up.	However,	the	non-provision	of	explanations	by
the	 employee	 shall	 not	 be	 impediment	 to	 the	 application	 of	 a
disciplinary	punishment.

A	disciplinary	punishment	shall	be	applied	within	one	month	after	the
day	of	discovery	of	a	misdeed,	without	taking	into	account	the	period	of
an	 employee’s	 illness,	 his	 vacation,	 as	 well	 as	 the	 time	 necessary	 to
obtain	the	opinion	of	the	employees’	representative	body.



A	disciplinary	punishment	may	not	be	applied	 later	 than	 six	months
after	the	day	of	commission	of	a	misdeed,	and,	if	based	on	the	results	of
an	inspection	and	examination	of	financial	and	economic	activity	or	an
audit,	later	than	two	years	after	the	day	of	its	commission.

Only	one	disciplinary	punishment	may	be	applied	for	each	disciplinary
misdeed.

An	employer’s	order	(instruction)	on	the	application	of	a	disciplinary
punishment	 shall	 be	 announced	 to	 an	 employee	 against	 his	 signature
within	three	working	days	upon	the	day	of	its	issuance,	without	account
taken	of	the	period	of	the	employee’s	absence	at	his	workplace.

An	 employee	 may	 appeal	 a	 disciplinary	 punishment	 with	 the	 state
labour	 inspectorate	 and	 (or)	 authorities	 for	 individual	 labour	 dispute
settlement.

Article	194	of	the	Labour	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation	governs	the
issues	 of	 lifting	 off	 disciplinary	 punishments.	 For	 instance,	 if	 an
employee	 is	 not	 subjected	 to	 a	 new	 disciplinary	 punishment	 within	 a
year	of	the	day	of	the	application	of	a	disciplinary	punishment,	he	shall
be	 considered	 as	 not	 having	 had	 a	 disciplinary	 punishment.	 In	 other
words,	a	disciplinary	punishment	is	only	valid	for	one	year.

An	 employer	 shall	 have	 the	 right	 before	 the	 expiration	 of	 one	 year
from	the	day	of	the	application	of	a	disciplinary	punishment	to	remove	it
from	 the	 employee	 at	 his	 own	 initiative,	 or	 at	 the	 request	 of	 the
employee	himself,	or	at	the	petition	of	his	 immediate	supervisor	or	the
employee’s	representative	body.

22.3.	Definition	and	Types	of	Leisure	Time

Right	to	leisure	is	a	constitutional	right	of	every	citizen	and	is	set	forth
in	 section	 5	 Article	 37	 of	 the	 Constitution	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,
whereby	 each	 employee	 working	 under	 a	 labour	 contract	 shall	 be
guaranteed	the	statutory	duration	of	work	time,	days	off,	holidays,	and
paid	annual	leave.



Article	 106	 of	 the	 Labour	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 defines
leisure	 time	 as	 time	 when	 the	 employee	 is	 free	 from	 the	 execution	 of
labour	duties	and	which	he	may	use	at	his	own	disposal.

The	following	are	the	types	of	leisure	time:

1.	 breaks	 during	 the	 working	 day.	 These	 are	 provided	 for	 rest	 and
meals	at	least	thirty	minutes	and	not	greater	than	two	hours	in	duration.
The	time	 in	break	 is	not	 included	 in	the	working	time.	The	time	of	 the
break	and	its	length	shall	be	specified	in	the	internal	labour	rules	or	by
agreement	between	the	employee	and	the	employer.

Pursuant	to	Article	109	of	the	Labour	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation,
in	certain	types	of	works,	special	breaks	shall	be	envisaged	for	employees
during	 the	working	 time	stipulated	by	 the	 technology	and	organisation
of	the	production	process	and	labour.	Employees	working	in	cold	seasons
in	 the	open	air	 and	other	employees	 shall	be	entitled	 to	 special	breaks
for	 warming	 up	 and	 rest	 which	 are	 included	 in	 the	 working	 time.	 The
employer	must	outfit	rooms	for	employee	warming	up	and	rest;

2.	 daily	 rest	 is	 the	 time	 from	 the	 ending	 of	 a	 workday	 until	 its
beginning	the	next	day.	The	Labour	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation	does
not	set	forth	minimal	duration	of	this	type	or	leisure,	but	customarily	the
working	regime	is	organised	in	such	a	manner	that	the	minimal	duration
of	daily	(intershift)	rest,	together	with	the	lunchtime	comprised	at	least
double	duration	of	work	time	on	the	preceding	working	day	(shift).

Law	can	envisage	different	duration	of	daily	rest	for	certain	categories
of	employees	(bus	or	cargo	vehicle	drivers,	etc.);

3.	days	off	(weekly	continuous	rest),	which,	pursuant	to	Article	111	of
the	Labour	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation	are	granted	to	all	employees.
As	 a	 general	 rule,	 with	 a	 five-day	 working	 week	 arrangement,	 the
employees	shall	be	provided	with	two	days	off	per	week,	with	a	six-day
working	week	arrangement,	one	day	off.

Sunday	shall	be	the	common	day	off.	The	second	day	off	with	a	five-
day	 working	 week	 arrangement	 shall	 be	 specified	 in	 the	 collective



contract	or	internal	labour	rules.

The	 duration	 of	 weekly	 continuous	 rest	 under	 Article	 110	 of	 the
Labour	Code	of	 the	Russian	Federation	may	not	be	 less	 than	 forty-two
hours;

4.	public	holidays,	which	are	the	following	in	the	Russian	Federation:
January	 1,	 2,	 3,	 4,	 5,	 6	 and	 8	 —	 New	 Year	 Holidays;	 January	 7	 —
Christmas	 Day;	 February	 23	—	 Fatherland	 Defender’s	 Day;	March	 8	—
International	Women’s	Day;	May	 1	—	 Spring	 and	 labour	Holiday;	May
9	 —	 Victory	 Day;	 June	 12	 —	 Day	 of	 Russia;	 November	 4	 —	 Day	 of
National	Unity.	Work	on	 these	days	 shall	 be	prohibited,	 except	 for	 the
cases	 expressly	 set	 forth	 by	 current	 legislation	 (prevention	 of	 a
catastrophe,	elimination	of	the	aftermath	of	natural	calamities,	etc.).

In	 other	 cases,	 engagement	 of	 employees	 for	 work	 on	 days	 off	 and
public	holidays	 is	 allowed	with	 their	written	 consent	 and	with	 account
taken	 of	 the	 opinion	 of	 the	 elected	 body	 of	 the	 primary	 trade	 union
organisation.

However,	labour	legislation	does	allow	performance	of	work	on	public
holidays,	if	such	work	cannot	be	suspended	due	to	production-technical
conditions	 (uninterrupted-cycle	 organisations)	 and	 work	 needed	 to
provide	 services	 to	 the	 public,	 as	 well	 as	 due	 to	 repair	 and
loading/unloading	works.

With	a	few	exceptions,	should	a	day	off	and	a	public	holiday	coincide,
the	day	off	shall	be	transferred	to	the	working	day	following	the	public
holiday;

5.	 leave,	 which	 is	 granted	 to	 the	 employees	 annually	 preserving	 the
place	of	work	and	average	earnings.

The	duration	of	main	annual	paid	leave	comprises	28	calendar	days	or
longer	for	certain	categories	of	employees.	For	instance,	extended	main
leave	 of	 42	 and	 56	 days	 in	 duration	 is	 granted	 to	 employees	 of
educational	institutions,	to	citizens	employed	at	facilities	with	chemical
weapons,	etc.



Additional	 paid	 leave	 under	 Article	 116	 of	 the	 Labour	 Code	 of	 the
Russian	Federation	shall	be	provided	to	employees	engaged	in	work	with
adverse	or	hazardous	working	conditions,	to	employees	having	a	special
nature	 of	 work,	 to	 employees	 having	 unregulated	 working	 day,	 to
employees	working	 in	 the	 regions	 of	 Far	North	 or	 similar	 locations,	 as
well	as	in	other	cases	set	forth	by	law.

However,	 employers,	 taking	 into	 account	 their	 production	 and
financial	 resources,	may	 institute	 additional	 leave	 for	 their	 employees.
The	procedure	and	terms	for	providing	this	leave	shall	be	defined	in	the
collective	agreement	or	other	local	act	adopted	with	the	account	taken	of
the	opinion	of	the	trade	union	organisation.

The	 right	 to	 paid	 leave	within	 the	 first	 year	 of	 employment	 shall	 be
granted	 to	 the	 employee	 upon	 the	 expiry	 of	 six	months	 of	 continuous
work	 for	 this	employer,	but	 this	 term	may	be	shortened	by	 the	parties’
agreement.

The	order	of	granting	the	annual	paid	leave	shall	be	defined	annually
in	 accordance	 with	 the	 leave	 schedule	 endorsed	 by	 the	 employer	 not
later	 than	 two	 weeks	 before	 the	 beginning	 of	 the	 calendar	 year.	 This
leave	schedule	is	obligatory	both	for	the	employer	and	the	employee.

Due	 to	 family	 circumstances	 and	 for	 other	 justifiable	 reasons	 the
employee	may	request	in	writing	unpaid	leave,	its	duration	being	defined
by	 the	 employer’s	 and	 employee’s	 agreement.	 However,	 Article	 128	 of
the	 Labour	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 lists	 the	 cases	 where	 such
unpaid	leave	shall	be	granted	(e.g.,	to	disabled	employees	—	up	to	sixty
calendar	days	per	year;	to	employees	in	cases	of	child	birth,	registration
of	a	marriage,	death	of	close	relatives	—	up	to	five	calendar	days,	as	well
as	in	a	number	of	other	cases).

Test	questions	and	tasks

1.	What	are	the	differences	between	reduced	duration	of	working	time
and	part-time	working	arrangement?



2.	 In	which	cases	 is	 it	admissible	 to	engage	an	employee	 in	overtime
work?

3.	Please	list	the	main	forms	of	labour	incentives.

4.	Please	describe	the	disciplinary	punishments	which	may	be	imposed
on	employees.

5.	What	are	the	types	of	leisure	as	per	Russian	labour	legislation?

Chapter	23.	Labour	Protection.	Protection	of	Labour
Rights	and	Freedoms

23.1.	Protection	of	Labour	and	Its	Organisation

The	 protection	 of	 labour	 is	 the	 priority	 of	 Russian	 socioeconomic
policy,	which	is	illustrated	in	Article	7	of	the	Constitution	of	the	Russian
Federation,	whereby	in	the	Russian	Federation	labour	and	health	shall	be
protected,	 minimal	 wage	 amount	 shall	 be	 established,	 and	 other
measures	of	social	protection	are	envisaged.

Protection	of	labour	is	a	system	for	the	preservation	of	employee’s	life
and	 health	 in	 the	 process	 of	 labour	 activity,	 which	 includes	 legal,
socioeconomic,	organisational,	 technical,	 sanitary,	medical,	 preventive,
rehabilitative,	and	other	measures.

Under	 Russian	 labour	 legislation,	 the	 obligation	 to	 provide	 safe
working	conditions	and	to	organise	labour	protection	is	primarily	vested
with	the	employer,	who	must	provide:

—	 the	 safety	 of	 employees	 during	 the	 operation	 of	 buildings,
structures,	and	equipment;

—	the	creation	and	maintenance	of	the	labour	protection	management
system;

—	 labour	 conditions	 corresponding	 to	 the	 labour	 protection
requirements	at	each	place	of	work;



—	employees’	labour	and	leisure	regime	in	accordance	with	the	labour
legislation	and	other	legal	acts	containing	labour	law	norms;

—	training	 in	provision	of	 first	 aid	 to	victims	of	 industrial	 accidents,
instructing	 personnel	 on	 labour	 protection,	 probation,	 and	 examining
the	knowledge	of	labour	protection	requirements;

—	the	organisation	of	special	evaluation	of	labour	conditions;

—	 non-admittance	 to	 work	 of	 employees	 who	 have	 not	 undergone
mandatory	medical	examinations,	mandatory	psychiatric	examinations,
as	well	as	in	the	event	of	medical	contraindications;

—	informing	employees	of	the	conditions	and	protection	of	 labour	in
work	places,	of	 the	 risk	of	an	 injury,	of	compensations	 therefor,	and	of
means	of	individual	protection;

—	 the	 familiarisation	 of	 employees	 with	 the	 labour	 protection
requirements;

—	the	elaboration	and	approval	of	rules	and	instructions	in	the	area	of
labour	protection,	as	well	as	other	measures.

Article	214	of	the	Labour	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation	sets	forth	the
corresponding	employees’	obligations,	which	include:

—	the	observance	of	labour	protection	requirements;

—	the	proper	use	of	means	of	individual	and	collective	protection;

—	 the	 undergoing	 training	 in	 safe	 methods	 and	 measures	 for	 the
performance	of	work	and	the	provision	of	first	aid;

—	 the	 immediate	 notification	 of	 their	 higher	 supervisor	 of	 any
situation	threatening	human	life	and	health,	of	each	accident	that	occurs
in	the	workplace	or	of	a	deterioration	of	the	state	of	his	health,	including
the	manifestation	of	symptoms	of	an	acute	occupational	illness;

—	the	undergoing	of	mandatory	preliminary	(when	starting	work)	and



periodic	(during	labour	activity)	medical	checkups.

The	 bodies	 exercising	 state	 labour	 protection	 management	 include:
the	Government	 of	 the	Russian	Federation,	 federal	 bodies	 of	 executive
authority,	which	may	conduct	state	inspection	of	labour	conditions.	Said
inspection	shall	be	organised	for	evaluation	of	actual	labour	conditions,
as	 well	 as	 for	 evaluation	 of	 correctness	 of	 providing	 guarantees	 and
compensations	for	work	in	harmful	and	hazardous	conditions	of	labour.

The	 system	 of	 labour	 protection	 in	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 shall	 be
created	and	managed	by	the	state,	and	the	employee	incurs	no	expenses
in	connection	with	measures	devoted	to	the	protection	of	labour.

As	 prescribed	 by	 Article	 217	 of	 the	 Labour	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation,	in	the	interests	of	ensuring	observance	of	labour	protection
requirements	 and	 monitoring	 their	 fulfilment,	 each	 employer
performing	 production	 activity	 with	 a	 contingent	 of	 more	 than	 fifty
employees	 shall	 establish	 a	 labour	 protection	 service	 or	 introduce	 the
position	of	a	labour	protection	specialist	possessing	appropriate	training
or	work	experience	 in	the	 field.	 If	an	employer	 is	not	obliged	by	 law	to
establish	 such	 labour	 protection	 service,	 he	 is	 obliged	 to	 observe	 the
proper	labour	conditions	personally.

An	employer	and	employees	may	initiate	the	establishment	of	 labour
protection	committees	(commissions)	(Article	218	of	the	Labour	Code	of
the	 Russian	 Federation).	 They	 shall	 include	 representatives	 of	 the
employer	 and	 representatives	 of	 the	 elected	 body	 of	 the	 primary	 trade
union	organisation	or	of	another	representative	body	of	employees	on	a
parity	basis.

Thus,	 locally	 the	 labour	 protection	 issues	 are	 governed	 by	 collective
agreements	 or	 individual	 labour	 contracts	 and	 labour	 protection
instructions.

Employer’s	and	employees’	violations	in	the	labour	protection	sphere
shall	 be	 punishable	 by	 material,	 disciplinary,	 administrative,	 and
criminal	liability.



23.2.	Protection	of	Labour	Rights	and	Labour	Disputes

Protection	of	employees’	 labour	 rights	 is	 their	 immediate	activity,	as
well	 as	 the	 activity	 of	 their	 representatives	 and	 competent	 bodies
centered	 around	 influencing	 the	 employer	 in	 order	 to	 eliminate	 any
obstacles	 to	 proper	 exercise	 of	 employees’	 rights,	 freedoms,	 and
legitimate	interests.

Article	 352	 of	 the	 Labour	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 sets	 forth
everyone’s	 right	 to	 protect	 their	 labour	 rights	 and	 freedoms	with	 non-
prohibited	means.

The	 primary	 means	 of	 protection	 of	 labour	 rights	 include:	 self-
protection	of	labour	rights	by	employees;	protection	of	labour	rights	and
legitimate	interests	of	employees	by	trade	unions;	state	supervision	and
control	 over	 the	 observance	 of	 the	 labour	 legislation	 and	 other
normative	acts	containing	norms	of	labour	law;	and	judicial	protection.

Federal	 state	 monitoring	 over	 observance	 of	 labour	 legislation	 and
other	normative	acts	containing	norms	of	 labour	 law	 is	effected	by	 the
federal	 labour	 inspectorate.	 State	monitoring	 of	 compliance	with	 rules
relating	 to	 safe	 work	 conduct	 in	 specific	 branches	 and	 certain	 sites	 of
industry	shall	be	carried	out	by	the	relevant	federal	executive	bodies.

Federal	labour	inspectorate	is	a	unified,	centralised	system	composed
of	 the	 federal	 executive	 governmental	 body	 and	 its	 territorial	 bodies
(state	labour	inspectorates).

The	primary	tasks	of	the	federal	labour	inspectorate	include:

—	to	ensure	observance	and	protection	of	 citizens’	 labour	 rights	and
freedoms,	including	the	right	to	safe	working	conditions;

—	to	ensure	that	employers	observe	labour	law;

—	to	provide	employers	and	employees	with	information	on	the	most
effective	means	and	methods	of	observing	the	provisions	of	labour	law,
etc.



Pursuant	to	Article	357	of	the	Labour	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation,
state	 labour	 inspectors	 in	 carrying	 out	 federal	 state	 supervision	 over
observance	of	labour	legislation	are	entitled	to:

—	visit	organisations	of	all	legal	and	organisational	forms	at	any	hour
with	proper	identification;

—	request	documents,	explanations,	and	information	needed	to	fulfill
their	monitoring	 and	 enforcement	 functions	 from	 employers	 and	 their
representatives;

—	investigate	industrial	accidents;

—	present	to	employers	and	their	representatives	binding	injunctions
to	eliminate	violations	of	labour	law;

—	claim	in	 judicial	proceedings	to	 liquidate	organisations	or	suspend
the	 activity	 of	 their	 structural	 subdivisions	 due	 to	 violations	 of
workplace	safety	requirements,	etc.

The	 primary	 guarantee	 of	 the	 efficient	 activity	 of	 state	 labour
inspectors	 is	 that	 they	 are	 authorised	 representatives	 of	 state	 and	 are
under	 its	 protection,	 are	 independent	 from	 state	 bodies,	 officials,	 and
subdue	 to	 law	 only.	 However,	 the	 decisions	 of	 state	 labour	 inspectors
may	 be	 appealed	 to	 their	 immediate	 supervisors,	 to	 chief	 state	 labour
inspector	of	the	Russian	Federation,	or	in	court.

State	 control	 over	 observance	 of	 labour	 law	 requirements	 in	 certain
spheres	 of	 production	 is	 effected	 by	 the	 state	 energy	 control,	 state
sanitary	 and	health	 control,	 state	 control	 in	 the	 sphere	 of	 nuclear	 and
radiation	safety,	and	other	bodies.

Article	370	of	the	Labour	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation	envisages	the
trade	 unions’	 right	 to	 monitor	 compliance	 with	 labour	 law	 and
compliance	 with	 the	 terms	 of	 collective	 agreements	 by	 employers	 and
their	representatives.

Employers	 are	 obliged	 within	 one	 week	 from	 the	 day	 of	 receiving	 a



demand	to	eliminate	discovered	violations	 to	 inform	the	relevant	 trade
union	 body	 of	 the	 results	 of	 their	 review	 of	 the	 given	 demand	 and
measures	taken.

Employers	 are	 obliged,	 for	 the	 purpose	 of	 facilitating	 the	 efficient
work	of	trade	union	organisation,	to	provide	to	the	elective	bodies	of	the
latter	the	premises	for	conducting	meetings,	storing	documents,	and	the
possibility	 to	 disseminate	 information	 in	 the	 places	 available	 to
employees.

The	 self-protection	 of	 employees’	 labour	 rights	 means	 his	 right
(having	 given	 prior	 written	 notice	 to	 the	 employer	 or	 his	 immediate
supervisor)	to	refuse	to	perform	work	that	is	not	stipulated	in	the	labour
contract,	 as	 well	 as	 to	 refuse	 to	 perform	 work	 that	 presents	 a	 direct
threat	 to	 his	 life	 or	 health,	 with	 the	 exception	 of	 cases	 expressly
stipulated	by	law.

An	 employer,	 as	 well	 as	 his	 representatives	 shall	 not	 be	 entitled	 to
obstruct	 workers	 in	 exercising	 the	 protection	 of	 their	 labour	 rights
(Article	380	of	the	Labour	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation).

A	 separate	 chapter	 of	 the	 Labour	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 is
devoted	to	the	consideration	and	resolution	of	individual	labour	disputes
which	 are,	 as	 a	 rule,	 connected	 with	 the	 exercise	 of	 employees’	 and
employers’	labour	rights.

An	 individual	 labour	 dispute	 is	 an	unresolved	disagreement	 between
an	employer	and	employee	on	issues	of	application	of	labour	legislation
and	other	legal	acts	containing	labour	law	norms,	collective	agreement,
contract,	 local	 normative	 act,	 labour	 contract,	 on	 which	 a	 petition	 is
made	to	the	individual	labour	dispute	review	body,	These	bodies	include
labour	dispute	commissions	and	courts.

Under	Article	384	of	the	Labour	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation,	labour
dispute	 commissions	 shall	 be	 set	 up	 at	 the	 initiative	 of	 employees	 or
employer	made	up	of	equal	number	of	representatives	of	the	employees
and	employer.	The	employer	and	the	representative	body	of	employees
that	 have	 received	 a	 written	 proposal	 to	 set	 up	 a	 labour	 dispute



commission	 shall	 send	 their	 representatives	 to	 the	 commission	 within
ten	days.

A	dispute	between	employee	and	employer	shall	be	considered	by	the
commission	in	case	of	failure	to	settle	the	disagreement	by	negotiations
between	employee	and	employer.	The	employee	may	address	the	labour
dispute	 commission	 within	 three	 months	 upon	 the	 day	 when	 he
discovered	or	should	have	discovered	the	violation	of	his	right.

A	 labour	 dispute	 commission	 shall	 consider	 an	 individual	 labour
dispute	within	ten	calendar	days	from	the	day	when	the	employee	filed
his	application.

The	dispute	shall	be	considered	in	the	presence	of	the	employee	or	his
authorised	representative.	A	dispute	may	be	heard	in	the	absence	of	the
employee	 or	 his	 representatives	 only	 upon	 employee’s	 application	 in
writing	(Article	387	of	the	Labour	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation).

A	 session	 of	 a	 labour	 dispute	 commission	 shall	 be	 considered
legitimate	if	at	least	a	half	of	the	members	representing	employees	and
at	least	a	half	of	the	members	representing	employer	are	present.

The	decision	of	a	labour	dispute	commission	shall	be	enforced	within
three	days	upon	expiry	of	ten	days	provided	for	an	appeal	thereof.

In	 the	 event	 of	 non-enforcement	 of	 the	 decision	 of	 a	 labour	 dispute
commission	within	established	term,	said	commission	shall	issue	to	the
employee	a	certificate	deemed	a	document	of	execution,	based	on	which
court	 bailiff	 shall	 enforce	 the	 labour	 dispute	 commission’s	 decision	 in
the	compulsory	procedure.

In	 the	 event	 an	 individual	 labour	 dispute	 is	 not	 heard	 by	 the	 labour
dispute	commission	within	the	ten-day	period	or	the	employee	disagrees
with	 a	 decision	 taken,	 he	 may	 refer	 the	 dispute	 for	 consideration	 by
court.

Pursuant	to	Article	391	of	the	Labour	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation,
individual	 labour	disputes	shall	be	considered	in	courts	upon	a	petition



from	 the	 employee,	 the	 employer,	 or	 trade	 union	 on	 behalf	 of	 the
employee	 if	 they	 disagree	 with	 the	 ruling	 of	 a	 labour	 dispute
commission,	 or	 upon	 direct	 petition	 to	 court	 from	 the	 employee,	 and
upon	 petition	 from	 a	 prosecutor	 if	 the	 ruling	 of	 a	 labour	 dispute
commission	 does	 not	 conform	 to	 the	 labour	 legislation	 and	 other	 acts
containing	norms	of	labour	law.

An	employee	is	entitled	to	file	a	claim	with	the	court	for	resolution	of
an	individual	labour	dispute	within	three	months	after	he	discovered	or
should	have	discovered	 the	 violation	of	his	 right,	 and	 for	 resolution	of
disputes	 connected	with	 dismissal,	 within	 one	month	 from	 the	 day	 he
was	served	with	a	copy	of	a	termination	order	or	his	labour	book.

Apart	 from	 an	 individual	 labour	 dispute,	 a	 collective	 labour	 dispute
may	arise	between	the	employee	and	the	employer.

A	 collective	 labour	 dispute	 is	 an	 unresolved	 agreement	 between
employees	and	employers	concerning	the	establishment	and	changing	of
working	conditions	(including	wages),	the	conclusion,	modification,	and
fulfilment	 of	 collective	 agreements	 and	 other	 agreements,	 as	 well	 as
disagreements	concerning	an	employer’s	refusal	to	consider	the	opinion
of	 an	 elected	 employees’	 representative	 body	 in	 adopting	 local
normative	acts.

Employees	 and	 their	 representatives	 shall	 have	 the	 right	 to	 present
demands.	The	demands	shall	be	approved	at	a	corresponding	employees’
assembly	 (conference),	 shall	 be	 in	writing	and	 sent	 to	 the	employer	by
the	authorised	employees’	representative	body.

An	employer	shall	accept	for	examination	demands	sent	by	employees
and	shall	consider	them	within	two	business	days	upon	receipt.

Pursuant	to	Article	401	of	the	Labour	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation,
the	 procedure	 of	 resolving	 a	 collective	 labour	 dispute	 consists	 of	 the
following	 stages:	 consideration	 of	 the	 dispute	 by	 a	 reconciliation
commission;	consideration	with	the	participation	of	a	mediator	and	(or)
in	 labour	 arbitration.	None	of	 the	parties	may	waiver	 from	 the	dispute
being	considered	by	the	reconciliation	commission.



A	reconciliation	commission	shall	be	set	up	within	two	working	days
after	the	commencement	of	a	collective	labour	dispute.	If	no	agreement
has	 been	 reached	 in	 the	 reconciliation	 commission,	 the	 parties	 are
obliged	to	start	negotiations	on	the	invitation	of	a	mediator.

If	 needed,	 the	 parties	 to	 a	 collective	 labour	 dispute	may	 turn	 to	 the
relevant	 state	 body	 for	 the	 resolution	 of	 a	 collective	 labour	 dispute	 to
recommend	a	candidate	for	mediator	(Article	403	of	the	Labour	Code	of
the	Russian	Federation).

The	next	stage	of	a	labour	dispute	(in	case	of	its	remaining	unresolved)
is	 its	 settlement	 in	 labour	 arbitration	 proceeding	 —	 a	 body	 for	 the
consideration	of	a	collective	labour	dispute	which	may	be	established	by
the	 parties	 to	 a	 dispute	 together	 with	 the	 relevant	 state	 body	 for
resolution	of	collective	labour	disputes.

Agreements	which	 the	parties	 agree	 during	 the	procedure	 of	 dispute
resolution,	 including	 the	 settlement	 agreement,	 shall	 be	 executed	 in
writing	and	shall	be	binding	on	the	parties.	The	latter	shall	observe	their
enforcement.

However,	 if	 reconciliation	 proceedings	 have	 not	 resulted	 in	 the
settlement	 of	 a	 collective	 labour	 dispute	 or	 if	 the	 employer	 does	 not
perform	 the	 agreement	 achieved,	 or	 if	 the	 parties	 do	 not	 execute	 the
decision	 of	 labour	 arbitration,	 the	 employees	 or	 their	 representatives
have	 the	 right	 to	 start	 the	 organisation	 of	 a	 strike	 (except	 for	 cases
envisaged	by	law).

Participation	in	a	strike	shall	be	voluntary,	and	no	one	can	be	coerced
to	 participate	 or	 not	 to	 participate	 in	 a	 strike.	 Parties	 are	 obliged	 to
continue	settlement	of	a	dispute	during	strike	by	negotiations.

Labour	 legislation	sets	 forth	rights	and	obligations	of	employees	and
employer	during	strike,	as	well	as	conditions	which	shall	be	conformed
to	for	the	strike	to	be	deemed	legitimate.

Article	 415	 of	 the	 Labour	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 expressly
prohibits	 lockout	 —	 dismissal	 of	 employees	 at	 the	 initiative	 of	 the



employer	due	to	their	participation	in	a	collective	labour	dispute	or	in	a
strike.

Test	questions	and	tasks

1.	 Please	 name	 the	 primary	 obligations	 of	 the	 employer	 and	 the
employee	connected	with	protection	of	labour.

2.	What	is	the	procedure	of	exercising	state	control	over	observance	of
labour	legislation?

3.	 Please	 list	 the	 main	 powers	 of	 trade	 union	 organisation	 in	 the
sphere	of	employee	labour	rights	protection.

4.	 What	 is	 the	 difference	 between	 the	 procedure	 of	 resolution	 of
individual	labour	disputes	from	the	procedure	of	resolution	of	collective
labour	disputes?



Part	5.	Basics	of	administrative	law
Chapter	24.	Administrative	Law	and	Participants	of

Administrative	Legal	Relations
24.1.	Subject	Matter,	Method	and	Distinctive	Features	of

Administrative	Law	as	a	Branch	of	Law

Administrative	law	is	a	branch	of	law	which	governs	the	legal	relations
in	 connection	with	 the	 realisation	of	 the	 executive	powers	of	 the	 state
and	arising	in	the	sphere	of	state	governance.

The	 distinctive	 feature	 of	 administrative	 law	 is	 that	 it	 is	 a	 “law	 of
management”,	 which	 directly	 regulates	 the	 area	 of	 state	 governance.
Thus,	state	governance	is	the	core	and	essence	of	administrative	law.

In	 the	 broader	 sense,	 state	 governance	 denotes	 the	 activities	 of	 any
state	 agencies	 of	 all	 branches	 of	 authority	 (executive,	 legislative	 and
judicial),	 aimed	 at	 the	 realisation	 of	 their	 authority.	 In	 the	 narrower,
legal	 and	 organisational	 sense,	 state	 governance	 denotes	 the	 lawful
activities	 of	 executive	 agencies	 for	 exercising	 their	 supervisory	 and
executive	 functions	 in	 various	 areas	 of	 social	 life:	 in	 economics,	 social
security,	 healthcare,	 culture,	 national	 security	 and	 defence,	 transport,
communications,	etc.

Therefore,	contrary	to	the	activities	of	the	legislative	or	judiciary	state
governance	in	the	narrow	sense	is	performed	by	the	executive	agencies
in	certain	specific	forms.

Firstly,	these	agencies	issue	subordinate	legal	acts	(regulations),	which
may	 not	 contradict	 the	 law	 and	 which	 help	 the	 executive	 agencies
exercise	their	functions	and	achieve	their	objectives.

Secondly,	the	executive	agencies	and	their	officials	perform	activities
aimed	at	the	realisation	of	laws	as	well	as	subordinate	legal	acts	and,	in
some	cases,	are	entitled	to	use	physical	force.

State	governance	has	a	number	of	defining	characteristics:



1.	 it	 has	 a	 purpose,	 which	 is	 demonstrated	 by	 the	 fact	 that	 it	 is	 the
state	 that	 ensures	 its	 own	 national	 interests	 are	 realised	 and	 the
interests	 of	 individuals	 and	 society	 are	 observed;	 it	 is	 the	 state	 that
provides	guarantees	 for	material	well-being	of	 the	members	of	 society,
their	moral	 and	 physical	 self-actualisation,	 legal	 and	 social	 protection.
The	 whole	 state	 apparatus	 serves	 this	 purpose	 by	 implementing	 the
provisions	 of	 the	 Constitution	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 laws	 and
subordinate	legal	acts;

2.	 it	 is	connected	with	direct	 implementation,	realisation	of	 laws	and
subordinate	legal	acts;

3.	it	is	active	and	dynamic,	realising	the	exact	functions	of	the	state	in
different	spheres	and	solving	practical,	vitally	important	objectives;

4.	 it	 is	 connected	 with	 state	 and	 is	 based	 on,	 among	 others,	 state
coercion	(enforcement);

5.	for	its	realisation,	the	state	creates	a	special	apparatus	(a	system	of
state	 agencies	 organised	 in	 a	 specific	 manner),	 which	 exercises	 its
competencies	 with	 the	 help	 of	 professionals	 specifically	 prepared	 to
carry	out	the	respective	functions.

Thus,	 the	 subject	 matter	 of	 the	 administrative	 law	 includes	 the
following	elements:

1.	 social	 relations	 connected	 with	 the	 implementation	 of	 state
functions	in	economic,	socio-cultural	and	administrative-political	areas
by	the	actors	of	state	governance	(foremostly,	the	executive	agencies);

2.	 relations	 within	 the	 system	 of	 executive,	 legislative	 and	 judicial
authorities,	 i.	 e.	building	an	effective	cooperation	among	public	bodies
and	regulating	the	internal	relations	within	the	apparatus;

3.	 relations	 in	 connection	 with	 the	 realisation	 of	 administrative
procedures	 and	 administrative	 jurisdiction.	 Administrative	 procedures
are	 connected	 with	 the	 preparation	 and	 publication	 of	 administrative
acts,	 issuance	 of	 licenses	 and	permits	 (for	 the	 right	 to	 perform	 certain



activities),	 and	 registration	 procedures.	 Administrative	 jurisdiction	 is
connected	 with	 the	 resolution	 of	 disputes	 in	 the	 domain	 of
administrative	 law,	 liability	 in	 the	 area	 of	 administrative	 law	 and
application	of	administrative	coercion	measures23.

Thus,	 administrative	 law	 is	 a	 branch	 of	 law	 which	 governs	 social
relations	in	the	three	above	named	spheres.

The	method	of	administrative	law,	like	methods	of	any	other	branch	of
law,	 is	 a	 system	 of	 forms	 and	 means,	 by	 which	 legal	 norms	 have
influence	on	social	relations	under	the	regulation	of	a	given	legal	branch.

Almost	 all	 branches	 of	 law	 use	 such	 legal	 categories	 as	 instruction
(placing	 an	 obligation	 to	 commit	 certain	 deeds),	 permission
(authorisation	 of	 certain	 deeds)	 and	 prohibition	 (placing	 an	 obligation
not	to	commit	certain	deeds	at	the	threat	or	penalty).

The	 specific	 feature	 of	 the	 administrative	 law’s	method	 is	 that	 state
governance,	which	is	its	subject	matter,	predetermines	inequality	of	the
parties	of	administrative	 legal	 relations	 (since	 there	 is	always	 someone
who	 governs	 and	 someone	 being	 governed).	 Because	 of	 this,
administrative	 law	 is	 characterised	by	 the	method	of	 legal	 authority	or
authoritative	 orders	 issued	 by	 a	 lawful	 actor	 of	 state	 governance.	 Such
orders	are	of	one-sided	character	and	express	the	will	of	such	actor24.

Thus,	 the	 mechanism	 of	 administrative	 law	 is	 mainly	 based	 on
prohibitions	 and	 authoritative	 means	 of	 regulation,	 i.e.	 it	 is	 mainly
imperative	(direct	subordination	of	the	will	of	the	governed	to	the	will	of
the	governing	actors).

Administrative	legal	relations	are	rarely	based	on	mutual	expression	of
will	 of	 parties.	 One-sidedness	 of	 will	 expression	 is	 their	 common
characteristic.	However,	dispositive	methods	may	be	used	by	the	parties
to	administrative	relations	if	they	are	state	agencies	and	none	of	them	is
subordinated	to	others.

24.2.	Administrative	Legal	Norms	and	Administrative	Relations



An	administrative	 legal	norm	 is	 a	 rule	 of	 conduct	 guaranteed	by	 the
state	 (either	 directly	 established	 or	 allowed	 by	 it),	 regulating	 the
relations	in	connection	with	state	agencies	exercising	their	powers,	their
interaction,	realisation	of	administrative	procedures	and	administrative
jurisdiction.

As	 a	 rule,	 administrative	 legal	 norms	 are	 created	 by	 the	 executive
agencies	 themselves	 and	may	 govern	 relations	which	 are	 a	 part	 of	 the
subject	matter	of	other	legal	branches	(financial,	land,	tax	law,	etc.).

This	 specific	 feature	of	administrative	 law	 is	 connected	with	 the	 fact
that	state	agencies	regulate	various	areas	of	social	relations.	Hence,	the
norms	of	administrative	 law	“penetrate”	 into	 those	area	where	specific
normative	 legal	 acts	 are	 already	 in	 force	 (Land	 Code,	 Tax	 Code,	 etc.).
However,	 this	does	not	mean	 that	 the	administrative	 legal	norms	have
the	priority	or	that	they	have	any	special	legal	force.	Numerous	norms	of
administrative	law	are	present	in	normative	legal	acts,	which	are	strictly
hierarchic	depending	on	their	legal	force	and	which	in	any	case	may	not
contradict	the	laws.

The	norms	of	administrative	law	consist	of	a	hypothesis,	a	disposition
and	a	sanction,	similarly	to	any	other	legal	norms.	The	said	elements	of	a
legal	norm	are	analyzed	in	para	7.2	hereof.

There	are	several	classifications	of	administrative	legal	norms:

1.	 based	 on	 their	 character,	 they	may	 be:	material	 (those	 envisaging
the	rights,	obligations	and	liability	of	the	participants	of	administrative
legal	 relations)	 and	 procedural	 (those	 governing	 the	 administrative
procedures	and	administrative	jurisdiction);

2.	 based	on	 their	means	of	 regulating	 the	behavior	 of	 their	 subjects,
they	may	be:	prohibitive,	restrictive,	permissive	or	enabling,	authorising,
stimulating;

3.	 based	 on	 their	 territorial	 scope,	 they	 may	 be:	 federal	 (set	 out	 in
federal	 laws	 and	 in	 force	 on	 the	 whole	 territory	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation)	 or	 regional	 (set	 out	 in	 regional	 laws	 and	 in	 force	 on	 the



territory	of	the	respective	subjects	of	the	Russian	Federation);

4.	based	on	their	temporal	scope,	they	may	be:	temporary	(with	a	fixed
term	of	action)	or	termless	(not	limited	in	time).

Administrative	 legal	 relations	 are	 relations	 in	 the	 area	 of	 state
governance	regulated	by	administrative	legal	norms.

These	legal	relations	possess	the	following	characteristics:

—	they	arise	on	the	basis	of	administrative	legal	norms;

—	they	arise	in	a	specific	area:	exercising	authoritative	activities;

—	one	of	the	participants	of	such	relations	is	a	state	agency	or	public
official;

—	 although	 it	 is	 possible	 to	 settle	 administrative	 legal	 disputes	 in
court,	 as	 a	 general	 rule	 they	 are	 solved	 according	 to	 an	 administrative
procedure	—	i.e.,	by	an	authoritarian	order	of	a	competent	official.

Parties	 to	 administrative	 legal	 relations	 include	 state	 agencies,	 their
structural	units,	officials,	organisations,	citizens	and	their	associations.

Subjects	of	administrative	legal	relations	are	things	in	connection	with
which	 such	 relations	 arise	 and	 develop.	 Such	 subjects	 include	 deeds,
decisions	and	behavior	of	parties	to	administrative	legal	relations;	state
or	private	property;	objects	of	spiritual	culture;	all	the	rights,	freedoms
and	obligations	which	form	the	administrative	legal	status	of	citizens	in
their	relations	with	state	agencies.

Administrative	 legal	 relations	 are	 created	 by	 legal	 facts,	 the
classification	of	which	is	provided	in	para.	16.1	hereof.

There	are	several	types	of	administrative	legal	relations:

1.	based	on	their	content,	they	may	be	material	or	procedural;

2.	 based	on	 the	nature	of	 the	 interaction	between	 their	parties,	 they



may	be	 vertical	 (if	 one	party	 is	 subordinate	 to	 the	other)	 or	horizontal
(relations	 between	 non-subordinate	 state	 agencies,	 enterprises,
organisations	 or	 citizens	 which	 are	 not	 subordinate	 to	 each	 other	 in
connection	 with	 the	 realisation	 of	 their	 rights	 in	 the	 area	 of	 state
governance);

3.	based	on	the	nature	of	legal	facts	giving	rise	to	such	relations,	they
may	 be	 those	 that	 have	 arisen	 due	 to	 lawful	 deeds	 or	 those	 that	 have
arisen	due	to	legal	offences;

4.	based	on	their	duration,	they	may	be	termless	or	temporary.

24.3.	System	of	Administrative	Law	and	Its	Sources

Administrative	law	is	a	system	i.e.	a	sum	total	of	legal	norms	and	legal
institutes	structured	in	a	certain	way.

The	fact	that	administrative	norms	and	institutes	are	a	system	may	be
explained	by	the	specifics	of	the	subject	matter	and	method	of	this	legal
branch	 as	 well	 as	 its	 purposes,	 the	 main	 of	 which	 are:	 1)	 creation	 of
conditions	for	the	realisation	of	citizen’s	rights,	freedoms	and	legitimate
interests	 by	 state	 agencies	 (actors	 of	 state	 governance);	 2)	 creation	 of
legal	 framework	 for	 the	 effective	 operation	 of	 executive	 agencies;	 3)
creation	 of	 favourable	 conditions	 for	 the	 development	 of	 socio-
economic,	 political,	 cultural	 and	 other	 spheres	 of	 social	 life;
4)	 protection	 of	 citizens	 and	 society	 from	 misuse	 or	 abuse	 of	 power,
negligence,	incompetence	of	state	agencies.

The	 system	 of	 administrative	 law	 includes	 the	 general	 and	 special
parts.

The	 general	 part	 of	 administrative	 law	 establishes	 institutes
governing:	the	status	of	administrative	law	actors;	forms	and	methods	of
state	 agencies’	 activities;	 grounds	 and	 forms	 of	 administrative	 legal
liability;	types	of	administrative	penalties.

The	 special	 part	 of	 administrative	 law	 governs	 the	 organisation	 and
realisation	 of	 state	 governance	 in	 various	 areas:	 economics,	 industry,



agriculture,	 trade,	 defence,	 security,	 etc.;	 as	 well	 as	 organisation	 and
realisation	of	political,	economic	and	other	ties	to	foreign	nations.

Sources	 of	 administrative	 law	 are	 external	 forms	of	manifestation	of
the	administrative	legal	norms,	i.e.	normative	legal	acts	of	state	agencies
which	contain	such	norms.

The	 normative	 legal	 acts	 which	 are	 sources	 of	 administrative	 law
include:

1.	 the	 Constitution	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 federal	 constitutional
and	federal	laws	—	their	administrative	legal	norms	form	the	basis	of	the
administrative	legal	branch;

2.	 universal	 principles	 and	 norms	 of	 international	 law	 and
international	treaties	of	the	Russian	Federation;

3.	decrees	of	the	President	of	the	Russian	Federation;

4.	normative	legal	acts	of	the	Government	of	the	Russian	Federation;

5.	normative	legal	acts	of	federal	ministries;

6.	laws	and	other	normative	legal	acts	of	supreme	state	agencies	of	the
subjects	of	the	Russian	Federation	(constitutions	of	the	republics	which
are	parts	of	 the	Russian	Federation,	 charters	of	 territories,	 regions	and
other	 subjects	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 laws	 on	 governments	 or
administrations	of	subjects	of	the	Russian	Federation,	etc.);

7.	 normative	 legal	 acts	 of	 municipal	 agencies	 if	 the	 law	 vests	 them
with	the	respective	authority.

24.4.	Administrative	Law	Actors	and	Their	Status
24.4.1.	Citizens,	Foreign	Citizens	and	Stateless	Persons

Citizens	are	among	 the	most	 important	 actors	of	 administrative	 law,
since	the	protection	of	their	rights	and	freedoms	is	the	priority	of	state
governance.



The	 administrative	 legal	 status	 of	 citizens	 is	 formed	 by	 their	 rights,
freedoms	and	 legitimate	 interests,	 their	guarantees	and	the	obligations
and	liability	envisaged	by	administrative	legal	norms.

Administrative	 legal	 status	 of	 citizens	 is	 determined	 by	 their
administrative	legal	capacity:	active	and	passive.

Passive	 administrative	 legal	 capacity	 is	 the	 recognised	 ability	 of	 a
citizen	to	be	a	party	to	administrative	legal	relations,	to	have	rights	and
bear	obligations	under	 administrative	 law.	The	 fundamental	 rights	 and
freedoms	of	a	man	arise	from	birth	and	cease	only	with	death.	However,
a	person	may	acquire	 some	 rights,	 especially	 those	 in	 the	area	of	 state
governance,	 later	 on.	 Besides,	 some	 of	 those	 rights	 cease	 long	 before
death.	Passive	administrative	legal	capacity	is	in	many	cases	dependent
on	age,	state	of	health,	education	and	other	factors	and	circumstances.

Active	administrative	 legal	 capacity	 is	 the	 capacity	 to	 exercise	 rights
and	 perform	 obligations	 envisaged	 by	 administrative	 legal	 norms,	 and
bear	 the	 liability	 in	 accordance	 with	 such	 norms.	 Partial	 active
administrative	 legal	 capacity	 arises	 from	 14	 years	 old	 (when	 a	 citizen
obtains	a	passport),	 full	 active	administrative	 legal	 capacity	—	 from	16
years	old.	Administrative	 liability	 arises	 from	 the	 age	of	 16.	The	 rights
which	 the	citizens	 receive	 later	 than	at	 the	age	of	18	may	be	exercised
from	the	moment	of	their	acquisition.

Administrative	legal	status	may	be	general	or	special.

The	 fundamentals	 of	 general	 legal	 status	 of	 man	 and	 citizen	 are
provided	 in	Chapter	2	of	 the	Constitution	of	 the	Russian	Federation	—
“Rights	 and	 freedoms	 of	 man	 and	 citizen”,	 whereas	 Article	 2	 of	 the
Constitution	of	the	Russian	Federation	sets	out	that	“man,	his	rights	and
freedoms	 are	 of	 supreme	 value.	 Recognition,	 adherence	 to	 and
protection	of	rights	and	freedoms	of	man	and	citizen	are	the	obligations
of	the	state”.

The	 fundamental	 constitutional	 rights	 and	 freedoms	 of	 man	 and
citizen	are	described	in	more	detail	in	para.	12.1	—	12.2	hereof.	However,
although	 the	 Constitution	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 is	 the	 most



important	source	of	 law	 in	 the	area	of	 rights	and	 freedoms	of	man	and
citizen,	but	it	is	not	the	only	one.

Among	the	most	important	legal	acts	in	this	area,	there	are:	the	Code
of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 on	 administrative	 offences	 of	 30	 December
200125;	Federal	Law	of	31	May	2002	“On	the	citizenship	of	the	Russian
Federation”26;	Federal	Law	of	25	June	1993	“On	the	right	of	citizens	of
the	Russian	Federation	to	free	movement,	choice	of	the	place	of	stay	and
residence	in	Russian	Federation”27;	Federal	Law	of	12	June	2002	“On	the
fundamental	guarantees	of	electoral	rights	and	right	to	participate	(vote)
on	 a	 referendum	 of	 citizens	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation”28	 and	 many
other	normative	legal	acts.

Apart	from	the	complex	normative	legal	acts,	some	of	which	have	been
mentioned	above,	the	administrative	legal	status	of	citizens	is	governed
by	 a	 variety	 of	 special	 legal	 acts	 which	 relate	 to	 specific	 elements	 or
aspects	 of	 their	 status	 (e.	 g.	 Federal	 Law	 of	 2	 May	 2006	 “On	 the
procedure	for	handling	appeals	of	citizens	of	the	Russian	Federation”29,
etc.

Thus,	 fundamental	 rights	 and	 obligations	 of	 citizens	 form	 their
general	 legal	 status,	 whereas	 their	 special	 legal	 status	 is	 formed	 by
specific	rights	and	obligations	of	citizens	in	certain	areas	and	spheres	of
state	governance.

Guarantees	 of	 rights,	 freedoms	 and	 legitimate	 interests	 of	 citizens
denotes	 the	 sum	 total	 of	 legal,	 political,	 economic,	 social	 and
organisational	means	which	make	possible	and	create	proper	conditions
for	a	person	to	exercise	their	rights	and	freedoms	and	which	ensure	their
legitimate	interests.

Administrative	 legal	 guarantees	 of	 citizens’	 rights	 are	 legally
established	 means	 and	 instruments	 which	 ensure	 the	 enjoyment	 and
protection	of	citizens’	rights	in	the	area	of	state	governance.

Apart	 from	 rights,	 freedoms	 and	 legitimate	 interests,	 citizens	 carry



certain	 responsibilities	 to	 the	 state.	 For	 a	 breach	 of	 such	 obligations,
administrative	liability	may	be	imposed	on	the	citizen,	which	is	provided
in	the	Code	of	administrative	offences	or	laws	of	subjects	of	the	Russian
Federation.

Under	 section	 3	 Article	 62	 of	 the	 Constitution	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation	 foreign	citizens	and	stateless	persons	enjoy	 the	same	rights
and	 carry	 the	 same	 obligations	 on	 an	 equal	 basis	 with	 citizens	 of	 the
Russian	 Federation,	 apart	 from	 the	 cases	 specified	 by	 federal	 laws	 or
international	 treaties	of	 the	Russian	Federation.	Legal	status	of	 foreign
citizens	and	stateless	persons	is	governed	by	Federal	Law	of	25	July	2002
“On	the	legal	status	of	foreign	citizens	in	the	Russian	Federation”30.

Under	 the	 current	 legislation,	 foreign	 citizens	 and	 stateless	 persons
may	not:	elect	and	be	elected	into	state	agencies,	as	well	as	participate	in
referenda;	work	 as	 state	 or	municipal	 servants;	 acquire	 land	plots	 into
their	ownership;	engage	in	business	activities	or	other	activities	if	such
activities	 are	 connected	 with	 the	 national	 security	 and	 defence	 or
handling	of	 state	 secrets.	There	 is	 a	 specific	 administrative	penalty	 for
foreign	citizens	and	stateless	persons	—	their	administrative	extradition
out	of	the	Russian	Federation	(Article	3.10	of	the	Code	of	administrative
offences	of	the	Russian	Federation).

Under	Article	5	of	Federal	Law	“On	the	legal	status	of	foreign	citizens
in	the	Russian	Federation”	the	term	of	temporary	stay	of	foreign	citizens
in	the	Russian	Federation	depends	on	the	expiry	date	of	their	visas.	The
term	of	 temporary	 stay	 in	 the	Russian	Federation	of	 foreign	 citizens	 if
they	do	not	need	a	visa	to	arrive	in	the	Russian	Federation	is	ninety	days
in	total	within	any	180-day	period.	The	term	of	temporary	stay	of	foreign
citizens	who	are	highly	qualified	specialists	if	they	do	not	need	a	visa	to
arrive	in	the	Russian	Federation	depends	on	the	expiry	date	of	the	work
permit	issued	to	such	specialist.

The	 term	 of	 temporary	 stay	 in	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 of	 a	 foreign
citizen	who	has	 joined	the	military	service	on	the	basis	of	a	contract	 is
determined	on	the	basis	of	the	procedure	specified	by	the	Government	of
the	Russian	Federation.	A	foreign	citizen	who	has	arrived	in	the	Russian



Federation	 for	 academic	 purposes	 and	who	 has	 become	 a	 student	may
stay	in	the	country	until	their	graduation.

Foreign	 citizens	 are	 entitled	 to	 the	 freedom	 of	 movement	 at	 the
territory	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 for	 personal	 or	 business	 purposes,
except	for	the	territories	which	require	an	additional	special	permit.

24.4.2.	President	and	Executive	Agencies

As	the	head	of	state,	the	President	of	the	Russian	Federation	plays	the
main	 role	 in	 the	structure	of	 state	governance.	The	Government	of	 the
Russian	Federation	being	 the	 supreme	executive	agency	 in	 the	Russian
Federation,	 as	well	 as	other	executive	agencies,	 also	play	an	 important
role.

Para.	14.1	and	14.4	hereof	describe	in	more	detail	the	main	rights	and
obligations	 of	 the	 President	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 as	 well	 as	 the
status	of	the	Government	of	the	Russian	Federation.

In	the	context	of	administrative	law,	the	President	is	both	the	supreme
state	official	and,	at	the	same	time,	a	state	authority	(agency).	Although
the	 President	 of	 the	Russian	 Federation	 is	 not	 de	 jure	 the	 head	 of	 the
executive	branch	of	power,	he	has	significant	influence	on	the	activities
of	the	executive	agencies	and	the	Government	of	the	Russian	Federation.
E.g.,	the	President,	subject	to	the	approval	of	the	State	Duma,	appoints
the	Chairman	of	the	Government	of	the	Russian	Federation;	may	preside
at	 the	 meetings	 of	 the	 Government	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation;	 may
dismiss	 the	 Government	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation;	 upon	 the
recommendation	 of	 the	 Government	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 may
approve	or	change	the	system	and	structure	of	federal	executive	agencies
and	has	a	number	of	other	competencies	in	this	area.

The	Administration	of	 the	President	 of	 the	Russian	 Federation	plays
an	 important	 role	 in	 realising	 the	 broad	 spectrum	 of	 functions	 and
competencies	of	the	President.

Under	 Decree	 of	 the	 President	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 of	 6	 April
2004	 “On	 the	 approval	 of	 the	Regulation	 on	 the	Administration	 of	 the



President	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation”31	 the	 Administration	 is	 a	 state
agency	established	 in	accordance	with	the	Constitution	which	supports
the	 activities	 of	 the	President	 and	monitors	 the	 implementation	of	 his
decisions.

Under	 paragraph	 5	 of	 the	 Regulation	 on	 the	 Administration	 of	 the
President	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 the	 Administration	 performs	 the
following	functions:

—	 preparing	 the	 bills	 to	 be	 proposed	 by	 the	 President	 to	 the	 State
Duma	as	the	presidential	legislative	initiative;

—	preparing	proposals	for	the	President	to	sign	federal	laws	or	decline
them;

—	 preparing	 draft	 decrees,	 orders,	 instructions	 and	 addresses	 of	 the
President	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 as	 well	 as	 analytical	 reports,
memoranda	and	other	documents	required	for	the	President;

—	ensuring	that	federal	laws	are	published,	promulgating	decrees	and
orders	 of	 the	 President	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 as	 well	 as	 other
documents	signed	by	the	President;

—	preparing	materials	 for	 the	annual	address	of	 the	President	 to	 the
Federal	 Assembly	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 and	 for	 other	 keynote
speeches	and	addresses;

—	 preparing	 recommendations	 for	 the	 President	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation	on	ensuring	coordinated	functioning	and	cooperation	of	state
agencies;

—	supporting	 the	 cooperation	of	 the	President	with	political	parties,
social	and	religious	associations,	trade	unions,	business	associations	and
chambers	of	trade	and	commerce;

—	ensuring	that	there	is	a	dialogue	with	the	civil	society	and	that	 its
structures	develop	and	strengthen;



—	 supporting	 the	 cooperation	 of	 the	 President	 with	 foreign	 state
agencies	and	officials,	Russian	political	and	social	leaders,	international
and	foreign	organisations;

—	assistance	to	the	President	of	the	Russian	Federation	in	HR-related
matters.

Many	 scholars	 note	 that	 the	 Administration	 of	 the	 President	 of	 the
Russian	Federation	and	 its	 structural	units	 is	not	an	 independent	 state
agency	and	may	not	take	decisions	which	are	mandatory	for	other	state
agencies.	 The	 only	 purpose	 of	 the	 Administration	 is	 to	 assist	 in	 the
decision-making	 of	 the	 President	 and	 ensure	 that	 his	 decisions	 are
implemented.	However,	de	facto	the	Administration	plays	a	crucial	role
in	 the	organisation	and	 functioning	of	 the	whole	 state	mechanism	and
its	chief	is	an	influential	political	heavyweight32.

As	 regards	 the	 status	 and	 legal	 capacity	 of	 executive	 agencies,	 the
following	is	of	note:

1.	 the	 nature	 of	 executive	 agencies	 is	 based	 on	 the	 constitutionally
established	 principle	 of	 separation	 of	 powers:	 the	 legislative,	 the
executive,	and	the	judiciary;

2.	the	main	task	of	an	executive	agency	is	to	ensure	the	enforcement
and	practical	realisation	of	laws	and	other	normative	legal	acts;

3.	the	activities	of	executive	agencies	are	of	the	organising,	executing,
supervising	and	regulating	nature	and	the	results	of	such	activities	solve
the	tasks	and	objectives	of	the	state33.

Para.	 14.4	 provides	 the	 analysis	 of	 the	 structure	 of	 federal	 executive
agencies	(the	Government	of	the	Russian	Federation,	federal	ministries,
agencies	and	services).

The	 structure	 of	 executive	 agencies	 of	 subjects	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation	can	be	described	in	the	following	manner.

Executive	 agencies	 of	 subjects	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 form	 the



single	 system	 of	 the	 executive	 jointly	 with	 the	 federal	 executive
agencies.

Federal	 Law	 of	 6	 October	 1999	 “On	 general	 principles	 of	 the
organisation	 of	 legislative	 (representative)	 and	 executive	 agencies	 of
subjects	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation”34,	 as	 well	 as	 legislative	 and	 other
normative	 acts	 of	 subjects	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 determine	 the
single	system	of	the	executive	in	Russia.

Subjects	of	the	Russian	Federation	are	free	to	regulate	their	system	of
executive	 as	 well	 as	 legislative	 agencies	 in	 accordance	 with	 the
fundamentals	 of	 the	 constitutional	 order	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 as
well	as	with	the	above	mentioned	federal	law.

Under	 the	 Constitution	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 federal	 executive
agencies	 and	 executive	 agencies	 of	 subjects	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation
may	 agree	 to	 transfer	 to	 each	 other	 a	 part	 of	 their	 functions	 unless	 it
contradicts	the	law.

Under	section	4	Article	17	of	Federal	Law	“On	general	principles	of	the
organisation	 of	 legislative	 (representative)	 and	 executive	 agencies	 of
subjects	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation”	 the	 supreme	 state	 official	 of	 a
subject	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 (chairman	 of	 the	 supreme	 executive
agency	of	the	subject)	determines	the	structure	of	executive	agencies	of
the	respective	subject	in	accordance	with	its	constitution	or	charter.

The	 supreme	 state	 official	 of	 a	 subject	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 is
elected	 by	 citizens	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 permanently	 residing	 on
the	territory	of	the	respective	subject.	This	post	may	be	held	by	a	citizen
of	the	Russian	Federation	who	is	over	thirty	years	old	who	has	no	foreign
citizenship	or	residence	permit	or	other	document	allowing	him	or	her	to
permanently	reside	on	the	territory	of	a	foreign	state.

The	supreme	state	official	of	a	subject	of	the	Russian	Federation	may
not	hold	office	longer	than	two	terms	in	a	row,	whereas	a	term	of	office
may	not	exceed	five	years.

The	supreme	state	official	of	a	subject	of	the	Russian	Federation:



а)	represents	the	subject	of	the	Russian	Federation	in	its	relations	with
federal	agencies,	state	agencies	of	the	subject	of	the	Russian	Federation,
municipal	 agencies;	 represents	 it	 in	 foreign	 trade.	 The	 supreme	 state
official	may	sign	treaties	and	agreements	on	behalf	of	the	subject	of	the
Russian	Federation;

b)	 promulgates	 laws,	 either	 attesting	 their	 promulgation	 by	 signing
them	or	declining	laws	adopted	by	the	legislative	(representative)	agency
of	the	subject	of	the	Russian	Federation;

c)	 forms	 the	 supreme	executive	 agency	of	 the	 subject	of	 the	Russian
Federation	in	accordance	with	the	laws	of	the	subject	and	takes	decisions
on	the	dismissal	of	this	agency;

d)	 ensures	 the	 coordination	 between	 the	 executive	 agencies	 of	 the
subject	with	other	state	agencies	of	the	subject;

e)	exercises	a	number	of	other	functions.

The	supreme	executive	official	of	a	subject	of	the	Russian	Federation
issues	 decrees	 (orders)	 and	 instructions	 which	 are	 compulsory	 on	 the
territory	of	the	respective	subject	of	the	Russian	Federation.

The	 permanently	 operating	 executive	 agency	 of	 a	 subject	 of	 the
Russian	 Federation	 is	 the	 supreme	 executive	 agency	 of	 the	 respective
subject.	The	most	important	area	of	its	activities	is	the	observance	of	the
Constitution	of	the	Russian	Federation	and	other	laws	on	the	territory	of
the	 Russian	 Federation.	 Besides,	 this	 agency	 develops	 and	 implements
measures	 to	 ensure	 socio-economic	 development	 of	 a	 subject	 of	 the
Russian	Federation	and	participates	in	the	implementation	of	the	single
state	 policy	 in	 the	 areas	 of	 finance,	 science,	 education,	 healthcare,
culture,	social	security,	etc.

The	supreme	executive	agency	of	a	subject	of	the	Russian	Federation	is
responsible	for:

—	implementing	measures	aimed	at	the	realisation	and	protection	of
rights	 and	 freedoms	 of	 man	 and	 citizen,	 protection	 of	 property	 and



public	order;

—	developing	and	submitting	to	the	legislative	agency	of	a	subject	of
the	 Russian	 Federation	 of	 draft	 budget	 of	 the	 subject	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation	and	ensures	its	further	observance;

—	 forming	 the	 system	of	 the	 executive	of	 the	 subject	 of	 the	Russian
Federation;

—	 managing	 and	 disposing	 of	 the	 property	 of	 the	 subject	 of	 the
Russian	Federation.

24.4.3.	State	Civil	Servants

State	service	is	one	of	the	most	important	institutes	of	administrative
law	 and	 is	 governed	 by	 a	 number	 of	 normative	 legal	 acts.	 The	 most
important	 of	 them	 are	 the	 Constitution	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 and
Federal	 Law	 of	 27	 May	 2003	 “On	 the	 system	 of	 state	 service	 of	 the
Russian	Federation”35.

Under	 Article	 1	 of	 the	 said	 law	 the	 state	 service	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation	denotes	the	professional	activities	of	citizens	of	the	Russian
Federation	for	ensuring	the	execution	of	competence:

—	of	the	Russian	Federation;

—	of	federal	state	agencies;

—	of	subjects	of	the	Russian	Federation;

—	of	state	agencies	of	subjects	of	the	Russian	Federation;

—	 of	 persons	 holding	 offices	 specified	 in	 the	 Constitution	 of	 the
Russian	Federation	and	federal	laws	which	allow	the	direct	execution	of
competences	of	federal	state	agencies;

—	 of	 persons	 holding	 offices	 specified	 in	 constitutions,	 charters	 and
laws	 of	 subjects	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 which	 allow	 the	 direct
execution	 of	 competences	 of	 state	 agencies	 of	 subjects	 of	 the	 Russian



Federation.

In	 other	 words,	 laws	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 distinguish	 between
state	offices	and	offices	of	state	service.

A	 person	 holding	 state	 office	 (state	 official)	 directly	 exercises	 the
competence	 of	 a	 state	 agency,	 whereas	 a	 person	 holding	 an	 office	 of
state	 service	 (state	 servant)	 ensures	 the	 execution	 of	 competence	 by	 a
person	holding	state	office	—	state	official.	E.g.	 the	minister	of	 foreign
affairs	is	a	state	official	and	the	employees	of	various	departments	of	the
ministry	are	state	servants.

The	 system	 of	 state	 service	 includes	 state	 civil	 service	 and	 military
service.

Federal	 Law	 of	 27	 July	 2004	 “On	 state	 civil	 service	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation”36	 regulates	 state	 civil	 service.	Under	 section	1	Article	3	of
this	 law,	 state	 civil	 service	 is	 a	 type	 of	 state	 service	 which	 denotes
professional	 activities	 of	 citizens	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 (state	 civil
servants)	 for	 ensuring	 the	 execution	 of	 competence	 of	 federal	 state
agencies,	 state	 agencies	 of	 subjects	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 federal
state	officials	and	state	officials	of	subjects	of	the	Russian	Federation.

A	 civil	 servant	 is	 a	 citizen	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	who	 has	 taken
obligations	to	join	the	civil	service,	who	performs	professional	duties	of
a	civil	servant	in	accordance	with	the	order	on	his	appointment	and	his
labour	contract	and	which	 receives	 remuneration	at	 the	expense	of	 the
federal	budget	or	budget	of	a	subject	of	the	Russian	Federation.

Only	 citizens	of	 the	Russian	Federation	over	 18	 years	old	who	 speak
the	state	language	of	the	Russian	Federation	and	meet	the	qualification
requirements	 for	 their	 office	 (i.e.	 requirements	 to	 professional
education,	 experience	 in	 civil	 service	 or	 in	 the	 area	 of	 qualification,
professional	knowledge	and	skills)	may	join	the	civil	service.

The	main	 elements	 of	 the	 legal	 status	 of	 civil	 servants	 include	 their
rights,	obligation,	restrictions,	prohibitions	and	liability.



The	main	rights	of	civil	servants	include	the	right	to:

—	due	working	conditions	for	the	performance	of	his	tasks;

—	 access	 to	 their	 office	 rules,	 key	 performance	 indicators	 and	 the
information	on	the	requirements	for	their	promotion;

—	 rest,	 which	 is	 ensured	 by	 standard	 working	 hours,	 days	 off	 and
public	holidays,	as	well	as	an	annual	vacation;

—	remuneration	and	other	compensations	in	accordance	with	the	law
and	labour	contract;

—	 access	 (under	 a	 due	 procedure)	 to	 information	 and	 materials
necessary	for	the	execution	of	their	office	duties;

—	 access	 (under	 a	 due	 procedure)	 to	 state	 agencies,	 municipal
agencies,	social	associations	and	other	organisations	in	connection	with
the	execution	of	their	office	duties;

—	protection	of	the	information	on	the	civil	servant;

—	promotion	on	a	competition	basis;

—	protection	of	 the	 rights	and	 legitimate	 interests	of	a	 civil	 servant,
including	by	appeal	to	court	in	case	of	their	violation;

—	state	protection	of	their	life	and	health,	as	well	as	life	and	health	of
their	family	members;

—	state	pensions,	etc.

The	main	obligations	of	civil	servants	include	the	obligations:

—	to	adhere	 to	 the	Constitution	of	 the	Russian	Federation	and	other
laws;

—	 to	 exercise	 office	 duties	 and	 execute	 instructions	 of	 their
management	in	accordance	with	the	office	rules;



—	 to	 abide	 by	 rights	 and	 legitimate	 interests	 of	 citizens	 and	 legal
entities;

—	to	follow	the	daily	office	routine	of	the	respective	state	agency;

—	 to	 maintain	 the	 level	 of	 qualifications	 necessary	 for	 proper
execution	of	the	office	duties;

—	 not	 to	 disclose	 state	 secrets	 or	 any	 other	 secret	 information
protected	by	federal	laws,	as	well	as	other	information	which	they	have
learned	in	connection	with	their	professional	activities;

—	provide,	as	prescribed	by	 law,	 required	 information	on	 themselves
and	their	family	members,	etc.

Restrictions	which	apply	to	civil	servants	are	the	circumstances	which
would	prevent	a	citizen	 from	being	admitted	 to	civil	 service	and	which
would	not	allow	them	to	continue	exercising	the	duties	of	a	state	servant
in	case	such	circumstances	arise.

Such	 restrictions	 include:	 declaration	 by	 court	 of	 a	 citizen	 as	 not
legally	 capable	 or	 as	 a	 person	 with	 limited	 active	 legal	 capacity;
application	 of	 penalties	 which	 do	 not	 allow	 a	 citizen	 to	 exercise	 the
duties	 of	 a	 state	 servant,	 as	 well	 as	 a	 non-cancelled	 or	 non-lifted
criminal	record;	refusal	to	undergo	procedures	for	access	to	state	secrets
and	 other	 secret	 information	 protected	 by	 federal	 laws;	 an	 illness
preventing	the	person	from	being	admitted	to	state	service	or	exercising
the	 respective	 duties;	 close	 relation	 to	 another	 civil	 servant	 (parents,
spouses,	children,	brothers,	sisters,	as	well	as	brothers,	sisters,	children
of	 spouses	 and	 spouses	 of	 children)	 in	 case	 of	 direct	 subordination	 or
responsibility	 of	 one	 civil	 servant	 to	 the	 other;	 cessation	 of	 the
citizenship	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 or	 adoption	 of	 citizenship	 of
another	state;	loss	of	confidence	by	the	employer	to	the	civil	servant	in
case	 of	 violation	 of	 restrictions,	 prohibitions,	 conflict	 of	 interests
requirements	 or	 non-performance	 of	 obligations	 set	 out	 in	 anti-
corruption	laws,	etc.

Prohibitions	are	the	direct	restrictions	which	apply	to	a	civil	servant.



E.g.,	 under	 Article	 17	 of	 Federal	 Law	 “On	 state	 civil	 service	 in	 the
Russian	Federation”,	a	state	servant	may	not:

1.	hold	an	office	of	state	service	if:

а)	he	is	elected	or	appointed	to	state	office;

b)	he	is	elected	to	a	municipal	agency;

c)	he	is	elected	to	a	paid	position	in	a	trade	union	body;

2.	do	business	in	person	or	through	trustees;

3.	in	cases	set	out	by	a	federal	law	—	acquire	securities;

4.	 receive	 remuneration	 from	 individuals	 or	 legal	 entities	 in
connection	with	their	duties	(gifts,	money,	 loans,	services,	payment	for
entertainment,	 vacation,	 transport	 expenses,	 and	 other	 forms	 of
remuneration).

5.	leave	the	borders	of	the	Russian	Federation	in	connection	with	their
duties	at	the	expense	of	individuals	or	legal	entities;

6.	make	public	statements,	speeches	or	evaluations,	including	in	mass
media,	 in	 respect	 of	 the	 activities	 of	 state	 agencies,	 their	 chiefs,
including	the	decisions	of	a	higher	state	agency	or	a	state	agency	where	a
civil	person	holds	office,	unless	it	is	a	part	of	their	duties;

7.	 use	 their	 duties	 in	 the	 interests	 of	 political	 parties,	 other	 social
associations,	 religious	 associations	 or	 other	 organisations,	 as	 well	 as
publically	express	their	attitude	to	the	said	associations	or	organisations,
unless	it	is	a	part	of	their	duties;	etc.

A	civil	servant,	his	or	her	spouse	and	his	minor	children,	may	not	open
and	 have	 accounts,	 store	 their	 money	 and	 valuables	 in	 foreign	 banks
which	are	situated	outside	of	the	border	of	the	Russian	Federation.	They
may	not	hold	or	use	foreign	financial	instruments.

For	the	purposes	of	strengthening	the	discipline	of	state	civil	servants



they	 may	 be	 rewarded	 (their	 accomplishments	 may	 be	 officially
recognised	 and	 they	 may	 be	 paid	 a	 bonus);	 they	 may	 be	 granted	 an
honorable	 title	of	 the	Russian	Federation;	distinction	awards,	and	 they
may	be	subject	to	disciplinary	penalties.

E.g.,	 for	 a	 disciplinary	 misdemeanor,	 i.e.	 for	 a	 culpable	 non-
performance	 or	 undue	 performance	 of	 their	 duties,	 the	 following
disciplinary	penalties	may	be	imposed	on	civil	servants:	an	admonition,
a	 reprimand,	 a	 declaration	 on	 the	 state	 servant’s	 lack	 of	 qualification;
dismissal	from	the	state	service.

The	maximum	 age	 for	 holding	 an	 office	 of	 state	 service	 is	 60	 years.
However,	a	competent	agency	may	prolong	this	term	until	the	person	is
65	years	old	subject	to	his	or	her	approval.	In	some	exceptional	cases	the
President	of	the	Russian	Federation	may	take	a	decision	to	prolong	the
term	 of	 office	 of	 a	 civil	 servant	 who	 holds	 a	 senior	 position	 until	 70
years.

24.4.4.	Military	Servicemen

The	 legal	 status	 of	 military	 servicemen	 is	 determined	 by	 the
Constitution	of	the	Russian	Federation	and	a	number	of	federal	laws,	the
most	 important	 of	 them	 being	 Federal	 Law	 of	 28	 March	 1998	 “On
military	 duty	 and	military	 service”37	 and	 Federal	 Law	 of	 27	May	 1998
“On	the	status	of	military	servicemen”38.

Article	59	of	the	Constitution	of	the	Russian	Federation	provides	that
the	protection	of	the	Fatherland	is	a	duty	and	obligation	of	a	citizen	of
Russian	Federation,	who	undergoes	military	 service	 in	accordance	with
the	 federal	 law.	However,	 if	military	 service	 contradicts	 the	 religion	or
beliefs	of	a	citizen	and	 in	some	other	cases,	he	has	 the	right	 to	opt	 for
alternative	civil	service	instead.

Military	 service	 is	 a	 special	 type	of	 federal	 state	 service	 exercised	by
citizens	who	have	no	foreign	citizenship.	Citizens	may	undergo	military
service	both	in	the	Military	Forces	of	the	Russian	Federation,	as	well	as
in	other	types	of	military	forces,	military	units	and	bodies.



Apart	 from	 the	 Military	 Forces	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 military
servicemen	may	serve	in:

—	 national	 forces	 of	 the	 Ministry	 of	 internal	 affairs	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation;

—	 engineering,	 technical,	 construction	 military	 forces	 or	 lifeguard
forces;

—	the	Foreign	Intelligence	Agency	of	the	Russian	Federation;

—	the	Federal	Security	Service	of	the	Russian	Federation;

—	 state	 security	 bodies,	 military	 divisions	 of	 the	 federal	 firefighter
service	and	special	units	created	for	wartimes.

Article	2	of	Federal	Law	“On	military	duty	and	military	service”	allows
foreign	citizens	to	become	military	servicemen	in	the	Military	Forces	of
the	 Russian	 Federation	 or	 special	 military	 units	 on	 the	 basis	 of	 a
contract.	Foreign	citizens	may	hold	positions	equivalent	to	the	military
ranks	of	soldiers,	seamen,	sergeants	and	foremen.	Russian	citizens	may
serve	as	draftees	or	on	the	basis	of	a	contract	(voluntarily).

Before	 enlisting	 into	 the	 military	 forces,	 citizens	 must	 undergo	 a
compulsory	medical	examination.

Male	citizens	aged	from	18	to	27	are	eligible	for	draft.	The	law	provides
for	some	circumstances	which	free	citizens	from	draft	(a	PhD	degree,	or
inability	to	serve	in	the	military	due	to	health	problems,	etc.)	and	some
circumstances	 which	 suspend	 their	 eligibility	 for	 draft	 (having	 two	 or
more	children;	being	elected	as	a	member	of	a	legislative	agency	of	the
Russian	Federation;	full-time	studying	in	a	university,	etc.).

If	 a	 citizen	wishes	 to	 undergo	 voluntary	military	 service	 (besides	his
conscription	obligation),	he	 enters	 into	 a	 contract	with	 the	Ministry	of
Defence	of	 the	Russian	Federation	or	 another	 federal	 executive	 agency
which	has	military	units.

A	contract	for	enlisted	military	service	may	last	three,	five	or	ten	years



or	may	be	equal	to	the	duration	of	the	education	in	a	military	college	or
university	plus	five	years.	The	parties	of	such	contract	are	a	citizen	and
the	 federal	 executive	 agency	 where	 the	 citizen	 will	 serve.	 One	 of	 the
distinguishing	 characteristics	 of	 voluntary	 enlistment	 is	 the	 fact	 that
foreign	citizens	may	also	conclude	military	contracts,	not	only	Russian
citizens39.

Article	1	of	Federal	Law	“On	the	status	of	military	servicemen”	defines
the	 status	 of	 a	 military	 serviceman	 as	 a	 sum	 total	 of	 his	 rights	 and
freedoms	safeguarded	by	the	state,	as	well	as	his	obligations	and	liability
determined	under	the	legislation.

Article	5	of	the	said	federal	law	provides	that	military	servicemen	are
protected	by	the	state.	 Insult	of	military	servicemen,	violence	or	threat
of	 violence,	 encroachment	 on	 their	 life,	 health,	 honour,	 dignity,
dwelling,	property,	as	well	as	other	acts	or	omissions	infringing	on	their
rights	 in	connection	with	 the	exercise	of	 their	professional	duties,	give
rise	to	liability	as	prescribed	by	law.

Military	servicemen	have	the	following	rights:

—	 freedom	of	movement	 and	 choice	 of	 place	of	 residence	 (this	 right
should	be	enjoyed	on	condition	that	military	servicemen	must	maintain
combat	 readiness	of	 their	military	units	and	be	able	 to	 timely	arrive	at
the	place	of	duty);

—	 free	 speech,	 freedom	to	participate	 in	demonstrations,	gatherings,
marches	 and	 pickets	 (however,	 they	may	 not	 disclose	 state	 or	military
secrets,	discuss	or	criticize	the	orders	of	their	commander,	or	participate
in	strikes);

—	freedom	of	 thought	and	religious	 freedom	(although	they	may	not
refuse	 from	 carrying	 out	 their	 duties	 on	 religious	 grounds	 or	 use	 their
powers	 for	 the	 propaganda	 of	 any	 religious	 beliefs	 or	 create	 religious
organisations	on	the	territory	of	military	units);

—	 right	 to	 labour,	 rest,	monetary	 allowance,	 subsistent	 and	material
support,	 housing,	 protection	 of	 healthcare	 and	medical	 aid,	 as	 well	 as



other	rights	provided	by	law.

Duties	of	 a	military	 serviceman	may	be	 classified	 into	general	duties
(being	loyal	to	the	oath,	devotedly	serving	the	nation,	courageously	and
skillfully	 protect	 the	 Fatherland),	 as	 well	 as	 professional	 and	 special
duties,	which	are	envisaged	by	laws,	military	service	manuals	and	other
normative	legal	acts.

Unless	 otherwise	 specified	 by	 law,	military	 servicemen	 also	have	 the
same	obligations,	restrictions	and	prohibitions	which	are	established	for
state	civil	servants	(Article	27.1	of	Federal	Law	“On	the	status	of	military
servicemen”).

A	 military	 serviceman	 or	 a	 citizen	 called	 out	 for	 military	 training,
depending	on	 the	nature	and	gravity	of	 the	 committed	offence	may	be
brought	 to	 disciplinary,	 administrative,	 material,	 civil	 or	 criminal
liability.

Test	questions	and	tasks

1.	Why	is	administrative	law	often	called	law	of	state	governance?

2.	What	are	the	specifics	of	the	administrative	law	method?

3.	Please	provide	a	classification	of	administrative	legal	norms.

4.	What	does	special	administrative	legal	status	of	a	citizen	denote?

5.	Please	describe	the	structure	of	executive	agencies	of	subjects	of	the
Russian	Federation.

6.	 What	 is	 the	 difference	 between	 state	 offices	 and	 offices	 of	 state
service?

7.	Please	list	general	restrictions	and	prohibitions	which	apply	to	civil
servants.

8.	 Please	 describe	 the	 specifics	 of	 the	 administrative	 legal	 status	 of



military	servicemen.

Chapter	25.	Administrative	Coercion	and	Administrative
Liability

25.1.	Definition	and	Types	of	Administrative	Coercion

Administrative	 coercion	 is	 one	 of	 the	 types	 of	 state	 coercion
designated	 for	 ensuring	 the	 effectiveness	 of	 state	 governance.	 Various
executive	 agencies	 and	 officials	 may	 impose	 administrative	 coercion
measures	 for	 the	 realisation	 and	 optimisation	 of	 their	 executive
competence.	Therefore,	such	measures	are	of	authoritative	and	forcible
(coercive)	nature.

Administrative	 coercion	 denotes	 external	 psychological	 and	 physical
influence	on	 the	mind	and	behavior	of	a	person	by	means	of	enforcing
restrictive	and	unfavourable	consequences	of	a	personal,	organisational
or	 material	 nature.	 In	 other	 words,	 all	 measures	 of	 administrative
coercion	are	applied	to	force	a	person	perform	certain	actions	or	refrain
from	them,	or	obey	the	established	restrictions40.

There	are	some	specific	characteristics	of	administrative	coercion:

1.	 it	 is	 a	 type	 of	 legal	 coercion	—	 therefore,	 administrative	 coercion
measures	must	be	envisaged	by	the	respective	normative	legal	acts;

2.	its	forms	and	methods	must	also	be	fully	in	line	with	the	legislation;

3.	 it	 may	 be	 imposed	 only	 by	 specially	 authorised	 agencies	 and
officials;

4.	 it	 may	 be	 imposed	 by	 bodies	 of	 executive	 power	 and	 by	 certain
officials	 individually,	without	 addressing	 the	 court,	 as	well	 as	 by	 court
bodies	 empowered	 with	 the	 right	 of	 administrative	 jurisdiction	 and
authority	to	adjudicate	certain	administrative	offences;

5.	 it	 is	 enforced	 outside	 of	 subordination,	 meaning	 that	 this	 legal
relation	arises	without	one	party	being	subordinate	to	the	other	(which
distinguishes	this	measure	of	influence	from	disciplinary	penalty).



The	grounds	of	imposing	measures	of	administrative	coercion	are	the
commission	of	 a	 violation	by	 a	 person	—	an	 administrative	 offence,	 as
well	as	arising	of	certain	circumstances	which	are	not	connected	to	the
offence	 (natural	 calamities,	 epidemic,	 and	 other	 emergency	 situations
where	such	measures	are	used	in	the	absence	of	an	offence	and	of	guilt
for	preventing	dangerous	consequences).

The	possibility	to	apply	the	measures	of	administrative	coercion	in	the
absence	 of	 corpus	 delicti	 of	 an	 administrative	 offence	 is	 their	 special
feature.

Depending	on	the	purposes	and	the	manner	of	observing	public	order,
there	are	the	following	groups	of	measures	of	administrative	coercion:

1.	 administrative	 measures	 of	 prevention,	 which	 are	 directed	 at	 the
prevention	 of	 possible	 unlawful	 deeds	 (inspection	 of	 a	 vehicle	 by	 a
policeman,	checking	of	documents,	changing	the	routes	of	traffic	due	to
mass	events,	customs	inspection,	etc.);

2.	measures	of	administrative	constraint,	which	are	directed	at	taking
prompt	measures	 by	 executive	 bodies	 for	 the	 elimination	of	 a	 possible
unlawful	deed.	These	measures	may	be	applied	to	the	person	directly	and
may	be	individual	(detention	and	delivery	to	the	police,	etc.),	of	property
nature	(forfeiture	of	firearms,	demolition	of	unauthorised	constructions,
etc.),	 of	 technical	 nature	 (suspension	 of	 construction	 works	 due	 to
infringement	of	safety	technique,	etc.),	operate	as	a	measure	of	exclusive
imposition	(using	firearms,	water	cannons,	etc.),	and	be	connected	with
cancellation	or	suspension	of	licenses,	etc.;

3.	 measures	 of	 administrative	 liability,	 which	 are	 closely	 connected
with	the	measures	of	administrative	constraint	and	usually	follow	them
(administrative	 fine,	 administrative	 arrest	 —	 i.e.	 the	 types	 of
administrative	punishment);

4.	 measures	 of	 administrative	 procedural	 enforcement,	 which	 are
directed	 at	 the	 efficient	 functioning	 of	 adjudication	 procedure
(administrative	detaining,	personal	inspection,	etc.).	These	measures	are
also	closely	connected	to	the	measures	of	administrative	constraint.



25.2.	Definition	and	Types	of	Administrative	Offences

Administrative	offence	is	the	grounds	for	administrative	liability.

Pursuant	 to	 section	 1	 Article	 2.1.	 of	 the	 Code	 of	 Administrative
Offences	of	the	Russian	Federation,	administrative	offence	is	a	wrongful,
culpable	 action	 (inaction)	 of	 a	 person	 or	 an	 entity	 which	 is
administratively	punishable	under	 the	Code	of	Administrative	Offences
of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 or	 laws	 of	 the	 subjects	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation.

Pursuant	 to	 section	 2	 Article	 2.1.	 of	 the	 Code	 of	 Administrative
Offences	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 a	 legal	 entity	 is	 deemed	 guilty	 of
committing	 an	 administrative	 offence,	 if	 it	 is	 shown	 that	 it	 had	 the
opportunity	 to	 abide	 by	 the	 rules	 and	 norms,	 for	 violation	 of	 which
administrative	liability	was	imposed,	but	did	not	take	all	the	measures	in
its	control	to	observe	them.

However,	 imposition	 of	 an	 administrative	 penalty	 to	 a	 legal	 entity
does	not	release	from	administrative	liability	the	guilty	person,	as	well	as
imposition	 of	 criminal	 or	 administrative	 penalty	 to	 a	 person	 does	 not
release	from	administrative	liability	the	legal	entity.

Administrative	 offence	 possesses	 the	 following	 crucial	 features	 (for
greater	detail	on	the	features	of	an	administrative	violation,	see	para.	9.1
of	the	textbook);

—	social	danger	 (it	 inflicts	or	may	 inflict	actual	damage	 to	protected
social	relations);

—	unlawfulness	(the	deed	breaches	norms	of	law	and	is	punishable	by
administrative	liability);

—	culpability	(intentional	and	negligent);

—	 punishability	 (an	 administrative	 offence	 is	 the	 deed	 which	 is
punishable	by	administrative	liability).

Administrative	 offence	 (as	 any	 other	 offence)	 shall	 contain	 corpus



delicti	—	a	sum	total	of	elements	which	makes	offence	an	offence.

As	 noted	 above,	 corpus	 delicti	 of	 any	 violation,	 including	 an
administrative	one,	shall	contain	the	object,	actus	reus,	the	subject,	and
mens	rea.

The	object	of	an	administrative	violation	 is	 represented	by	protected
social	 relations,	 encroachment	 upon	 which	 is	 punishable	 with
administrative	liability.

Common	object	of	an	administrative	offence	is	all	the	social	relations
which	arise	in	the	sphere	of	state	management	and	governed	by	norms	of
administrative,	as	well	as	constitutional,	ecologic,	customs,	labour,	land,
financial,	and	other	branches	and	institutions	of	law.	Nevertheless,	these
relations	 are	only	protected	by	 the	Code	of	Administrative	Offences	of
the	Russian	Federation	and	laws	of	subjects	of	the	Russian	Federation	on
administrative	offences.

Generic	object	is	social	relations	united	by	the	Code	of	Administrative
Offences	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 into	 certain	 chapters.	 The	 generic
object	(i.e.,	social	relations	in	the	certain	sphere	of	state	management	or
social	 life)	 is	 the	 main	 criterion	 of	 division	 of	 administrative	 offences
into	types.

Based	 on	 above,	 there	 are	 the	 following	 types	 of	 administrative
offences:

—	 encroaching	 on	 rights	 of	 citizens	 (chapter	 5	 of	 the	 Code	 of
Administrative	Offences	of	the	Russian	Federation);

—	encroaching	on	health,	sanitary,	and	epidemiological	well-being	of
people,	 and	 social	 morality	 (chapter	 6	 of	 the	 Code	 of	 Administrative
Offences	of	the	Russian	Federation);

—	 in	 the	 sphere	 of	 protection	 of	 property	 (chapter	 7	 of	 the	 Code	 of
Administrative	Offences	of	the	Russian	Federation);

—	in	the	sphere	of	protection	of	the	environment	and	its	use	(chapter



8	of	the	Code	of	Administrative	Offences	of	the	Russian	Federation);

—	in	the	sphere	of	industry,	production,	and	energy	(chapter	9	of	the
Code	of	Administrative	Offences	of	the	Russian	Federation);

—	on	transport	(chapter	11	of	the	Code	of	Administrative	Offences	of
the	Russian	Federation);

—	in	the	sphere	of	finances,	taxes,	fees,	and	securities	market	(chapter
15	of	the	Code	of	Administrative	Offences	of	the	Russian	Federation)	and
others.

Direct	object	is	the	social	relations	breached	as	a	result	of	commission
of	a	certain	administrative	violation	and	described	in	a	certain	article	of
administrative	legislation	(e.g.,	operating	a	vehicle	in	breach	of	rules	of
setup	of	license	plate,	etc.).

Actus	 reus	 of	 an	 administrative	 violation	 is	 the	 system	 of	 features
prescribed	 by	 norms	 of	 administrative	 law,	 which	 characterize	 the
external	 aspect	 of	 the	 offence	 committed.	 Actus	 reus	 includes,	 in
particular,	the	following	features:	a)	unlawful	action	or	inaction	and	its
consequences;	 b)	 causality	 between	 the	 committed	 deed	 and	 its
consequences.

Depending	on	corpus	delicti,	violations	may	be	formal	and	material.

In	 violations	 with	 formal	 corpus	 delicti,	 the	 fact	 of	 committing	 a
violation	suffices	to	impose	administrative	liability,	regardless	of	the	fact
whether	 socially	 dangerous	 consequences	 arose	 or	 not	 (operating	 a
vehicle	 in	 the	 state	 of	 alcoholic	 intoxication,	 etc.).	 In	 violations	 with
material	 corpus	 delicti,	 the	 one	 may	 be	 brought	 to	 administrative
liability	 only	 in	 case	 socially	 dangerous	 consequences	 arose	 (e.g.,
section	 6.1	 Article	 20.4	 of	 the	 Code	 of	 Administrative	 Offences	 of	 the
Russian	 Federation	 —	 violation	 of	 fire	 safety	 requirements	 which
resulted	 in	 the	origination	of	 fire	and	 infliction	of	grave	harm	to	one’s
health	or	death,	etc.).

Subjects	of	administrative	 liability	 include	persons	who	have	reached



by	 the	 time	 of	 commission	 of	 an	 administrative	 offence	 the	 age	 of
sixteen	years,	as	well	as	legal	entities.

The	 Code	 of	 Administrative	 Offences	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation
identifies	 special	 subjects	 of	 administrative	 liability,	 i.e.	 the	 persons
whose	 bringing	 to	 administrative	 liability	 is	 connected	 with	 certain
peculiarities	 (officials,	 military	 servicemen,	 foreign	 citizens,	 stateless
persons,	etc.).

Mens	 rea	 of	 an	 administrative	 offence	 includes	 the	 guilt	 of	 the
wrongdoer,	 motives	 of	 his	 behavior,	 and	 the	 purpose	 of	 the	 deed
committed.

Pursuant	to	Article	2.2	of	the	Code	of	Administrative	Offences	of	the
Russian	 Federation,	 an	 administrative	 offence	 is	 deemed	 committed
intentionally	 if	 the	 wrongdoer	 realised	 the	 illegal	 nature	 of	 his	 action
(inaction),	 foresaw	 its	 harmful	 consequences	 and	 wished	 for	 these
consequences	 to	 arise	 or	 deliberately	 tolerated	 them,	 or	 treated	 them
indifferently.

An	administrative	offence	is	deemed	committed	through	negligence	if
the	wrongdoer	could	foresee	the	possibility	of	harmful	consequences	of
his	 action	 (inaction),	 but	 self-conceitedly	 hoped	 to	 prevent	 such
consequences,	or	did	not	foresee	their	arising,	although	he	should	have
and	could	foresee	them.

25.3.	Administrative	Liability	and	Its	Principles

Administrative	 liability	 is	 a	 legally	 prescribed	 type	 of	 legal	 liability
imposed	for	the	commission	of	an	administrative	offence	and	connected
with	application	of	an	administrative	penalty.

Administrative	 liability	 is	 the	 consequence	 of	 an	 administrative
offence	 (as	 opposed	 to	 preventive	 measures	 of	 administrative
enforcement).

Liability	 for	 administrative	 offences	 is	 liability	 towards	 the	 state,
which	empowers	the	respective	bodies	or	officials	to	adjudicate	cases	on



administrative	 offences	 and	 to	 impose	 administrative	 liability
(administrative	jurisdictional	activity).

The	following	are	features	of	administrative	liability:

—	it	is	imposed	only	for	a	committed	administrative	offence;

—	it	is	governed	by	the	norms	of	administrative	law;

—	it	lies	in	imposition	of	administrative	penalties;

—	it	may	be	applied	by	officials	of	executive	bodies	of	state	authority,
by	 collective	 subjects	 (commissions	 on	 juveniles,	 administrative
commissions,	etc.)	as	well	as	by	judges	(courts);

—	it	does	not	result	in	criminal	record,	as	opposed	to	criminal	liability;

—	 as	 opposed	 to	 civil	 liability,	 it	 may	 arise	 regardless	 of	 certain
material	damage;

—	as	opposed	to	disciplinary	liability,	it	is	imposed	on	persons	who	are
not	subordinate	to	the	subject	applying	the	certain	measure	of	liability.

There	 is	 a	 number	 of	 principles	 of	 administrative	 liability,	 some	 of
which	 were	 expressly	 listed	 in	 the	 Code	 of	 Administrative	 Offences	 of
the	Russian	Federation.	They	include:

—	 the	 principle	 of	 equality	 before	 law	 (Article	 1.4.	 of	 the	 Code	 of
Administrative	Offences	of	the	Russian	Federation),	according	to	which
persons	 who	 have	 committed	 administrative	 violations	 are	 subject	 to
administrative	liability	regardless	of	the	sex,	race,	nationality,	language,
origin,	and	other	factors;

—	the	benefit	of	 the	doubt	(Article	1.5	of	 the	Code	of	Administrative
Offences	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation),	 under	 which	 a	 person	 shall	 be
brought	to	administrative	liability	only	for	those	administrative	offences,
in	 respect	 to	which	his	 guilt	 has	 been	 established.	A	person	who	 is	 on
trial	 for	 an	 administrative	 offence	 shall	 be	 regarded	 innocent	 until	 his
guilt	 is	 proven	 in	 the	 procedure	 established	 by	 the	 Code	 of



Administrative	Offences	of	the	Russian	Federation	and	determined	by	a
lawful	decision	of	 the	 judge,	body,	or	official	who	have	adjudicated	the
case;

—	ensuring	 lawfulness	while	 taking	 coercive	measures	 in	 connection
with	an	administrative	offence	(Article	1.6	of	the	Code	of	Administrative
Offences	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation),	 including	 the	 express	 indication
that	when	taking	administrative	coercive	measures,	decisions	or	actions
(inactions)	abasing	human	dignity	are	prohibited;

—	liability	based	only	on	law	which	operated	at	the	time	and	location
of	committing	the	violation.

The	 legislation	 on	 administrative	 offences	 consists	 of	 the	 Code	 of
Administrative	 Offences	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 and	 laws	 of	 the
subjects	of	the	Russian	Federation	on	administrative	violations,	adopted
in	conformity	thereto.

The	 Code	 of	 Administrative	 Offences	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation
establishes	 two	 grounds	 of	 releasing	 a	 person	 from	 administrative
liability:	extreme	necessity	and	insanity.

Pursuant	to	Article	2.7	of	the	Code	of	Administrative	Offences	of	the
Russian	Federation	infliction	of	harm	to	protected	interests	in	the	event
of	 extreme	necessity,	 i.e.	 for	 the	prevention	of	direct	danger	 to	person
and	their	rights,	as	well	as	to	protected	interests	of	the	society	and	the
state	is	not	deemed	an	administrative	offence,	if	such	danger	could	not
be	eliminated	by	other	means	and	if	the	harm	inflicted	is	less	significant
than	the	harm	prevented.

Article	 2.8	 of	 the	 Code	 of	 Administrative	 Offences	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation	 defines	 insanity	 as	 the	 state	 where	 a	 person	 cannot
comprehend	 the	actual	nature	of	his	 actions	and	 their	unlawfulness	or
direct	them	due	to	a	chronic	or	temporary	mental	disorder,	imbecility,	or
other	mental	disease.

Article	 2.9	 of	 the	 Code	 of	 Administrative	 Offences	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation	also	sets	 forth	 the	possibility	of	 release	 from	administrative



liability	due	 to	 the	 insignificancy	of	 the	administrative	offence.	 In	 that
case,	 a	 judge,	 a	 body,	 or	 an	 official	 authorised	 to	 adjudicate	 the	 case
concerning	 the	 administrative	 offence,	 may	 (but	 are	 not	 obliged	 to)
release	the	person	who	has	committed	the	administrative	offence,	from
administrative	liability	and	limit	themselves	to	a	reprimand.

25.4.	Administrative	Penalty	and	Its	Types

Pursuant	to	Article	3.1	of	the	Code	of	Administrative	Offences	of	the
Russian	Federation,	an	administrative	penalty	is	a	punitive	measure	for
committing	an	administrative	offence	and	is	imposed	for	the	purpose	of
prevention	 of	 new	 offences	 either	 by	 the	 offender	 himself	 or	 by	 other
persons.

An	 administrative	 penalty	 is	 a	 type	 of	 administrative	 coercion	 and
shall	be	distinguished	 from	above	measures	of	administrative	coercion,
including	 measures	 of	 prevention,	 constraint,	 and	 administrative
procedure.

An	 administrative	 penalty	 is	 imposed	 on	 behalf	 of	 the	 state	 and	 is
always	 connected	with	unpleasant	 restrictions	and	deprivations	 for	 the
person	who	has	committed	the	offence.

However,	 an	 administrative	 penalty	 may	 not	 be	 aimed	 at	 the
abasement	 of	 human	 dignity	 of	 a	 person	 who	 has	 committed	 an
administrative	offence,	or	at	inflicting	physical	suffering,	or	at	damaging
the	business	reputation	of	a	legal	entity.

Pursuant	to	Article	3.2	of	the	Code	of	Administrative	Offences	of	the
Russian	Federation,	the	following	types	of	administrative	penalties	may
be	established	and	imposed	for	committing	administrative	offences:

1)	warning,	which	shall	be	issued	in	writing	and	operates	as	an	official
censure	of	a	person	or	an	entity.	It	may	be	imposed	for	an	administrative
offence	made	for	the	first	time,	if	there	is	no	harm	caused	or	there	is	no
threat	of	such,	to	the	protected	interests;

2)	 administrative	 fine,	 which	 is	 a	 monetary	 sanction	 expressed	 in



rubles.	 For	 persons,	 the	 amount	 of	 fine	may	 reach	 up	 to	 five	 hundred
thousand	rubles,	for	entities	—	sixty	million	rubles;

3)	 confiscation	 of	 the	 instrument	 or	 object	 of	 an	 administrative
offence	 —	 compulsory	 transfer	 to	 federal	 ownership	 or	 subject	 of	 the
Russian	 Federation	 of	 items	 which	 are	 not	 withdrawn	 from	 civil
turnover.	This	penalty	shall	be	imposed	by	a	judge;

4)	 deprivation	 of	 a	 special	 right	 granted	 to	 a	 person	 (operating	 a
vehicle,	going	hunting,	etc.).	The	 term	of	deprivation	of	a	 special	 right
may	not	be	less	than	one	month	or	more	than	three	years;

5)	 administrative	 arrest,	 which	 consists	 of	 keeping	 the	 offender
isolated	from	society	and	is	established	for	a	term	up	to	fifteen	days,	and
up	to	thirty	days	for	violating	the	demands	of	a	state	of	emergency	or	in
other	cases	established	by	law.	Administrative	arrest	shall	be	imposed	by
a	judge,	and	in	certain	cases	for	certain	kinds	of	administrative	offences
may	not	be	imposed	on	several	categories	of	persons	(pregnant	women,
women	having	children	of	fourteen	years	or	less,	persons	who	have	not
attained	the	age	of	eighteen	years,	etc.).

6)	administrative	deportation	from	the	Russian	Federation	of	a	foreign
citizen	 or	 of	 a	 stateless	 person,	 which	 lies	 in	 the	 compulsory	 and
controlled	 transportation	 of	 said	 citizens	 and	 persons	 across	 the	 State
Border	of	the	Russian	Federation	beyond	its	boundaries;

7)	disqualification,	i.e.	deprivation	of	a	person	of	their	right	to	occupy
positions	 in	 the	 federal	 state	 civil	 service,	 positions	 in	 the	 state	 civil
service	of	a	subject	of	 the	Russian	Federation,	positions	 in	a	municipal
service,	 occupy	 positions	 in	 the	 executive	 managerial	 body	 of	 a	 legal
entity,	 sit	 on	 a	 board	 of	 directors	 (supervisory	 board),	 pursue
entrepreneurial	 activity	 of	managing	 a	 legal	 entity,	 or	 to	 pursue	 other
activities	expressly	stipulated	by	the	Code	of	Administrative	Offences	of
the	 Russian	 Federation.	 Disqualification	 shall	 be	 imposed	 by	 a	 judge
only;

8)	 administrative	 suspension	of	 activity,	which	 lies	 in	 the	 temporary
termination	 of	 the	 activity	 of	 persons	 engaged	 in	 business	 activity



without	 creating	 a	 legal	 entity,	 or	 legal	 entities,	 their	 affiliates,
structural	subdivisions,	as	well	as	of	the	running	of	aggregates,	objects,
buildings	 and	 structures,	 of	 the	 performance	 of	 individual	 types	 of
activities	 (works),	 rendering	 services.	This	 type	of	penalty	may	only	be
imposed	by	a	judge	for	the	term	up	to	ninety	days,	in	case	the	less	strict
type	of	administrative	penalty	may	not	provide	achievement	of	its	aim;

9)	 compulsory	 works	 are	 the	 performance	 by	 the	 offender	 of	 free,
socially	 useful	 works	 in	 the	 free	 time.	 Compulsory	 works	 shall	 be
imposed	by	a	judge	for	the	term	from	twenty	to	two	hundred	hours	and
shall	 be	 performed	 within	 four	 hours	 per	 day.	 The	 Code	 of
Administrative	 Offences	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 sets	 forth	 that	 this
type	 of	 punishment	 may	 not	 be	 imposed	 to	 pregnant	 women,	 women
having	infants,	disabled	person	in	groups	I	and	II,	servicemen,	and	other
categories	of	citizens;

10)	 administrative	 prohibition	 to	 attend	 the	 places	 where	 official
sports	competitions	are	held	on	the	days	such	competitions	are	held.	It
shall	 be	 established	 for	 the	 violation	 of	 rules	 of	 spectators’	 conduct
during	official	sports	competitions	and	is	imposed	for	the	term	from	six
months	up	to	seven	years	by	judge.

It	 is	 worth	 mentioning	 that	 in	 respect	 of	 a	 legal	 entity,	 the
administrative	penalties	may	be	imposed	which	are	listed	under	numbers
1,	2,	3,	and	8.

Administrative	 penalties	 listed	 under	 numbers	 3	 —	 10	 are	 only
established	 by	 the	 Code	 of	 Administrative	 Offences	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation	and	may	not	be	established	by	the	legislation	of	the	subjects
of	the	Russian	Federation.

The	 types	of	punishments	 established	by	 the	Code	of	Administrative
Offences	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 may	 be	 divided	 into	 primary	 and
additional.

Primary	are	the	penalties	which	may	not	be	imposed	as	an	addition	to
other	 administrative	 penalties.	 Pursuant	 to	 section	 1	Article	 3.3	 of	 the
Code	 of	 Administrative	 Offences	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 these



include:	 warning,	 administrative	 fine,	 deprivation	 of	 a	 special	 right
granted	 to	 a	 person	 (except	 the	 right	 to	 operate	 a	 vehicle	 of	 certain
type),	 administrative	 arrest,	 disqualification,	 administrative	 suspension
of	activity,	and	compulsory	works.

Additional	are	the	penalties	which	may	be	imposed	separately	or	as	an
addition	to	the	primary	types	of	penalty.	They	include:	confiscation	of	an
instrument	or	 an	object	 of	 the	 administrative	offence,	 deprivation	of	 a
special	 right	 to	 operate	 a	 vehicle	 of	 certain	 type,	 administrative
deportation	outside	 of	 the	Russian	 Federation	 of	 a	 foreign	 citizen	 or	 a
stateless	 person,	 administrative	prohibition	 to	 attend	 the	places	where
official	sports	competitions	are	held	on	the	days	when	such	competitions
are	held	(section	2	Article	3.3	of	the	Code	of	Administrative	Offences	of
the	Russian	Federation).

When	 imposing	 a	 penalty,	 the	 following	 rule	 shall	 be	 taken	 into
account:	only	one	primary	or	one	primary	and	additional	administrative
penalty	may	be	imposed	for	one	administrative	offence.

Under	section	2	Article	4.1	of	the	Code	of	Administrative	Offences	of
the	Russian	Federation,	when	 imposing	an	administrative	penalty	on	a
person,	 the	 nature	 of	 the	 offence,	 the	 personality	 of	 the	 culprit,	 his
property	 statues,	 the	 circumstances	 mitigating	 or	 aggravating
administrative	 liability	 shall	 be	 taken	 into	 account.	 Nevertheless,
imposition	 of	 an	 administrative	 penalty	 does	 not	 release	 one	 from	 the
obligation	 to	 perform	 the	 duty	 for	 the	 non-performance	 of	 which	 the
penalty	was	imposed.

Pursuant	to	Article	4.2	of	the	Code	of	Administrative	Offences	of	the
Russian	 Federation,	 the	 following	 are	 the	 circumstances	 mitigating
administrative	liability:

—	repentance	of	the	wrongdoer;

—	voluntary	termination	of	wrongful	behavior	by	the	wrongdoer;

—	voluntary	provision	of	information	about	an	administrative	offence
to	the	competent	authority	by	the	wrongdoer;



—	 assistance	 of	 the	 wrongdoer	 to	 competent	 authorities	 in
establishing	the	circumstances	connected	with	the	offence;

—	prevention	by	the	wrongdoer	of	harmful	consequences	of	his	deed;

—	voluntary	compensation	or	elimination	of	the	harm	inflicted;

—	voluntary	performance	of	a	prescription	to	eliminate	the	offence;

—	commission	of	an	administrative	offence	 in	the	condition	of	grave
mental	disarrangement	or	in	severe	personal	or	family	circumstances;

—	 commission	 of	 an	 administrative	 offence	 by	 a	 minor,	 a	 pregnant
woman,	or	a	woman	having	an	infant	child.

The	 list	 of	 these	 circumstances	 is	 open¸	 i.e.	 a	 judge,	 a	 body,	 or	 an
official	 who	 adjudicate	 the	 case,	 may	 deem	 other	 circumstances	 as
mitigating	 administrative	 liability,	 apart	 from	 those	 indicated	 by	 the
Code	 of	 Administrative	 Offences	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 and	 other
legislation.	This	illustrates	the	principle	of	humanism	of	administrative
legislation.

The	circumstances	aggravating	administrative	liability	are	as	follows:

—	 continuance	 of	 unlawful	 behavior,	 regardless	 of	 the	 demand	 of
authorised	persons	to	stop	it;

—	 repeated	 commission	 of	 an	 analogous	 administrative	 offence,	 i.e.
commission	of	an	administrative	offence	during	the	period	within	which
one	is	deemed	brought	to	administrative	liability	(within	one	year	after
issuance	 of	 a	 decree	 of	 imposing	 an	 administrative	 penalty	 and	 its
serving	by	the	wrongdoer);

—	 involving	 of	 a	 minor	 into	 the	 commission	 of	 an	 administrative
offence;

—	commission	of	an	administrative	offence	by	a	group	of	persons;

—	commission	of	an	offence	in	the	conditions	of	a	natural	calamity	or



in	other	contingencies;

—	 commission	 of	 an	 administrative	 offence	 in	 the	 state	 of	 alcoholic
intoxication.

However,	 a	 judge,	 a	 body,	 or	 an	 official	 imposing	 administrative
penalty,	depending	on	the	type	of	the	offence	committed,	are	free	not	to
deem	 such	 circumstance	 as	 aggravating¸	which	 illustrates	 the	principle
of	humanism	when	imposing	an	administrative	penalty.

Test	questions	and	tasks

1.	 What	 is	 administrative	 coercion	 and	 how	 is	 it	 different	 from
administrative	punishment?

2.	 Please	 describe	 the	 classification	 of	 measures	 of	 administrative
coercion.

3.	Please	define	the	term	“corpus	delicti	of	an	administrative	offence”.

4.	 What	 is	 the	 difference	 between	 administrative	 liability	 and
measures	of	administrative	coercion?

5.	Please	list	the	crucial	features	of	administrative	liability.

6.	Please	describe	the	primary	types	of	administrative	punishment.



Part	6.	Basics	of	criminal	law
Chapter	26.	Criminal	Law	and	Criminal	Legislation

26.1.	Definition,	Subject	Matter,	Method,	and	Specifics	of	Criminal
Law

Criminal	law	is	a	separate	branch	of	Russian	law	which	is	a	sum	total
of	 legal	 norms	 established	 by	 the	 highest	 lawmaking	 authority	 of	 the
Russian	Federation,	 defining	 the	 crime	of	 a	 deed	 and	 its	 punishability,
grounds	for	criminal	liability,	types	of	punishments,	as	well	as	common
principles	and	conditions	of	their	application.

Criminal	law,	as	well	as	other	branches	of	law,	governs	social	relations,
but	in	a	specific	manner.	It	protects	crucial	social	relations	with	punitive
measures	 and	 recognizes	 as	 crime	 any	 infringement	 thereupon	 and
prescribing	criminal	penalties	therefor.

The	subject	matter	of	criminal	law	is	formed	by	protective	criminal	law
relations,	 i.e.	 relations	 arising	 at	 the	 moment	 of	 committing	 crime
between	 the	 actor	 and	 the	 state	 represented	 by	 its	 law	 enforcement
authorities.

These	relations	are	bilateral:	one	party	thereto	is	the	state	which	has
established	a	definite	and	exhaustive	list	of	criminal	acts	punishable	by
criminal	 penalties,	 and	 the	 other	 party	 is	 the	 criminal	 who	 infringed
upon	state-protected	relations	by	committing	a	forbidden	act	—	crime.

Some	 authors	 reasonably	 believe	 that	 the	 subject	matter	 of	 criminal
law	is	also	represented	with	regulatory	relations,	i.e.	relations	which	are
governed	 by	 criminal	 law	 norms	 and	 which	 entitle	 citizens	 to	 inflict
harm	in	certain	circumstances:	 justifiable	defense,	the	state	of	extreme
necessity,	 etc.	 The	 state	 encourages	 its	 citizens	 to	 protect	 their	 rights
and	freedoms,	other	persons,	 the	 interests	of	 the	society	and	the	state.
Criminal	law	thereby	stimulates	the	legality	of	their	actions,	on	the	one
hand,	and	forms	additional	restraining	effect	with	potential	criminals	on
the	other	hand.

The	method	of	 criminal	 law,	 as	opposed	 to	other	branches	of	 law,	 is



characterised	 with	 the	 predominance	 of	 imperative	 (authoritative,
providing	 no	 discretion	 of	 the	 actor)	 principles,	 prohibitive	 norms	 and
mechanisms.	 The	 essence	 of	 the	 method	 of	 criminal	 law	 lies	 in	 the
establishment	 of	 a	 ban	 to	 commit	 certain	 acts	 under	 the	 threat	 of
imposing	 a	 criminal	 punishment.	 This	 method	 of	 legal	 governance	 is
special	and	is	not	common	to	any	other	branch	of	Russian	law.

However,	some	specialists	underline	that	in	some	cases	the	method	of
criminal	law	suggests	granting	certain	rights	to	citizens	(e.g.,	the	right	to
reasoned	 risk,	 right	 to	 justifiable	 defense,	 right	 to	 non-abidance	 by
unlawful	 order	 or	 instruction,	 etc.).	 Infringement	 of	 protected	 social
relations	 is	 admissible	 when	 realising	 these	 rights,	 and	 in	 some	 cases
even	homicide.

Article	 2	of	 the	Criminal	Code	of	 the	Russian	Federation	defines	 the
tasks	of	criminal	legislation	and,	hence,	criminal	law	as	a	branch	of	law.

These	tasks	include	the	protection	of	rights	and	freedoms	of	man	and
citizen,	 public	 order	 and	 public	 security,	 environment,	 and	 the
constitutional	 system	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 against	 criminal
encroachment,	the	maintenance	of	peace	and	security	of	the	mankind,	as
well	as	prevention	of	crimes.

Obviously,	the	protective	function	is	prioritised	by	the	lawmaker.

For	the	fulfilment	of	the	said	tasks,	the	Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian
Federation	sets	forth	the	grounds	and	the	principles	of	criminal	liability,
defines	the	criminality	of	acts	which	pose	a	danger	to	the	society	and	the
state,	and	establishes	the	types	of	penalties	and	other	measures	for	their
commission.

26.2.	Principles	of	Criminal	Law

In	 governing	 social	 relations,	 criminal	 law	 is	 based	 on	 a	 number	 of
principles	united	into	a	single	system	and	interacting	with	one	another.

The	following	are	the	principles:



—	principle	of	 legality.	This	principle	means	that	the	criminality	of	a
deed,	its	punishability,	and	other	legal	consequences	shall	be	determined
by	 the	 Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 and	 by	 no	 other	 acts.
Application	of	criminal	law	by	analogy	shall	not	be	allowed;

—	principle	of	equality	of	 individuals	before	 the	 law.	Article	4	of	 the
Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 prescribes	 that	 persons	 who
have	 committed	 crimes	 shall	 be	 equal	 before	 the	 law	 and	 shall	 be
brought	 to	 criminal	 liability,	 regardless	 of	 their	 sex,	 race,	 nationality,
language,	origin,	property	or	official	status,	and	other	circumstances;

—	 principle	 of	 guilt	 which	means	 that	 a	 person	 shall	 be	 brought	 to
criminal	liability	only	for	those	socially	dangerous	actions	(inaction)	and
socially	dangerous	consequences	 in	 respect	 to	which	his	guilt	has	been
established.	 Objective	 imputation,	 i.e.	 criminal	 liability	 for	 innocent
injury,	shall	not	be	allowed.

—	 principle	 of	 justice,	 i.e.	 punishment	 and	 other	 legal	 measures
applicable	to	a	person	who	has	committed	an	offence	shall	correspond	to
the	 character	 and	 degree	 of	 the	 social	 danger	 of	 the	 offence,	 the
circumstances	of	its	commission,	and	the	personality	of	the	guilty	party.
Pursuant	 to	 section	 2	 Article	 6	 of	 the	 Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation,	 no	 one	may	 bear	 double	 criminal	 liability	 for	 one	 and	 the
same	crime;

—	 principle	 of	 humanism.	 Article	 7	 of	 the	 Criminal	 Code	 of	 the
Russian	 Federation	 underlines	 that	 criminal	 law	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation	 shall	 ensure	 the	 safety	 of	 man,	 and	 that	 punishment	 and
other	legal	measures	applicable	to	a	person	who	has	committed	a	crime
may	not	pursue	the	aim	of	causing	physical	suffering	or	debasement	of
human	dignity.

26.3.	Criminal	Law	of	Russia	and	Its	Structure

Criminal	 law	 is	 a	 federal	 normative	 act	 adopted	 by	 the	 Federal
Assembly	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 signed	 by	 the	 President	 of	 the
Russian	 Federation,	 and	 published	 in	 a	 certain	 procedure,	 establishing
the	 principles,	 grounds,	 and	 conditions	 of	 criminal	 liability	 or	 release



therefrom	and	 from	punishment,	 as	well	 as	defining	 the	 list	 of	 actions
deemed	crimes	and	establishing	types	of	punishment	and	other	criminal
legal	measures	for	their	commission.

The	 criminal	 legislation	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 consists	 solely	 of
the	 Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation.	 In	 other	words,	 criminal
legal	 norms	may	not	 be	 included	 into	 any	 other	 normative	 act	 (law	 or
regulation),	except	in	the	Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation.

Criminal	 legislation	 (the	Criminal	Code	of	 the	Russian	Federation)	 is
the	 only	 source	 of	 criminal	 law.	 Pursuant	 to	 section	 1	Article	 1	 of	 the
Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 new	 laws	 providing	 for
criminal	 liability	are	 subject	 to	 inclusion	 into	 the	Criminal	Code	of	 the
Russian	Federation.

While	being	the	sole	source	of	criminal	law,	the	Criminal	Code	of	the
Russian	 Federation	 is	 based	 on	 the	 Constitution	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation	 and	 the	 generally	 recognised	 principles	 and	 norms	 of
international	law.

The	Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation	consists	of	two	parts	—
General	and	Special,	which	unite	parts,	chapters,	and	articles	containing
criminal	law	norms.

The	 General	 Part	 of	 the	 Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation
consists	 of	 six	 parts,	 sixteen	 chapters,	 and	 one	 hundred	 and	 seven
articles	 devoted	 to:	 a)	 the	 criminal	 legislation	 and	 its	 principles;
operation	 of	 law	 in	 time	 and	 space;	 b)	 the	 crime	 and	 its	 types;
preliminary	criminal	activity,	joint	participation	in	crime;	circumstances
excluding	 the	 criminality	 of	 an	 act;	 c)	 punishment,	 its	 types,	 and	 its
imposition;	 d)	 release	 from	 criminal	 liability	 and	 punishment;	 e)
criminal	liability	of	minors;	f)	other	measures	of	criminal	law	nature.

The	norms	of	 the	Common	part	of	 the	Criminal	Code	of	 the	Russian
Federation	are	quite	specific.	They	do	not	consist	of	the	classic	elements:
the	hypothesis,	the	disposition,	and	the	sanction.	Therefore,	depending
on	the	content	and	the	purposes	of	a	norm	established	by	this	part	of	the
Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 they	 may	 be	 divided	 into



norms-definitions,	 norms-principles,	 norms-declarations,	 norms-rules,
obligating	and	entitling	norms.

The	 Special	 Part	 of	 the	 Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation
contains	 the	description	of	certain	crimes	and	establishes	punishments
imposed	onto	persons	who	are	guilty	in	their	commission.	It	consists	of
six	parts,	nineteen	chapters,	and	two	hundred	and	fifty-five	articles.

Norms	which	are	included	into	the	Special	Part	of	the	Criminal	Code	of
the	 Russian	 Federation,	 consists	 of	 two	 structural	 elements:	 the
disposition	 and	 the	 sanction.	 The	 former	 indicates	 the	 features	 of	 a
crime,	and	the	latter	—	the	type,	duration	or	amount	of	the	punishment.
Hypothesis	 is	 common	 for	 all	 the	 norms	 of	 the	 Special	 Part	 of	 the
Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	—	 it	 is	 the	 commission	 of	 a
crime	described	in	the	Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation.

26.4.	Operation	of	Criminal	Law	in	Time	and	Space

Section	 1	 Article	 9	 of	 the	 Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation
establishes	 that	 the	 criminality	 and	 punishability	 of	 an	 action	 are
defined	 by	 criminal	 legislation	 which	 is	 in	 operation	 at	 the	 time	 of
commission	 of	 that	 act.	 The	 time	 of	 a	 socially	 dangerous	 action
(inaction)	shall	be	deemed	the	time	of	committing	a	crime,	regardless	of
the	time	of	the	onset	of	consequences.

Criminal	 law	is	deemed	operating	 if	 it	has	been	adopted,	signed,	and
published	 in	 the	 set	procedure	 (for	 greater	detail,	 see	para.	 14.3	of	 the
textbook).

By	 a	 general	 rule,	 criminal	 law	 (as	 any	other	 law)	has	no	 retroactive
force.	This	means	that	if	the	new	law	leads	to	tightening	of	liability,	the
relations	which	had	arisen	before	the	promulgation	of	that	law	shall	be
governed	by	the	old,	abrogated	law.	In	other	words,	a	criminal	 law	that
establishes	the	criminality	of	a	deed	and	increases	punishment	or	in	any
other	 way	 worsens	 the	 position	 of	 a	 person	 shall	 have	 no	 retroactive
force.	This	 epitomizes	 the	principle	 according	 to	which	 the	 criminality
and	punishability	of	a	deed	shall	be	governed	by	a	 law	operating	at	the
time	of	its	commission.



At	 the	 same	 time,	 Article	 10	 of	 the	 Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation	 establishes	 an	 exception	 from	 this	 rule	 and	 sets	 forth	 that
criminal	 law	 which	 removes	 the	 criminality	 of	 a	 deed,	 mitigates
punishment	or	in	any	other	way	improves	the	position	of	a	person	who
has	 committed	 a	 crime	 shall	 have	 retroactive	 force,	 i.e.	 shall	 be
applicable	 to	persons	who	have	 committed	 the	 respective	deeds	before
the	 entry	 of	 such	 law	 into	 force,	 including	 persons	who	 are	 serving	 or
have	served	a	sentence	but	have	a	criminal	record.

Thus,	 if	 a	 criminal	 law	 mitigates	 punishment	 for	 a	 deed	 which	 the
person	 is	 serving,	 the	 punishment	 shall	 be	 shortened	 in	 a	 manner
prescribed	by	the	new	criminal	law.

Operation	 of	 a	 criminal	 law	 is	 limited	 with	 a	 certain	 territory.
Therefore,	the	primary	principle	of	operation	of	criminal	law	in	space	is
the	principle	of	territoriality.

Pursuant	 to	 section	1	Article	11	of	 the	Criminal	Code	of	 the	Russian
Federation,	a	person	who	has	committed	a	crime	on	the	territory	of	the
Russian	Federation	shall	be	brought	to	liability	under	the	Criminal	Code
of	 the	 Russian	 Federation.	 Also,	 those	 persons	 shall	 be	 brought	 to
liability	 under	 the	 current	 Russian	 criminal	 legislation	 who	 have
committed	crimes	within	the	limits	of	the	territorial	sea	or	the	airspace,
the	continental	shelf,	and	in	the	exclusive	economic	zone	of	the	Russian
Federation,	on	a	warship	or	a	military	aircraft	of	the	Russian	Federation
regardless	of	the	place	of	their	location.

A	person	who	has	committed	a	crime	on	a	craft	registered	in	a	port	of
the	Russian	Federation	 and	 situated	 in	 the	open	 sea	or	 in	 the	 airspace
outside	 of	 the	 confines	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 shall	 be	 brought	 to
criminal	 liability	 under	 the	 Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,
unless	otherwise	stipulated	by	an	international	agreement	of	the	Russian
Federation.

The	issue	of	criminal	liability	of	diplomatic	representatives	of	foreign
states	 and	 of	 other	 citizens	 enjoying	 immunity,	 should	 such	 persons
commit	crimes	at	the	territory	of	the	Russian	Federation,	shall	be	settled
pursuant	to	norms	of	international	law	which	by	no	means	suggests	their



impunity.

The	 territorial	 principle	 of	 operation	 of	 criminal	 law	 in	 space	 is
supplemented	with	 the	 principle	 of	 citizenship	 (section	 1	Article	 12	 of
the	 Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation),	 whereby	 citizens	 of	 the
Russian	 Federation	 and	 stateless	 persons	 permanently	 residing	 in	 the
Russian	Federation	who	have	committed	a	crime	outside	of	the	Russian
Federation	 shall	 be	 subject	 to	 criminal	 liability	 in	 accordance	with	 the
Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation,	unless	a	decision	of	a	foreign
state’s	court	is	in	place	concerning	this	crime	in	respect	of	these	persons.

Foreign	 nationals	 and	 stateless	 persons	 who	 do	 not	 reside
permanently	in	the	Russian	Federation	and	who	have	committed	a	crime
outside	 the	 boundaries	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 shall	 be	 brought	 to
criminal	liability	under	the	Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation	only
where	these	crimes	run	against	the	interests	of	the	Russian	Federation	or
a	 citizen	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 or	 a	 stateless	 person	 permanently
residing	in	the	Russian	Federation.

Pursuant	 to	 section	1	Article	13	of	 the	Criminal	Code	of	 the	Russian
Federation,	 citizens	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 who	 have	 committed
crimes	 in	 foreign	 states	 shall	 not	 be	 subject	 to	 extradition	 to	 these
states.

However,	foreign	nationals	and	stateless	persons	who	have	committed
offences	outside	 the	boundaries	of	 the	Russian	Federation	and	who	are
to	be	found	at	the	territory	of	the	Russian	Federation	may	be	extradited
to	 a	 foreign	 state	 for	 bringing	 to	 criminal	 liability	 or	 to	 serve	 their
sentences	 in	 conformity	 with	 international	 agreements	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation.	 The	 existence	 of	 a	 respective	 bilateral	 agreement	 is	 a
condition	precedent	for	extradition	of	a	criminal.

However,	 the	 right	 to	 asylum	 constitutes	 an	 exception	 to	 the	 above
rule.	 This	 right	 suggests	 prohibition	 to	 extradite	 persons	 from	 the
Russian	Federation	who	are	prosecuted	for	political	beliefs.

Test	questions	and	tasks:



1.	What	is	the	special	character	of	criminal	law	as	a	branch	of	law?

2.	Please	list	the	main	features	of	Russian	criminal	law.

3.	What	is	the	criminal	law	of	the	Russian	Federation?

4.	Please	describe	the	operation	of	criminal	law	in	time	and	in	space.

Chapter	27.	Crime	and	Criminal	Liability
27.1.	Definition	of	Crime,	Its	Features,	and	Categories

Section	 1	 Article	 14	 of	 the	 Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation
defines	 a	 crime	 as	 a	 socially	 dangerous	 culpable	 act	 prohibited	 by	 the
Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation	under	a	threat	of	punishment.
Section	2	Article	14	underlines	that	the	commission	of	an	act	(inaction),
although	 formally	containing	 the	 indicia	of	any	act	provided	 for	by	 the
Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 but	 which,	 due	 to
insignificance	 does	 not	 represent	 social	 danger	 shall	 not	 be	 deemed	 a
crime.

In	 connection	 with	 the	 above,	 the	 following	 are	 main	 features	 of	 a
crime:

1)	social	danger;

2)	criminal	prohibition;

3)	culpability;

4)	punishability.

A	crime	is	a	deed	(action	or	inaction),	i.e.	an	external	act	of	behavior
committed	under	the	control	of	consciousness	and	will	(conscious	deed).

Thoughts,	 psychological	 processes,	 beliefs,	 and	 judgments	 per	 se	 do
not	constitute	crime,	however	negative	they	are	from	the	standpoint	of
law.	A	person’s	 inner	world	 is	of	no	 interest	 for	criminal	 law,	although
certain	mental	activity	may	definitely	motivate	one	to	commit	unlawful
actions.	 In	 other	 words,	 thoughts	 cannot	 be	 criminal,	 unless	 they	 are



complemented	with	 certain	 actions	 (statements,	 threats,	 incitement	 of
religious	intolerance,	etc.).

Social	 danger	 means	 that	 the	 deed	 inflicts	 or	 threatens	 to	 inflict
damage	to	protected	social	relations.

Some	 deeds	 become	 socially	 dangerous	 from	 the	 moment	 of
commission	of	the	action	or	inaction,	regardless	of	the	fact	whether	they
resulted	 in	 harmful	 consequences	 (sale	 of	 liquor	 to	 minors	 —	 Article
151.1	 of	 the	 Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 disclosure	 of
adoption	 secret	 —	 Article	 155	 of	 the	 Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation),	 others	 become	 socially	 dangerous	 in	 case	 of	 arising	 of
harmful	consequences	(infringement	of	road	traffic	rules	which	resulted
in	careless	infliction	of	grave	harm	to	health	of	another	—	Article	264	of
the	Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation).

The	 nature	 of	 social	 danger	 of	 a	 crime	 is	 defined	 by	 social	 relations
which	are	threatened,	i.e.	the	object	of	the	crime.	Thus,	encroachments
upon	 human	 life	 differ	 in	 their	 social	 danger	 from	 crimes	 in	 the	 cyber
security	sphere.

The	 degree	 of	 social	 danger	 is	 the	 quantification	 of	 comparative
danger	 of	 deeds.	 It	 is	 defined	 by	 the	 graveness	 of	 consequences,	 the
manner	of	commission	of	a	crime,	and	by	other	circumstances	(intended
infliction	of	grave	bodily	harm	is	of	higher	degree	of	social	danger	than
infliction	 of	 medium	 bodily	 harm;	 commission	 of	 a	 crime	 by	 an
organised	 group	 or	 with	 severe	 cruelty	 is	 of	 higher	 degree	 of	 social
danger	 than	 the	 same	 committed	 by	 a	 person	 as	 a	 result	 of	 instant
intent,	etc.).

Criminal	prohibition	means	that	a	person	who	has	committed	a	crime
has	breached	a	certain	criminal	 law	ban.	 If	a	person	commits	an	action
which	is	not	deemed	a	crime,	it	may	not	be	considered	a	crime	even	due
to	a	lacuna	in	the	legislation.

In	other	words,	 there	 is	no	crime	where	 there	 is	no	 indication	 in	 the
Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation.	 A	 person	 is	 deemed	 having
committed	a	crime	only	as	a	result	of	breaching	a	norm	of	the	Criminal



Code	of	the	Russian	Federation.	Breaching	of	a	norm	which	is	contained
in	any	other	act	 is	deemed	a	misdemeanor	(for	greater	detail,	see	para.
9.1	of	the	textbook).

Mens	rea	in	the	criminal	sense	suggests	certain	psychological	attitude
to	one’s	behavior	and	its	consequences.	Guilt	may	exist	 in	the	forms	of
intent	 (direct	 and	 indirect)	 and	 negligent	 culpability	 (reckless
misconduct	 and	 criminal	 negligence).	 Objective	 imputation,	 i.e.
imposition	of	criminal	liability	without	guilt	is	prohibited	under	Russian
criminal	legislation.

Punishability	 shall	 be	 construed	 as	 the	 possibility	 of	 imposing	 a
punishment	 for	 each	 crime	 and	 as	 the	 threat	 of	 punishment	 for
breaching	a	criminal	law	norm.

Only	those	deeds	shall	be	deemed	crimes	which	the	lawmaker	believes
should	be	punishable	with	a	criminal	punishment.

Low	significance	of	a	deed,	as	underlined	by	the	lawmaker	shall	cancel
the	criminality	of	a	deed,	since	a	crime	is	a	deed	of	certain	social	danger.

This	means	that	in	the	event	of	merely	formal	qualification	of	a	deed
as	 a	 crime	 together	 with	 the	 lack	 of	 actual	 possibility	 to	 harm	 the
protected	 social	 relations	 means	 that	 the	 deed	 shall	 not	 be	 deemed	 a
crime	 due	 to	 its	 lack	 of	 social	 danger	 (e.g.,	 one	 steals	 a	 photo	 of	 his
beloved	 one	 from	 her	 apartment	 as	 a	 souvenir;	 one	 picks	 a	 couple	 of
apples	from	a	neighbor’s	tree,	etc.).

Depending	on	 the	nature	 and	 the	degree	of	 social	 danger,	 all	 crimes
are	 divided	 into	 certain	 categories:	 crimes	 of	 little	 gravity,	 crimes	 of
medium	gravity,	grave	crimes,	and	particularly	grave	crimes.

Pursuant	to	Article	15	of	the	Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation,
crimes	 of	 little	 gravity	 are	 intentional	 and	 negligent	 acts,	 for	 the
commission	 of	which	 the	maximum	penalty	 stipulated	 in	 the	Criminal
Code	of	the	Russian	Federation	does	not	exceed	two	years	deprivation	of
liberty.



Crimes	of	medium	gravity	are	intentional	offences,	for	the	commission
of	which	 the	maximum	penalty	 stipulated	 in	 the	Criminal	 Code	 of	 the
Russian	Federation	does	not	exceed	three	years	deprivation	of	liberty.

Grave	 crimes	 are	 intentional	 acts,	 for	 the	 commission	 of	 which	 the
maximum	 penalty	 stipulated	 in	 the	 Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation,	does	not	exceed	ten	years	deprivation	of	liberty.

Particularly	 grave	 crimes	 are	 intentional	 acts,	 for	 the	 commission	 of
which	the	Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation	establishes	a	penalty
in	the	form	of	deprivation	of	liberty	for	a	term	exceeding	ten	years	or	a
more	severe	punishment.

27.2.	Multiplicity	of	Crimes

Multiplicity	of	crimes	is	the	commission	of	two	or	more	crimes,	each	of
which	is	deemed	a	separate	crime.

The	features	of	multiplicity	of	crimes	include	the	following:	a)	each	of
the	crimes	committed	shall	contain	their	own	corpus	delicti;	b)	each	of
the	crimes	shall	lead	to	legal	consequences.

The	 term	 multiplicity	 of	 crimes	 shall	 be	 distinguished	 from	 single
crime,	which	may	be	simple	or	complex.

Single	crime	is	simple	where	it	encroaches	on	one	object,	is	committed
as	one	deed,	results	in	one	consequence,	and	has	one	form	of	guilt	(e.g.,
merder	—	Article	105	of	the	Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation).

A	 single	 crime	may	 be	 complex.	 The	 types	 of	 complex	 single	 crimes
include:

1.	extended	crime,	which	is	built	from	a	number	of	identical	criminal
acts	which	are	united	by	single	intent	and	are	directed	at	single	aim	(e.g.,
larceny	of	spare	parts	from	a	factory	for	a	month	in	order	to	assemble	a
single	mechanism	—	an	automobile).

2.	 continuing	 crime	 —	 an	 action	 or	 inaction	 with	 continuing	 non-
performance	of	duties	which	 the	 culprit	was	obliged	by	 law	 to	perform



(e.g.,	illegal	storage	of	a	weapon,	escape	from	penitentiary,	etc.);

3.	 compound	crime	—	a	crime	uniting	 two	or	 several	actions	each	of
which	 constitutes	 a	 separate	 crime	 under	 criminal	 legislation	 (e.g.,
banditry	is	a	single	crime	but	also	unites	open	larceny	of	other’s	property
(which	 is	 a	 separate	 crime)	 and	 infliction	 of	 harm	 (or	 threat)	 to	 the
injured	 person	 (which	 is	 also	 punishable	 by	 the	 Criminal	 Code	 of	 the
Russian	Federation);

4.	 crime	 with	 alternatively	 indicated	 deeds,	 where	 each	 of	 actions
prescribed	 by	 the	 disposition	 suffices	 (e.g.,	 Article	 221	 of	 the	Criminal
Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 provides	 for	 liability	 for	 larceny	 or
extortion	of	nuclear	materials;	Article	 222	of	 the	Criminal	Code	of	 the
Russian	 Federation	 provides	 for	 liability	 for	 illegal	 acquisition	 or
transfer,	or	sale,	or	storage,	or	transportation,	or	bearing	of	weapons);

5.	 crime	 with	 additional	 grave	 circumstances,	 where	 such	 grave
circumstance	is	envisaged	by	a	respective	rule	(infliction	of	grave	harm
to	health,	which	resulted	in	the	death	of	the	aggrieved	person).

The	 Criminal	 Code	 establishes	 two	 types	 of	 multiplicity	 of	 crimes:
cumulative	crimes	and	recidivism.

Pursuant	to	Article	17	of	the	Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation,
cumulative	crimes	are	two	or	more	crimes	for	neither	of	which	one	has
been	convicted,	except	 for	 the	cases	where	commission	of	 two	or	more
crimes	is	envisaged	by	the	Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation	as	a
circumstance	 stiffening	 the	 punishment.	 If	 crimes	 are	 cumulative,	 the
convict	shall	be	liable	under	each	crime	separately.

Cumulative	 crimes	 are	 also	 recognised	 as	 one	 action	 (inaction)
combining	the	features	of	crimes	described	by	two	or	more	articles	of	the
Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 (e.g.,	 by	 shooting	 one	 kills	 a
man	and	inflicts	harm	to	another	man’s	health).

The	essence	of	recidivism	as	a	type	of	multiplicity	of	crimes	lies	in	the
fact	that	a	person	who	has	a	record	of	conviction	for	an	intentional	harm
commits	 another	 intentional	 crime.	Recidivism	may	not	be	 constituted



by	repetition	of	reckless	crimes.

Pursuant	 to	 section	5	Article	18	of	 the	Criminal	Code	of	 the	Russian
Federation,	 recidivism	 of	 crimes	 leads	 to	 stricter	 punishment	 on	 the
basis	 of,	 and	 within	 the	 limits	 envisaged	 by	 the	 Criminal	 Code	 of	 the
Russian	Federation.

27.3.	Criminal	Liability

Criminal	 liability	 is	 legally	 established	 authoritative	 influence	 of	 the
state	upon	a	person,	 imposed	by	a	convictive	decision	of	a	court	which
has	entered	into	legal	force.

Criminal	liability	has	a	number	of	material	features.

1.	 It	 is	 established	 exclusively	 by	 the	norms	of	 the	Criminal	Code	of
the	 Russian	 Federation.	 Section	 1	 Article	 1	 provides	 that	 any	 norms
establishing	 criminal	 liability	 shall	 only	 be	 contained	 in	 the	 Criminal
Code	of	the	Russian	Federation.

2.	Criminal	liability	is	always	connected	to	state	coercion,	which	is	its
content.	State	coercion	is	effected	through	authorised	bodies.

3.	Criminal	liability	may	only	be	imposed	for	a	committed	crime.	If	one
has	not	committed	a	crime,	he	will	not	enter	the	criminal	law	sphere.	In
particular,	criminal	 liability	 is	not	established	for	 innocent	 infliction	of
harm	 (Article	 28	 of	 the	 Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation),
justifiable	 defense	 (Article	 37	 of	 the	 Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation),	etc.

4.	 Criminal	 liability	 is	 connected	 to	 certain	 deprivations	 which	 the
convict	shall	be	subjected	to.	These	deprivations	are	the	state’s	reaction
to	the	harm	inflicted	upon	the	man,	the	society,	and	the	state	itself.

These	deprivations	or	negative	consequences	may	be	of	the	following
nature:

a)	 personal	 nature	 (deprivation	 of	 liberty,	 arrest,	 compulsory	 works,
etc.);



b)	property	nature	(fine);

c)	moral	nature	(the	fact	of	criminal	record	and	conviction;	emotional
stress	connected	to	certain	types	of	punishment,	etc.).

Criminal	 liability	 and	 criminal	 punishment	 are	 two	 different	 terms
distinguished	by	the	Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation	(section	2
Article	2	provides	that	for	the	commission	of	crimes	the	Criminal	Code
of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 establishes	 types	 of	 punishment	 and	 other
measures	 of	 criminal	 law	 nature).	 Thus,	 the	 term	 criminal	 liability	 is
wider	 than	 punishment,	 and	 criminal	 liability	 is	 possible	 without	 the
punishment	 (Article	 90,	 92	 of	 the	 Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation).	Criminal	liability	without	imposition	of	a	punishment	lies	in
the	 fact	 of	 conviction.	 However,	 imposition	 of	 punishment	 is	 always
preceded	by	bringing	to	criminal	liability.

Pursuant	 to	 the	 Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 criminal
liability	is	imposed	in	the	following	forms:

—	 conviction	 without	 imposing	 a	 punishment	 (Article	 92	 of	 the
Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation);

—	conviction	and	imposing	a	punishment	without	its	actual	execution
(Article	73	of	the	Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation);

—	conviction,	imposing	a	punishment,	and	its	actual	execution.

Article	 8	 of	 the	Criminal	Code	 of	 the	Russian	 Federation	 establishes
that	the	only	grounds	for	criminal	 liability	 is	the	commission	of	a	deed
containing	all	the	features	of	a	crime	provided	for	by	the	Criminal	Code
of	the	Russian	Federation.

27.4.	Corpus	Delicti

Corpus	delicti	 is	a	sum	total	of	 features	provided	for	by	the	Criminal
Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 with	 the	 help	 of	 which	 a	 socially
dangerous	 deed	 is	 characterised	 as	 a	 crime	 (оn	 corpus	 delicti	 of	 a
violation,	see	para.	9.1	of	the	textbook).



A	 feature	 of	 corpus	 delicti	 is	 a	 feature	 of	 a	 socially	 dangerous	 deed
which	 is	 established	 by	 the	 criminal	 legislation	 and	 is	 material,	 i.e.
inherent	 to	 all	 the	 deeds	 of	 such	 kind	 and	distinguishing	 this	 criminal
deed	from	other	criminal	encroachments.

All	of	the	features	of	corpus	delicti	are	united	into	four	elements:

1)	object	of	a	crime;

2)	actus	reus;

3)	offender;

4)	mens	rea.

The	elements	of	corpus	delicti	are	interconnected,	they	are	organically
united	and	form	the	grounds	of	criminal	liability.

Corpus	delicti	may	be	distinguished	by	various	criteria.

Depending	 on	 the	 degree	 of	 social	 danger,	 corpus	 delicti	may	 be:	 a)
simple	 (main);	 b)	 in	 aggravating	 circumstances	 (e.g.	 commission	 of	 a
crime	 for	 reasons	 of	 religious	 hate);	 c)	 in	 mitigating	 circumstances
(pregnancy,	etc.).

Depending	on	the	manner	of	describing	actus	reus	(i.e.,	on	the	manner
of	describing	the	criminal	deed),	corpus	delicti	may	be:

—	material	(the	actus	reus	includes	not	only	the	act	itself,	but	also	the
socially	 dangerous	 consequences.	 Such	 crime	 is	 deemed	 completed	 at
the	moment	of	arising	of	these	consequences,	e.g.	homicide,	theft,	fraud,
etc.);

—	 formal	 (the	 actus	 reus	 describes	 only	 the	 act	 itself,	 without
indicating	 the	 socially	 dangerous	 consequences.	 Such	 crime	 is	 deemed
completed	at	the	moment	of	commission	of	the	described	act,	regardless
of	 arising	 of	 socially	 harmful	 consequences	 —	 slander/libel,	 unlawful
deprivation	of	liberty,	etc.);



—	reduced	(for	a	crime	to	be	deemed	completed,	it	is	not	required	for
the	socially	harmful	consequences	to	arise,	as	well	as	for	the	deed	to	be
completed.	 Such	 crimes	 are	 deemed	 completed	 at	 the	 earliest	 stage	 of
criminal	 deeds	 —	 robbery,	 banditry,	 organisation	 of	 criminal	 network,
etc.).

Below	is	the	description	of	the	elements	of	corpus	delicti.

Object	of	a	crime	is	the	protected	social	relations	which	are	harmed	or
threatened	by	the	crime.

Obviously,	 not	 all	 social	 relations	 are	 protected	 by	 criminal	 law,	 but
only	the	crucial	ones.	A	great	amount	of	social	relations	is	protected	by
other	branches	of	law.

Social	 relations	 protected	 by	 criminal	 law	 are	 not	 static.	 A	 part	 of
newly	 arising	 social	 relations	 is	 recognised	 by	 the	 state	 as	 extremely
significant	and	are	included	into	the	object	of	the	crime	(criminalisation
of	deeds),	 another	part	 loses	 their	 significance	 for	 the	 society,	 and	 the
state	 ceases	 to	 protect	 them	 with	 criminal	 law	 measures
(decriminalisation	of	deeds).

All	social	relations	which	are	protected	by	state	through	criminal	law
represent	the	general	object	of	crime.

Generic	object	of	crime	is	a	group	of	uniform	social	relations	protected
by	 a	 sum	 total	 of	 interconnected	 criminal	 law	 norms	 from	 criminal
encroachments.	 In	 other	 words,	 within	 a	 generic	 object	 all	 crimes	 are
gathered	that	encroach	on	one	and	the	same	group	of	social	relations.

Depending	 on	 the	 generic	 object	 of	 crime,	 the	 Special	 Part	 of	 the
Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 distinguishes	 the	 following
parts:	 part	 7	 —	 “Crimes	 against	 human”,	 part	 8	 —	 “Crimes	 in	 the
economic	 sphere”,	 part	 9	—	 “Crimes	 against	 social	 security	 and	 social
order”,	 part	 10	—	 “Crimes	 against	 state	 authority”,	 part	 11	—	 “Crimes
against	 military	 service”,	 part	 12	 —	 “Crimes	 against	 peace	 and	 the
security	of	the	humanity”.



Specific	object	is	the	part	of	the	generic	object	uniting	smaller	groups
of	 protected	 social	 relations.	 Specific	 object	 of	 a	 crime	 provides
foundation	for	distinguishing	chapters	in	the	Special	Part	of	the	Criminal
Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation.	 Part	 7	 —	 “Crimes	 against	 human”
includes	 chapter	 16	—	 “Crimes	 against	 life	 and	 health”,	 chapter	 17	—
“Crimes	against	freedom,	honor,	and	dignity”,	and	chapter	18	—	“Crimes
against	sexual	immunity	and	sexual	freedom”,	etc.

Direct	 object	 is	 the	 part	 of	 the	 specific	 object	 representing	 a	 certain
social	 relation	which	 is	encroached	on	by	the	criminal	deed.	The	direct
object	 corresponds	 to	 the	 title	 of	 an	 article	 of	 the	 Special	 Part	 of	 the
Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 (Article	 105	 —	 “Murder”,
Article	110	“Incitement	to	suicide”,	Article	111	“Intentional	infliction	of
grave	harm	to	health”,	etc.).

The	target	of	crime	is	the	material	item	or	intellectual	valuables	which
are	 impacted	by	the	criminal	and	thereby	protected	social	 relations	are
infringed	(property,	weapons,	etc.).

While	 the	object	of	crime	 is	a	social	 relation,	 the	target	of	crime	 is	a
tangible	 item	 or	 intellectual	 valuables.	 While	 the	 object	 of	 crime	 is
always	infringed	upon	during	the	crime,	the	target	of	crime	may	remain
unharmed	 (e.g.,	during	 robbery	 its	 target	—	a	valuable	painting	—	may
remain	undamaged).

Actus	reus	is	a	sum	total	of	features	characterising	the	external	act	of	a
certain	socially	harmful	encroachment	upon	protected	social	relations.

Scholars	reasonably	note	that	a	crime	cannot	exist	outside	of	reality.	A
certain	crime	is	always	committed	by	certain	means,	in	a	certain	way,	at
certain	time	and	 in	certain	 location.	At	the	moment	of	 its	commission,
there	 are	 certain	 circumstances.	 Thus,	 actus	 reus	 includes	 all	 of	 these
features.

Actus	reus	includes	a	number	of	legally	significant	features	which	are
divided	into	obligatory	and	optional.

The	 obligatory	 features	 are	 those	 which	 are	 inherent	 to	 any	 corpus



delicti.	 However,	 depending	 on	 the	 type	 of	 corpus	 delicti	 (material	 or
formal),	the	number	of	obligatory	features	varies.

In	crimes	with	material	corpus	delicti,	the	obligatory	features	are:

1.	the	socially	harmful	deed	(action	or	inaction);

2.	the	socially	harmful	consequence;

3.	the	causality	between	the	deed	and	the	circumstances.

In	crimes	with	formal	corpus	delicti	(e.g.,	libel/slander),	the	obligatory
feature	of	actus	reus	is	the	socially	harmful	deed	only.

The	optional	features	of	actus	reus,	regardless	of	the	type	of	actus	reus
are:	manner,	place,	time,	instrument,	and	setting	of	a	crime.

Mens	 rea	 is	 a	 sum	 total	 of	 features	 characterising	 the	 psychological
activity	of	a	criminal	at	 the	time	of	commission	of	the	crime.	Mens	rea
characterizes	 the	psychological,	 emotional	 attitude	of	 a	 criminal	 to	his
crime	and	its	consequences,	and	lies	in	guilt,	motive,	and	aim.

Pursuant	 to	 section	1	Article	24	of	 the	Criminal	Code	of	 the	Russian
Federation,	 a	 person	 who	 has	 committed	 an	 act	 intentionally	 or
negligently	shall	be	deemed	to	be	guilty	of	crime.	For	greater	detail	on
these	forms	of	guilt,	see	para.	9.1	of	the	textbook.

The	 motive	 and	 the	 aim	 are	 the	 optional	 features	 of	 mens	 rea	 of	 a
crime	 (their	 existence	 shall	 be	 only	 proven	 if	 directly	 required	 by	 the
norm	of	criminal	law),	but	they	help	understand	the	criminal’s	intent	in
greater	detail.

Pursuant	to	Article	19	of	the	Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation,
a	 subject	 of	 crime	 is	 a	 sane	 person	who	 has	 reached	 the	 statutory	 age
envisaged	by	the	Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation.

Thus,	criminal	liability	shall	be	imposed	on	condition	that	the	crime	is
committed	by:



1)	an	individual;

2)	who	has	reаched	the	statutory	age;	and

3)	is	sane.

These	 features	 characterize	 any	 subject	 of	 any	 crime,	 i.e.	 they	 are
obligatory.

As	a	general	rule,	a	person	who	before	the	commission	of	a	crime	has
reached	 the	 age	 of	 sixteen	 years	 (section	 1	 Article	 20	 of	 the	 Criminal
Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation)	 may	 be	 subject	 to	 criminal	 liability.
Nevertheless,	people	who	before	the	commission	of	a	crime	have	reached
the	age	of	fourteen	years	shall	be	subject	to	criminal	liability	for	murder,
intentional	 infliction	 of	 grave	 bodily	 injury,	 intentional	 infliction	 of
medium	bodily	 injury,	 kidnapping,	 rape,	 and	a	number	of	other	 crimes
which	are	highly	socially	dangerous.

A	number	of	rules	of	the	Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation	sets
forth	 higher	 age	 threshold	 of	 liability.	 For	 instance,	 subjects	 of
encroachments	 on	 minors,	 on	 their	 normal	 moral	 and	 physical
development,	 sexual	 immunity	 (Articles	 134,	 135,	 150,	 and	 151	 of	 the
Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation)	 may	 be	 persons	 who	 have
reached	eighteen	years.

Article	21	of	the	Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation	establishes
that	a	person	who	at	the	time	of	committing	a	socially	dangerous	act	was
insane,	i.e.	unable	to	understand	the	actual	nature	or	social	danger	of	his
actions	 (inaction)	 or	 to	 govern	 them	 shall	 not	 be	 subject	 to	 criminal
liability.	Compulsory	medical	 treatment	may	be	 imposed	by	 a	 court	on
that	person.

However,	a	sane	person	who	at	the	time	of	commission	of	a	crime	due
to	mental	 derangement	was	unable	 to	 understand	 the	 actual	 nature	 or
social	danger	of	his	actions	(inaction)	or	to	govern	them,	shall	be	subject
to	 criminal	 liability.	 Alcoholic	 or	 other	 intoxication	 shall	 not	 release
from	criminal	liability.



Some	articles	of	the	Special	Part	of	the	Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian
Federation	 establish	 criminal	 liability	 for	 certain	 crimes,	 a	 subject
wherein	 can	 only	 be	 represented	 by	 a	 person	 possessing	 additional
features.	This	means	a	special	subject	of	crime	is	in	action.

For	 instance,	 subjects	 of	 a	 number	 of	 crimes	 can	 be	 persons	 doing
certain	 kinds	 of	 business:	 officials	 (registration	 of	 illegal	 transactions
with	real	property,	abuse	of	authority),	managers	of	organisations	(non-
payment	 of	 wages,	 pension,	 allowances,	 and	 other	 payments),	 or
servicemen	(failure	to	obey	an	order),	etc.

The	 second	 group	 of	 special	 subjects	 may	 be	 connected	 with	 the
gender	of	the	criminal	(rape	may	only	be	committed	by	a	man),	existence
of	a	venereal	disease	(communicating	venereal	disease),	etc.

The	 third	 group	 of	 special	 subjects	 is	 connected	 to	 the	 convict’s
relation	 to	 the	 aggrieved	 party:	 parent,	 teacher,	 person	 vested	 with
responsibility	to	foster	a	minor	(involving	a	minor	into	criminal	activity,
etc.).

27.5.	Stages	of	Committing	a	Crime

The	stages	of	committing	a	crime	are	certain	stages	of	development	of
criminal	activity,	which,	based	on	Article	29	of	the	Criminal	Code	of	the
Russian	Federation,	may	be	illustrated	as	follows:

—	preparation	for	commission	of	a	crime;

—	attempt	to	commit	a	crime;

—	completed	crime.

Preparation	for	commission	of	a	crime	is	deemed	unfinished	crime	by
the	 Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation.	 Pursuant	 to
section	 1	Article	 29	 of	 the	Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	Russian	 Federation,	 a
crime	 shall	 be	 deemed	 to	 be	 complete	 if	 the	 deed	 committed	 by	 the
person	 contains	 all	 the	 elements	 of	 corpus	 delicti	 envisaged	 by	 the
Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation.



Preparation	 for	 a	 crime	 includes	 looking	 for,	 manufacturing,	 or
adapting	by	a	person	of	means	or	 instruments	 for	 committing	a	 crime,
finding	of	accomplices	for	a	crime,	conspiracy	to	commit	a	crime,	or	any
other	intentional	creation	of	conditions	to	commit	a	crime,	if	the	crime
has	not	been	 finished	owing	 to	circumstances	outside	of	 the	criminal’s
control	 (section	 1	 Article	 30	 of	 the	 Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation).

Preparation	for	a	crime	is	always	effected	with	direct	intent,	since	the
convict	 realises	 that	 he	 is	 preparing	 for	 a	 crime	 and	 wishes	 to	 create
proper	conditions	for	successful	accomplishment	of	a	crime.

The	 main	 feature	 of	 preparation	 for	 a	 crime	 is	 that	 the	 convict’s
actions	are	not	finished	due	to	circumstances	outside	of	his	control.

Criminal	 legislation	 punishes	 preparation	 only	 for	 grave	 and
particularly	grave	crimes.

Attempted	crime	is	intentional	actions	(inaction)	of	a	person,	directed
towards	 the	 commission	 of	 a	 crime,	 if	 a	 crime	 has	 not	 been	 finished
owing	to	circumstances	outside	of	criminal’s	control	(section	3	Article	30
of	the	Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation).

As	 opposed	 to	 preparation	 for	 a	 crime,	with	 an	 attempted	 crime	 the
subject	encroaches	on	protected	social	relations,	i.e.	attempted	crime	is
the	beginning	of	commission	of	the	crime.

Article	31	of	the	Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation	provides	for
the	term	voluntary	refusal	to	commit	a	crime,	which	is	the	termination
by	the	criminal	of	preparations	for	a	crime	or	the	termination	of	actions
(inaction)	 directed	 at	 the	 commission	 of	 the	 crime,	 if	 the	 person	 was
aware	of	the	possibility	of	carrying	out	the	crime

Generally,	one	shall	not	be	subject	to	criminal	liability	for	a	crime	if	he
voluntarily	 refused	 to	 finish	 a	 crime.	 However,	 that	 person	 shall	 be
subject	to	criminal	liability	if	the	deed	carried	out	(prior	to	the	moment
of	refusal	from	commission	of	crime)	already	constitutes	another	corpus
delicti	of	a	crime.



27.6.	Complicity	in	a	Crime

Article	32	of	the	Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation	defines	that
the	 intentional	 joint	 participation	 of	 two	 or	 more	 persons	 in	 the
commission	of	a	crime	is	deemed	complicity	in	crime.

Complicity	is	characterised	with	objective	and	subjective	features.

The	objective	features	include:

1.	participation	in	a	crime	of	two	or	more	persons	(at	least	two	persons
who	qualify	as	subjects	of	crime	should	take	part	in	it);

2.	joint	nature	of	their	activity.	It	does	not	mean	that	the	accomplices
perform	identical	actions	and	that	their	input	into	the	crime	is	equal.	It
means	the	joint	nature	of	their	effort	for	the	achievement	of	single	result
and	the	causality	between	the	criminals’	interaction	and	harm	inflicted.

The	subjective	features	include:

1.	 intentional	 participation	 in	 committing	 a	 crime	 —	 the	 will	 to
commit	a	crime	together.	One	realizes	the	social	danger	of	his	deed	and
the	fact	that	he	is	not	acting	alone;

2.	participation	in	committing	an	intentional	crime	(complicity	is	not
possible	in	committing	a	negligent	crime).

Article	 33	 of	 the	 Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation
distinguishes	the	following	types	of	accomplices:

1.	perpetrator	—	a	person	who	has	actually	committed	a	crime	or	who
has	directly	participated	 in	 its	commission	together	with	other	persons
(co-perpetrators).	A	person	who	has	 committed	a	 crime	by	using	other
persons	 who	 are	 not	 subject	 to	 criminal	 liability	 by	 reason	 of	 age,
insanity,	or	other	circumstances	shall	also	be	deemed	perpetrator;

2.	organiser	—	a	person	who	has	organised	the	commission	of	a	crime
or	has	directed	 its	commission,	as	well	as	a	person	who	has	created	an
organised	group	or	a	criminal	community	(criminal	organisation)	or	has



guided	them;

3.	 instigator	 —	 a	 person	 who	 has	 abetted	 another	 person	 in
committing	 a	 crime	 by	 persuasion,	 bribery,	 threat,	 or	 by	 any	 other
method;

4.	accessory	—	a	person	who	has	assisted	in	the	commission	of	a	crime
by	 advice,	 instructions,	 information,	 means	 and	 instruments	 of
commission	of	a	crime	or	by	removing	obstacles	thereto.	An	accessory	is
also	 a	 person	 who	 has	 promised	 beforehand	 to	 conceal	 the	 criminal,
means	and	instruments	of	commission	of	the	crime,	traces	of	the	crime
or	 objects	 obtained	 criminally,	 as	 well	 as	 a	 person	 who	 has	 promised
beforehand	to	acquire	such	objects.

Complicity	 in	 crime	 may	 be	 simple	 (two	 or	 more	 co-perpetrators
participate	in	a	crime)	and	complex	(apart	from	the	perpetrator,	at	least
one	organiser,	instigator,	or	accessory	take	part	in	the	crime).

Depending	 on	 the	 degree	 of	 coherence	 of	 the	 accomplices’	 actions,
Article	35	of	the	Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation	distinguishes
four	forms	of	complicity:

1)	 group	 of	 persons	 without	 previous	 concert	 —	 two	 or	 more
perpetrators	 have	 jointly	 participated	 in	 the	 commission	 of	 the	 crime
without	 previous	 concert.	 Their	 criminal	 bond	 arises	 spontaneously	 at
the	moment	of	the	commission	of	the	crime;

2)	group	of	persons	by	previous	concert	—	the	criminals	have	reached
an	agreement	on	the	joint	commission	of	a	crime	before	the	start	of	its
commission.

3)	 organised	 group	 —	 the	 crime	 was	 committed	 by	 a	 stable	 group
persons	who	had	united	 for	 the	commission	of	one	or	more	crimes.	As
opposed	to	a	group	of	persons	by	previous	concert,	the	organised	group
is	 characterised	 with	 the	 existence	 of	 an	 organiser	 (director)	 and	 an
elaborated	 plan	 of	 joint	 criminal	 activity,	 distribution	 of	 functions
between	the	members	thereof	at	the	stage	of	preparation	for	a	crime;



4)	 criminal	 community	 (criminal	 organisation)	 —	 the	 crime	 is
committed	by	 a	 structured	organised	 group	or	 by	 a	union	of	 organised
groups	 acting	 under	 single	 management.	 The	 members	 of	 a	 criminal
community	 unite	 for	 the	 join	 commission	 of	 one	 or	 several	 grave	 or
particularly	grave	crimes	and	for	receiving	direct	or	indirect	financial	or
other	material	benefit.

The	 grounds	 for	 criminal	 liability	 of	 all	 the	 accomplices	 lie	 in	 the
commission	of	a	deed	containing	all	elements	of	corpus	delicti	of	a	crime
(Article	8	of	the	Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation).

Pursuant	 to	 section	1	Article	34	of	 the	Criminal	Code	of	 the	Russian
Federation,	 liability	 of	 accomplices	 of	 a	 crime	 is	 determined	 by	 the
nature	and	the	degree	of	their	actual	participation	in	the	commission	of
the	crime.

Co-perpetrators	 are	 liable	 under	 an	 article	 of	 the	 Special	 Part	 of	 the
Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation	for	a	crime	committed	jointly.
Criminal	 liability	 of	 an	 organiser,	 instigator,	 and	 an	 accessory	 arises
under	an	article	which	provides	 for	punishment	 for	a	 committed	crime
referring	 to	Article	 33	of	 the	Criminal	Code	of	 the	Russian	Federation,
which	 specifies	 each	 accomplice’s	 role	 in	 the	 commission	 of	 the	 crime
and	thereby	individualizes	the	punishment.

Section	 5	 Article	 34	 of	 the	 Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation
declares	 that	 if	 the	 perpetrator	 of	 a	 crime	 fails	 to	 carry	 out	 the	 crime
owing	to	circumstances	beyond	his	control,	the	rest	of	accomplices	shall
bear	criminal	liability	for	preparation	for	a	crime	or	for	attempted	crime.
A	person	who	has	not	managed	 to	 abet	other	persons	 in	 committing	 a
crime	 owing	 to	 circumstances	 beyond	 his	 control,	 shall	 also	 bear
criminal	liability	for	preparation	for	a	crime.

Article	36	of	the	Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation	provides	for
an	 excess	 of	 the	 perpetrator,	 which	means	 the	 commission	 of	 a	 crime
that	is	not	embraced	by	the	intent	of	other	accomplices	(the	organiser	of
the	 crime	 performs	 actions	 which	 had	 not	 previously	 been	 planned	 or
stipulated).	For	instance,	the	accomplices	had	agreed	to	commit	robbery,
and	the	organiser	at	the	victim’s	resistance	committed	murder.



Other	accomplices	to	a	crime	shall	not	be	subject	to	criminal	liability
for	the	excess	of	the	perpetrator.

27.7.	Circumstances	Excluding	the	Criminality	of	a	Deed

Chapter	8	of	the	Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation	provides	for
a	 number	 of	 circumstances	 excluding	 the	 criminality	 of	 a	 deed.	 These
circumstances	are	special	situations	where	one’s	behavior,	even	though
it	may	be	similar	to	a	crime,	is	deemed	lawful	and	even	socially	beneficial
and	 reasonable,	 since	 it	 is	 aimed	 at	 the	 elimination	 of	 a	 threat	 to
protected	interests	of	human,	society,	and	the	state.

Such	circumstances	include:

1.	 justifiable	 defense,	 which	 is	 an	 integral,	 natural	 human	 right.
Pursuant	 to	 section	 1	 Article	 37	 of	 the	 Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation,	 infliction	of	harm	in	the	state	of	 justifiable	defense	against
an	 attacking	 person,	 i.e.	 in	 case	 of	 protection	 of	 the	 person	 and	 the
rights	of	the	defending	party	or	other	persons,	protected	interests	of	the
society	or	the	state	against	a	socially	dangerous	attack	if	such	an	attack
involved	violence	threatening	the	life	of	the	defending	party	or	another
person	or	an	immediate	threat	of	use	of	such	violence.

Based	on	the	above,	one	may	distinguish	the	following	features	of	the
legality	of	justifiable	defense:

—	encroachment	on	protected	interests	should	be	socially	dangerous;

—	 that	 encroachment	 should	 have	 started	 or	 there	 should	 be	 an
immediate	 threat	 thereof	 (meaning	 that	 the	 encroachment	 or	 a	 threat
thereof	 should	 exist	 objectively	 and	 not	 in	 the	 defending	 party’s
imagination	or	as	a	result	of	his	mistaken	perception	of	the	situation);

—	 only	 those	 interests	may	 be	 defended	which	 are	 protected	 by	 the
criminal	laws;

—	 the	 harm	 should	 be	 inflicted	 upon	 the	wrongdoer	 and	 not	 to	 any
other	persons,	otherwise	the	harm	inflicted	to	other	persons	shall	not	be



deemed	justifiable	defense;

—	 excessive	 justifiable	 defense	 is	 prohibited.	 This	 means	 that	 the
harm	inflicted	should	not	be	excessive	or	obviously	disproportionate	to
the	nature	and	the	degree	of	social	danger	of	the	encroachment.

However,	 actions	 of	 the	 defending	 party	 shall	 not	 be	 deemed	 as
surpassing	 the	 limits	 of	 justifiable	 defense	 if	 the	 defense	 was	 against
violence	which	posed	a	danger	to	the	life	of	the	defending	party	or	other
party,	or	an	immediate	threat	thereof.	 In	these	cases,	even	infliction	of
death	 to	 the	 wrongdoer	 is	 lawful	 and	 there	 is	 no	 question	 as	 to	 the
surpass	 of	 justifiable	 defense.	 Surpass	 of	 justifiable	 defense	 is	 only
possible	when	an	attack	does	not	involve	violence	threatening	the	life	of
the	defending	party	or	 another	person,	or	 an	 immediate	 threat	 thereof
(section	2	Article	3	of	the	Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation).

Pursuant	to	section	2.1	Article	37	of	the	Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian
Federation,	 actions	 of	 a	 defending	 party	 shall	 not	 be	 deemed	 as
surpassing	the	limits	of	justifiable	defense,	if	the	defending	party	could
not	 fairly	 assess	 the	 degree	 and	 nature	 of	 the	 threat	 posed	 by	 the
unexpected	attack.

The	 right	 to	 justifiable	defense	 is	vested	 in	all	persons,	 regardless	of
their	professional	or	other	particular	qualification	or	position,	as	well	as
of	the	possibility	to	avoid	a	socially	dangerous	attack	or	to	address	other
persons	or	authorities	for	help;

2.	infliction	of	harm	during	detention	of	a	person	who	has	committed
a	 crime.	 Section	 1	 Article	 38	 of	 the	 Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation	 sets	 forth	 that	 the	 infliction	 of	 harm	 on	 a	 person	 who	 has
committed	 a	 crime	 during	 his	 detention	 or	 during	 his	 delivery	 to	 the
authorities,	or	 in	thwarting	the	possibility	of	his	commission	of	 further
offenses	 shall	 not	 be	 deemed	 a	 crime,	 unless	 it	 was	 possible	 to	 detain
such	 person	 and	 there	 was	 an	 excess	 of	 the	 measures	 taken	 for	 this
detention.

A	 number	 of	 conditions	 is	 required	 for	 this	 infliction	 of	 harm	 to	 be
lawful:



—	the	legal	grounds	for	detention	is	the	obvious	fact	of	commission	of
a	crime	(not	an	administrative	offense	or	another	violation);

—	the	criminal	attempts	to	avoid	liability,	escape	and	avoid	detention;

—	the	infliction	of	harm	is	only	allowed	if	it	is	impossible	to	detain	the
criminal	using	other,	non-violent	means;

—	the	harm	inflicted	to	the	criminal	shall	correspond	to	the	nature	and
the	degree	of	 social	 danger	 of	 the	 crime	 committed,	 the	personality	 of
the	detained	person,	and	the	circumstances	of	detention;

3.	extreme	necessity.	Section	1	Article	39	of	the	Criminal	Code	of	the
Russian	 Federation	 declares	 that	 the	 harming	 of	 legally	 protected
interests	in	a	state	of	extreme	necessity,	i.e.	for	the	purpose	of	removing
a	direct	danger	to	a	person	or	his	rights,	to	the	rights	of	other	persons,	or
to	 legally	 protected	 interests	 of	 the	 society	 and	 the	 state	 shall	 not	 be
deemed	a	crime	if	this	danger	could	not	be	removed	by	other	means	and
if	there	was	no	exceeding	the	limits	of	extreme	necessity.

In	other	words,	extreme	necessity	is	infliction	of	harm	for	prevention
of	bigger	harm.

The	 infliction	of	harm	that	clearly	neither	corresponds	 to	 the	nature
and	the	degree	of	the	danger,	nor	to	the	circumstances	under	which	the
danger	was	removed	when	equal	or	more	considerable	harm	was	caused
to	 said	 interests	 than	 the	 harm	 averted,	 shall	 be	 deemed	 exceeding
extreme	 necessity.	 Such	 excess	 shall	 lead	 to	 criminal	 liability	 only	 in
cases	of	intended	infliction	of	harm.

Extreme	 necessity	 shall	 be	 distinguished	 from	 justifiable	 defense.
While	 the	 grounds	 for	 extreme	 necessity	 is	 the	 objectively	 existing
danger,	 the	 grounds	 for	 justifiable	 defense	 is	 the	 socially	 dangerous
encroachment;	while	in	the	state	of	extreme	necessity	harm	is	 inflicted
to	 third	 parties,	 in	 the	 state	 of	 justifiable	 defense	 it	 is	 inflicted	 to	 the
wrongdoer;	while	with	 extreme	necessity	harm	 inflicted	 should	 be	 less
than	 harm	 prevented,	 with	 justifiable	 defense	 harm	 inflicted	 may	 be
equal	 or	 even	 bigger	 than	 harm	 prevented,	 and	 in	 circumstances



threatening	life,	harm	inflicted	is	unlimited.

4.	physical	or	mental	coercion.	Pursuant	to	section	1	Article	40	of	the
Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation,	the	infliction	of	harm	to	legally
protected	interests	as	a	result	of	physical	coercion	shall	not	be	a	crime,
if,	as	a	result	of	such	coercion	the	offender	could	not	control	his	actions
(inaction).

In	 the	 case	 considered	 the	 coercion	 hinders	 the	 execution	 of	 man’s
free	will	and	forces	him	to	do	something	he	does	not	wish	to	do.

Section	 2	 Article	 40	 of	 the	 Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation
deals	with	 the	physical	or	mental	coercion	 (threat,	hypnosis,	narcotics)
due	 to	 which	 one	 was	 still	 able	 to	 control	 his	 actions,	 but	 with
substantial	obstacles	thereto.	The	infliction	of	harm	in	these	conditions
is	equal	to	actions	in	the	state	of	extreme	necessity;

5.	 justifiable	 risk.	Due	 to	 the	 requirements	 of	 section	 1	Article	 41	of
the	Criminal	Code	of	 the	Russian	Federation,	no	criminal	 liability	shall
ensue	for	 infliction	of	harm	to	 legally	protected	 interests	provided	that
the	risk	is	justified	as	attaining	a	socially	useful	goal.

Risk	is	deemed	justified	if	the	said	goal	could	not	have	been	attained
through	action	(inaction)	not	associated	with	risk	and	provided	that	the
person	 that	 took	 the	 risk	 has	 undertaken	 all	 measures	 sufficient	 to
prevent	harm	to	legally	protected	interests.

The	 lawmaker	 does	 not	 deem	 the	 risk	 justified	 if	 it	 was	 known	 to
involve	a	threat	to	the	life	of	many	persons,	or	a	hazard	of	environmental
or	societal	disaster;

6.	execution	of	an	order	or	 instruction.	Pursuant	 to	Article	42	of	 the
Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 infliction	 of	 harm	 to	 legally
protected	interests	shall	not	be	qualified	as	a	crime	if	it	was	caused	by	a
person	 acting	 in	 execution	 of	 an	 order	 or	 instruction	 binding	 on	 him.
Criminal	 liability	for	 infliction	of	such	harm	shall	be	borne	by	a	person
who	gave	the	illegal	order	or	instruction.



However,	 a	 person	who	 committed	 intentional	 crime	 in	 execution	of
an	 order	 or	 instruction	 known	 to	 be	 illegal	 shall	 be	 liable	 under	 usual
terms.	Criminal	liability	for	an	intentional	crime	in	execution	of	an	order
or	instruction	known	to	be	illegal	shall	be	borne	by	the	person	who	gave
such	 illegal	 order	 and	 by	 the	 perpetrator.	 In	 these	 cases,	 complicity	 in
crime	is	in	place:	the	perpetrator	of	the	order	is	deemed	the	perpetrator
of	 the	 crime,	 and	 the	 person	 who	 gave	 such	 order	 is	 deemed	 the
organiser	or	the	instigator	of	the	crime.

The	 non-performance	 of	 an	 order	 or	 instruction	 known	 to	 be	 illegal
shall	preclude	criminal	liability.

Test	questions	and	tasks

1.	What	is	social	danger	and	is	it	a	feature	of	a	crime?

2.	What	is	the	difference	between	an	extended	and	continuous	crime?

3.	 Please	 describe	 the	 correlation	 between	 the	 terms	 “criminal
liability”	and	“punishment”.

4.	 What	 is	 the	 difference	 between	 the	 formal	 and	 reduced	 corpus
delicti?

5.	 What	 is	 the	 difference	 between	 the	 preparation	 for	 a	 crime	 and
attempted	crime?

6.	Please	list	the	types	of	accomplices	in	a	crime.

7.	 Please	 describe	 the	 notion	 of	 circumstances	 excluding	 the
criminality	of	a	deed.

Chapter	28.	Criminal	Punishment
28.1.	The	Definition,	Purposes,	and	Types	of	Punishment

Punishment	 is	 the	main,	 but	 not	 the	 only	measure	 of	 realisation	 of
criminal	 liability	 and	 is	 a	 measure	 of	 state	 compulsion	 assigned	 by



court’s	judgment.	Punishment	shall	be	applied	to	a	person	who	has	been
found	guilty	of	the	commission	of	a	crime	(convict)	and	consists	of	the
deprivation	or	restriction	of	the	rights	of	this	person	(section	1	Article	43
of	the	Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation).

A	criminal	punishment	has	a	number	of	specific	features.

1.	 Criminal	 punishment	 is	 one	 of	 the	 severest	 forms	 of	 state
compulsion.	The	object	of	 its	 influence	 lies	 in	the	crucial	and	the	most
valuable	virtues	of	a	person	and	consists	of	the	deprivation	of	the	convict
of	certain	rights	and	freedoms.

2.	Criminal	punishment	is	assigned	for	a	committed	crime	to	a	certain
person	and	is	strictly	 individual.	It	does	not	apply	to	persons	who	have
nothing	to	do	with	the	commission	of	a	crime.

3.	 Criminal	 liability	 is	 assigned	 on	 behalf	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation
based	on	a	court’s	 judgment.	No	other	body	of	state	authority	has	such
functions	and	competence	—	nobody	may	be	found	guilty	in	committing
a	 crime	 and	 subjected	 to	 criminal	 punishment	 otherwise	 than	 by	 a
court’s	judgment.

4.	Through	punishment,	the	state	forces	the	criminal	to	atone	his	guilt
and	incites	law-abiding	behavior.

5.	 Only	 criminal	 punishment	 gives	 rise	 to	 criminal	 record	—	 a	 legal
consequence	 connected	 to	 the	 entry	 of	 the	 conviction	 judgment	 into
force	 and	 remaining	 in	 force	 until	 the	 moment	 of	 discharge	 or	 lift	 of
criminal	record.

Section	 2	 Article	 43	 of	 the	 Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation
declares	the	following	purposes	of	punishment:

1)	restoring	social	justice;

2)	reforming	the	convicted	person;

3)	preventing	of	the	commission	of	further	crimes.



All	the	punishments	established	by	the	Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian
Federation	 form	 a	 certain	 system,	 i.e.	 binding	 on	 the	 court	 exhaustive
list	of	the	types	of	punishments,	 listed	in	certain	order	(beginning	with
the	less	strict	and	finishing	with	the	stricter).

The	following	are	the	types	of	punishment:

1)	fine,	i.e.	a	monetary	penalty	imposed	within	the	limits	provided	for
by	the	Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation.	It	may	be	established	in
the	 amount	 from	 five	 thousand	 rules	 to	 five	 million	 rubles	 or	 in	 the
amount	 of	 wage	 or	 other	 income	 of	 the	 convicted	 person	 for	 a	 period
from	two	weeks	to	five	years;

2)	 deprivation	 of	 the	 right	 to	 hold	 specified	 office	 or	 to	 engage	 in
specified	activities,	meaning	 the	prohibition	 to	hold	offices	 in	 the	 civil
service	and	local	self-government	bodies,	or	to	engage	in	professional	or
any	other	activity.	This	punishment	may	be	assigned	for	the	term	from
one	year	to	five	years	as	the	principal	punishment	and	for	the	term	from
six	months	to	twenty	years	as	the	additional	punishment;

3)	deprivation	of	special	or	military	rank	or	honorary	title,	class	rank,
or	 government	 medals	 —	 may	 be	 assigned	 for	 a	 grave	 or	 particularly
grave	 crime,	 with	 the	 account	 taken	 of	 the	 convicted	 person’s
personality;

4)	compulsory	works,	which	consist	of	 the	performance	of	gratuitous
socially	 useful	 works	 by	 the	 convicted	 person	 during	 his	 spare	 time.
Their	 duration	 may	 comprise	 sixty	 to	 eighty	 hours,	 and	 they	 shall	 be
served	within	no	longer	than	four	hours	a	day;

5)	corrective	labour,	which,	as	opposed	to	compulsory	works,	lie	in	the
withholding	 from	 the	 convicted	 person’s	 wages	 up	 to	 twenty-five	 per
cent	for	the	state	budget.	The	term	of	corrective	labour	shall	be	from	two
months	to	two	years;

6)	 restriction	 connected	 with	 military	 service,	 which	 lies	 in	 the
withholding	 from	 the	 serviceman’s	 wages	 for	 the	 state	 budget	 in	 the
amount	 set	 forth	 by	 court	 judgment,	 but	 not	 higher	 than	 twenty	 per



cent.	During	 the	 time	of	 serving	 this	 punishment,	 the	 serviceman	may
not	 be	 promoted	 in	 his	 post	 or	 military	 rank,	 and	 the	 period	 of
punishment	shall	not	be	counted	in	the	period	of	service	record	for	the
purposes	of	promotion	in	rank;

7)	restriction	of	liberty,	which	lies	in	the	establishment	by	court	of	the
following	restrictions:

—	not	to	leave	his	permanent	place	of	residence	(stay)	at	certain	time;

—	not	to	visit	certain	places	 located	at	the	territory	of	the	respective
municipality;

—	not	to	leave	the	respective	municipality;

—	not	to	visit	the	places	of	mass	and	other	activities	and	not	to	take
part	in	the	said	activities,	etc.

The	 convicted	 person	 shall	 be	 obliged	 to	 visit	 competent	 state
authority	once	to	four	times	per	month	for	registration.

The	term	of	restriction	of	liberty	varies	from	six	months	to	four	years;

8)	 obligatory	 works,	 applied	 as	 an	 alternative	 to	 the	 deprivation	 of
liberty	and	lie	in	the	engagement	of	the	convicted	person	to	labour	in	the
places	specified	by	the	bodies	of	criminal	enforcement	system.	Amount
specified	by	court	from	five	to	twenty	per	cent	shall	be	withheld	from	the
convicted	person’s	wages.	Obligatory	works	may	be	assigned	for	a	period
from	two	months	to	five	years;

9)	arrest	—	i.e.	the	maintenance	of	the	convicted	person	in	conditions
of	strict	isolation	from	society.	It	may	be	assigned	for	a	period	from	one
to	six	months;

10)	 service	 in	 a	 disciplinary	 military	 unit,	 which	 is	 imposed	 upon
servicemen	undergoing	military	service	for	the	term	of	three	months	to
two	years	if	the	personality	of	the	convicted	person	shows	the	possibility
of	substitution	of	deprivation	of	liberty	by	this	type	of	punishment;



11)	deprivation	of	liberty	for	a	fixed	term,	which	lies	in	the	isolation	of
the	 convict	 from	 the	 society	 for	 a	 period	 from	 two	 months	 to	 twenty
years;

12)	 deprivation	 of	 liberty	 for	 life,	 which	 is	 established	 for	 the
commission	of	particularly	grave	crimes	of	attack	on	human	life,	as	well
as	for	committing	particularly	grave	crimes	against	public	health,	public
morals,	public	safety,	 sexual	 immunity	of	minors	below	fourteen	years.
Pursuant	 to	 section	 2	 Article	 57	 of	 the	 Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation,	 deprivation	 of	 liberty	 for	 life	 shall	 not	 be	 imposed	 upon
women,	 persons	 who	 have	 committed	 crimes	 at	 ages	 below	 eighteen
years,	 and	 upon	men	 who	 have	 reached	 sixty-five	 years	 of	 age	 by	 the
time	of	adjudication;

13)	capital	punishment,	which	is	the	extraordinary	punishment	and	is
imposed	only	for	particularly	grave	crimes	encroaching	on	human	life.

Capital	 punishment	 is	 executed	 in	 a	 closed	 setting	 by	 manner	 of
shooting.	 The	 execution	 of	 capital	 punishment	 in	 regard	 to	 several
convicts	 shall	 be	 performed	 separately	 from	 each	 of	 them.	 The
administration	 of	 the	 facility	 where	 capital	 punishment	 is	 executed	 is
obliged	to	notify	of	the	execution	the	court	which	issued	the	judgment,
as	well	 as	one	of	 the	 close	 relatives	of	 the	 convicted	person.	The	body
shall	not	be	provided	for	burying,	and	the	burial	location	is	not	disclosed
(Article	186	of	the	Criminal	Execution	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation).

Currently,	 a	 moratorium	 on	 capital	 punishment	 is	 in	 place	 in	 the
Russian	Federation.

Pursuant	to	Article	45	of	the	Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation,
compulsory	 works,	 corrective	 labour,	 restriction	 of	 military	 service,
restriction	 of	 liberty,	 arrest,	 service	 in	 a	 disciplinary	 military	 unit,
deprivation	of	liberty	for	a	fixed	term,	deprivation	of	liberty	for	life,	and
capital	punishment	shall	be	applicable	as	basic	penalties	only.

Fines	and	deprivation	of	the	right	to	hold	specific	offices	or	to	engage
in	specific	activity	shall	be	applicable	as	basic	and	additional	penalties.



Deprivation	of	a	special	or	military	rank,	honorary	title,	class	rank	or
government	medal	shall	be	applicable	as	additional	penalties	only.

28.2.	Imposition	of	a	Punishment

Imposition	of	a	punishment	means	the	judge’s	choice	of	the	type	and
amount	 of	 the	 punishment	 prescribed	 by	 the	 Criminal	 Code	 of	 the
Russian	Federation.

Under	 the	 rules	 of	 section	 1	 Article	 60	 of	 the	 Criminal	 Code	 of	 the
Russian	Federation,	the	court	shall	impose	just	punishment	on	a	person
who	 has	 been	 found	 guilty	 of	 committing	 a	 crime,	 within	 the	 limits
stipulated	 by	 the	 respective	 article	 of	 the	 Special	 Part	 of	 the	 Criminal
Code	of	the	Russian	Federation,	and	with	due	account	for	the	provisions
of	 the	General	 Part	 of	 the	Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	Russian	 Federation.	A
stricter	 punishment	 from	 those	 provided	 for	 a	 crime	 shall	 be	 imposed
only	if	a	milder	penalty	cannot	ensure	the	achievement	of	the	purposes
of	punishment.

In	 imposing	 the	 punishment,	 the	 court	 shall	 take	 into	 consideration
the	following:

—	nature	and	degree	of	the	social	danger	of	the	crime;

—	 personality	 of	 the	 convict,	 his	 social	 characteristics,	 relation	 to
family,	employment,	etc.;

—	circumstances	mitigating	and	aggravating	the	punishment;

—	consequences	and	influence	which	the	imposed	penalty	will	have	on
the	 correction	 of	 the	 convicted	 person	 and	 on	 the	 conditions	 of	 his
family.

Article	 61	 of	 the	 Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 lists	 the
mitigating	circumstances,	which	include:

—	 commission	 of	 a	 crime	 of	 light	 or	 medium	 gravity	 due	 to	 a
coincidence	of	circumstances;



—	the	convicted	person	being	a	minor;

—	pregnancy;

—	the	convicted	person	having	infant	children;

—	 commission	 of	 a	 crime	 due	 to	 a	 coincidence	 of	 grave	 personal
circumstances,	or	out	of	compassion;

—	 illegality	 or	 amorality	 of	 the	 victim’s	 behavior,	 which	 served	 as	 a
pretext	for	the	crime;

—	giving	oneself	up,	rendering	active	assistance	in	the	clearance	and
investigation	of	a	crime,	the	exposure	and	criminal	prosecution	of	other
accomplices	 in	 the	 crime,	 search	 for	 the	property	 received	 through	 the
crime,	and	a	number	of	other	circumstances.

The	list	of	circumstances	mitigating	the	punishment	is	open,	i.e.	when
a	 court	 is	 imposing	 a	 penalty,	 other	 circumstances	 may	 be	 used	 as
mitigating,	apart	 from	those	expressly	prescribed	by	 the	Criminal	Code
of	the	Russian	Federation.

The	 list	 of	 aggravating	 circumstances	 set	 forth	 in	 Article	 63	 of	 the
Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 is	 closed,	 or	 exhaustive,
meaning	that	when	a	court	is	imposing	a	penalty,	no	circumstances	may
be	 used	 as	 aggravating,	 apart	 from	 those	 expressly	 prescribed	 by	 the
Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation.

These	circumstances	include:

—	recidivism	of	crimes;

—	grave	consequences	of	the	commission	of	a	crime;

—	commission	of	a	crime	by	a	group	of	persons	or	a	group	of	persons
by	previous	concert,	by	an	organised	group	or	by	a	criminal	community
(criminal	organisation);

—	an	especially	active	role	played	in	the	commission	of	the	crime;



—	 involvement	 in	 the	 commission	 of	 a	 crime	 of	 persons	 who	 suffer
from	heavy	mental	derangement	or	who	are	in	the	state	of	intoxication,
or	of	persons	who	have	not	reached	the	age	of	criminal	liability;

—	 commission	 of	 a	 crime	 by	 reason	 of	 political,	 ideological,	 racial,
national,	or	religious	hatred	or	enmity	or	by	reason	of	hatred	or	enmity
with	respect	to	some	social	group;

—	 commission	 of	 a	 crime	 against	 a	 person	 or	 his	 relatives	 in
connection	with	his	official	activity	or	in	the	discharge	of	his	public	duty;

—	commission	of	a	crime	against	a	woman	who	is	known	to	be	in	the
state	 of	 pregnancy,	 or	 against	 a	 minor,	 another	 helpless	 person	 or	 a
person	who	is	dependent	on	the	guilty	person;

—	commission	of	a	crime	with	severe	brutality,	sadism,	or	mockery,	or
involving	tormenting	the	victim,	and	a	number	of	other	circumstances.

The	lawmaker	entitled	the	court	to	recognize	commission	of	a	crime	in
the	 state	 of	 alcoholic	 or	 other	 intoxication	 as	 an	 aggravating
circumstance.

The	 Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 sets	 forth	 cases	where
the	existence	of	certain	mitigating	circumstances	or	a	sum	total	thereof
may	serve	as	grounds	not	only	for	mitigating	the	punishment	prescribed
by	a	certain	article	of	the	Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation,	but
also	for	imposition	of	a	milder	punishment	than	that	prescribed	for	this
crime.

In	 other	 words,	 taking	 into	 account	 the	 circumstances	 of	 the	 case
(purpose	and	motive	of	 the	crime,	 the	 role	of	 the	convict,	his	behavior
during	 or	 after	 the	 crime,	 and	 other	 circumstances	 which	 materially
reduce	the	degree	of	social	danger	of	the	crime),	the	court	may	elect	to
impose	either	a	 lower	degree	of	penalty	than	the	lowest	one	prescribed
for	that	crime,	or	to	impose	another,	a	milder	punishment.

Under	Article	 66	 of	 the	 Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 in
imposing	punishment	 for	an	unfinished	crime	 the	court	 shall	 take	 into



account	the	circumstances	by	virtue	of	which	the	crime	was	not	finished.
The	 term	 or	 scope	 of	 punishment	 for	 preparation	 for	 a	 crime	may	 not
exceed	 half	 of	 the	maximum	 of	 the	 term	 or	 scope	 of	 the	most	 severe
penalty	 prescribed	 by	 the	 relevant	 article	 of	 the	 Criminal	 Code	 of	 the
Russian	Federation	for	a	finished	crime.

The	 term	 or	 extent	 of	 punishment	 for	 an	 attempted	 crime	may	 not
exceed	 three-quarters	 of	 the	maximum	 term	 or	 the	 scope	 of	 the	most
severe	penalty	prescribed	by	the	relevant	article	of	the	Criminal	Code	of
the	Russian	Federation	for	a	finished	crime.

In	imposing	punishment	for	a	criminal	complicity,	the	court	shall	take
into	 consideration	 the	nature	 and	 the	degree	of	 actual	 participation	of
the	 person	 in	 its	 perpetration,	 as	 well	 as	 the	 importance	 of	 this
participation	for	the	achievement	of	the	purpose	of	the	crime.

In	 imposing	 punishment	 in	 case	 of	 recidivism	 of	 crimes,	 the	 nature
and	degree	of	social	danger	of	the	newly	committed	crimes	shall	be	taken
into	account.	The	term	of	punishment	in	any	case	of	recidivism	may	not
be	less	than	one	third	of	the	maximum	term	of	the	most	severe	penalty
prescribed	for	the	crime	committed.

However,	 law	 obliges	 the	 court	 to	 take	 into	 account	 mitigating
circumstances,	 as	well	 as	 extraordinary	 circumstances	 of	 committing	 a
crime,	if	their	application	allows	the	imposition	of	a	milder	penalty	than
prescribed	for	that	crime	by	the	respective	article	of	the	Criminal	Code	of
the	Russian	Federation.

With	respect	to	multiplicity	of	crimes	(i.e.	commission	of	two	or	more
crimes,	 for	neither	of	which	the	person	was	convicted)	 the	punishment
shall	 be	 imposed	 separately	 for	 each	 committed	 crime.	 The	 rule	 is	 in
action	whereby	the	maximum	punishment	may	not	exceed	more	than	by
a	half	the	maximum	term	or	scope	of	the	punishment	established	for	the
gravest	of	the	committed	crimes.

With	 respect	 to	 imposition	 of	 punishment	 by	 cumulation	 of
convictions	(i.e.	when	the	convicted	person	committed	a	new	crime	after
the	 adjudication	 of	 a	 judgment	 but	 before	 its	 full	 serving)	 the



punishment	imposed	by	the	latest	court	judgment	shall	be	joined	to	the
non-served	 part	 of	 the	 punishment	 imposed	 by	 the	 earlier	 court
judgment	in	part	or	in	full.

The	final	punishment	by	cumulation	of	convictions	should	be	greater
than	the	punishments	under	the	later	and	the	earlier	court	judgment.	It
may	not	exceed	thirty-five	years	of	deprivation	of	liberty.

Article	 73	 of	 the	Criminal	Code	 of	 the	Russian	 Federation	 sets	 forth
that	 if	 by	 imposing	 corrective	 labour,	 restriction	 in	 military	 service,
restriction	 of	 liberty,	 service	 in	 a	 disciplinary	 military	 unit,	 or
deprivation	of	liberty	for	a	term	up	to	eight	years,	a	court	arrives	at	the
conclusion	that	 it	 is	possible	to	reform	the	convict	without	his	actually
serving	 a	 punishment,	 the	 court	 shall	 decree	 that	 the	 imposed
punishment	 is	 deemed	 conditional.	 Therefore,	 in	 this	 case	 the	 penalty
shall	not	apply	to	the	convict.

The	Criminal	Code	of	 the	Russian	Federation	 sets	 forth	 a	number	 of
crimes	of	higher	social	danger,	 for	which	conditional	sentence	may	not
be	imposed	(only	a	real	punishment	shall	be	served).

In	 imposing	 a	 conditional	 sentence	 the	 court	 shall	 set	 forth	 a
probationary	 period	 during	 which	 the	 person	 convicted	 conditionally
should	prove	his	rehabilitation	by	his	behavior	(from	six	months	to	five
years).

If	 before	 the	 expiry	 of	 the	 probationary	 period	 the	 conditionally
convicted	 person	 systematically	 or	 maliciously	 failed	 to	 execute	 his
duties	 placed	on	him	by	 court,	 systematically	 breached	public	 order	 or
hid	 himself	 from	 control	 measures,	 the	 conditional	 sentence	 shall	 be
reversed	and	the	punishment	shall	be	imposed.

If	 the	 conditionally	 convicted	 person	 has	 proven	 his	 reformation,
compensates	 damage	 inflicted	 by	 his	 crime,	 the	 conditional	 sentence
may	 be	 reversed	 upon	 the	 expiry	 of	 no	 less	 than	 half	 of	 the	 fixed
probationary	period,	and	the	criminal	record	shall	be	lifted.

28.3.	Release	from	Criminal	Liability	and	Punishment



Release	 from	 criminal	 liability	 means	 that	 a	 person	 who	 has
committed	a	crime	of	little	or	medium	gravity	for	the	first	time,	may	be
released	 from	 state	 compulsion	 and	 punishment	 for	 the	 crime
committed.	Should	this	be	the	case,	the	person	shall	not	be	convicted	by
court.

A	 person	 shall	 be	 released	 from	 criminal	 liability	 if	 after	 the
perpetration	 of	 the	 crime	 he	 has	 given	 himself	 up,	 assisted	 in	 the
exposure	 and	 investigation	 of	 the	 crime,	 compensated	 for	 the	 damage
inflicted,	or	 in	any	other	way	effected	restitution	of	the	damage	caused
by	the	crime,	which	ceased	to	be	socially	dangerous	as	a	result	of	active
repentance.

A	 person	 who	 has	 committed	 a	 crime	 may	 also	 be	 released	 from
criminal	liability	if	he	has	reconciled	with	the	victim	and	restituted	any
damage	 inflicted	 on	 the	 victim	 (Article	 76	 of	 the	Criminal	Code	 of	 the
Russian	Federation).

Article	76.1	of	the	Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation	sets	forth
the	conditions	of	releasing	from	criminal	liability	for	a	number	of	crimes
in	the	economic	sphere.	For	instance,	for	some	crimes	(unlawful	receipt
of	state	 loan	 for	particular	purposes,	evasion	 from	payment	of	customs
fees,	unlawful	actions	during	bankruptcy)	release	from	criminal	liability
is	 possible	 if	 the	 convict	 compensated	 for	 the	 damage	 inflicted	 on	 a
citizen,	 organisation,	 or	 the	 state	 and	 paid	 to	 the	 federal	 budget
monetary	compensation	in	the	amount	of	five	times	the	sum	of	damage.

By	 operation	 of	 Article	 78	 of	 the	 Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation	 a	 person	 shall	 be	 released	 from	 criminal	 liability	 due	 to
expiration	of	statutes	of	limitation,	i.e.	if	the	following	time	limits	have
expired	since	the	day	of	commission	of	the	crime:

a)	two	years	after	the	commission	of	a	crime	of	little	gravity;

b)	six	years	after	the	commission	of	a	crime	of	medium	gravity;

c)	ten	years	after	the	commission	of	a	grave	crime;



d)	fifteen	years	after	the	commission	of	a	particularly	grave	crime.

The	 running	 of	 limitation	 period	 shall	 be	 stopped	 if	 the	 person	who
has	committed	the	crime	evades	investigation	or	court	trial.

Alongside	with	 that,	 section	5	Article	78	of	 the	Criminal	Code	of	 the
Russian	Federation	indicates	that	the	statutes	of	limitation	shall	not	be
applied	 to	 persons	 who	 have	 committed	 crimes	 connected	 with
terrorism;	planning,	preparing,	unleashing,	or	waging	an	aggressive	war;
ecocide;	genocide;	infringement	on	life	of	a	state	or	social	public	figure;
seizure	or	retaining	of	power,	and	a	number	of	other	crimes).

Release	 from	 punishment	 is	 a	 release	 of	 the	 convicted	 person	 by	 a
competent	 state	body	 from	either	 imposition	of	penalty	or	 from	full	or
partial	serving	that	penalty.

As	opposed	to	release	from	criminal	liability,	release	from	punishment
may	only	be	applied	to	a	person	convicted	of	committing	a	crime,	i.e.	to
a	 person	 in	 whose	 relation	 a	 convicting	 judgment	 has	 been	 issued	 by
court.

With	 the	 exception	 of	 amnesty	 and	pardon,	 only	 court	 can	 release	 a
person	from	punishment.

Criminal	 legislation	 sets	 forth	 the	 following	 types	 of	 release	 from
punishment:

—	conditional	early	release	from	punishment	(i.e.	release	of	a	person
from	further	serving	the	sentence	which	is	already	being	served);

—	the	replacement	of	the	unserved	term	of	punishment	with	a	milder
penalty;

—	release	from	punishment	due	to	a	change	of	situation	(i.e.,	change
of	 situation	 which	 lead	 to	 loss	 of	 social	 danger	 of	 the	 deed	 or	 of	 the
convict);

—	release	from	punishment	due	to	illness;



—	suspended	sentence;

—	suspended	sentence	for	drug	addicts;

—	 release	 from	 punishment	 in	 connection	 with	 the	 expiry	 of	 the
limitation	statutes	for	the	court’s	sentence;

—	release	from	punishment	based	on	an	act	of	amnesty	or	pardon.

Each	 of	 the	 listed	 types	 of	 release	 from	 punishment	 (mitigation	 of
punishment)	 may	 be	 applied	 where	 there	 are	 strictly	 defined	 grounds
and	certain	conditions.

28.4.	Amnesty.	Pardon.	Criminal	Record

Pursuant	 to	 section	2	Article	84	of	 the	Criminal	Code	of	 the	Russian
Federation,	 persons	who	have	 committed	 crimes	may	be	 released	 from
criminal	liability	by	an	act	of	amnesty	(Greek:	amnestia	—	forgiveness).
Persons	who	have	been	convicted	of	crimes	may	be	either	released	from
punishment,	or	 the	punishment	 imposed	may	be	shortened	or	replaced
with	 a	 milder	 type	 of	 punishment,	 or	 released	 from	 additional
punishment.	 Criminal	 record	 may	 be	 lifted	 from	 persons	 who	 have
served	punishment,	by	an	act	of	amnesty.

An	 amnesty	 may	 be	 declared	 by	 the	 State	 Duma	 of	 the	 Federal
Assembly	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 with	 regard	 to	 a	 broad	 scope	 of
persons.

Application	of	amnesty	is	generally	connected	with	the	expression	of
humanism,	but	it	may	also	have	practical	purposes:	prevent	polarisation
in	the	society,	avoid	an	armed	conflict,	 return	capital	 into	the	country,
etc.

Amnesties	in	Russia,	as	 in	many	other	countries,	are	also	declared	in
connection	 with	 significant	 national	 holidays	 or	 important
anniversaries.

As	opposed	to	an	amnesty,	pardon	may	be	granted	by	the	President	of
the	Russian	Federation	in	respect	to	a	specific	person	(Article	85	of	the



Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation).

A	 person	 who	 has	 been	 convicted	 of	 a	 crime	 may	 be	 released	 from
further	serving	his	sentence,	or	the	imposed	punishment	may	be	reduced
or	 replaced	 with	 a	 milder	 penalty	 by	 an	 act	 of	 pardon.	 The	 criminal
record	may	be	lifted	from	the	person	who	has	served	punishment,	by	an
act	of	pardon.

Criminal	record	is	a	special	legal	status	of	a	person	constituted	by	his
being	 convicted	 and	 sentenced	 to	 a	 certain	 punishment,	 which	 is
expressed	 in	 the	 possibility	 of	 arising	 of	 negative	 consequences
(limitations)	of	general	legal	and	criminal	legal	character.

Criminal	legal	nature	of	the	consequences	of	criminal	record	lies	in	the
fact	 that	 criminal	 record	 shall	 be	 taken	 account	 of	 in	 recidivism,	 in
imposition	of	penalty,	in	deciding	on	release	from	criminal	liability,	etc.

Common	 legal	 nature	 of	 criminal	 record	 may	 lie	 in	 the	 fact	 that
persons	who	have	criminal	record	may	not	hold	certain	offices,	obtain	a
license	 for	 acquisition	 and	 storage	 of	 firearms,	 leave	 the	 country,	 be
recruited	for	military	service,	have	access	to	state	secret,	etc.

However,	 criminal	 record	 is	 not	 an	 eternal	 consequence	 of	 a
committed	 crime.	 It	 has	 certain	 timeframes.	 Pursuant	 to	 section
1	 Article	 86	 of	 the	 Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 criminal
record	 arises	 from	 the	 day	 of	 entry	 of	 the	 court’s	 sentence	 into	 legal
force,	remains	in	force	during	the	serving	of	the	punishment	and	stays	in
effect	 for	 a	 certain	 time	 after	 its	 serving	 upon	 the	 moment	 of	 its
cancellation	or	lifting.

A	 person	 released	 from	 punishment	 shall	 be	 deemed	 not	 having
criminal	record	under	section	2	Article	86.

Criminal	record	is	cancelled	in	the	following	manner:

a)	with	respect	to	conditionally	sentenced	persons	—	upon	the	expiry
of	the	period	or	probation;



b)	 with	 respect	 to	 persons	 sentenced	 to	 penalties	 milder	 than
deprivation	 of	 liberty	—	upon	 the	 expiry	 of	 one	 year	 after	 punishment
was	served	or	executed;

c)	 with	 respect	 to	 persons	 sentenced	 to	 deprivation	 of	 liberty	 for
crimes	 of	 little	 or	 medium	 gravity	 —	 upon	 expiry	 of	 three	 years	 after
punishment	was	served;

d)	with	respect	to	persons	sentenced	to	deprivation	of	liberty	for	grave
crimes	—	upon	expiry	of	eight	years	after	punishment	was	served;

e)	 with	 respect	 to	 persons	 sentenced	 to	 deprivation	 of	 liberty	 for
particularly	 grave	 crimes	—	upon	 expiry	 of	 ten	 years	 after	 punishment
was	served.

However,	if	the	convicted	person	behaved	faultlessly	after	the	serving
of	the	punishment,	as	well	as	compensated	for	the	damage	inflicted,	the
court	upon	his	motion	may	remove	his	criminal	record	before	the	expiry
of	 the	 normal	 term	 for	 cancelling	 the	 record	 of	 conviction	 (section	 5
Article	86	of	the	Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation).

The	cancellation	or	lifting	of	a	criminal	record	shall	cancel	all	the	legal
consequences	related	to	the	record	of	conviction.

28.5.	Criminal	Liability	of	Minors

Criminal	liability	of	minors	is	stipulated	in	part	5	of	the	Criminal	Code
of	 the	 Russian	 Federation,	 establishing	 the	 specifics	 of	 types	 of
punishments	and	their	application	for	minors.

Pursuant	 to	 section	1	Article	87	of	 the	Criminal	Code	of	 the	Russian
Federation,	minors	are	persons	who	at	the	moment	of	the	commission	of
the	crime	had	reached	the	age	of	fourteen	but	had	not	reached	the	age	of
eighteen	years.

The	types	of	punishments	which	can	be	imposed	to	minors	are:

a)	 fine	 (which	 may	 be	 imposed	 if	 the	 convicted	 minor	 has	 his	 own
earnings	or	property	on	which	recovery	may	be	levied,	as	well	as	in	the



absence	of	such.	A	fine	imposed	on	a	convicted	minor	may	be	recovered
by	 a	 decision	 of	 court	 from	 his	 parents	 or	 other	 legal	 representatives
with	their	consent);

b)	deprivation	of	the	right	to	engage	in	specified	activities;

c)	compulsory	works	(for	the	term	from	forty	to	one	hundred	and	sixty
hours);

d)	corrective	labour	(for	the	term	up	to	one	year);

e)	restriction	of	liberty	(for	the	term	from	two	months	to	two	years);

f)	deprivation	of	liberty	for	a	fixed	term	(this	punishment	may	not	be
imposed	 on	 a	 minor	 convict	 who	 has	 committed	 a	 crime	 of	 little	 or
medium	gravity	at	the	age	of	less	than	sixteen	years	old	for	the	first	time,
as	well	as	on	other	minor	convicts	who	have	committed	crimes	of	 little
gravity	 for	 the	 first	 time.	When	 inflicting	upon	a	minor	punishment	 in
the	form	of	deprivation	of	liberty	for	committing	a	grave	or	a	particularly
grave	time,	the	lowest	limit	of	punishment	provided	for	by	the	respective
article	of	the	Special	Part	of	the	Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation
shall	be	reduced	by	half).

The	 minor	 age	 of	 the	 convict	 is	 undoubtedly	 a	 mitigating
circumstance,	but	the	court	should	also	take	into	account	the	conditions
of	 his	 life	 and	 upbringing,	 the	 level	 of	 mental	 development,	 other
specifics	of	the	personality,	as	well	as	the	older	people’s	influence.

Pursuant	to	Article	90	of	the	Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation,
a	minor	who	has	committed	a	crime	of	little	or	medium	gravity	may	be
relieved	from	criminal	liability	if	it	is	found	that	his	reformation	can	be
achieved	by	applying	compulsory	measures	of	educational	influence.

These	measures	include:

а)	a	warning	(clarification	of	the	harm	inflicted	by	his	deed	and	of	the
consequences	of	further	commission	of	crimes);

b)	 transfer	 to	 the	 surveillance	 of	 parents	 or	 persons	 acting	 in	 loco



parents,	or	a	specialised	state	agency	(burdening	these	persons	with	the
obligation	 of	 educational	 influence	 on	 the	minor	 and	 control	 over	 his
behavior);

c)	the	duty	of	redressing	the	damage	caused;

d)	restriction	of	leisure	and	establishment	of	special	requirements	for
the	behavior	of	the	minor	(there	may	be	a	ban	on	visiting	certain	places,
using	 certain	 forms	 of	 leisure,	 restriction	 on	 being	 outside	 of	 home
during	certain	time	of	day,	etc.).

Several	 compulsory	 measures	 of	 educational	 influence	 may	 be
imposed	upon	a	minor	simultaneously.

A	minor	 convicted	 for	 a	 punishment	 for	 a	 crime	 of	 little	 or	medium
gravity	 may	 be	 released	 by	 court	 from	 punishment	 by	 the	 use	 of
compulsory	measures	of	educational	character	listed	above.

A	minor	 sentenced	 to	 deprivation	 of	 liberty	 for	 the	 commission	of	 a
crime	of	medium	gravity,	or	a	grave	crime,	may	be	released	by	court	from
punishment	 and	 placed	 in	 a	 specialised	 closed-type	 teaching	 and
educational	institution.

This	measure	is	of	special	educational	character	and	is	applied	for	the
purpose	of	 reforming	 the	minor	who	needs	 special	 teaching	 conditions
and	 pedagogical	 approach.	 The	 minor	 may	 be	 placed	 in	 the	 said
institution	before	his	reaching	eighteen	years,	but	for	no	longer	than	for
three	years.

By	 way	 of	 exception,	 compulsory	measures	 of	 educational	 influence
may	 be	 applied	 to	 persons	 who	 have	 committed	 crimes	 at	 the	 age	 of
eighteen	to	twenty	years.

28.6.	Compulsory	Measures	of	Medical	Nature

Compulsory	measures	of	medical	nature	are	the	measures	established
by	Chapter	15	of	 the	Criminal	Code	of	 the	Russian	Federation	 imposed
by	court	to	persons	suffering	from	mental	derangement,	for	the	purpose



of	treating	them	or	improving	their	mental	condition	and	prevention	of
further	commission	of	crimes.

Said	measures	 are	 coercive,	 but	 they	are	not	punishment,	 since	 they
are	not	connected	to	the	infliction	of	certain	harm	and	deprivations,	but
are	 imposed	 for	 the	 sake	 of	 the	 convict’s	 interests.	 Moreover,
punishment	shall	be	imposed	by	a	court	judgment	for	a	fixed	term,	while
compulsory	 measures	 of	 medical	 nature	 are	 imposed	 until	 the	 full
recovery	of	the	convict	or	until	the	loss	of	social	danger.

Compulsory	 measures	 of	 medical	 nature	 do	 not	 express	 a	 negative
attitude	of	state	to	the	mentally	deranged	person,	do	not	cause	arising	of
criminal	 record,	 and	 are	 not	 aimed	 at	 the	 restoration	 of	 justice	 and
reformation	of	a	person.

They	may	only	be	applied	towards	persons	who	by	the	nature	of	their
deed	and	their	state	of	mental	derangement	pose	a	social	danger.

Pursuant	to	Article	97	of	the	Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation,
compulsory	measures	of	medical	nature	may	be	 imposed	by	a	 court	on
the	following	persons:

a)	persons	who	have	committed	crimes	while	in	a	state	of	insanity;

b)	 persons	 who,	 after	 the	 commission	 of	 a	 crime,	 became	 mentally
deranged,	which	makes	it	impossible	to	impose	or	execute	punishment;

c)	persons	who	have	committed	a	 crime	and	who	suffer	 from	mental
derangement	that	does	not	incapacitate	them	mentally;

d)	 persons	who	 have	 committed	 at	 the	 age	 of	 older	 than	 eighteen	 a
crime	against	sexual	immunity	of	minors	under	fourteen	years	and	who
suffer	from	sexual	preference	disorder	(pedophilia)	that	does	not	qualify
as	insanity.

Criminal	 legislation	 sets	 forth	 the	 following	 types	 of	 compulsory
measures	of	medical	nature:

a)	 compulsory	 out-patient	 observation	 and	 treatment	 by	 a



psychiatrist;

b)	compulsory	treatment	in	a	specialised	mental	hospital;

c)	 compulsory	 treatment	 in	 a	 specialised	 mental	 hospital	 with
intensive	observation;

d)	 compulsory	 treatment	 in	a	psychiatric	hospital	of	 specialised	 type
with	intensive	observation.

Persons	who	are	convicted	of	crimes	committed	in	the	state	of	sanity,
but	who	are	in	need	of	medical	treatment	for	medical	disorders	that	do
not	 qualify	 as	 insanity,	 may	 be	 imposed	 by	 a	 court	 in	 addition	 to	 the
punishment	 with	 compulsory	 medical	 measures	 in	 the	 form	 of
compulsory	out-patient	observation	and	treatment	by	a	psychiatrist.

28.7.	Confiscation	of	Property

Pursuant	 to	 Article	 104.1	 of	 the	 Criminal	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation,	 confiscation	 of	 property	 is	 forced	 gratuitous	 withdrawal
without	compensation,	and	conversion	 into	ownership	of	 state	under	a
judgment	of	conviction	of	certain	types	of	property.

That	property	includes:

—	 money,	 valuables,	 and	 other	 property	 received	 as	 a	 result	 of
committing	 of	 murder,	 human	 trafficking,	 infringement	 of	 rights	 of
authorship,	 unlawful	 organisation	 and	 conduction	 of	 gambling	 games,
act	 of	 terror	 and	 assistance	 in	 terrorism,	 abuse	 of	 authority,	 receipt	 of
bribe,	and	a	number	of	other	crimes	set	forth	in	section	1	Article	104.1	of
the	Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation;

—	money,	valuables,	and	other	property	used	or	 intended	for	the	use
in	 financing	 terrorism,	 extremist	 activity,	 organised	 group,	 unlawful
organised	 military	 formation,	 criminal	 community	 (criminal	 organi-
sation);

—	 instruments,	 equipment,	 or	 other	 means	 of	 commission	 of	 crime
belonging	to	the	accused	person.



Article	104.2	of	the	Criminal	Code	of	the	Russian	Federation	sets	forth
that	 if	 the	 confiscation	 of	 a	 specific	 item	 incorporated	 in	 the	 said
property	 is	 impossible	due	to	 its	being	in	use,	being	sold,	or	otherwise,
the	court	shall	issue	a	decision	on	confiscation	of	the	amount	of	money
corresponding	to	the	value	of	the	item.

In	 case	 of	 insufficiency	 of	 monetary	 means	 subject	 to	 confiscation
instead	of	 the	 item	 included	 into	property	 to	 be	 confiscated,	 the	 court
shall	 issue	 a	 decision	 on	 confiscation	 of	 other	 property	 which	 value
corresponds	to	the	value	of	that	item,	or	is	comparable	with	the	value	of
the	 item,	with	 the	exception	of	property	which	may	not	be	confiscated
under	current	legislation.

Test	questions	and	tasks

1.	Please	describe	the	types	of	criminal	punishment.

2.	 What	 should	 the	 court	 take	 into	 account	 when	 imposing	 a
punishment?

3.	What	is	the	difference	between	imposing	a	punishment	with	respect
to	 multiplicity	 of	 crimes	 and	 imposing	 a	 punishment	 with	 respect	 to
cumulation	of	convictions?

4.	What	 is	 the	difference	between	 release	 from	criminal	 liability	 and
release	from	criminal	punishment?

5.	What	is	criminal	record	and	how	is	it	different	from	punishment?

6.	What	is	special	about	criminal	liability	of	minors?

7.	Can	compulsory	measures	of	medical	nature	be	imposed	along	with
punishment?

8.	In	what	cases	can	a	certain	sum	of	money	be	confiscated?



Notes

<<1>>	 See:	Matusov	 N.I.,	 Malko	 A.	 V.	 The	 theory	 of	 state	 and	 law.
Textbook.	4th	Edition.	M.:	“Delo”	Publishing	House.	RANEPA,	2011.	P.
35.

<<2>>	 Baglay	 M.V.	 Constitutional	 Law	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation.
Textbook.	M.,	2009.	P.	15.

<<3>>	Baglay	M.V.	Op	cit.	P.	31

<<4>>	 For	 greater	 detail,	 please	 see:	 Malko	 A.V.,	 Zatonsky	 V.A.
Jurisprudence.	Textbook.	М.,	2014.	P.	92.

<<5>>	For	more	detail	please	see	Federal	Law	dated	13.12.1996	#	150-
FZ	“On	arms”	//	Rossiyskaya	gazeta,	18	December	1996.

<<6>>	Baglay	M.V.	Op.	cit.	P.	516.

<<7>>	 Federal	 law	 of	 February	 22,	 2014	 #20-FZ	 (as	 of	 July	 14,	 2015)
“On	 the	 Elections	 of	 Deputies	 to	 the	 Sstate	 Duma	 of	 the	 Federal
Assembly	of	the	Russian	Federation”	//	Rossiyskaya	Gazeta.	February	26,
2014.	#	45.

<<8>>	 See	 Federal	 Constitutional	 Law	 of	December	 17,	 1997	 #2-FKZ
(as	of	May	23,	2015)	“On	the	Government	of	the	Russian	Federation”	//
Rossiyskaya	 Gazeta.	 December	 23,	 1997.	 #	 245	 //
http://www.pravo.gov.ru	—	23.05.2015

<<9>>	The	Decree	of	the	President	of	the	Russian	Federation	of	March
09,	2004	#	314	(as	of	June	22,	2010)	“On	the	System	and	Structure	of	the
Federal	 Bodies	 of	 Executive	 Power”	 //	 Rossiyskaya	 Gazeta.	 March	 12,
2004.	#	50.

<<10>>	See	Federal	Constitutional	Law	of	December	31,	1996	#	1-FKZ



(as	 of	 February	 5,	 2014)	 “On	 the	 Judicial	 System	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation”	//	Rossiyskaya	Gazeta.	January	6,	1997.	#	3.

<<11>>	 See	 Federal	 Law	 dated	 17.01.1992	 #	 2202-1	 “On	 the
Prosecutor’s	Office	of	the	Russian	Federation”	//	Rossiyskaya	gazeta.	25
November	1995.	#	229.

<<12>>	See	Federal	Law	dated	06.10.2003	#	131-FZ	(as	of	29.06.2015)
“On	 General	 Principles	 of	 Local	 Self-Government	 in	 the	 Russian
Federation”	//	Rossiyskaya	gazeta.	8	October	2003.	#	202.

<<13>>	 See	 Ivanchak	 A.I.	 Civil	 Law	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation.
Textbook.	M.,	2014.	P.	8.

<<14>>	 See:	 Civil	 Law.	 Textbook	 /	 Under	 the	 editorship	 of	 E.A.
Sukhanov.	M.,	2004.	P.	80.

<<15>>	See	Federal	law	of	August	8,	2001	#	129-FZ	(as	of	July	13,	2015)
“On	state	 registration	of	 legal	entities	and	 individual	entrepreneurs”	 //
Rossiyskaya	Gazeta.	2001.	August	10.	#	153–154.

<<16>>	See	Federal	Law	of	October	26,	2002	#	127-FZ	 (as	of	 July	13,
2015)	 “On	 insolvency	 (bankruptcy)”	 //	 Rossiyskaya	 Gazeta.	 2002.
November	2.	#	209–210.

<<17>>	 See	 Federal	 Law	 of	 August	 8,	 2008	 #	 129-FZ	 (as	 of	 July	 13,
2015)	 “On	 the	 state	 registration	 of	 legal	 entities	 and	 individual
entrepreneurs”	//	Rossiyskaya	Gazeta.	2001.	August	10.	#	153–154.

<<18>>	See	Federal	Law	of	October	26,	2002	#	127-FZ	 (as	of	 July	13,
2015)	 “On	 insolvency	 (bankruptcy)”	 (with	 amendments	 entering	 into
force	on	July	25,	2015)	//	Rossiyskaya	Gazeta.	2002.	November	2.	#	209–
210.

<<19>>	For	greater	detail	see	Federal	Law	of	May	19,	2005	#	82-FZ	(as
of	March	8,	2015)	“On	social	associations”	//	Rossiyskaya	Gazeta.	1995.



May	25.	#	100.

<<20>>	See	Federal	Law	of	November	14,	2002	#	161-FZ	(as	of	July	13,
2015)	 “On	 state-run	 and	municipal	 unitary	 enterprises”	 //	 Rossiyskaya
Gazeta.	2002.	December	3.	#	229.

<<21>>	 See	 Civil	 Law.	 Textbook	 /	 Under	 the	 editorship	 of	 E.	 A.
Sukhanov.	M.,	2004.	P.	454.

<<22>>	See	Ivanchak	A.I.	Ibid.	P.	193.

<<23>>	See	Migachev	 Y.I.,	 Popov	 L.L.,	 Tikhomirov	 S.V.	 Administrative
Law	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation:	 textbook	 for	 bachelors.	 M.,	 2014.	 Pp.
236–247.

<<24>>	Migachev	Y.I.,	Popov	L.L.,	Tikhomirov	S.V.	Op.	cit.	P.	29.

<<25>>	 See	 the	 Code	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 on	 administrative
offences	 of	 30	 December	 2001	 #	 195-FZ	 (as	 of	 28	 November	 2015)	 //
Rossiyskaya	Gazeta.	2001.	31	December.

<<26>>	See	Federal	Law	of	31	May	2002	#	62-FZ	 (as	of	31	December
2014)	 “On	 the	 citizenship	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation”	 //	 Rossiyskaya
Gazeta.	2002.	5	June.

<<27>>	See	Law	of	the	Russian	Federation	of	25	June	1993	#	5242-1	(as
of	28	November	2015)	“On	the	right	of	citizens	of	the	Russian	Federation
to	 free	movement,	choice	of	 the	place	of	stay	and	residence	 in	Russian
Federation”	//	Rossiyskaya	Gazeta.	1993.	25	June.

<<28>>	See	Law	of	the	Russian	Federation	of	12	June	2002	#	67-FZ	(as
of	3	November	2015)	“On	the	fundamental	guarantees	of	electoral	rights
and	 right	 to	 participate	 in	 a	 referendum	 of	 citizens	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation”	//	Rossiyskaya	Gazeta.	2002.	15	June.

<<29>>	 See	 Federal	 Law	 of	 2	 May	 2006	 #	 59-FZ	 (as	 of	 3	 November



2015)	“On	the	procedure	for	handling	appeals	of	citizens	of	the	Russian
Federation”	//	Rossiyskaya	Gazeta.	2006.	5	May.

<<30>>	See	Federal	Law	of	25	July	2002	#	115-FZ	(as	of	28	November
2015)	 “On	 the	 legal	 status	 of	 foreign	 citizens	 in	 the	 Russian
Federation”	//	Rossiyskaya	Gazeta.	2002.	31	July.

<<31>>	 See	 Decree	 of	 the	 President	 of	 the	 Russian	 Federation	 of	 6
April	 2004	 #	 490	 (as	 of	 31	 December	 2014)	 “On	 the	 approval	 of	 the
Regulation	 on	 the	 Administration	 of	 the	 President	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation”	//	Rossiyskaya	Gazeta.	2004.	8	April.

<<32>>	See	Bratanovsky	S.N.	Administrative	Law:	Textbook.	М.,	2013.
P.	303.

<<33>>	Bratanovsky	S.N.	Op.	cit.	P.	304.

<<34>>	 See	 Federal	 Law	 of	 6	 October	 1999	 #	 184-FZ	 (as	 of	 28
November	2015)	“On	general	principles	of	the	organisation	of	legislative
(representative)	 and	 executive	 agencies	 of	 subjects	 of	 the	 Russian
Federation”	//	Rossiyskaya	Gazeta.	1999.	19	October.

<<35>>	See	Federal	Law	of	27	May	2003	#	58-FZ	 (as	of	13	 July	2015)
“On	the	system	of	state	service	of	the	Russian	Federation”	//	Rossiyskaya
Gazeta.	2003.	31	May.

<<36>>	See	 Federal	 Law	of	 27	 July	 2004	 #	 79-FZ	 (as	 of	 14	December
2015)	 “On	 state	 civil	 service	 of	 the	Russian	 Federation”	 //	 Rossiyskaya
Gazeta.	2004.	31	July.

<<37>>	 See	 Federal	 Law	 of	 28	March	 1998	 #	 53-FZ	 (as	 of	 5	 October
2015)	 “On	 military	 duty	 and	 military	 service”	 //	 Rossiyskaya	 Gazeta.
1998.	2	April.

<<38>>	See	Federal	Law	of	27	May	1998	#	76-FZ	 (as	of	13	 July	2015)
“On	 the	 status	 of	 military	 servicemen”	 //	 Rossiyskaya	 Gazeta.	 1998.	 2



June.

<<39>>	See	Bratanovsky	S.	N.	Op.	cit.	P.	310.

<<40>>	See	Migachev	Y.I.,	Popov	L.L.,	Tikhomirov	S.V.	Op.	cit.	P.	190.