Law, Rights and Ideology in Russia


Law, Rights and Ideology in Russia: Landmarks in the destiny of a great power brings into sharp focus several key episodes in Russia’s vividly ideological engagement with law and rights. Drawing on 30 years of experience of consultancy and teaching in many regions of Russia and on library research in Russian-language texts, Bill Bowring provides unique insights into people, events and ideas.

The book starts with the surprising role of the Scottish Enlightenment in the origins of law as an academic discipline in Russia in the eighteenth century. The Great Reforms of Tsar Aleksandr II, abolishing serfdom in 1861 and introducing jury trial in 1864, are then examined and debated as genuine reforms or the response to a revolutionary situation. A new interpretation of the life and work of the Soviet legal theorist Yevgeniy Pashukanis leads to an analysis of the conflicted attitude of the USSR to international law and human rights, especially the right of peoples to self-determination. The complex history of autonomy in Tsarist and Soviet Russia is considered, alongside the collapse of the USSR in 1991. An examination of Russia’s plunge into the European human rights system under Yeltsin is followed by the history of the death penalty in Russia. Finally, the secrets of the ideology of ‘sovereignty’ in the Putin era and their impact on law and rights are revealed. Throughout, the constant theme is the centuries long hegemonic struggle between Westernisers and Slavophiles, against the backdrop of the Messianism that proclaimed Russia to be the Third Rome, was revived in the mission of Soviet Russia to change the world and which has echoes in contemporary Eurasianism and the ideology of sovereignty.

Bill Bowring is Professor of Law at Birkbeck College, University of London, where he teaches human rights, public international law and minority rights. He is also a practising barrister specialising in human rights, since 2000 representing applicants against Russia and other post-Soviet states at the European Court of Human Rights. He has taught at a number of Russian universities and has worked as a consultant with DFID, the EU, Council of Europe, and the OSCE’s High Commissioner on National Minorities.





Law, Rights and Ideology in Russia Landmarks in the destiny of a great power





Bill Bowring





First published 2013

by Routledge

2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN



Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada

by Routledge

605 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017



A GlassHouse Book

Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business

© 2013 Bill Bowring

The right of Bill Bowring to be identified as author of this work has been asserted by him in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.

Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.

British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data

A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library

Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data

A catalog record for this book has been requested.

ISBN 978-0-415-68346-3 (hbk)

ISBN 978-0-203-49021-1 (ebk)

DOI: 10.4324/9780203490211

Typeset in Garamond

by Cenveo Publisher Services





Contents


Acknowledgements

List of tables

Introduction



Theorising Russia’s ideological history

The Scottish Enlightenment in the Russian Empire

The 1850s and 1860s in Russia: revolutionary situation or great reforms?

The trajectory of Yevgeniy Pashukanis and the struggle for power in Soviet law

Soviet international law and self-determination

The collapse of the USSR and the ‘parade of sovereignties’

Russian autonomy

Human rights in the Yeltsin period

Russia and the death penalty

Sovereign democracy



Conclusion

Autobiographical note

Reference

Index





Acknowledgments


At every stage of the two-year process of writing this book I had invaluable assistance from many colleagues and contacts. I cannot name all the very many Russian and non-Russian interlocutors who fired and sustained my passion for Russia from 1983 onwards.

Chapter 1 owes a considerable debt to the research of Peter Duncan, who has been a colleague and friend for quite a few years. Similarly, Olga Malinova, who has published extensively in English and in Russian on Russian identity, has become a good friend and introduced me to the work of Andrzej Walicki.

It would have been impossible to write Chapter 2 without the assistance of Archie Brown, who not only provided me with copies of his own articles and chapters on Desnitskiy, otherwise very hard to find, but gave me acute critical comments on the results of my work. He may well write the definitive monograph on this extraordinary interpenetration of Russia and the Scottish Enlightenment. I hope so.

For Chapter 3, I must thank not a person but a bookshop, the Falanster bookshop, almost impossible to find, in central Moscow,1 where a wonderfully rich treasure trove of small print-run scholarly books, especially on history, is to be found.

1 To help my readers, here is the address with a map: http://www.bookcrossing.ru/map_falanster.php. Chapter 4 could not have been researched without the help of Olga Malinova, who helped me to obtain a reader’s card for the huge INION (Institute of Scientific Information on Social Science) Library near Profsoyuznaya Metro Station, where I spent many hours in Reading Room No. 330. I also found facsimile texts of the great texts of Russian legal scholarship from several centuries and complete sets of journals from the 1920s and 1930s at the private SPARK law library. The staff there were extraordinarily helpful.2 Sébastian Budgen and Robert Knox have been invaluable interlocutors on all questions concerning Pashukanis.

2 Their website is http://www.lawlibrary.ru/. Chapter 5 is a further reworking of themes I have developed over the years, with the help and encouragement of many colleagues and friends and the participants in countless seminars and conferences.

Chapter 6 owes a great debt to Valentin Vakhtangovich Mikhailov, a veteran scholar and politician, who has become a close friend. I have drawn deeply from his research and writing.

Chapter 7 is a further development of research in which I was inspired by the student of Austro-Marxism and non-territorial autonomy, Ephraim Nimni, and by colleagues at the European Centre for Minority Issues (ECMI) in Flensburg: Sasha Osipov, Timofei Agarin and my own successful PhD student, Federica Prina. Karl Cordell has also been a constant friend and critic.

Chapter 8 had its origins in a collection edited many years ago by Istvan Pogany, but also benefited greatly from collaborating with the preeminent expert on the European Convention on Human Rights, Philip Leach. Colleagues and co-workers at Memorial must also be mentioned: Sergey Kovalyov, Tatiana Kasatkina, Oleg Orlov, Sasha Cherkasov, Svetlana Gannushkina.

Chapter 9 had its origins in a collection edited by Jon Yorke, whose PhD thesis I examined.

The impetus for Chapter 10 was provided by the article by Julia Svetlichnaya, whom I subsequently met. I presented versions of the chapter at the Institute of Advanced Legal Studies, with thanks to Alexandra Zernova; at the University of Northampton, with thanks to Anton Shekhovtsov; and the International University College in Turin, with thanks to John Haskell. And, of course, due acknowledgment for the excellent discussion and criticism at the events they made possible.

The Birkbeck Law School, and its Executive Dean, Patricia Tuitt, made possible a sabbatical in the first half of 2011, which I spent at the University of Essex. The Human Rights Centre and its then Director, John Packer, provided me with an office and I had the benefit of the magnificent Russian studies resource still to be found in the Library there.

I have attended many events at Chatham House thanks to James Nixey, Director of its Russia and Eurasia Programme. I am grateful for his enthusiastic support for this project and reception of the text.

For many years I have had the privilege of serving as external examiner for the unique courses in Russian and Soviet law taught at King’s College, London, by Jane Henderson and have on occasion taught her highly motivated students. She was kind enough to read my text and to make many invaluable suggestions and criticisms. The book is much better as a result of her close attention and that of Archie Brown. All errors are, of course, my own.

Finally, I owe a debt of immense gratitude to my family, Olga, Vanya and Masha, who have suffered the pains of scholarly preoccupation and occasional irascibility for the last two years.





Tables


Table 6.1 Declarations of state sovereignty

Table 6.2 Types of subject of the Russian Federation

Table 6.3 Contradictory principles of the Russian Federation

Table 6.4 Mergers

Table 6.5 ‘National’ (ethnic) populations of Russia by self-description, 2002 Census as against 1989

Table 6.6 Russian and ethnic populations by self-description, 2010 Census

Table 9.1 Death penalty executions

Table 9.2 Seventeen crimes for which the death penalty was possible, 1983





Introduction


DOI: 10.4324/9780203490211-1

This book is not a general history of law in Russia; neither is it one of politics or ideas. Andrzej Walicki has written an excellent history of Russian thought up to the late Soviet period1 and a definitive exploration of legal philosophies of Russian liberalism.2 Instead, a number of episodes and themes are brought into sharp focus. The word ‘landmarks’ has been chosen deliberately. In 1909, following the defeat of the First Russian Revolution in 1905, a group of leading liberal and religious theorists published the collection Vekhi (Landmarks), in which Struve, Berdyaev, Kistyakovsky and others attacked the Russian intelligentsia who, in the tradition of Herzen, Belinsky and Chernyshevsky, all of them later given hero status in Soviet mythology, had supported the revolutionary movement. The collection has recently been republished in Russia in paperback in a widely distributed series.3 So the word ‘landmarks’ resonates in Russia, where history has great symbolic and mythological force.

1 Walicki (1979). 2 Walicki (1992). 3 Gershenzon (1909/2011). Thus, the imprisoned oligarch Mikhail Khodorkovskiy has presented himself to the educated public as a ‘Decembrist’, inheriting the tradition of the revolutionary democrats of 1825. The authorities were stupid enough to send him to serve his sentence in Chita in Siberia, where those Decembrists who were not executed after 1825 were sent into exile. And on 21 March 2011 a large number of Russian human rights activists and cultural figures, especially writers, signed an open letter in support of Khodorkovskiy to the former President Medvedev headed ‘Free the Decembrists, Mr President!’4 The web page on the khodorkovskiy.ru website had at its head a joint portrait of Medvedev and Tsar Aleksandr II, the initiator of the Liberation of the Serfs in 1861 and Great Reforms of 1864.

4 Website:http://khodorkovsky.ru/publicsupport/news/16020.html (accessed 27 October 2012). The open letter started:

The intelligentsia demand from Medevedev political amnesty and liberalisation.

On 3 March (2011) in your speech commemorating 150 years since the abolition of serfdom in Russia, you said that the model for the implementation of liberal reforms for you was the policy implemented by the emperor Aleksandr II, upon whom fell the heavy historical task of liberating the country from the despotic ‘military-bureaucratic’ inheritance of his predecessor Nikolai I.

As you know, the liberation of the serfs was one of the most important measures of Aleksandr ‘The Liberator’, but this was preceded by other actions without which it would have been impossible to implement his reforming course.

Already, within a year of occupying the throne, the emperor in his Manifesto ‘On ending the war’ of 13 March 1856 made clear his desire to reform and to bring about equality before the courts.

In Russia the famous ‘spring’ began – and a wide and rather free public discussion unfolded on the situation in the country and on the roads to reform, and a mass of liberal publications appeared. On the commemoration of his coronation on 26 August 1856 the emperor amnestied – without seeking confessions or repentance – the Decembrists, and the participants in dissident circles (the Petrashevtsy including Dostoevsky) and the participants in the Polish uprising in 1830–31.



Several significant points should be noted here. First, the term ‘intelligentsia’ is used in today’s Russia without irony. Second, there is a strong sense of history and of significant historical landmarks in Russia. Third, the Great Reforms of the 1860s are fresh in the minds of the educated public in Russia. One source from which I draw in this book is a new collection Aleksandr II: the tragedy of a reformer. People in the destiny of reforms, reforms in the destiny of people.5

5 Lapin (2012). I also use the word ‘ideology’ in my title purposefully.

The usual response, if the words ‘Russia’ and ‘ideology’ are placed together, is to think of Marxism–Leninism or scientific communism. But in fact, ideology, as the systems of ideas legitimating Russia’s statehood and development, has much deeper roots and has taken a wide variety of forms. The ideology of the Putin regime, the ideas of ‘sovereignty’ and ‘sovereign democracy’, developed by the regime’s chief ideologist, Vladimir Surkov, have, as I explore in Chapter 10, surprising foundations.

Moreover, a constant thread in Russian ideology is that of Messianism, the idea that Russia has a special or sacred task, of saving the world. With the fall of Constantinople in 1453, there was a growing tendency to refer to Moscow as the ‘Third Rome’. In 1510 (during the reign of Henry VIII of England) the Russian Orthodox monk Filofei composed a panegyric letter to Tsar Vasiliy III (1505–1533) in which he warned: ‘And now I say unto Thee, take care and take heed, pious Tsar: all the empires of Christendom are united in thine. For two Romes have fallen, and the Third exists and there will not be a fourth. Thy Christian Empire, according to the great theologian, will not pass away.’ Moscow thus became, symbolically, the ‘Third Rome’ and the ‘Second Jerusalem’, inheritor of both the Roman Empire and the Christian Church.

The double-headed eagle was the symbol of the late Byzantine Empire and symbolised the unity between the Orthodox Church and the Empire. It was adopted by Ivan III when he married the Byzantine princess Sophia Paleologo, whose uncle Constantine was the last Byzantine Emperor. It is the state symbol of Russia today and extremely controversial in a country whose Constitution proclaims it to be a secular state and the state of all its various peoples, more than 150 of them.

‘Destiny’ is another word that, in Russia, comes with a great deal of baggage, as I show especially in Chapter 1.

Is Russia therefore simply a land of mysticism, obscurantism and Messianism?

In Chapter 1, I tackle the question of how Russian is to be theorised. In 1939 in a radio broadcast Winston Churchill famously said: ‘I cannot forecast to you the action of Russia. It is a riddle, wrapped in a mystery, inside an enigma; but perhaps there is a key. That key is Russian national interest.’6 As a theory of Russia, this is plainly wholly inadequate.

6 Website:http://www.churchill-society-london.org.uk/RusnEnig.html (accessed 11 July 2012). Marx and Engels both had a fascination with Russia and exerted a certain influence over developments. There is no ‘Marxist’ theory of Russia, just as Marx himself insisted that he was not a Marxist. For most of his life Marx was an uncompromising enemy of the Russian Empire, but mastered the Russian language in his later years and entered into correspondence with the Russian Narodniks, including Vera Zasulich (1849–1919). In his letter to her of March 1881, he took very seriously the role of the Russian peasant and the ‘rural commune’. Marx wrote:

Theoretically speaking, then, the Russian ‘rural commune’ can preserve itself by developing its basis, the common ownership of land, and by eliminating the principle of private property which it also implies … it can gain possession of the fruits with which capitalist production has enriched mankind, without passing through the capitalist regime.



That is not, of course, how things turned out in Russia.

Next, I turn to a Gramscian analysis of Russian ideology and politics, written in the early years after the collapse of the Soviet Union. This persuasive account continues the story, familiar to some of my readers, of the dispute between the Westernisers and the Slavophiles, which began in the nineteenth century. I refer in this regard to some of the most recent Russian scholarly literature. Gramsci was, of course, a Marxian thinker. Soviet ideology, too, had more than a trace of messianism: Soviet leadership of the 3rd International was at least at first intended to save the world from capitalism. Caterina Clark has recently written of Moscow: the fourth Rome.7 She wrote:

7 Clark (2011). Arguably Stalin, and many Soviet cultural bureaucrats and intellectuals – themselves inheritors of a messianic tradition – aspired to generate a superior civilisation, to make their country a primus inter pares in a cultural confederation within their world, continental Europe.8



8 Clark (2011), 10. In the twentieth century the project of ‘Eurasianism’, first mooted by Count Trubetskoy in the White emigration after 1917, has become an important source of the ideology of the Putin regime. Aleksandr Dugin (born 1962), who is now professor of sociology at Moscow State University, started as a propagandist of ‘Russian fascism’ and was deeply engaged in occultism. He summed up his ‘Eurasianism’ in 1997 as follows:

In principle, Eurasia and our space, the heartland Russia, remain the staging area of a new anti-bourgeois, anti-American revolution … The new Eurasian empire will be constructed on the fundamental principle of the common enemy: the rejection of Atlanticism … and the refusal to allow liberal values to dominate us.9



9 Dugin (1997). Eurasianism is intended to unite the traditional religions of Russia, Orthodoxy, Islam, Judaism and Buddhism, in a common opposition to Western materialism and consumerism. Dugin speaks and publishes very regularly in the Russian media and Putin and others in the elite use his rhetoric. I explore Messianism in Chapter 1 and return to it in Chapter 10, where I show that, in contemporary Russia, there is an unlikely marriage between Eurasianism and a decisionism, which has its roots in Carl Schmitt’s ideas.

Next, it may come as a surprise for my readers to learn that the first Russian professor of law in Russia was Semyon Desnitskiy (1740–1789), who was sent to study at the University of Glasgow from 1760 to 1767, at the time of the Scottish Enlightenment, attended lectures by Adam Smith, successfully defended his doctorate on civil and church law and was Professor of Law at Moscow University from 1767 to 1787. He was the first to teach in Russian – his colleagues all taught in German – and brought with him from Scotland a passion for Roman law. He translated William Blackstone’s ‘Commentaries on the Laws of England’ into Russian. As a result of his inspiration, the academic discipline of law in Russia has remained strong to the present day. In Chapter 2, I not only tell his own story and that of his influence on the teaching of law in Russia, but place him in the context of the short-lived Russian Enlightenment, which survived the Pugachev Rebellion, the mass uprising of the peasants which threatened the very existence of the Empire, but did not survive the French Revolution.

In 1812 Napoleon arrived at Moscow, only to witness from the Sparrow Hills the city in flames, its population having set the fires departing eastwards. In 1814 the Russian army, led by Aleksandr I and his generals, whose names, Wittgenstein, Barclay de Tollay and others, announced their varied origins, pursued Napoleon from the burnt-out ruins of Moscow, all the way across Europe and triumphantly marched through Paris before departing home, their work done.10 The Russian Empire appeared to be invincible. The disaster of defeat in the Crimean War changed all that and plunged the Empire into deep crisis.

10 Lieven (2010). There is a strong ideological factor at play here too. One of the factors that precipitated the Crimean War was the Russian Empire’s claim to lead and protect the Christians of the Ottoman Empire, to reclaim Hagia Sophia in Istanbul as the ‘Mother Church’ and to re-establish Constantinople as the capital of Orthodoxy connecting Moscow to Jerusalem. Part of the reason for the downfall of Nikolai II in World War I was his ambition, egged on by Rasputin, to reclaim Constantinople for Orthodox Christendom.

I do not explore 1825 and the Decembrists’ uprising in any detail, but, in Chapter 3, move on to the 1850s and 1860s, in my view a true landmark in the history of law in Russia. Aleksandr II, his liberation of the serfs, and the Great Reforms he initiated are a constant point of reference in contemporary Russia as I have shown earlier. With the help of newly published work by the Russian scholar Anna Popova, I analyse the legal and judicial reforms of 1864, which saw trial by jury established in the Russian Empire, along with a much reduced role for the prokuratura and truly independent judges, chief among them the venerated figure of judicial reform, A. F. Koni, cited to the present day. In the Soviet period the role of Aleksandr II was minimised and, instead, historians depicted a revolutionary situation in the 1860s. It was, according to the Soviet historians, the threat of a peasant uprising led by revolutionary democrats, Belinsky, Chernyshevsky and Herzen, which forced Aleksandr’s hand.Recent historiographical research shows the Soviet account to have been deeply flawed.

Friedrich Engels was the primary influence on Russia in relation to law. The article he wrote with Karl Kautsky in 1887, ‘Juridical socialism,11 was the touchstone for the Russian Social-Democrats. Engels emphasised that the worldview of the bourgeoisie was the ‘juridical worldview’. He endorsed the dominant theory of legal positivism and saw law as an instrument of class domination. This view was taken up by Georgy Plekhanov and other social-democrats, and, after the 1905 Revolution, provoked a spirited response by the Russian ex-Marxist, liberal and religious legal theorists, in the famous collection Vekhi, to which I referred earlier. Lenin denounced Vekhi as ‘an encyclopedia of liberal renegacy’.

11 Engels and Kautsky (1977). In Chapter 4, I tell the story of the most well known (in the West) and accomplished of the generation of Marxist legal scholars who wrote and disputed in the years after the 1917 Revolution, Yevgeniy Pashukanis. Research in Moscow libraries has given me access to the journals published in this period; and this is the first time, as far as I know, that Pashukanis’ intellectual journey has been analysed in depth, from a precocious early blossoming to deep conformity. In particular, I have ascertained the place and circumstances in which he wrote his famous A general theory of law and Marxism. An attempt at a critique of fundamental juridical concepts and can offer some explanation as to its content, references and its unique place in his theoretical output. I also analyse some of the crucial debates of the period; and provide, in a number of annexes, the tables of contents of some of the key journals.

Chapter 5 continues with the thoroughly paradoxical and even schizophrenic history of Soviet public international law, which managed to combine a strict positivism with a revolutionary principle, the right of peoples to self-determination, first adumbrated by Lenin before World War I. At first fiercely resisted by the West, this principle achieved, through a combination of Soviet diplomacy and the role of national liberation movements in the struggle for decolonisation, the status not only of a right, but of a right in which all states have an interest in compliance, erga omnes. By the late Soviet period this focus had entirely disappeared.

Sovietologists and indeed almost all scholars of Russia and the USSR were confounded when, at the end of 1991, the USSR collapsed, ignominiously and without protest. A key landmark in the history of law in Russia is what preceded and followed the collapse: an unprecedented series of proclamations of sovereignty by many components of the Russian Socialist Federation of Soviet States, the RSFSR. The extraordinarily complex and sometimes violent consequences of these events continue to haunt Russia’s leaders. Chapter 6 provides a close analysis, drawing on the work of Valentin Mikhailov.

Chapter 7 turns to another utterly unexpected moment, in 1996, when Russia enacted a law ‘on national-cultural autonomy’. My abiding interest in this topic was sparked when I was asked by the Council of Europe to provide an expert comment on Russia’s first periodical report having ratified the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities. National (or personal) non-territorial cultural autonomy was anathema to Lenin and the Bolsheviks, a matter that united Lenin, Stalin and Trotsky.

I have a special interest, for reasons I outline in what follows, in the extraordinary history of Russia’s accession to the Council of Europe in 1996 and ratification of the European Convention on Human Rights in 1998. Why did the Western European member states permit Russia to join, at a time when the First Chechen War (1994–1997) was raging? Why did the Communists and nationalists in the state Duma vote overwhelmingly for Russian accession and ratification, given the very high level of interference in its internal affairs to which Russia was subjecting itself? I explore and seek to answer these questions in Chapter 8.

Russia is the only Council of Europe member state not to have definitively abolished the death penalty and it has signed but not yet ratified Protocol 6 to the European Convention on Human Rights, which would require it to do so. In Chapter 9, I trace the history of the death penalty in Russia; in earlier centuries Russia was, very much ahead of its time, the only state in Europe to abolish the ultimate penalty. I show how the Russian Orthodox Church played as surprising role. The dues ex machine that brought about de facto abolition turned out to be the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation.

In the present day, Vladislav Surkov (b.1964) emerged as the preeminent ideologist of the first Putin regime and then Medvedev’s term as President (although he has recently been moved from the President’s Administration to become a deputy prime minister). He is responsible for the doctrines of ‘sovereignty’ and ‘sovereign democracy’. In 2006 a collection appeared entitled Sovereignty, edited by the ‘young conservative’ Nikita Garadzha, with essays by Putin, Medevedev, Surkov and others. The key essay is entitled ‘Sovereignty as a political choice’, by Aleksandr Filippov, who is the chief Russian translator and exponent of the Nazi legal theorist Carl Schmitt. Indeed, the whole collection is infused with Schmitt’s decisionistic ideas. Surkov and his circle have strongly influenced senior figures in the judiciary, especially Valery Zorkin, the Chairman of the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation. His speeches and articles make frequent reference to ‘sovereignty’ in the special sense given to it by the Putin regime.





Chapter 1

Theorising Russia’s ideological history




DOI: 10.4324/9780203490211-2

In this chapter, I delve more deeply into two significant approaches to understanding Russia’s ideology and history, by Karl Marx and by Jeremy Lester and, from this basis, reflect on the perennial Russian conflict between Westernisers and Slovophiles and on Russia’s Messianism and, since the early twentieth century, Eurasianism.

Paradoxically, Karl Marx, who began with views consistent with those of the Westernisers, late in life taught himself Russian and corresponded with the Russian revolutionaries and formed views that are in some ways close to the Slavophiles. Early in his writing career, in 1851–52, Karl Marx (5 May 1818–14 March 1883) announced his deep hostility to the Russia Empire. In Revolution and counter-revolution or Germany in 1848, published as a book edited by his daughter Eleanor Aveling (Marx) in 1912, he referred to:

[T]he terrible reality of the Russian Empire; that empire which by every movement proclaims the pretension of considering all Europe as the domain of the Slavonic race, and especially of the only energetic part of this race, of the Russians; that empire which, with two capitals such as St. Petersburg and Moscow, has not yet found its centre of gravity, as long as the ‘City of the Czar’ [Constantinople, called in Russian Tzarigrad, the Czar’s city], considered by every Russian peasant as the true metropolis of his religion and his nation, is not actually the residence of its Emperor; that empire which, for the last one hundred and fifty years, has never lost, but always gained territory by every war it has commenced. And well known in Central Europe are the intrigues by which Russian policy supported the new-fangled system of Panslavism, a system than which none better could be invented to suit its purposes.1



1 Marxh (1852/1912), 92. In 1856–57, when in his 30s, and following the end of the Crimean War (October 1853–February 1856), he wrote Revelations of the diplomatic history of the 18th Century, published in instalments in The Free Press from August 1856 to April 18572 These articles were edited by his daughter Eleanor and published after his death, in 1899, by Swan Sonnenschein in London. The title page of this edition carries ‘Opinions of the press’. The opinion of the Westminster Review (founded by Jeremy Bentham as the official organ of the Philosophical Radicals and published from 1824 to 1914) was:

2 Marx (1856/1899/1986). With all Marx’s faults and his extravagant abuse of high political personages, one cannot but admire the man’s strength of mind, the courage of his opinions, and the scorn and contempt for everything small, petty and mean. Although many and great changes have taken place since these papers appeared, they are still valuable not only for the elucidation of the past, but also for throwing a clearer light upon the present as also upon the future.



Marx’s target in the book was British connivance with Russia:

[A]t the time of the Empress Anna [ruled 1730 to 1740], England already betrayed her own allies to Russia, it will be seen from the pamphlets we are now about to reprint that, even before the epoch of Anna, at the very epoch of Russian ascendency in Europe, springing up at the time of Peter I, the plans of Russia were understood, and the connivance of British statesmen at these plans was denounced by English writers.3



3 Marx (1856/1899/1986), 40. Chapter IV presented a ‘general history of Russian politics’.4 For Marx, the ‘cradle of Muscovy’ was the ‘bloody mire of Mongolian slavery’, the ‘Tatar yoke’ which lasted from 1237 to 1462 – ‘a yoke not only crushing but dishonouring and withering the very soul of the people that fell its prey’.5 He identified the state policy of Muscovy, from Ivan Kalita (the moneybag, 1288–1340) who used tax money collected ostensibly for the Tatars to build his own possessions, to Ivan III (the Great, 1440–1505), who gathered the Russian lands and to Peter the Great, who gave Russia access to the sea, and nineteenth century Russia as ‘to encroach by the fraudulent use of a hostile power, to weaken that power by the very act of using it, and to overthrow it at last by the efforts produced through its own instrumentality’.6 He summed up his theory of Russia as follows:

4 Marx (1856/1899/1986), 74. 5 Marx (1856/1899/1986), 77. 6 Marx (1856/1899/1986), 87. It is in the terrible and abject school of Mongolian slavery that Muscovy was nursed and grew up. It gathered strength only by becoming a virtuoso in the craft of serfdom. Even when emancipated, Muscovy continued to perform its traditional part of the slave as master. At length Peter the Great coupled the political craft of the Mongol slave with the proud aspiration of the Mongol master, to whom Genghis Khan had, by will, bequeathed his conquest of the earth.7



7 Marx (1856/1899/1986), 87. Peter the Great’s achievement was as follows:

It was but by the conversion of Muscovy from a country wholly of land into a sea-bordering empire, that the traditional limits of the Muscovite policy could be superseded and merged into that bold synthesis which, blending the encroaching method of the Mongol slave with the world-conquering tendencies of the Mongol master, forms the life-spring of modern Russian diplomacy.8



8 Marx (1856/1899/1986), 89. The conquest of the Baltic provinces, from Sweden, with their German aristocracy, gave him diplomats and generals, and a ‘crop of bureaucrats, schoolmasters and drill-sergeants, who were to drill Russians into that varnish of civilisation that adapts them to the technical appliances of the Western peoples without imbuing them with their ideas.’9 Avraham Yassour contends that:

9 Marx (1856/1899/1986), 91. In the 1850s Marx’ vision of Russian realities was that it was a ‘semi-Eastern’ society. He observed the following characteristic traits: the reign of a despotic potentate: scattered village communities; the absence of predominantly privately owned land; exploitation of the peasants’ communities by a bureaucratic, hierarchic apparatus, etc. His denomination of Russia as ‘semi-Asiatic’ was not a journalistic geographical metaphor: Russia seemed to be isolated from the socioeconomic dynamics of modernization exemplified in Western Europe. Russian autocrats – the Ivans and Peters – followed the Mongol pattern, structuring the evolving Russian Imperial-State into a pyramidal framework of centralized and militarized despotism.10



10 Yassour (1987), 8–9. In his Late Marx and the Russian road: Marx and ‘the peripheries of capitalism’,11 Teodor Shanin explored Marx’s later fascination with Russia, teaching himself Russian from 1870–71 and building a substantial library of Russian texts, including Flerovskiy and Chernishevskiy. The attraction of Russia to Marx was, as Shanin points out, ‘rich evidence concerning rural communes (“archaic” yet evidently alive in a world of capitalist triumphs) and of direct revolutionary experience, all encompassed by the theory and practice of Russian populism’.12 Marx was taken to support the Populists, and his letters were suppressed by the Russian Marxists, Plekhanov and others, and the draft manuscripts were discovered in 1913 by D.B. Ryazanov and deciphered with the help of Nikolay Bukharin. However, they were not published until 1923.13

11 Shanin (1983). 12 Ibid. 13 Wada (1981), 130. Marx himself initially denounced Russian Populism in a footnote to the first edition of Capital, but erased the footnote and added, in the postscript, a glowing tribute to Chernyshevskiy, author of What is to be done?, as the ‘great Russian scholar and critic’.14 In the French edition of Capital, he changed a passage in Chapter 26, ‘The secret of primitive accumulation,’ so as to imply that the English form of the expropriation of the peasants is applicable only to Western Europe or, to put it differently, Eastern Europe and Russia may follow a completely different path of evolution.15

14 Wada (1981), 133–34. 15 Wada (1981), 135. In his famous reply to Vera Zasulich (1849–1919) of 8 March 1881,16 Marx emphasised that the expropriation of the agricultural producer, carried out in such a radical way in England, was ‘historically inevitable’ only in the countries of Western Europe. He continued:

16 Text at Shanin, (1983), 123; Marx’s four earlier drafts of the letter are also set out in Shanin (1983), Part II. In the Western case, then, one form of private property is transformed into another form of private property. In the case of the Russian peasants, however, their communal property would have to be transformed into private property.

The analysis in Capital therefore provides no reasons either for or against the vitality of the Russian commune. But the special study I have made of it, including a search for original source-material, has convinced me that the commune is the fulcrum for social regeneration in Russia. But in order that it might function as such, the harmful influences assailing it from all sides must first be eliminated, and it must then be assured the normal conditions for spontaneous development.17



17 Shanin (1983), 124. In other words, Marx was open to the idea that Russia might have its own path of non-capitalist development, through the elimination of the inroads already made by capital.

Marx’s four drafts of his letter to Vera Zasulich have been of great interest to Japanese scholars of Marx. Shizumu Hinada18 argued that:

18 Hinada (1977). Marx was able to and had to theorize a general problem of ‘the village community in more belatedly started capitalistic countries under the capitalistic world system’, through the analysis of ‘commune russe’ and its environment as a whole from the angle not only of her happy contemporaneity but of her unhappiness which was made by the Western capitalist invasion.19



19 Hinada (1977), 74. For Hinada, Marx achieved a considerable degree of prescience:

Marx’s theory that ‘the landlord’s property vis-à-vis d’elle (de la commune rurale (= mir))’ promotes ‘le mouvement general ‘should be regarded as a merit in ‘the first draft’, and it grasps intuitively the necessity of the movement for the ‘Chornyi peredel’,20 recognizing in fact the actual situation of ‘mir’, which was provided by Russian ‘primitive accumulation of capital’ in the second half of the nineteenth century.

20 Chornyi Peredel (Black Partition) – also Party of Socialists and Federalists, a revolutionary populist organisation in Russia in the early 1880s. The Black Partition was formed in August and September 1879 after a split in the secret society Land and Liberty. Its name is connected with the rumor, widespread among the peasants, of an imminent partition of the land among the common people (chern). They favoured large-scale agitation and propaganda among the masses. The organisers of the Central Circle of the Black Partition in St Petersburg included G.V. Plekhanov, B. Aksel’rod, and V.I. Zasulich. The circle set up a press, which published the journal Chornyi peredel and the newspaper Zerno and established ties with students and workers; Great Soviet Encylopedia, http://encyclopedia2.thefreedictionary.com/Chernyi+Peredel (accessed 14 October 2012). In real Russian history, such a ‘le mouvement general’ as had been expected by Marx was realized in ‘the whole village agreement movement (prigovor)’, which was initiated by peasant-workers in the revolutionary summer–autumn of 1905, and in ‘the acquisition movement for the authority of the county committee’ in the revolutionary autumn of 1917.



There is another attempt to theorise Russia that is worth serious attention.

In a splendid Gramscian analysis of Russian politics in 1995, following the August 1991 putsch and the collapse of the USSR in November 1991, Jeremy Lester explained the ‘hegemonic combatants’ struggling for the future of Russia.21

21 Lester (1995). It would be a mistake to think that Gramsci originated the concept of hegemony. Lester showed, as had Perry Anderson,22 that first Georgiy Plekhanov and then Vladimir Lenin had found the concept to be of ‘great strategic significance’.23 But whereas for Lenin hegemony must be defined only in class terms, for Gramsci the ‘terrain of hegemonic struggle was considerably broader’.24

22 Anderson (1977). 23 Lester (1995), 3. 24 Lester (1995), 4. The two main combatants, according to Lester, were the Westerners and Russophiles. For the Westerners, the West personified progress and development and was the one means of genuinely overcoming the more reactionary elements of Russia’s past.25 According to Lester, this was the heart of the Westerners’ collective will, ‘that common mode of understanding which for Gramsci was the essential prerequisite to the attainment of a cultural-social unity through which a multiplicity of heterogeneous aims could be welded together’.26 He added that the dominant theme at the core of the Westerners’ hegemonic strategy was the emphasis on individualism or rather possessive individualism.27

25 Lester (1995), 86. 26 Lester (1995), 86. 27 Lester (1995), 92. This was not a current of thought emerging at the end of the twentieth century; its roots were to be found in the middle of the nineteenth century. Lester referred to Andrzej Walicki’s classic A history of Russian thought: from the enlightenment to Marxism,28 Chapter 8 of which, ‘Belinsky and different variants of Westernism’, explained how, in contrast to the Slavophiles, the ‘Westernisers’ ‘did not form a homogeneous movement with a single cohesive ideology and social philosophy … Westernism was only a loose alliance of potentially divergent trends, a platform where democrats and liberals in the 1840s found common ground in their opposition to Slavophilism.’29

28 Walicki (1979). 29 Walicki (1979), 135. According to Lester, ‘the contemporary Russophiles owe their revived intellectual prominence largely to the anti-liberal, anti-Western backlash that set in after 1968.’30 He described a set of fragmented and very general self-conceptions, trying to give concrete and specific meanings to these conceptions: Russophilia as a counterhegemonic project, identified even before the collapse of the USSR, as ‘a rallying point of counter-reform’.31 The collective will of the Russophiles combines the theme of Russia’s distinctiveness (samobytnost), combined with a virulent anti-Westernism. It brings together the concepts of the unique Russian narod or people, of pochvennost, the intimate bond with the soil of the Russian people and the old Orthodox insistence on sobornost, as Lester explained it ‘the organic synthesis of multiplicity and unity, the yearning for a unified collective instead of the atomised individual’. The roots of the word sobornost are to be found in the noun sobor (council) and the verb sobirat (to collect, connect, unite).

30 Lester (1995), 128. 31 Yanov (1988). The progenitors of these Russophiles were also to be found in the nineteenth century, when they were known as ‘Slavophiles’, described by Walicki as ‘a group of ideologists belonging to the conservative nobility, whose outlook became formed in the late 1830s in opposition to the trend known as Westernism’.32 This was not so much solidarity with brother Slavs (Serbs etc.), as ‘a cultivation of the native and primarily Slavic elements in the social life and culture of ancient Russia’.33 They also focused on Orthodox Christianity (which early Russia had borrowed as one piece from Byzantium) and its principle of sobornost or conciliarism, a free unity of believers. They were profoundly opposed to private property and possessive individualism and found, in parallel with Karl Marx as I showed earlier, inspiration in the ancient Russian village commune or obshchina, founded on the common use of land, mutual agreement and community of custom, governed by the mir, the council of elders that made decisions on the basis of unanimity and settled disputes in accordance with hallowed custom.34

32 Walicki (1979), 92. 33 Walicki (1979), 92. 34 Walicki (1979), 96. And it is no surprise that many of the leading legal philosophers of Russia have been motivated by religious concerns. One of the most influential, to this day, was Vladimir Solovyov (1853–1900), who worked out a complete philosophical system, based on the German idealist philosophers. His objective was the unification of all Christians, to be followed by a Messianic Kingdom of God on earth, with political motivation under the Russian Tsar. The young intellectual historian Konstantin Alekseev, who has specialised in the thought of Solovyov,35 concluded that Sovolyov, synthesised ideas of personal freedom, especially freedom of conscience, with principles of social justice, under the positive guidance of Christian religion.36 This led him, for Alekseev, to a European type of conservatism, which while conserving tradition did not contradict democracy or socialism.

35 Alekseev (2007). 36 Alekseev (2007), 131. He was a strong opponent of the leading conservative Pobedonostsev, whose views he considered to be dangerous.37 And Andrzej Walicki pointed out that Solovyov ‘attacked all forms of nationalism, rejected the Slavophile idealisation of Orthodox Christianity, and condemned the persecution of national and religious minorities’.38 These ‘hegemonic combatants’, infused on both sides with religion, thus had their roots in the nineteenth century. But much older in Russia is the tradition of Messianism, the Russians as the chosen people.

37 Alekseev (2007), 132. 38 Walicki (1979), 373. In 2000 Peter Duncan provided a definitive account of Messianism covering the whole of Russian history from 1511.39 According to Duncan:

39 Duncan (2000). Analytically, Russian messianism can be given the status of a ‘national myth’; in the taxonomy of George Schöpflin, it is both a myth of redemption and suffering and a myth of election.40 Paradoxically, the strength of this national myth has militated against the development of the nation … In contrast to the empires centred in Western Europe, neither in the Russian Empire nor in the Soviet Union did the ethnic Russians gain from being the principal building block of the state.41



40 Schöpflin (1997). 41 Duncan (2000), 3. Therefore, we must go back to the very beginning of Russia.

The first green shoots of Russia emerged in the ninth century AD, in a mix of Vikings (Varangians) and Slavs, protected by a Turkic semi-nomadic aristocracy, living on the river Dnieper and centred on Kiev.42 In 980 AD Prince Vladimir (later Saint Vladimir) inherited the crown of Rus, thanks to the help of an army recruited in Sweden. Vladimir embraced Christianity and allied himself with Byzantium, marrying the sister of the Byzantine emperor, Anna, in 988 AD. He expanded Kievan Rus with successful campaigns against the Poles, Bulgars and Pechenegs and decreed the conversion of Novgorod and Kiev to Orthodox Christianity (the ‘Baptism of Russia’). According to the chronicles, ‘Vladimir sent emissaries to inquire into the teaching and rituals of Islam, Judaism, Catholicism and Orthodoxy. They reported that the Catholic ritual was without beauty and that Islam did not permit the consumption of alcohol … Judaism they passed over in silence, but the Orthodox divine service they described as being so beautiful that “we knew not whether we were in heaven or on earth”.’43

42 Hosking (2001), 29–33. 43 Hosking (2001), 38. On 31 May 1223 (in the reign of Henry III, the Plantagenet king of England), the army of Kievan Rus was defeated by the Mongol armies of Chingiz Khan at the battle of the Kalka river, in present-day eastern Ukraine. In 1240 the Mongols sacked Kiev and established control over the whole of the territory of Russia for more than 200 years, not so much occupying the territory, as receiving tribute and relying on divisions between the Russian principalities. The hitherto insignificant settlement of Moscow grew in power and became a separate principality in 1263.

Moscow became the spiritual centre of Russian Orthodoxy. In 1299 Metropolitan Petr chose Moscow as the location of the see of all Rus.44 Petr was canonised a year after 1326, the year of his death, ‘in a ceremony designed to make Moscow the lasting centre of the Orthodox Church in Rus. His tomb became a shrine for all Orthodox believers and greatly enhanced the standing of the city.’45 From this symbolically significant moment, the principality of Moscow began to expand in all directions.

44 Hosking (2001), 72. 45 See Ostrowski (1993), 83–101; see also Fennell (1995), 134–36. Soon Moscow could challenge the Mongols. On 8 September 1380 an army commanded by the Prince of Moscow, Dmitriy I (1359–1389), defeated the Golden Horde at the battle of Kulikovo (near Tula, south of Moscow). However, Mongol rule in Russia did not end until 1480, at the ‘Great Standing on the Ugra River’, a standoff between Akhmat Khan of the Golden Horde and Grand Duke Ivan III of Russia.

Ivan III (1440–1505 – the reign of Henry VI in England) was the first ruler of Moscow to proclaim himself first ‘grand duke of all the Russias’ and, increasingly, Tsar of Russia. With the fall of Constantinople in 1453, there was a growing tendency to refer to Moscow as the ‘Third Rome’.

In 1510 (the reign of Henry VIII of England) the Russian Orthodox monk Filofei composed the panegyric letter to Tsar Vasiliy III (1505–1533) in which he warned:

And now I say unto Thee, take care and take heed, pious Tsar: all the empires of Christendom are united in thine. For two Romes have fallen, and the Third exists and there will not be a fourth. Thy Christian Empire, according to the great theologian, will not pass away.46



46 Andreyev (1959). Hosking writes: ‘Moscow thus became symbolically both the “Third Rome” and the “Second Jerusalem”, inheritor of both the Roman Empire and the Christian Church.’47

47 Hosking (2001), 107. The strong bedrock of Messianism in Russian identity and ideology thus provided support for the Slavophiles of the nineteenth century. Olga Malinova has written extensively on the question of Russian national identity.48 She has in mind ‘the West’ as a ‘constructed other’ of Russia. In her view, for most of the nineteenth century, a central factor in the complex of problems whose working out formed various ‘ideas of the nation’ was the question of preserving national ‘originality’ in the situation of ‘catching up modernisation’.49

48 Malinova (2005); (2005–06); (2007); (2009). 49 Malinova (2005), 39. As Duncan notes, the classic statement of Russian universalist Messianism was made by Dostoevsky in his ‘Pushkin speech’ of June 1880, which was acclaimed by Westernisers and Slavophiles. Here is Duncan’s own translation:50

50 Duncan (2000), 40, Dnevnik pisatelia za 1877 god (Paris: YMCA Press), 526; there is a recent English translation by Kenneth Lange, F.M. Dostoevsky Writer’s diary: 1873–1876 (Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 2008) Yes, the Russian’s destiny is incontestably pan-European and universal. To become a true Russian, to become completely Russian, perhaps means only (in the last analysis, underline this) to become a brother to all people, a universal person if you like. Oh, all this Slavophilism and Westernism of ours is a great misunderstanding with us, although historically inevitable. For a true Russian, Europe and the fate of the whole great Aryan race are as dear as even Russia herself, as her native land, because her fate is universality, acquired not by the sword but by the force of brotherhood and our brotherly striving for the reunification of people … Oh, the peoples of Europe have no idea how dear they are to us! And later, I believe that we, that is of course not we but the future Russians, will understand to a person that to become a true Russian will mean precisely this: to strive finally to bring reconciliation to the European contradictions, to show the way out of European despair in our own Russian soul, pan-human and all-uniting, to embrace in it with brotherly love all our brothers, and finally, perhaps, to utter the final word of great, general harmony, of the final brotherly accord of all races according to Christ’s Gospel law.



The human geographer Alastair Bonnett has described the mindset of the Slavophiles thus:

To a degree unique among ‘other major European’ nations, the assumption that ‘European civilisation’ was inherently superior to all others, or even a meaningful category, was actively contested. Russia’s defeat by Britain, France and Turkey during the Crimean War (1853–6), combined with a persistent unease at the prospect of Russia ever really being accepted as fully European, encouraged those voices that condemned Westernisation as the spirit of alienation, materialism and superficiality. Throughout the mid and late 19th century, Slavophile and pan-Slavic critics poured scorn on the empty and instrumental world of the Occident.51



51 Bonnett (2002), 444. This was the fertile ground on which the notion of ‘Eurasianism’ emerged in the post-1917 context of the White emigration.

The philologist and ethnographer Count Nikolai Trubetskoy (1890–1938) wrote his key work Yevropa i chelovechestvo (Europe and humanity)52 in 1920 (it was published in Sofia) and inspired a group of authors to publish Iskhod k Vostoku (Exodus to the East) in 1921.53 He argued that no European state could be compared with Russia, since Russia is not a nation in the ordinary sense of the word, but a whole continent – Eurasia. ‘Turkic blood mingles in Russian veins with that of the Ugro-Finns and the Slavs,’ he wrote, and referred to Russia’s ‘non-European, half-Asiatic face’. As Mark Bassin points out, he insisted that Russia’s ‘existence as an empire was a thing of the past; Russians now represented just another of the constituent “ethnographic” groups which collectively comprised Eurasia’s multi-cultural complexion’.54

52 Trubetskoy (1995), 55–104. 53 Luks (1996), 58–9. 54 Bassin (2001), 3. ‘Eurasia’ is not only an anti-Western discourse; it also provides the space for an accommodation between Russian Orthodox and Muslim traditions. A. Agadjanian notes that:

Still another cultural framework is Eurasia, a notion of the old continental cultural space of tradition opposed to the ‘Atlantic civilisation’ of modernity. Also, Eurasia is the place of Christianity’s encounter with Islam. While the usual stereotyped attitude towards Islam is unfavourable, in the public discourse Christianity and Islam are sometimes drawn together. Russia is a unique combined Eurasian civilisation of Orthodox Slavs and Muslim Turks and, therefore, the ‘Western democratic standards cannot be fully transferred into Russian reality.’ Thus, V. Polosin, a former Orthodox priest converted to Islam, has defended the idea of a ‘social alliance’ of the two religions to create a Eurasian identity.55



55 Agadjanian (2001), 360. Ilan Berman identifies a change of course by President Putin, in the direction of Eurasianism. He argues that: ‘Indeed, by all indications, the growing emphasis on geopolitics from all corners of the Russian political spectrum is rapidly elevating Eurasianism to the level of a mainstream ideology.’56 Berman catalogues the growing influence of the doctrine and its controversial guru, Aleksandr Dugin,57 on Russian official and policymakers, and points out that on 13 November 2000, Putin himself affirmed that ‘Russia has always conceived of itself as a Euro-Asian nation.’ This speech is to be found on the website of Dugin’s Eurasia Party.58 Putin’s creation of the Collective Rapid Deployment Force as a regional ‘rapid reaction force’ in May 2001 and of the Eurasian Economic Community on 1 June 2001 can be seen as a concretisation of Eurasianist concepts.

56 Berman (2001); see also Berman(2002). 57 Dugin is a former member of the radical anti-Semitic Pamyatmovement and later of the racist Conservative Revolution, and has close links with the ‘national-Bolshevik’ Eduard Limonov. See also Kullberg (2001) and Yasmann (2001). 58 Putin (2000). On 21 June 2002, Dugin’s Eurasian Party was registered.59 The co-founders were significant: the Supreme Mufti of Russia and the Chairman of the Central Muslim Religious Board, Talgat Tadjuddin. The ideology of the new party was encapsulated by Aleksandr Panarin’s ‘History’s revenge’, which, in Gordon Hahn’s words ‘incorporates strains of Russia’s political culture: anti-Westernism, Messianism, Prometheanism, and anti-rationalism’.60 Thus, in the view of its founders: ‘It is uniquely poised to organise an alternative to the techno-economic globalisation threatening global ecology. Since Russia’s Orthodox civilisation is the only one with affinity to the Buddhist, Confucian and Islamic civilisations, only it can gather them together to counter the expansion of environmental and cultural pollution and poverty to countries left behind in globalisation.’

59 See http://www.eurasia.com.ru/english.html. 60 Hahn (2002). Dmitry Shlapentokh has concluded that:

Eurasianism belongs to currents of thinking which took their roots in nineteenth century Russia: the ambiguousness of relation to the Byzantine Empire, conservative pan-Slavism, the ‘yellow peril’ myth at the time of progression towards the Far East, Literary pan-Mongolism and Asiatism at the beginning of the century, movements of the Conservative Revolution in the 1920s, etc. Eurasianism rephrases in its own point of view, often in ways disconcerting to western thought, the Russian intellectuals’ questioning of the foundations of the identity of their country and of their own identity.61



61 Shlapentokh (2007), 193–94. As I show in the final chapter of this book, the ideology of the Putin regime and its impact on law and on human rights have their roots in the ideological currents explored in this chapter. In the next chapter, I focus on the very beginnings of law as an academic discipline in Russia.





Chapter 2

The Scottish Enlightenment in the Russian Empire




DOI: 10.4324/9780203490211-3

This chapter starts at the beginning; that is, the beginning of law as an academic discipline in Russia, with the first Russian professor of law and the first to teach in Russian, Semyon Yefimovich Desnitskiy (1740–1789). Desnitskiy studied for six years at Glasgow University, under Adam Smith. His influence in Russia was first as the victor in a successful battle against German abstract natural law, which had until then dominated the theory and teaching of law in Russia, in favour of a characteristically materialist, historical, sociological method taken from the Scottish Enlightenment. Second, following the Pugachev Rebellion (1773–1775) and the Empress Catherine II’s disillusionment with the French encyclopedists, she turned with satisfaction to Desnitskiy’s translation and commentaries on the first volume of William Blackstone’s 1766 Commentaries on the laws of England, which Desnitskiy annotated.

A recent textbook on the history of legal thought in Russia1 identifies Desntiskiy as ‘one of the first representatives of moderate liberalism in Russia’.2

1 Antonov (2012). 2 Antonov (2012), 55. Russia had a long tradition of sending its brightest young people to study abroad. According to David Saunders, Boris Gudonov, in 1602, may have been the first to do this.3 Peter the Great was well aware of the importance of the scientific revolution of Western Europe in the seventeenth century and despatched students abroad as well as appointing foreign tutors to run training establishments in Russia. Thus, an imperial ukase in January 1701 appointed Henry Farquharson head of the newly established Moscow Mathematics and Navigation School and in 1716 he became the Professor of Mathematics at its successor, the Naval Academy, ‘Russia’s first serious scientific centre’.4 And the great Mikhail Lomonosov (1711–1765), who founded Moscow University in 1755, was sent in 1736 to study in Marburg under Christian Wolff, the German Pietist philosopher. He remained there until 1741 and on his return became, in 1745, Professor of Chemistry in the Academy of Sciences in St Petersburg.5

3 Saunders (2010), 32. 4 Jones (2010), 75. 5 Jones (2010), 79–80. But it was the German princess who became Catherine the Great (1729–1796) who from the start of her reign in 1762 is considered by many to have initiated the Russian Enlightenment and who was responsible for the origins of law as an academic discipline in Russia. In 1767 she convened the Legislative Commission to which she presented her Nakaz (Instruction), which was intended to replace the 1649 Sobornoye ulozheniye with a modern legal code. No fewer than 294 of 526 articles in Part I of her Nakaz were drawn from Montesquieu’s 1748 Spirit of the laws, which she read along with the work of Beccaria (On crimes and punishments), d’Alembert and François Quenay’s Natural law.6 For 15 years, until 1778, when he died, she corresponded with Voltaire; and from 1773 to 1775 she invited Denis Diderot, the great French materialist and determinist, to her court in St Petersburg.

6 Jones (2010), 90. The Legislative Commission failed to produce the hoped-for reform of Russia’s laws.

But the focus of this chapter is the first Russian Professor of Law, Semyon Yefimovich Desnitskiy (1740–1789), who received his Doctor of Laws degree following six years, from 1761 to 1767, studying at the University of Glasgow.7 Walicki points out that he was also the first theoretical jurist in Russia.8

7 This chapter draws especially from Korkunov (1905), Brown (1969, 1975, 1977) and Mernikova (2000). 8 Walicki (1979), 12. Sadly, Desnitskiy’s archive was entirely destroyed in the great fire of 1812, when Moscow was destroyed by its inhabitants in the face of Napoleon. However, the historian and political scientist Archie Brown, who taught from 1964 to 1971 at the University of Glasgow, spent the years 1967–1968 at Moscow State University as a British Council exchange student and, as he pointed out in an article published in 1969 in Russian in the Moscow University Bulletin, he was able to draw together: (1) the intellectual milieu in Glasgow and the character of the lectures which he and his fellow Russian student I.A. Tretyakov attended; (2) some aspects of the student life of the two Russian students; and (3) documents now available throwing light on their published works.9

9 Brown (1969), 75. Moscow University was the first university in Russia; for comparison, the University of Glasgow was founded in 1451, the University of Bologna in 1088 and teaching began in Oxford in 1096. Lomonosov believed that the new university should include a gymnasium, or preparatory school, to prepare qualified students for admission: ‘A university without a gymnasium is like a ploughed field without seeds.’ For the university, he proposed three fakultety (departments) with a total of 12 professors: six in a philosophical department (philosophy, physics, eloquence, poetry, history and antiquities), three in a medical department (chemistry, natural history and anatomy), and three in law (general jurisprudence, Russian jurisprudence and politics). Ivan Shuvalov, the philanthropist, who had the ear of the Empress Elizabeth, agreed to only 10, combining philosophy with physics and eloquence with poetry.

Shuvalov submitted a report to the Senate and, on 12 January 1755, Elizabeth signed the decree setting up Moscow University and naming Shuvalov and Blumentrost10 as the first curators. Aleksei Argamakov, the son of one of Peter the Great’s aides who had studied abroad, became the first director of the gymnasium, which formally opened on 26 April.

10 Lavrentiy Blumentrost, the Tsar’s court physician, who became the first President of the Imperial Russian Academy of Sciences in 1724. Finding 10 professors for the new university was difficult. The university had several options. A student could finish the university with a master’s degree, begin teaching in the gymnasium and work his way up to university level, as did Professor Khariton Chebotarev, who taught history. Another method was for students to study abroad, as Lomonosov had done. On Shuvalov’s orders, in 1758 nine of the first gymnasium students were sent abroad: Danil Iastrebov, Ivan Svishchov, Petr Veniaminov and Semen Zybelin went to Königsberg and Leiden to study medicine and the natural sciences; Matvei Afonin and Petr Karamyshev travelled to Uppsala for metallurgy, botany and chemistry; and (two years later) Semyon Desnitskiy and Ivan Tretiakov went to Glasgow to study law.

It is not known exactly why Scotland was chosen in addition to Germany, the Netherlands and Sweden, but Archie Brown points out that there were strong links between Scotland and Russia in the eighteenth century. A great many doctors, soldiers, engineers, architects and diplomats settled in Russia. Three physicians in succession to the Empress of Russia (Elizabeth then Catherine), James Mounsey, Matthew Halliday and John Rogerson, all came from Dumfriesshire. The Russian educated public knew the work of William Roberston, David Hume, Adam Ferguson and Adam Smith (in French translation); and Desnitskiy himself was especially responsible for introducing Russian readers to the Scottish Enlightenment.11

11 Brown (1975), 248. Shuvalov found two of the first 10 professors from the Academy of Sciences. For the rest, he turned to Europe and located Johann Fromann, Johann Shaden, and Philipp Dilthey. Fromann came from the University of Tübingen and taught logic until his return to Germany in 1765.12 Shaden, also from Tübingen, was the rector of the gymnasium and taught rhetoric and logic. Only in 1772 did he begin to teach natural law and politics. For the first 10 years of the university, Dilthey was the only law professor.13

12 Information in this and preceding paragraphs from http://novaonline.nvcc.edu/eli/evans/his241/Documents/Dissertation/Chapter1.pdf (accessed 17 October 2012). 13 Korkunov (1905), 283. Thus, the first teacher of law (and for five years the only teacher of law) at this new university was Philip Heinrich Dilthey, born in the Tirol, who was awarded his doctorate in law at Vienna University in 1753 and was invited to Moscow in September 1756. In October 1756 he began his lectures with a presentation on ‘On the need for and use of law’. He also taught private lectures, in French, on natural law. Students each paid 12 roubles to attend these lectures, which must have been successful, because in 1760 Dilthey bought a house in Moscow for 1500 roubles. However, Dilthey’s colleagues felt he was spending too much time on private lessons, in order to make money. According to the catalogue of lectures for 1757, Dilthey taught natural law, Roman law, feudal law, criminal law and state law, in four languages, according to the choice of his listeners. It is highly likely, therefore, that Dilthey was Desnitskiy’s teacher at Moscow University, before Desnitskiy departed for Glasgow.

But his main subject matter was natural law, taught through the works of the German professors Benedikt Winkler (1579–1648), Samuel Pufendorf (1632–1694) and Daniel Nettelbladt (1719–1791).

In late 1761 the university dealt with a dispute between Dilthey, who was the gymnasium inspector at the time, and Boyer de Roquet, a French teacher. Roquet complained about Dilthey’s ‘inaccurate’ reports on his teaching ability and added that Dilthey, ‘while drunk’, had assaulted him in a tavern. The conference listened to the complaint and allowed Dilthey a response in ‘which he, instead of refuting the accusations against him, spoke in gross and insulting terms against the accuser and accused the conference of partiality’. Eventually, the university removed Dilthey from his position as inspector.

Dilthey was dismissed in 1765, during Desnitskiy’s absence in Glasgow. He was accused of failure to attend his lectures and often appearing in an intoxicated state and behaving in a manner unbecoming. However, on 8 March 1766 he was reinstated by handwritten decree of Catherine herself.14 He continued to teach as a professor at Moscow University until his death in 1781.

14 Korkunov (1905), 283. Much of Desnitskiy’s writing and teaching were directed against the German natural law school represented by Dilthey and I turn to the strong influence of Adam Smith and the Scottish Enlightenment later in this chapter.

Desnitskiy’s own history was as follows.

He was not a member of the land-owning class in Russia. The year of his birth is not known, but his place of birth is known to have been Nezhin in what is now Ukraine.15 He was the second son of a meshchanin (petit-bourgeois – an artisan or similar). He was educated first at the Troitsko-Sergievsky monastery, founded about 1345, in Sergiev Posad, north of Moscow, the centre of Russian Orthodoxy, and then the ‘gymnasium’ (secondary school), attached to Moscow University, which educated children of the raznochintsyi (those of non-noble birth – noble children had their own gymnasium).16 In 1760 he entered the philosophical faculty of Moscow University itself, five years after its foundation (all students were obliged to study philosophy first). At that time many students came from poor families, as Mikhail Lomonosov had intended. As I have pointed out earlier, Dilthey began to teach in Moscow in 1756 and was then the only law lecturer.

15 The city, one of the oldest in Ukraine, is now called Nizhyn, with a population of some 70,000. In the nineteenth century it was a centre of Jewish settlement, with a 25 per cent Jewish population. 16 Brown (1975), 249. From there, Desnitskiy was sent to the Academy of Sciences in St Petersburg and, on the instruction of Shuvalov, he was then sent to study at the University of Glasgow.

Desnitskiy lived in Glasgow from 1761 to 1767. In 1765 he was awarded a Master of Arts and in 1767 he successfully defended his thesis and became a Doctor of Civil and Church Law. According to the entry by Vladislav Kalmykov in the Large biographical encyclopedia (repeated elsewhere), he also received the special award of the privileges of British citizenship, although he remained a Russian subject.17 He studied Roman law and took the course on moral philosophy with Adam Smith (1723–1790). He and his fellow student I.A. Tretyakov were the first foreigners to be awarded a doctorate by the University of Glasgow.

17 Website:http://dic.academic.ru/dic.nsf/enc_biography/1993/ Десницкий. The passage reads: ‘vmeste s chem, yemu byli pozhalovany privilegii anglisskovo grazhdanstvo, zvaniya, osobenno pochetnovo dlya inostrantsa (in addition to [the doctorate] he was awarded the privileges of English citizenship, a rank especially honourable for a foreigner)’. Alexander Broadie noted, in the context of the Scottish Enlightenment, that chairs of law were not founded in the Scottish universities until the eighteenth century.18 At Glasgow University the chair of civil law was founded in 1713 and filled in 1714. Broadie argued that:

18 Broadie (1997), 11. The intellectual and moral strength of Scottish law, as represented especially by the works of Stair and Mackenzie, was no doubt one explanation of the provision for the continued separate identity of Scots law that was written into the 1707 Acts of Union.19



19 Broadie (1997), 12. Adam Smith became a professor at Glasgow in 1751 and was in post until 1764, when he left to become travelling tutor to the young Duke of Buccleuch. Brown has found proof positive that Desnitskiy and Tretyakov attended Smith’s lectures: a letter written by Desnitskiy to the Dean and members of the Faculty of Glasgow University on 31 December 1765, with a request to for him and Tretyakov be accepted as candidates for the degree of Doctor of Law. The letter contained the following:

We humbly request … that the Faculty would take into Consideration, whether our attendance on Dr Smith’s class of Ethicks and Jurisprudence and our attendance for three years on Mr Millar’s classes of civil law may procure us a Liberty of offering ourselves candidates for a degree in Law.20



20 Brown (1975), 252. Broadie’s Anthology includes Adam Smith’s lectures of 21 and 22 March 1763, On jurisprudence, in which he considered the duties of the sovereign.21 In his lecture of 22 March 1763, Smith started with a thorough critique of Locke and of the ‘voluntary contract’ between the people and the sovereign power. He declared: ‘Besides, this doctrine of obedience as founded on contract is confined to Britain and has never been heard of in any other country … and even here it can have influence with a very small part of the people, such as have read Locke!’22 Furthermore, the present sovereign could not be bound by a promise made by a predecessor: ‘The contract of ones predecessors never binds one merely because it was his.’23 For Smith, the principle or duty of allegiance was founded on two principles: first, the principle of authority and, second, the principle of common or general interest. For the first, Smith asserted that:

21 Broadie (1997), 617–27; from Meek et al. (1978), 311–21. 22 At Broadie (1997), 622–23. 23 Broadie (1997), 623. [E]very one naturally has a disposition to respect an established authority and superiority in others, whatever they be. The young respect the old, children respect their parents, and in general the weak respect those who excel in power and strength.24



24 Broadie (1997), 624. As to the second principle, Smith declared that:

[E]veryone sees that the magistrates not only support the government in generall but the security and independency of each individual, and they see that this security can not be attained without a regular government.25



25 Broadie (1997), 625. For Smith, the principle of authority ‘is that which chiefly prevails in a monarchy’. People are motivated to obey by respect and deference to the monarchy, the idea that there is ‘a sort of sinfulness or impiety in disobedience’ and the duty they owe to the monarch.26 In a republic, the principle of utility is the basis for obedience.

26 Broadie (1997), 625. Smith’s thoughts on the British system must also have impressed Desnitskiy. According to Smith, ‘the sovereign power is partly entrusted to the king, partly to the people and partly to the nobles.’ Thus, the principle of authority is engaged with regard to king and nobles: ‘But as the government is in great part democratic, by the influence of the House of Commons, the principle of utility is also found in it.’

This led him to a fascinating distinction between Whigs and Tories. For the Tories, the principle of authority is paramount, albeit thoroughly confused by ideas of contract. The Whigs, too, are confused by the notion of a contract, although they insist that since the government was established not for the benefit of the ruler but the people, the government has no authority other than that derived from the people. Thus, when power is abused, the people have a right to resist. These principles affect ‘people of different cast’. Whigs are ‘bustling, spirited, active folk, who can’t brook oppression and are constantly endeavouring to advance themselves’, whereas Tories are ‘calm, contented folks of no great spirit and abundant fortunes which they want to enjoy at their own ease, and don’t want to be disturbed or disturb others’.27

27 Broadie (1997), 626. Finally, Smith insisted on the right of resistance. ‘Absurdity and impropriety of conduct and great perverseness destroy obedience, whether it be due from authority or the sense of the common good.’28

28 Broadie (1997), 627. Broadie comments that there is one point stressed by Smith in The wealth of nations but not present in the lectures, which is the need to keep the power of the judiciary out of the hands of the executive. The liberty of the individual depends on the impartial administration of justice. Smith held that:

The judge should not be liable to be removed from his office according to the caprice of that [executive] power. The regular payment of his salary should not depend upon the good-will, or even upon the good economy of that power.29



29 Smith (1976), 723; Broadie (1997), 616 On Desnitskiy return in 1767 to Moscow, the Curator of the University refused to recognise the validity of the Glasgow doctorate, and insisted that Desnitskiy sit an examination to give him the right to lecture. According to N. Mernikova, the results of the examination attracted the attention of Catherine the Great.30 It was clear that Desnitskiy understood more about Roman law than his examiners.

30 Mernikova (2000). Having passed the examination, Desnitskiy was given the right to teach a course on Roman law in relation to Russian law. At that time these lectures were given in Latin; this was especially convenient for foreign professors who could not lecture in Russian. Desnitskiy asked to be permitted to lecture in Russian, but this was opposed by the university. The issue was resolved by Catherine herself, who decreed that it would be more proper to teach in Russian, especially for jurisprudence. This was a decisive moment for Russian higher education.31 In 1768 Desnitskiy was granted the title of ‘extraordinary professor’ and six years later, in 1774, he became an ‘ordinary professor’.

31 Korkunov (1915), 288. The content of Desnitskiy’s lectures is known from only two sources: his official lectures (aktoviye rechi) and the notes he wrote for his translations of the first volume of Blackstone, which appeared in three instalments, in 1780, 1781 and 1782.32

32 Korkunov (1915), 289; I am indebted to Archie Brown for the result of his own research, that, contrary to the views of Russian commentators and also of Walicki, Desnitskiy translated only the first volume of Blackstone, albeit published in Russia in three instalments. On 30 June 1768 Desnitskiy delivered his first address to the law faculty’s academic council – and the general public. This was entitled ‘On the direct and immediate means of teaching jurisprudence’ (Slovo o pryamom i blizhaishem sposob k izucheniyu iurisprudentsiy) – Brown33 translates it as the ‘Best means of teaching jurisprudence’. This was a long lecture indeed, 51 pages in its original published version and was delivered in honour of the sixth anniversary of the accession of Catherine to the throne. Many passages in the lecture were drawn verbatim from Adam Smith’s lecture, which Desnitskiy had attended. For example, having paid tribute to the richness of the British philosophical tradition, Desnitskiy continued:

33 Desnitskiy (1768). From hence have appeared the renowned Hobbes, Cumberland, Mandeville, Locke, Berkeley, Bolingbroke, Sidney, Harrington, and the more recent Hutcheson, David Hume and Mr. Smith; and of the last two names one has published his metaphysics and the other his moral philosophy, to the great pleasure of the scholarly world. In my opinion, if I am not mistaken, the moral philosophy of Mr. Smith is more closely connected with natural jurisprudence than are all the other systems of this science.34



34 Brown (1975), 268. This text became the programme for the scientific study of law and of law teaching in the Russian universities. It is plain also that he was engaged in throwing down a challenge to the German scholasticism, which at that time, through Dilthey, dominated the teaching of law in Russia.35

35 Walicki (1979), 12. Indeed, he launched a direct attack on Pufendorf, saying that he wrote about:

[T]he duties which man must observe in a state of nature and in civil society … The work of Pufendorf was really superfluous, for to write about imaginary conditions of mankind without showing how property, ownership, inheritance, etc. originate and are limited among peoples, is something which does not quite correspond with his intention and aim.36



36 Brown (1977), 125. Desnitskiy also displayed his knowledge of English legal history, drawing from Blackstone as to the situation in the eleventh to twelfth centuries, when the judges were mostly drawn from ecclesiastics and the monks taught Roman jurisprudence, and King Stephen (1096–1154) forbade by decree the reading and studying of Roman law37 – the monks declared that King Stephen was an atheist and an apostate. In a footnote, Desnitskiy added that for those who read Blackstone: ‘The monks in England in those days acted in every way no differently from the way the present-day German scholars in Russia act’ (emphasis in original).38

37 See Re (1961), 453. 38 Brown (1977), 126–27. Furthermore, having outlined ‘natural jurisprudence’, ‘Roman jurisprudence’ and ‘Russian jurisprudence’, Desnitsky concluded:

These in my judgment are the sciences necessary for the successful study of law in Russia … However, the German Doctors of law may invent as many systems of jurisprudence as they like.39



39 Brown (1977), 133. Desnitskiy’s enemy was the monopoly over the teaching of law in Moscow University that the German professors Dilthey and Langer (from 1765 to 1771) enjoyed, until the return from Scotland of Desnitskiy and Tretyakov. As noted already, in 1768 the Germans were ‘ordinary’ (full) professors, when Desnitskiy and Tretyakov were ‘extraordinary professors’. It can be safely assumed the question of teaching in Russian or in Latin was not the only point of conflict between them.40

40 Brown (1977), 127. Desnitskiy was also appointed one of the experts for the Legislative Commission (Ulozhennoi kommissiy) that worked from 1767 to 1768. In 1768 he wrote a ‘Proposal for establishing legislative, judicial and executive power in the Russian Empire (Predstavleniye o uchrezhdeniy zakonodatelnoi, sudutelnoy i nakazatelnoi vlasti v rossiysskoi imperiy)’,41 containing suggestions for political reform that reflect English and Scottish ideas and British constitutional practice, adapted in a highly original manner to Russian conditions.42 Many of Desnitskiy’s ideas and references found their way into Catherine’s Nakaz.

41 Available electronically at Desnitskiy (1988). 42 Brown (1975), 263. Desnitskiy was the first in Russia to propose the separation of powers. Walicki states:

His plan proposed that a permanent representative body known as the Senate should be elected every five years; formally this body was to have only advisory capacity, but there is no doubt that Desnitsky wanted to ensure some form of control and restriction of absolutism.43



43 Walicki (1979), 13. His proposal also included the reorganisation of the judiciary, including dispersal of courts throughout Russia to render justice more accessible, and the introduction of open trials, including trial by jury. He argued for the independence and irremovability of judges and for strict limits on the right of the monarch to appoint judges. As to executive power, this must be placed under judicial control, not going beyond the limits of judgments. At the head of the executive was the monarch, who appointed governors. The functions of the executive were criminal investigation, the fight against crime, maintenance of peace and quiet, upholding order in the towns, collection of taxes and excise and guarantee of fire and prison services.

And to prevent arbitrariness and abuse by the governors of regions and towns he proposed the establishment of regional courts, to ensure legality through special departments for receiving complaints. This was thus the first proposal in Russian history to subordinate the executive power to the judicial power.44

44 Mernikova (2000). As Walicki noted, a turning point in Catherine’s life was her suppression of the Pugachev Rebellion (1773–1775), which started as a peasant uprising led by Pugachev, a Don Cossack who promised a return to an imagined Russia pre-dating Peter the Great, but was joined by Urals metalworkers and Bashkir tribesmen. This was the greatest uprising in Russian history and threatened the existence of the Empire. Catherine now rejected both the theories of natural rights and her earlier Francophile enthusiasm for Voltaire and Diderot. In a vindication of Desnitskiy’s own project, she turned instead to William Blackstone’s sober conservatism. She now referred to her Nakaz as ‘idle chatter’. Her legislation was now intended to strengthen the position of the gentry. She returned to Russian nationalism and a study of Russian history.45

45 Walicki (1997), 6–7. In 1775 Desnitskiy published Juridical discourses on the principles and origins of marriage, in which he followed his characteristic method of analysing social phenomena as part of a historical, evolutionary process, the method he learned from Adam Smith and John Millar. This was a materialist methodology. He argued, using the exact terminology of Smith and Millar with regard to the four stages,46 that sexual relationships had also evolved: there were no institutionalised form of marriage in hunting society; polygamy was characteristic of the pastoral stage; in the agricultural stage, patriarchal monogamy ruled; and in the commercial stage, although still marked by monogamy, conditions were ripe for equal rights for women, a cause Desnitskiy supported wholeheartedly.47

46 See Brown (1975) – I am indebted to Archie Brown for this observation. 47 Walicki (1979), 13. In 1778 he delivered his Discourse on the benefit of knowledge of the legal art of the fatherland (Rasuzhdeniye o polze znaniye otechestvennovo zakonoiskusstva) in which once more he closely followed Blackstone as to the need for legal education, for gentlemen as much as for judges.

He applied the same method in 1781 in his Juridical discourse on the views of various nations concerning property and various forms of social relationship. Returning to the four stages of social evolution just noted, Desnitskiy wrote that private property only emerged during the third, agricultural stage, and ownership in the full meaning of the word could not develop fully until the commercial stage, when it replaced other forms of property.

Desnitsky’s final published work was Legal discourse on the concepts held by various peoples concerning property of estates in various forms of social relationships (Iuridicheskoye passuzhdeniye o raznikh ponyatiyakh, kakiye imeyut narody o sobstvennosti imeniya v razlichnikh sostoyaniyakh obshchezhitalstva), a lecture delivered in 1781.48 Entirely consistently with his work to date, he criticised the abstract theory of natural law, beloved of the German professors, and argued that instead of a focus on ‘imaginary conditions of the human race’, the scholar should rather study the historical genesis and evolution of ownership, property and inheritance. He distinguished, as before, between four stages of social evolution, based on economic criteria: the hunting, pastoral, agricultural and commercial stages. In this materialist account, private property only emerged during the agricultural stage and ownership (as the right to dispose freely of a given thing and to secure its return from any person who has taken unlawful possession of it) came to fruition in the commercial stage.49

48 See http://www.rosreferat.ru/economy/628.htm (accessed 18 October 2012). 49 Walicki (1979), 12. For more than 20 years Desnitskiy continued his scholarly, teaching and public activity. In 1787 he retired from his chair at the university, and died on 15 June 1789. The French Revolution had just begun. In May 1789 the Estates-General were convoked, in June the Third Estate proclaimed the Tennis Court Oath, in July the Bastille was stormed, on 26 August 1789 the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen was adopted by the National Constituent Assembly and in October the march on Versailles forced the royal court back to Paris.

It could be said that he died just in time. The French Revolution was the definitive end of Catherine’s Russian Enlightenment. According to Walicki, the execution of the King of France on 21 January 1793 left her ‘stunned as by a hammer-blow’ and she had the busts of the encyclopedists removed from the hermitage, the last being Voltaire.50 She dealt very firmly with the two leading progressive thinkers of the Russian Enlightenment. In 1790 Aleksandr Radishchev (1749–1802, 10 years younger than Desnitskiy), author in that year of A journey from St Petersburg to Moscow, was exiled to Siberia and in 1792 Nikolai Novikov (1744–1818, four years younger than Desnitskiy), freemason and editor of satirical journals, was imprisoned without trial in the Schlüsselburg Fortress.

50 Walicki (1979), 8. Desnitskiy left not only an abiding influence on law as an academic discipline in Russia and the teaching of law to generations of students, but also helped to form a distinctive school of moderate reformism.

In his Legal philosophies of Russian liberalism, Andrzey Walicki, while comparing Radishchev with Thomas Paine, as typifying the ‘radical current of European Enlightenment – a current which managed to combine revolutionary radicalism with deep commitment to liberal-democratic values’, identified ‘a much less politically radical form of the liberal variant of the juridical world-view’, whose outstanding members were Ivan Pnin (1773–1805), author in 1804 of An essay on Enlightenment concerning Russia, and Vasily Popugaev (1778–1816), author of On the firmness of constitution and laws. In Walicki’s view, it was they who continued and developed some of Desnitskiy’s ideas – Walicki here described Desnitskiy as ‘the first theoretical jurist in Russia’.51

51 Walicki (1992), 24. This chapter has endeavoured to show that law and rights in Russia grow from a rich and varied history, in which Messianic ideology intermingles with many other schools of thought, primarily from Germany, but also from Scotland. Most legal scholars in the West are almost entirely unaware of the strength and creativity of Russian scholarship. The main cause is the absence of translation. I hope that my own access to texts in Russian will assist even if in a very small way in revealing the wealth of interest to be found in the history of Russian legal thought. In the next chapter, I move forward some 50 years, to perhaps the most significant landmark of pre-revolutionary Russia.





Chapter 3

The 1850s and 1860s in Russia: Revolutionary situation or great reforms?




DOI: 10.4324/9780203490211-4

In this chapter, I explain and analyse the great legal reforms of Aleksandr II. As I show, many of the legal and judicial reforms since 1991, under President Yeltsin and in the first years of President Putin, have been in effect a restoration of Aleksandr’s reforms.

The Crimean War ended in 1856; Aleksandr II had become Tsar in February 1855. The Empire was in a terrible state. It had no railroads and was crushed by an immense national debt and the huge expense of maintaining its vast army, quite apart from the debilitating effect of serfdom. One economic expert, L.V. Tengoberskij estimated that about 84 per cent of the expenditures of the Russian state in 1856 were used to pay for the military and the interest on the national debt.1

1 Lincoln (1975), 167, citing L.V. Tengoberskiy Ktatkoe izlozheniye nashevo finansovovo polozheniya (maia 1856) (A brief account of our financial situation, May 1856), Tsentralniy Gosudarstvanniy Istoricheskiy Arkhiv v Leningrad,958 (1), 742. The focus of this chapter is on the Great Legal Reforms of Aleksandr II in 1864. As a result of these reforms, the courts were separated from the administration; open and adversarial justice was introduced; a bar was created, guaranteeing the right of the accused to a defence; the system of ‘estates’ (soslovniy) courts was abolished; the presumption of innocence was entrenched; in place of the theory of formal proof there was free evaluation of evidence; minor criminal and civil cases were transferred to justices of the peace; even before 1864 the criminal investigators were removed from the police and became judicial investigators, attached to the courts; and the irremovability of judges and investigators was put in place.2

2 Kazantsev (1991), 4. How did this come about?

In 1856 Aleksandr II invited an assembly of nobles to Moscow to discuss the abolition of serfdom and initiated an extraordinarily open and dynamic debate. Between 1856 and 1863 some 33 new journals were founded every year and became forums for discussing economic and social change.3

3 Starr (1972), 57; cited in Lincoln (1975), 167, 178. The decisive moment was the abolition of serfdom on 19 February 1861.

The abolition of serfdom was followed by financial reform in 1862. This brought about a complete centralisation of financial affairs, with all expenditures made through the Ministry of Finance, and not each government department as previously. The reform of education followed in 1863, with a new ‘Charter of universities’, increasing the number of subjects taught and doubling the number of professors and lecturers and, in 1864, with the ‘Order on primary people’s colleges’ and the ‘Charter of gymnasiums and progymnasiums’. These statutes opened the possibility of opening schools for all who wanted them.

Prior to 1864, courts were organised on the soslovniy model: each estate had its own courts. For the nobles, every uyezd (district) had a uyezdniy court whose judge and two assessors were elected by the nobles for three years. The appellate instance was the supreme zemskiy court, one in each gubernia, made up of criminal and civil chambers. The chairman and vice-chairman of this court were appointed by the Tsar and assessors were elected by the nobles.

For town-dwellers, the lowest judicial instance was the ‘town magistrate’ and the appellate instance was the ‘gubernia magistrate’. These were elected for three years by the town-dwellers.

State peasants were judged by the uyezdnoi lower rasprave, with appeal to a ‘supreme’ rasprave. ‘Conscience courts’ (sovestniy sud) also existed, which could hear civil cases. These courts were also organised according to the ‘estates principle’, with each estate electing its own chairman and assessors. The judgments of all the higher courts could be appealed to the ‘judicial chamber’ and ultimately to the Senat in St Petersburg.4

4 Popova (2009), 22. Justice was performed by people with no legal education, which was required only of the court secretaries. Judicial procedure was archaic. There were no oral proceedings. The courts only read papers, the pleadings of the parties in civil cases and the records of examination of witnesses, accused and victim in criminal cases. The theory of formal proof was equally archaic, with the evidence of men considered more trustworthy than that of women and educated more than uneducated. The judicial system was riddled with bureaucracy and with corruption. Cases could continue for years. For example, a case of theft from the Moscow uyezd treasury of 115,000 pennies started in 1844 and finished in 1865, that is, it went on for 21 years.5

5 E.P. Tomachev (1998) Aleksandr II and his time (Moscow) Vol. 1, 252, cited by Popova (2009), 22–3. The roots of reform were to be found in the two Decembrist constitutional documents, which survived the unsuccessful uprising of 14 December 1825, Muraviev’s ‘Constitution’ and Pestel’s ‘Russkaya pravda (Russian truth)’. Both documents proposed the abolition of serfdom, the liquidation of the estates, the democratisation of the systems of government and politics and the introduction of parliamentary democracy.





Active debates in Russia


Although Nikolai I did his best to stifle dissent, the 1830s and 1840s were the time of the most active debates between Westernisers and Slavophiles. Both sides contained some liberal thinkers, who agreed on abolition of serfdom and widescale reform. The former, including B.N. Chicherin, K.D. Kavelin, T.N. Granovskiy and A.M. Unkovskiy, considered Russia to be a Western country like others, requiring Western democratic institutions: a parliament, local government and trial by jury. The latter, including A.I. Koshelev, Yu. F. Samarin, K.A. Aksakov and A.S. Khomyakov, considered Russia to be a unique country, requiring from the West only technical progress. Although they were for the abolition of serfdom, their ideal of governance was the Zemskiye sobory of the period of Ivan IV (the Terrible).6

6 Popova (2009), 30–32. Aleksandr II was no liberal, but understood the need for reform. In his first years as Tsar he lifted the ban on travel abroad, relaxed censorship and amnestied the Decembrists and many others who had been exiled. The liberals directed a whole series of proposals to the new Tsar: these included B.N. Chicherin’s ‘The eastern question from the Russian point of view’, N.A. Mengulov’s ‘Thoughts of the last thirteen years’, K.S. Aksakov’s ‘On the internal condition of Russia’, A.I. Koshelev’s ‘On monetary means in the present circumstances’ and P.A. Valuev’s ‘Russian thought in the second half of 1855’. In 1855 to 1857 alone 63 projects for various reforms were prepared and published.7 These nurtured a groundswell of support for reform in public opinion, and also had their effect in government. Aleksandr’s circle included hide-bound conservatives such as the Minister of Justice V.N. Panin, but others, such as the Tsar’s brother the Grand Duke Constantine, the Grand Duchess Yelena Pavlovna and the Miliutin brothers, also understood the need for reform.

7 Tolmachev (1998) Vol. 1 154, cited at Popova (2009), 32. In 1857 the Russkiy vestnik newspaper published the following words:

The present time is rich in new thoughts and new desires. The Russian mind awoke … How many vitally important questions were considered or simply posed in the last two years … We have not at all stopped thinking that our times will go down in history as the epoch of the most important transformations in Russia.8



8 Russkiye vestnik1857 No. 9 152, at Popova (2009), 33. Many newspapers and journals of the late 1850s published articles on reform of the judicial system, arguing that Russian judicial procedure must become oral and open, as in most European countries.9 S.I. Barshev, professor of criminal law at St Petersburg University, became one of the most outspoken supporters of reform, arguing that in Russian courts as in English courts it was essential to restrict the powers of the prosecution while giving wide possibilities for the defence.10 It was necessary to create a Russian bar, as the basis for an adversarial system that did not yet exist in Russia.

9 See, e.g., ‘On oral judicial procedure in Russia’ Russkiye vestnik 1857 Vol. 11, Col.1; S.I. Barshev, ‘Criminal court procedure’ Russkiye vestnik 1857 Vol. 10, Col. 2; Kh. D., ‘Some thoughts on judicial procedure’ Russkiye vestnik 1858 Vol. 16, Col. 2; A.A. Nalyumbetskiy, ‘The question of oral proceedings and of openness in courts’ Russkiye vestnik (1859) Vol. 16, Col. 2. 10 S.I. Barshev (1863) ‘On necessary guarantees in the criminal court’ Russkiye vestnik 1859 Vol. 20 Col. 2; S.I. Barshev, ‘Tasks of the jurors in criminal cases’ Russkiye vestnik Vol. 45, cited in Popova (2009).





Trial by jury in the Russian Empire


The apotheosis of these publications was the proposal to introduce jury trials. Only trial by jury could guarantee real independence and protect the court from miscarriages of justice, Barshev argued.11 Indeed, as S.M. Kazantsev pointed out, writing in the last year of Soviet power, in the opinion of contemporaries as well as researchers into the judicial reforms of 1864, the introduction of trial by jury was the most democratic of all the reforms of Aleksandr II.12 Even the leader of the reaction, and outright fighter against jury trial in the 1860s, M.N. Katkov, wrote that this was ‘not so much reform, as the creation of judicial power’.13 The first to propose the introduction of jury trial in Russia at the end of the eighteenth century was Semeon Desnitskiy (see Chapter 2). Desnitskiy sent a nakaz (instruction) to Catherine’s Legislative Commission proposing the introduction of courts on the English model, but his bold nakaz was not even read at the Commission.14 The great legal reformer M.M. Speranskiy also planned the introduction of jury trials, but his plans were never realised. The debates of the 1860s were fiery: the newspaper Den wrote that ‘The Russian people is not capable of self-government.’15

11 Barshev (1863) Vol. 45, Col.116, cited in Popova (2009), 51. 12 Kazantsev (1991), 4. 13 G.A. Dzhanshiev (1914) Collection of articles Moscow, 5; cited at Kazantsev (1991), 4. 14 Popova (2009), 275. 15 Den1862, No. 45; Popova (2009), 275. And trial by jury was indeed brought to Russia from England. Kazantsev reminded his readers that while trial by jury was developed in the fourteenth to fifteenth centuries, the French Revolution provided the impetus for the spread of the jury system throughout Europe. Revolutionaries saw in the jury a weapon against despotism, but also emphasised its intrinsic value. Thus, Robespierre claimed that the main achievement of the new court was the separation of the judgments of fact and of law, and that judicial power was to composed of ‘ordinary citizens, chosen from the people, who immediately return to the masses, where they will themselves be subjected to the very same power which they themselves only recently represented’.16

16 M. Robespierre (1959) ‘On the introduction of jury trial’ in the book Revolutionary legality and justice (Moscow); at Kazantsev (1991), 6. The more the various reform projects were examined in detail in the Russian press, the more actively the experience of the various foreign models was drawn on. From 1860 to 1866 interest in foreign experience peaked in Russia. A whole series of articles appeared in the press, many referring to English and French experience.17 Russia adopted the system of 12 jurors, ordinary people, sitting with a professional judge, with all the rights of the judge, participating in the investigation of all the evidence and, through their foreman, posing questions to witnesses, experts and the accused and retiring without the judge (this was especially important) in order to decide questions of fact, that is, whether the guilt of the accused had been proved or not.

17 ‘A comparison of English and French criminal procedure’ Journal of the Ministry of Justice1862 Vol. 19 Ch. 2; N. Utin, ‘A study of the historical formation of the jury trial in England’ Russkiy vestnik 1860 Vol. 26; A. Kistyakovskiy, ‘A study of the English criminal trial’ Journal of the Ministry of Justice 1860 No. 6, 9, 11, 12; V. Bervi, ‘A study of judicial administration in England’ Journal of the Ministry of Justice 1859, No. 9; B. Utin, ‘On justices of the peace in England’ Sovremennik 1860 No. 4, 11; K.S.U., ‘On advocates and khodatai in France’ Russkiy vestnik 1858 Vol. 18, book 2; ‘On the special juries for special classes of case in England, France and Italy’ Journal of the Ministry of Justice 1862 Vol. 14; Ch. 2; N.V. Shcherbanya, ‘Judges, magistrates and advocates in France’ Russkiy vestnik 1858 Vol. 15, books 1–2; A.O. Arsenev, ‘The contemporary condition of the French bar’ Russkiy vestnik 1861 Vol. 32; all cited at Popova (2009), 52, n. 103 The French jury system, like the German and others, was not a strict copy of the English jury. All these models were attentively studied by the Editing Commission along with, among others, the criminal procedural codes of Geneva and the Kingdom of Sardinia. In 1864 the well-known German legal scholar K. Mittermaier commented in a Russian journal that the Russian draft criminal procedure ‘stands higher even than many of the latest legislative works’. And as concerns the introduction of juries, he noted that ‘in comparison with the French legislation … contrary to it, the Russian model keeps to the English model to a much greater extent, even though on that side it is far from being a blind reflection.’18

18 K. Mittermaier (1864) Noviy proyekt russkovo ugolovnovo sudoproizvodstva (The new draft of Russian criminal procedure) Journal of the Ministry of Justice 1864, Vol. 22, 16; at Kazantsev (1991), 7. However, the Russian jury did not have jurisdiction concerning crimes against the state or most crimes of excess of authority and the most famous jury trials were murder cases. Yet the pool of jurors was relatively very wide and included all civil chinovniks (civil servants) of classes V to XIV in the Table of Ranks, all elected officers of town and nobility assemblies and peasants who had served for not fewer than three years in elected office as village starost, starshin and others. Only men aged between 25 and 70 who were subjects of the Empire could serve as jurors. However, clergy and monks were excluded, as were persons of the level of general (classes I to IV in the Table of Ranks), court employees, the police, the military, teachers and some others.19

19 Kazentsev (1991), 7. All persons meeting these qualifications were included in a general list of jurors. The general list was one of the main achievements of the jury system, since these were not chosen people, but every person meeting the qualification. Opponents of the jury described it as the ‘court of the street’ and ‘court of the crowd’. This phrase was used with success by the famous advocate S.A. Andreevskiy in his splendid speech for the case of the Kronstadt Bank:

Recently a certain publicist dared to call the jury ‘the street’. But, despite the intentions of the author, I see in that word no denigration or slur on the jury: on the contrary it brings together the most valuable features of this court. And in truth: you should be – the street! We are glad of this. On the street there is fresh air; we are all there without difference, rich and poor; there we are all equal, because under the eyes of the people we feel our security; in the street no-one permits himself shamelessness – we recall the funeral about which the prokuror spoke yesterday: when you take part on the street in the cortege of your relative, people you do not know take off their hats and cross themselves … On the street they help those who have become ill, extend charity to beggars, stop persons who are offensive, detain a thief running away! When you have a disaster at home – burglary, murder, fire – where do you run to for help? Onto the street. Because there you always find people ready to serve as the source of common human justice. Let us bring to us, to our court, this source … come and judge as from the street, because it is precisely from there that the legislator wished to bring his own judges, and not from offices and salons.20



20 S.A. Andreevskiy (1916) Drama zhizni (The drama of life) St Petersburg 1916, 609; Kazanstev (1991), 8. In 1901 even V.I. Lenin wrote: ‘The court of the street is valued precisely because it brings a breath of fresh air into that spirit of office formalism, in which our government departments are soaked.’21

21 V.I. Lenin Complete Collected Works Vol. 4, 407; Kazantsev (1991), 8. On the basis of the decision of the jury, the ‘crown judge’ declared the corresponding guilty or not guilty verdict. This verdict could only be appealed by way of cassation (on a point of law) to the Senat. In non-jury cases, the appeal instance was the ‘judicial board’. The ‘judicial board’ also heard at first instance the most dangerous crimes, crimes against the state and crimes committed in public office (dolzhnostnostniy). These cases were heard by a ‘crown court’ with representatives of the estates, one from each estate: the head of the gubernia or uyezd nobility, the town head and the volost starshina. The ‘crown judge’ and the representatives of the estates had equal voting rights, both as examining judges and in considering the verdict. V.I. Lenin wrote more critically that the estates representatives ‘were voiceless state-ists, and play the sad role of witnesses, participants in whatever the bureaucrats of justice order’.22

22 V.I. Lenin Complete Collected Works Vol. 4, 407; Kazantsev (1991), 10. Kazantsev’s collection also contains an extensive memoir by one of the most distinguished judges of the period, A.F. Koni,23 writing in 1914, who was able to reflect on a career spanning 30 years, as tovarishch prokuror, prokuror, chairman of a regional court, ober-prokuror and senator of the Criminal Cassation Department of the Senat.24 Moreover, it also reproduces the advocates’ speeches and judicial summings-up in some of the most famous jury trials. Perhaps the most famous, and infamous for opponents of jury trial, was the trial in 1878 of Vera Zasulich, charged with the attempted murder of the governor of St Petersburg, Colonel Teodor Trepov, whom she had shot in broad daylight and before witnesses.25 Koni, who was presiding judge, refused to be pressured by the authorities, and Zasulich was acquitted, a verdict that was respected by the authorities. I have already noted her correspondence with Karl Marx. In fact, she became a Menshevik, returned to Russia after the 1905 Revolution and moved away from revolutionary politics. She supported the Russian war effort during World War I and was an opponent of the October Revolution of 1917. She died in Petrograd on 8 May 1919.

23 A.F. Koni 1844–1927. 24 Koni (1991), 28–91. 25 In July 1877 a political prisoner, Alexei Bogolyubov, refused to remove his cap in the presence of Trepov, the governor of St Petersburg. Trepov, who was already infamous for his suppression of the Polish rebellions in 1830 and 1863, ordered that Bogolyubov be flogged. This outraged not only revolutionaries, but also sympathetic members of the intelligentsia. A group of six revolutionaries plotted to kill Trepov, but Zasulich was the first to act. However, in 1889 to 1891 the percentage of convictions in the ‘judicial boards’ was 68 per cent as against 65 per cent in jury trials – only a marginal difference26 and an indication of the independence of the ‘crown judges’ and a strong contrast to the 99 per cent conviction rate in non-jury trials in contemporary Russia.

26 Vysochaishe uchrezhdennaya komissiya dlya peresmotra zakonopolozheniy po sudebnoi chasti(Supreme departmental commission for oversight of legality in the courts): Trudy (works), Vol. 1, St Petersburg, 1895, 201; Kazantsev (1991), 201. Towards the end of the nineteenth century reactionary voices increasingly called for abolition of trial by jury. The conservative publicist M.N. Katkov called for a reform of the Sudebniye uchrezhdeniya so as to get rid of ‘slavish copying of alien models’ and demanded that ‘the Minister of Justice should be in truth a minister of his own state, and not as it were a diplomatic agent of the autocratic judicial republic.’27 In 1885 the leader of the conservatives, the notorious reactionary K.P. Pobedonostsev, sent to the Tsar a memorandum on ‘the necessity of judicial reform’ in which he proposed among other reforms ‘abolition of jury trial so as to restore the significance of the court in Russia’.28 And in the same year the Supreme Disciplinary Section of the Senat was created, abolishing the principle of irremovability of judges, with the power to move judges and in the final analysis dismiss them. In 1887 jurors were required to be able to read Russian and the property qualification was raised. In 1889 justices of the peace were abolished in most of the country. However, until the Revolution attempts to abolish jury trial failed.29 Juries and other features of the reformed judicial system were abolished by the Decree on the Courts No. 1, adopted by the Sovnarkom, the Council of People’s Commissars, on 22 November 1917.

27 N.A. Troitskiy (1975) Tsarism pod sudom progressivnoi obshchestvennost (Tsarism judged by progressive public opinion) (Moscow) 46: Kazantsev (1991), 17. 28 B.V. Vilenskiy Sudebnaya reforma i kontrreforma v Rossiy (Judicial reform and counter-reform in Russia) Saratov, 1969, 295–305; Kazantsev (1991), 17. 29 Jury trials abolished by the Decree on the Courts No. 1 adopted by the Sovnarkom (Council of People’s Commissars) on 22 November 1917.





Reform of the judicial system


From 1857 to 1858 in addition to the conservative views of the Minister of Justice V.N. Panin, there were two leading opinions. One was led by the head of the II Section of the Imperial Chancery30 D.N. Bludov, who considered that the judicial system of Russia could be improved without sharp changes and was against using ideas taken from Western countries. The other tendency was propagandised by Prince D.A. Obolenskiy, who, on the contrary, believed that it was essential to incorporate into the Russian judicial system the core aspects of Western procedure: oral and open procedure, jury trial, the bar. His opinions prevailed and in 1861 he founded the ‘Commission of the II Section for preparation of the project of judicial reform’.31

30 The Imperial Chancery was created by Tsar Nikolai I. The II Section was tasked with the codification of Russian legislation. 31 Tolmachev (1998) Vol. 1, 253; at Popova (2009), 53. In the autumn of 1863 work on the preparation of the new judicial charters was completed and on 20 November 1864 they were signed by Tsar Aleksandr II. The charters contained four normative legal acts: the Uchrezhdeniye of judicial institutions; the Statute of criminal procedure; the Statute of civil procedure; and the Statute of punishments, which may be imposed by justices of the peace.

These new statutes brought about cardinal changes in the judicial department. They were so far reaching that it was better to speak of the construction of a new judicial system and not of the reform of the old. They are in the view of many commentators, including Kazantsev, a true monument to the liberal thought of the nineteenth century.

The judicial charters created, in the words of Kazantsev, ‘an original and effective system of justice’.32 This new system had two branches, two subsystems, which were united in the highest judicial organ, the Senat. These were the general courts and justice of the peace courts. There were also courts with special jurisdiction: military, volost, commercial and others, as envisaged in various special laws. Judicial reform continued until the end of the nineteenth century. The first general courts were opened in 1866, but only in the 10 gubernia of central Russia. In the other regions, the previous courts continued to operate under the previous laws.

32 Kazantsev (1991), 5. What was especially important was that the administrative and judicial territories of the Empire did not coincide. Uyezdy and towns were divided into justice of the peace jurisdictions. Territories under the jurisdiction of okruzhniy (regional), general, courts of first instance covered several uyezds, while the jurisdiction of the ‘judicial boards’, courts of second instance covered several gubernia. At the beginning of the twentieth century there were 106 regional courts in the Empire and 14 ‘judicial boards’. Kazantsev commented, correctly, that the system created by the Great Reforms was far more effective at ensuring the absence of any executive or administrative interference with the judicial system than the reforms of the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries.33

33 Kazantsev (1991), 5. The new principle of irremovability of judges, contained in Article 243 of the Uchrezhdeniye was perhaps of equal significance. This article provided that the chairmen and members of the regional (general) courts could not be removed or transferred from one responsibility to another except by order of the court. All permanent, professional members of the regional courts and judicial boards, the so-called ‘crown (koronniye) judges’, were appointed by the Tsar on the recommendation of the Minister of Justice. To become a member of a regional court a candidate must have higher legal education and not fewer than three years stage in the court or the prokuratura; and to become a prisyazhniy poverenniy, an advocate, permitted to defend in jury trials, five years’ experience was necessary.34

34 Kazantsev (1991), 5–6.





Justices of the peace


It should not be forgotten that justices of the peace were also an important democratic component of the Great Reforms of 1864. These had two instances: justice of the peace in the uchastky and the uyezd (town) congress of justices of the peace. Justices of the peace decided their cases unanimously and were elected by the zemskiy sobraniye (local assembly) for three years. They heard civil cases up to 300 roubles and criminal cases where the maximum penalty was one year of imprisonment. This form of justice was rapid and popular. The appeal verdict of the congress was final and subject only to cassation (appeal on point of law) to the Senat.





The bar


The Great Reforms created a bar in Russia and reformed the prokuratura. A large number of talented and eloquent advocates appeared from the stormy discussions of the 1860s and rapidly acquired prominence and popularity. For many of them, practice at the bar was a legal means of opposing the autocracy. There were two categories of advocate. The highest category of advocates was the prisyazhniy poverenniy, advocates permitted to defend in jury trials, ‘jury advocates’, who formed corporations in the regions of the ‘judicial boards’. The jury advocates elected a council, which supervised the admission of new members – higher legal education and a five-year stage (pupillage) must be spent with a practising jury advocate – and reviewed the activity of existing members. The second category was able to conduct less significant cases and was not required to have higher legal education, provided members passed an examinations set by the court.35

35 Kazantsev (1991), 11–12.





The prokuratura


The prokuratura no longer exercised the function of general supervisory review (nadzor) over all aspects of government – this was returned to them in Soviet Russia. Instead, the prosecutor was now responsible for oversight of investigation and for presenting the case for the state in the trial. The new prokuratura was attached to the courts. The new offices created were the prokuror of the judicial board and his tovarishchei (assistants) and the prokuror of the regional court and his tovarishchei. The Minister of Justice held the office of General Prokuror.

The prokuratura was therefore much more dependent on the government both because of their direct subordination to the Minister of Justice and because they had no principle of irremovability. However, the prokuratura generally rejected any attempt at influence by local authorities boldly and decisively. They were not only independent of police and gendarmerie, but saw themselves as in charge of them. Prokurors were often promoted to senior posts not only in the Ministry of Justice but also the Ministry of Internal Affairs. The prokuratura as an institution was relatively incorrupt, partly explained by the fact that a tovarishch prokuror at the start of the twentieth century received 2,400 roubles a month, that is, 10 times more than a middling worker.36

36 Kazantsev (1991), 13.





The historians’ debate – revolutionary situation or Great Reform?


There has been an intense debate since 1864 as to the significance of the 1860s, which can be summed up under the heading ‘Great Reform or revolutionary situation?’37 One of the first attempts to analyse what had happened was ‘Ten years of reform’ by the commentator A.A. Golobachev, published in 1872. In his opinion, there was not a complete break with the old laws and government and he was satisfied that the cause of the reforms was Russia’s disaster in the Crimean War. Twenty years later, in 1907, G.A. Dzhanshiev wrote in the context of political reaction, and assured his readers that there were no real threats of disturbance and the peasants patiently awaited their liberation.38

37 Vedernikov (2012). 38 Vedernikov (2012), 20. In 1912, soon after the first Russian Revolution in 1905, A.A. Kornilov published his course of lectures, which expressed scepticism as to the reform potential of the authorities. In his view, Aleksandr II was a moderate conservative, who remodelled himself as a reformer not because of his sympathy for the people who in the 1840s railed against serfdom, but because the Crimean War persuaded him of the need for moderate reform. N.A. Kotlyarevskiy in 1916 expressed greater scepticism and considered that the 1860s were in fact the epilogue of pre-reform Russia. The 50th anniversary of the reforms in 1911 inspired a flood of publications, among them works by the Marxists G.V. Plekahnov and V.I. Lenin. Plekhanov evaluated the 1864 reform highly critically, as a liberal apology for the liberation of the peasants. He saw the main cause of the reforms as to be found in the economic factor.39

39 Vedernikov (2012), 21. Lenin, on the one hand, saw great significance in the role of the revolutionaries of the 1860s, while, on the other, noting the extreme weakness of those social elements whose interests demanded reform.40 He saw the economic factor and the Crimean War disaster as the least of the factors causing the reform. Only in his works of 1915 did Lenin describe the period 1859 to 1861 as a ‘revolutionary situation’, but, according to Vedernikov without giving evidence for this.

40 Vedernikov (2012), 23. Plekhanov’s ideas were concretised in the work of the leading Marxist historian of the 1920s and 1930s, M N. Pokrovskiy, who was the only professional historian who was also a Marxist. He wrote that it was, in fact, the rise in the price of grain on the world market that no longer made it profitable for land-owners to own serfs. He also downplayed the significance of the revolutionary movement of that time; Chernyshevskiy, author of What is to be done?, had no real forces at hand. For Pokrovskiy, this was a revolution from above. Lenin’s views were not significant for him. Thus, for pre-revolutionary historiography, the decisive role in the 1860s was played by the government apparatus.

Pokrovskiy saw no need to change his assessment until the late 1920s, when Stalin intervened in the writing of history. In 1928 Pokrovskiy admitted his errors. He wrote that ‘in Russia at the time of Chernyshevskiy there was not and could not be a revolutionary bourgeoisie’, but Chernyshevskiy (and here Pokrovskiy cited Lenin) was a revolutionary democrat. The only revolutionary force at that time was the peasantry. The petit-bourgeoisie of the towns was exhausted and the proletariat had only begun to appear. The peasant revolution of 1850 to 1860 was a bourgeois revolution.

By the early 1930s the idea of a ‘revolutionary situation’ in 1861 was to be found in school textbooks, for example that written by Pokrovskiy’s student, S.A. Piontkovskiy. The ideologists of the revolutionary bourgeois nature of the peasantry were now the critic V.G. Belinskiy, A.I. Herzen and N.G. Chernyshevskiy. Belinskiy reflected the position of the enslaved serfs and the textbook author cited Lenin’s furious 1909 polemic against the collection Vekhi (Landmarks), in which the main enemies were Belinskiy and Chernyshevskiy. Herzen, the editor of Kolokol (The bell) from exile in London, stirred up the common people. And the author of What is to be Done?, revered by Lenin, was presented as the most uncompromising revolutionary democrat and supporter of a peasant revolution.

Vekhi 41 was published in 1909, edited by Mikhail Gershenzon and contained essays by the religious and idealist philosophers Nikolai Berdyaev, Sergei Bulgakov, Bogdan Kistyakovsky, Pyotr Struve, Semen Frank and Aleksandr Izgoyev. With invective, sarcasm and irony they attacked the Russian intelligentsia for its enthusiastic support of the 1905 Revolution. In the words of Adrzej Walicki42 it was ‘a manifesto of rightwing, anti-revolutionary liberalism’ whose authors agreed on the ‘need for a new intellectual canon focused on religious thought and efforts to define the Russian national identity’. Kistyakovskiy’s contribution was well summarised by Walicki:43

41 Gershenzon (1909/2011); full text, with an enthusiastic introduction by Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, at http://www.vehi.net/vehi/index.html (accessed 26 October 2012). 42 Walicki (2010), 101. 43 Walicki (2010), 106. Kistjakovskij’s contribution to Milestones was entitled In Defense of Law.44 In it, he criticized the Russian intelligentsia for its absolute contempt of the law and legal culture, and its failure to realize that law is a social value in itself and not merely an instrument serving the attainment of this or that political end. To back his claims Kistjakovskij quoted philosophers from the right and the left—the slavophiles as well as Hercen, Leont’ev and Mikhailovskij; he also emphasized that even staunch ‘westerners’ like Kavelin and Plekhanov deeply mistrusted the law. He also saw evidence of the low level and deformed character of the intelligentsia’s legal awareness in the programs proposed by the country’s political parties, all of which in his opinion showed a strong preference for strict social control based on written lore, which was typical of bureaucracies in police states. This led Kistjakowskij to conclude that the Russian intelligentsia’s legal awareness in some way resembled that of a police state.



44 Text in Russian at http://www.vehi.net/vehi/kistyak.html (accessed 26 October 2012). Lenin argued that for the authors ‘the “intelligentsia” in fact appears as the spiritual leader, inspirer and mouthpiece of the whole Russian democracy and the whole Russian liberation movement … The attack is being pursued all along the line against democracy, against the democratic world outlook.’45

45 Lenin (1909/1963), 123–25. Lenin’s respect for Herzen was once again demonstrated in his ‘Memories of Herzen’, published on 8 May 1912 in the journal Sotsial-Demokrat, on the occasion of the 100th anniversary of Herzen’s birth.46 Herzen was celebrated by all liberal Russia, all those who sought to forget the revolutionary Herzen, who had played a great role in preparing the revolution in Russia. Herzen was born into the nobility, Lenin reminded his readers, but was not a gambler or drunkard like so many, but was one of the ‘men of December 14’ (1825), as Herzen himself wrote, ‘a phalanx of heroes reared, like Romulus and Remus, on the milk of a wild beast … They were veritable titans, hammered out of pure steel from head to foot, comrades-in-arms who deliberately went to certain death in order to awaken the young generation to a new life and to purify the children born in an environment of tyranny and servility.’47

46 Lenin (2010), 221–29; English translation (1968) ‘In memory of Herzen’ in Collected Works Vol. 18 (London: Lawrence & Wishart), 25–31. 47 Lenin quoted from Herzen: A. Herzen, ‘Ends and beginnings: letter to I.S. Turgenev’ (1862) in The memoirs of Aleksandr Herzen Vol. IV (London: Chatto & Windus, 1968), 1683. Piontkovskiy continued that the most powerful revolutionary organisations of the 1860s were Molodaya Rossiya (Young Russia) and Zemlya i volya (Land and Freedom), both of which, he said, were under the unmediated ideological influence of Chernyshevskiy.48

48 Vedernikov (2012), 30. The results of Stalin’s interventions were to be seen in the textbook History of the USSR for higher education institutions, published in 1940 and edited by M.V. Nechkina, who followed in the footsteps of Pokrovskiy.49 Chapter 21 of the volume ‘Russia in the XIX century’ bore the title ‘The revolutionary movement of the 1850s. The ripening of the revolutionary situation’.50 However, the immediate cause of social stirring was given not as the peasant movement, but as the disaster of the Crimean War, ‘which with shattering clarity unveiled the technical, economic and political backwardness of Russia’. According to the authors of the textbook, the government was obliged to undertake political reform ‘under the influence of the revolutionary situation’. The only evidence given for this, says Vedernikov, was the famous warning speech of Aleksandr II to the Moscow nobility. However, it is perfectly clear that the Tsar spoke not of an actual threat of a peasant uprising, but only of the possibility of unfortunate consequences in the future, if reform from above were not carried out. Aleksandr was presented as ‘weak and indecisive, deprived of serious interests’ and a disciple of his father’s political system.

49 Vedernikov (2012), 32–3. 50 Vedernikov (2012), 33; Nechkin (ed.) Vol. II, 384–428. Only by the mid-1950s were the ideas of a ‘revolutionary situation’ thrown into doubt. But the decisive role in undermining the thesis of a ‘revolutionary situation’ was played by English language scholars in the 1960s and 1970s.51

51 Adler, Ch. (1969) ‘The revolutionary situation 1859–1861: the uses of historical conception’, Canadian Slavic Studies 3(2); Emmons, T. (1968) The Russian landed gentry and the peasant emancipation of 1861 (Cambridge); Field, D. (1976) The end of serfdom: nobility and bureaucracy in Russia, 1855–1861 (London). Vedernikov’s own view, in 2012, is worthy of note, especially in view of his very thorough study of the preceding historiography. According to him:52

52 Lapin (2012), 290–91. [T]he most important period in the history of the Great Reform was the period 1856–1859, when the preparation of reform united in a single goal the Westernisers and the Slavophiles, and representatives of government circles and civil society. This was the time when M. N. Katkov and the Grand Duchess Yelena Pavlovna, M. P. Pogodin and N. G. Chernyshevskiy, Yu. F. Samarin and K. D. Kavelin formed one team. Not the mythical ‘revolutionary situation’ but its absence permitted the preparation and the implementation of the liberation of the serfs, and the working out of an interconnected complex of economic, social, political and cultural reforms.



Alekseev also confirms that the Great Reforms satisfied many of the demands of the Slavophiles, including Vladimir Solovyov: the abolition of serfdom, jury trial and institution of equality of rights.53 The situation, said Vedernikov, changed in 1859. The united camp of reformers broke up. The radical wing, represented in Russia by Chernyshevskiy, split away. In Vedernikov’s view, it was no accident that the action of I.S. Turgenev’s novel Fathers and sons, the book about the split in Russian society, took place precisely in 1859.

53 Alekseev (2007), 21. Chernyshevskiy came to be reviled by conservatives and liberals.





Chapter 4

The trajectory of Yevgeniy Pashukanis and the struggle for power in Soviet law




DOI: 10.4324/9780203490211-5

This chapter explores the brief flowering of a specifically Marxist understanding of law during the first decades of the Soviet Union, through the history of its most original exponent, Yevgeniy Pashukanis. Chris Arthur has described Pashukanis’ ‘important contribution to the materialist critique of legal forms’ as ‘to this day the most significant Marxist work on the subject’.1 I do not disagree.

1 Arthur (1983), 9. However, a recently published textbook, The history of legal thought in Russia,2 has no section on Pashukanis as such, although it has a very short section (1½ pages) on G.V. Plekhanov (the ‘father of Russian Marxism’, 1857–1918),3 as an example of ‘Russian radicalism of the XIX century’. Its author, Professor Mikhail Antonov, introduces Pashukanis in the context of the contest in Russia between the Slavanophiles and Westernisers, and then in their respective intellectual traditions, the conservatives (whose head was Konstantin Pobedonostsev) and liberals (led by Boris Chichern).4 According to Antonov, there was considerable continuity in legal theoretical debate following the 1917 Revolution. The first ideologists of the new legal system, Yevgeniy Pashukanis and Mikhail Reisner, continued the tradition of pre-revolutionary liberal legal discourse. The Slavophile, conservative tradition found its continuation in the Eurasianism developed by the White emigration (see Chapter 1). Thus Chapter 14, the final chapter, of Antonov’s textbook is entitled ‘Alternatives to Russian authoritarianism: Eurasianism and Bolshevism’.5

2 Antonov (2012). 3 Antonov (2012), 130–31. 4 Antonov (2012), 10. 5 Antonov (2012), 194–210. Eurasianism started with the thought of Ivan Ilyin (1883–1954), whose neo-idealism crystallised in his conceptions of the state as ‘organised spiritual solidarity’ and law as the ‘foundation for reciprocal spiritual recognition of the order (in the sense of “law and order”) of human relations’.6 Thus law for Ilyin has nothing to do with a contract, but was first and foremost a feeling of spiritual rightness, of justice. Ilyin is enormously popular in Russian law schools today and he is cited by Putin, among others.

6 Antonov (2012), 195. Antonov prefers the word ‘Bolshevism’ to ‘Marxism, since the latter is interpreted in various ways. In his view, Lenin’s weakness was his inability to find a scientific foundation for his position. The theory of law in the first years after 1917 was based on the ideas of the psychological school of law, finding support in Marx’s conception of class consciousness. Then, in the 1930s, in Antonov’s view, statist positivism dominated.7 Up to then, there was a wide variety of points of view, from the psychological (L.I. Petrazhitskiy), to Marxism as ‘god seeking’ (the Peoples’ Commissar for Enlightenment, A.V. Lunacharskiy).8 Pashukanis makes his appearance three pages before the end of the textbook, but as an example of the ‘most interesting and constructive attempt at an economic analysis of law from the position of Marxism’.9 Pashukanis apparently held the view that ‘law is always connected with economic relations and is unthinkable absent these relations.’ Public law as such did not exist.10

7 Antonov (1912), 201. 8 Antonov (2012), 202. 9 Antonov (2012), 208. 10 Antonov (2012), 209. In this chapter, I suggest that there is rather more of interest and substance in Pashukanis’ own work; and that the turbulent history of the ideological struggles over law in the early years of Soviet power are a further example of the close intermingling of law and ideology in Russia.





The life and times of Yevgeniy Pashukanis


Pashukanis’ life and career run as follows.11 Yevgeniy Bronislavovich Pashukanis was born on 23 February 1891 in the town of Staritsa in Tver Guberniya (north of Moscow), in a family with revolutionary traditions. His mother, Sofiya Pavlovna, was a member of the Russian Social Democratic Workers Party (RSDRP) from 1903. His father, Bronislav Frantsevich, worked as a medical doctor. In 1906 the Pashukanis family moved to Petersburg, and there Yevgeniy spent much time with his uncle, M.P. Lyadov, a Bolshevik from 1903, a leader of the December armed uprising in Moscow and, in the 1920s, Rector of the Sverdlov Communist University.

11 I draw here from the thesis of Protopopov (2007). In October 1917 Pashukanis worked actively in the Sushchevsko-Mariynskiy Military Revolutionary Committee in Moscow and was later elected a member of the Cassation (Appeal) Tribunal attached to the All-Russian Central Executive Committee (VTsIK),12 acting as a revolutionary judge.13 Having been up to then a Menshevik-Internationalist,14 he joined the Russian Communist Party (Bolshevik) – RKP(B) – in 1918.

12 These courts were established by the Decree of 22 November (5 December) 1917 ‘On the Court’: Decree of the Council of People’s Commissars SU 1917–1918, No. 4, item 50. English translation in Zile (1992), 95–6. 13 Pashukanis (1922), 15–16; see also Stuchka (1918), cited in Zile (1992). 14 The radical wing of the Menshevik Party, opposed to any coalition with the propertied classes, yet unwilling to accept the Bolshevik concept of the dictatorship of the working class. Trotsky was a member of this group, which also included Martov and Martinov. See http://www.marxists.org/glossary/orgs/m/e.htm (accessed 31 July 2012).





Pashukanis in Berlin – the writing of the General Theory


From 1920 to 1923 Pashukanis worked in the Peoples’ Commissariat for Foreign Affairs as the deputy head of the economic law department, and then as an adviser in the Soviet Embassy in Berlin, where he took part in the preparation of the Rapallo Treaty with Germany. This was the agreement signed at the Hotel Imperiale in the Italian town of Rapallo on 16 April 1922 between Germany and Soviet Russia, under which each renounced all territorial and financial claims against the other following the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk. This treaty enabled the young Soviet state to break the blockade of the capitalist states and to enter into full diplomatic relations with Germany.

Pashukanis prepared his General theory in 1920–21 while in Berlin, as he later related.15 This explains the large number of German authors cited; and the fact that Pashukanis’ text was in essence a response to ‘the extreme formalism of the normative school’ of Hans Kelsen.16

15 Pashukanis (1930), 26. 16 Pashukanis (1983), 70 – and see also 51, 58, 75 (where Kelsen is described as a ‘consistent neo-Kantian’) and 86. Pashukanis engaged with Karl Renner at 86, and the French positivist Duguit, 96–9. In 1922 Pashukanis entered the Institute of Law in the Communist Academy.17 The Institute’s Director was A.D. Goikhbarg. Pashukanis worked closely with the Latvian-born legal theorist Piotr I. Stuchka, his senior by 25 years – Pashukanis was 33 years old in 1917, Stuchka was 52. Stuchka lived from 1865 to 1932, when, unusually for those times, he died of natural causes; he was Chairman of the Supreme Court of the RSFSR from 1923.18

17 Isaev (1988), 76. 18 Stuchka (1988), x–xi. The Academy existed from 1918 to 1936 and it started life as the Socialist Academy of Social Sciences by way of a decree of 25 June 1918 of the VTsIK (All-Union Executive Committee) of the Russian Socialist Federation of Soviet Republics (RSFSR)19 and opened on 1 October 1918. On 15 April 1919 it was renamed the Socialist Academy and on 17 April 1924, the Communist Academy.

19 SU RSFSR 1918, First Section No. 49, 573. In 1922, Stuchka wrote the following about his first meetings with Pashukanis:

As for Comrade Pashukanis, in the legal field, we met for the first time in Moscow at a conference on the legal program of Sverdlov Communist University, and later at my lecture at the Communist Academy. Finding that our views coincided on basic questions, I invited Comrade Pashukanis to joint work on the theory of law at the Communist Academy, and he agreed. Even then I was aware of one disagreement between us: this was his underestimation of the role of the state for law, which later turned out not to be accidental. For me, in my very first work, the state played a central role for law.20



20 Stuchka (1931) 70; in English at Stuchka (1988), 223.





Pashukanis and the New Economic Policy


Pashukanis’ intellectual flourishing took place in the period of the New Economic Policy (NEP), which was Lenin’s response to the devastation caused by the civil war, from 1918 to 1921, and the interventions of Japan, Britain and the United States. According to Siegelbaum, in 1917 there were 3.5 million workers in factories employing more than 16 workers. In 1918 there were 2 million and just 1.5 million in 1921. In 1917 Petrograd had a population of 2.5 million and only 722,000 in 1920, its population in 1870. Moscow’s population fell from 2 million to just over 1 million. The Moscow death rate rose from 23.7 per thousand to 45.4 per thousand from 1917 to 1919, the result of waves of epidemics.21 By 1920 the area of cultivated land in Russia was 25 per cent less than in 1913. Many died of starvation.

21 Siegelbaum (1992), 26–9. In these dire circumstances, on 15 March 1921 at the 10th Congress of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks),22 Lenin launched a programme of material incentives to peasants, cooperatives and private manufacturers. In November 1922 Lenin proposed a notion of ‘state capitalism’ in which capitalist production and exchange would be permitted subject to the supervision of the Soviet state.23 Very quickly small-scale production and retailing became dominated by capitalists, ‘NEP men’ and sophisticated legal regulation of their activities and of their disputes was required. In 1922 and 1923 the RSFSR enacted a full set of legal codes: judiciary code, civil and civil procedural codes, criminal and criminal procedural codes, a land code and a labour code, based, primarily, on German models. Lenin’s death in January 1924 did not mean the end of the NEP; but Stalin, increasingly powerful, began the process of systematic destruction of any opposition and ordered sharp turns to ‘socialism in one country’ in late 1924 and, from 1927 onwards, ostensibly ‘left’ policies of elimination of the market, industrialisation and forced collectivisation of agriculture.

22 V.I. Lenin (1921) Report to the 10th Congress, cited in Zile (1992), 144–52. 23 V. I. Lenin (1922/1964), 302. This was the context of Pashukanis’ rise to theoretical prominence.





Pashukanis’ early writings


The Selected Works of Pashukanis published in 198024 has a bibliography25 of the fundamental works of Pashukanis; but one is missing. Pashukanis’ first published article appeared in 1921 and was entitled Burzhuazniy yurist o prirode gosudarstvo (‘A bourgeois jurist on the nature of the state’).26 He wrote the article while working in the Soviet representation in Berlin. It appeared in the literary journal Krasnaya Nov (Red Virgin Soil), which was the first Soviet literary ‘thick’ journal, published between 1921 and 1941. From 1921 to 1927 it was edited by Aleksandr Voronkov (1884–1937), who was close to Trotsky, agreed with Trotsky’s 1923 Literature and revolution, did much to encourage new literary talent and in 1937 was executed for Trotskyism.

24 Pashukanis (1980). 25 Ibid, 261–67. 26 Pashukanis (1921). The subject of the article was the University of Toulouse professor Maurice Hauriou (1856–1929),27 whose textbook, Principles of public law, was published in 1910. Pashukanis did not refer in his 4,000-word article to any other literature. This contrasts strongly with the General theory, which has many references, including several to German authors. He referred to Marx, but without indicating his source. Most of the article consisted of often sarcastic references to Hauriou’s positivist doctrine. Pashukanis’ concluding paragraph was as follows:28

27 For biography see http://www.universalis.fr/encyclopedie/maurice-hauriou/ (accessed 27 July 2012). He was a positivist, influenced by Aquinas, Comte and Bergson. 28 Pashukanis (1921), 231–32. In one of his speeches Cde Lenin remarked that sincere defenders of capitalism may now be found only among our SRs [Social Revolutionaries] and Mensheviks. In the West they have become extinct. We can see the cause of this. Russia underwent an accelerated course of capitalism and therefore our intelligentsia may bona fide come out in defence of the sublime beginning of democracy and freedom, without sensing that it has been crucified by capitalism. But in order to be a sincere defender of capitalism in the West, where social relations have been able to mature and over-mature, one must sincerely, like Hauriou, assert that the principles of freedom, democracy, individual rights and so on, conceal behind themselves quite simply faire valoir de la propriété!29 And such courage is not given to everyone.



29 Enforceproperty!. In 1923 he published two articles in the Socialist Academy bulletin, ‘A survey of the literature on the general theory of law’30 and ‘Kunov, as an interpreter of the Marxist theory of society and state’.31

30 Pashukanis (1983). 31 Pashukanis (1923a). In 1924 Pashukanis published his classic A general theory of law and Marxism,32 which brought him to prominence and the start of a spectacular career. A further publication in 1924 was ‘Ruhr and reparations: the observations of a diplomat, notes from January to September 1923’.33 From 1925 to 1927 the Communist Academy began the work of publishing a three-volume Encyclopedia of state and law. Its authors were Pashukanis, P.I. Stuchka and V.V. Adoratskiy (see later). This was the first Marxist encyclopedia of law and it played a significant role in the development of Soviet legal scholarship. In 1927 Pashukanis became one of the editors of the newly published journal Revolution of Law, a full member (deistvitelniy chlen) of the Communist Academy and within a few years a member of its Presidium and then its vice-president. He also joined the editorial board of Soviet Law, as well as the Bulletin of the Communist Academy and World Economy and World Politics, later becoming editor of the journal Soviet State and Revolution of Law, which, in 1932, was renamed Soviet State. In June 1928 Pashukanis took part in the ‘Week of Russian historians’ in Berlin and presented a paper on ‘Cromwell’s soldier Soviets’. In 1929 at another conference in Berlin Pashukanis presented a paper on ‘Emergency legislation in capitalist countries’. In 1935 at the sixth International Conference on Unification of Criminal Law in Copenhagen, Pashukanis presented a paper on ‘The struggle against terrorism’.

32 Pashukanis (1983). 33 Pashukanis (1983).





The triumph of Pashukanis


From 1927 to 1936 Pashukanis was the leading theorist of law in the USSR, recognised as such by Stuchka, who wrote in 1924 shortly after its publication that the General theory was ‘to the highest degree a valuable contribution to our Marxist theoretical literature on law and directly supplements my work, which provides only an incomplete and greatly inadequate general doctrine of law’.34

34 Stuchka (1988), xvii; preface to the third edition of Stuchka’s Revolutionary role of law and state, 1924. In 1931, following a dramatic recantation of his previous views, Pashukanis became Director of the Institute of Soviet Construction and Law of the Communist Academy. He was effectively the USSR’s director of legal research and legal education. The American scholar John Hazard (1909–1955),35 who studied under Pashukanis from 1934 to 1937, summarised his effect on legal education as follows:36

35 Hazard was a founder of the field of Soviet legal studies in America who taught at Columbia for 48 years. On his graduation from Harvard Law School, he was sent by the Institute of Current World Affairs as the first American to study Soviet law at the Moscow Institute of Law. Only a handful of scholars were concerned with Russian diplomacy and business then and scholarship on Russia was limited principally to historical studies. He approached the field of Soviet law as a pioneer and received the certificate of the Institute of Law in 1937. He was the author of widely used textbooks and studies of Soviet law and public administration, and served the US government during World War II, helping to negotiate the Lend–Lease agreement with the Soviet Union. 36 Hazard (1938b); see also Hazard (1938a). His influence was so marked that the courses in civil law in the law school were abolished, and to replace them there appeared a course called economic-administrative law, concerning itself with regulation of the relations between state enterprises.37



37 Ibid, 13. Believing that the state was slowly withering away as socialism came nearer to achievement, Pashukanis advocated the cessation of courses in civil law. He understood civil law to be the regulation of the relations of men under the trading conditions of capitalism and, as such, no longer of importance, as the remnants of capitalism disappeared.

Following Pashukanis’ fall in 1937, courses on (Soviet) civil law were reintroduced to the syllabus.

Hazard also wrote that the situation in the Institute where: ‘[Pashukanis] projected a theory said to be infallible, and where those who strayed from Pashukanis’ line were castigated like Korovin38 or denied faculty appointments, promotions and salary raises was novel to me. I saw teachers compelled to conform not only to ideas of Marx but also to those of Pashukanis as his infallible interpreter.’39

38 Yevgeniy Aleksandrovich Korovin (1892–1964), one year younger than Pashukanis, but outliving him by many years, was indeed Pashukanis’ chief enemy, at least in Pashukanis’ eyes. Also in 1924, the same year as Pashukanis’ General theory, Korovin, already a professor at Moscow State University from 1923, published his first major work, International law of the transitional period. 39 Hazard (1938a). On 16 November 1936 Pashukanis reached the high point of his career: the Presidium of the Central Executive Committee of the USSR appointed him Deputy People’s Commissar for Justice of the USSR. In the same year he was deputy chairman of the Drafting Committee for the 1936 ‘Stalin Constitution’40 and the Institute of State and Law proposed him as a candidate for membership of the Academy of Science of the USSR. Also in 1936 he became the chairman of the Academic Council attached to the People’s Commissariat of Justice of the USSR.

40 Hazard (1938b). Pashukanis was a staunch loyalist in relation to the regime – in my opinion, by conviction rather than any sort of pressure. Thus, by 1932, Pashukanis, by then editor-in-chief of the official law journal Soviet State, was able to write a ‘hallelujah’ in response to Stalin’s letter ‘Some questions on the history of Bolshevism’.41 Pashukanis’ major work on international law, Essays in international law, appeared in 1935.42

41 Pashukanis (1932). 42 Pashukanis (1935). Most copies of the Essays were destroyed after he was denounced in 1937, but in this culminating work he declared that any attempt to define the ‘nature of international law’ was scholastic.43 In his view, such attempts were the result of the continuing influence of bourgeois legal methodology, which, he said, rested on the association of law with substance developing in accordance with its own internal principles. For him, in 1935, international law was a means of formulating and strengthening in custom and treaties various political and economic relationships between states; the USSR could use international law to further Soviet interests in the struggle with capitalist states. He saw no reason to believe that, in using these principles of international law for its own purposes, the USSR was compromising its principles, in a world in which most states were capitalist. For Pashukanis, there was no point in seeking to determine whether international law was ‘bourgeois’ or ‘socialist’; such a discussion would be ‘scholastic’.44

43 CitedinHazard (1957), 385–88. 44 SeeHazard (1957), 387. Within two years he was dead, following Pravda’s announcement on 20 January 1937 that he had been found to be an enemy of the people – just two months after he had been named by the regime to supervise the revision of the whole system of Soviet codes of law. On the same day he was arrested. On 4 September 1937 a military collegium sentenced him to death. He was condemned as a member of a ‘band of wreckers’ and ‘Trotsky-Bukharin fascist agents’. He was posthumously rehabilitated in 1956.





Legal journals of the 1920s


At this point I clarify the intellectual context into which Pashukanis exploded in 1924. In 1999 T.F. Yashuk published an important survey of law journals of the 1920s.45 He analysed the work of three journals, Pravo i zhizn (Law and Life), Sovetskoye pravo (Soviet Law), and Revolyutsiya prava (Revolution of Law). There were many other journals, central and regional, including bulletins of the work of the courts, administrative law and so on. Yashuk chose these three journals for their particular significance. He pointed out that the political situation of the early 1920s permitted a pluralism of scholarly publication, in which neither a precise class evaluation was required nor a formal recognition of Marxist method.

45 Yashuk (1999). In these conditions of relative intellectual freedom a privately published law journal, Law and Life, was published from 1922 to 1927, edited by the well-known professors A.M. Vinaver, M.N. Gernet and A.N. Trainin. The journal tackled issues of law and economic construction. As far as I know, Pashukanis was not involved in this journal.

Also in 1922, the Institute of Soviet Law, part of the Socialist (later Communist) Academy, began publication of Soviet Law. As with all the work of the Institute it was produced under the general editorship of the Institute’s Director, A.G. Goikhbarg (1883–1962), who drafted the 1922 Civil Code of the RSFSR, on the specific instruction of Lenin, who considered that such a code, based on the German model, was an essential component of the New Economic Policy.46 The Institute of Soviet Law was the first Soviet scholarly institution, created to bring together Marxist lawyers. The journal did not have an editorial board or regular contributors, but between 1922 and 1925 its most active authors were D.I. Kurskiy, P.I. Stuchka, D.A. Magerovskiy, A.I. Yelistratov, M.M. Isaev and P.I. Lyubinskiy. In 1928 its collaborators changed and I.S. Voitinskiy, D.A. Magerovskiy, N.N. Ovsyannikov, S.I. Raevich and E.G. Shirvind became its regular contributors. The journal continued publication until 1929, when it was renamed Zapiski instituta sovetskovo prava (Bulletin of the Institute of Soviet Law). It can be seen that Pashukanis was not one of the journal’s authors. In 1922 in his introductory article for Soviet Law, ‘The immediate tasks of Soviet law’, the People’s Commissar of Justice D.I. Kurskiy asserted that the journal must attract scholars for the study of law from a Marxist position, so as to build a system of Soviet law.47 As will be seen, Pashukanis strongly believed that there could be no such thing as Soviet law.

46 See V.P. Gribanov Osushchestvleniye i zashchita grazhdanskikh prav (The realisation and defence of civil law rights); http://civil.consultant.ru/elib/books/1/page_7.html (accessed 18 November 2012). 47 (1922) No. 1 Soviet Law, 3–4. In 1925 the Section of Law and State of the Communist Academy began publication of the provocatively entitled Revolution of Law. The publication of Soviet Law and Revolution of Law represented an important step in the consolidation of lawyers who took a Marxist position and also reflected the substantial shift in legal scholarship, as well as exposing significant differences. These were highlighted by the introductory article, ‘Nashi zadachi (Our tasks)’ of Revolution of Law,48 which evaluated the situation of legal scholarship quite differently from Soviet Law. The editorial board members, P.I. Stuchka, V.V. Adoratskiy, G.S. Gurvich, Ye.B. Pashukanis, I.P. Razumovskiy and A.Ya. Estrin, identified themselves as the Communist wing of lawyers and their articles ‘were not only theoretical weapons, but were intended for organisational intervention’.49 This required taking the line of a ‘materialist, class, revolutionary dialectical approach to questions of the state and law’.50 Such an approach was mandatory for contributors to the journal.

48 (1925) No. 1 Revolution of Law, 3–4. I made photocopies of key parts of this and later issues of Revolution of Law, at the SPARK Library in Moscow. Yashuk wrongly gives the year of publication as 1927. 49 Ibid, 4. 50 Ibid, 3. All three journals shared a common structure and were composed of three sections. The first contained significant scholarly articles. The second reflected on experience of implementing law. Soviet Law entitled this section ‘Soviet legal construction’, while in Law and Life it was entitled ‘Questions of contemporary legislation’ or ‘Legal chronicle’. The third section contained bibliographic surveys, abstracts of monographs, information on scholarly life. In the first years of Soviet Law, most of the articles continued the pre-revolutionary tradition of the posing of questions, argumentation and analysis. An example was Goikhbarg’s 1924 ‘Some reflections on law’.

Revolution of Law published programmatic articles, for example in No. 2 of 1927 Stuchka’s ‘State and law in the period of socialist construction’, in No. 3 Pashukanis’ article ‘The Marxist theory of law and the construction of socialism’ and in No. 4 the simultaneous publication of Stuchka’s ‘Three stages of Soviet law’ and Pashukanis’ ‘Ten years of Lenin’s “State and revolution”’. According to Yashuk’s analysis, by the middle of the 1920s there were clear disagreements between Pashukanis, Stuchka and Goikhbarg. Goikhbarg, who edited Soviet Law, set its general line: the interpretation of law as a form of ideology, calling for opposition to law by analogy with anti-religious propaganda, with a sceptical attitude to the very concept of ‘law’, which should be replaced.51

51 Goikhbarg (1925), 3–4. In the second half of the 1920s Pashukanis and Stuchka became the official interpreters of the Marxist understanding of law, their views found wide support among lawyers and they became the most cited scholars. There were still polemics in the journals, but these were less principled scholarly differences and more the result of competition for scholarly supremacy. Often Stuchka and Pashukanis exaggerated one another’s positions. For example, Stuchka alleged that Pashukanis’ disagreement on the relation of state and law, since there could be no law without the state, undermined the class character of any law etc.52

52 Stuchka (1927). At the end of the 1920s the content of the journals changed fundamentally, reflecting the evolution of the political regime. Scholarly references were, according to Yashuk, replaced by references to Party decisions. In 1930 Revolution of Law changed its name to Soviet State and Revolution of Law, in 1931 Pashukanis became its editor, in 1932 it changed its name to Soviet State, remaining under Pashukanis as editor until 1937 and, in 1939, changed yet again to Soviet State and Law. It became State and Law in 1992 and remains the journal of the Institute of State and Law of the Academy of Science of the Russian Federation, recently celebrating 85 years of publication.53

53 See ‘Eighty-five years of the journal State and Law’ http://www.igpran.ru/journal/85let/85letGiphp (accessed 1 August 2012).





Pashukanis’ 1924 General Theory


There is, a connection between Pashukanis’ sole publication before the General theory, his 1921 article and the 1924 General theory itself, although Pashukanis did not refer directly to his earlier work. In fact, Maurice Hauriou appears three times54 in the General theory, but this time with approbation – as ‘one of the most astute bourgeois theorists’55 and ‘an astute jurist like Hauriou’.56 And there are many references to the German legal scholars whom Pashukanis read for his doctoral dissertation in Munich and during his time in Berlin.

54 Pashukanis (1983), 122, 123, 134. 55 Ibid, 123. 56 Ibid, 134. However, Pashukanis’ paramount reason for writing this book was not to renew or explain his relationship with Hauriou, but to identify ‘law in its general definition, law as a form’.57 That is, to tackle the question of the nature of law as a materially grounded abstraction. In the next section, I follow a clear thread right through the General theory.

57 Ibid, 68. For Pashukanis, there had been two epochs in which ‘the general concepts of law reached their highest point of development: Rome, with its system of private law, and the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries in Europe’. But only bourgeois society was destined to embody ‘the universal significance of the legal form’.58 He posed his question in the following way: ‘Can law be conceived of as a social relation in the same sense in which Marx called capital a social relation? ‘[emphasis in original].59 Pashukanis insisted that only under capitalism does legal form appear: ‘the possibility of taking up a legal standpoint is linked with the fact that, under commodity production, the most diverse relations approximate the prototype of commercial relation and hence assume legal form’.60 Indeed, he asserted that ‘the commodity form produces the legal form’.61 In a further passage, Pashukanis left no room for doubt: ‘[W]e see how the economic relation in its actual workings is the source of the legal relation, which comes into being only at the moment of dispute. It is dispute, conflict of interest, which creates the legal form, the legal superstructure.’62 Furthermore: ‘It is readily evident that the logic of juridical concepts corresponds to the logic of the social relations of a commodity-producing society.’63

58 Ibid, 71. 59 Ibid, 74. 60 Pashukanis (1983): 82. 61 Ibid, 85. 62 Ibid, 93. 63 Ibid, 96. The legal form was to be found only in private, civil law, while public, constitutional law, was full of confusion:

Yet while civil law, which is concerned with the fundamental, primary level of law, makes use of the concept of subjective rights with complete assurance, application of this concept in public-law theory creates misunderstandings and contradictions at every step. For this reason, the system of civil law is distinguished by its simplicity, clarity and perfection, while theories of constitutional law teem with far-fetched constructs which are so one-sided as to become grotesque. The form of law with its aspect of subjective right is born in a society of isolated bearers of private egotistic interests.64



64 Ibid, 103. Pashukanis was clear that: ‘As a Marxist, I did not set myself the task of constructing a theory of pure jurisprudence, nor could I set myself such a task. From the very first I had a clear idea of the goal … My aim was this: to present a sociological interpretation of the legal form and of the specific categories which express it.’65

65 Ibid, 107. And a few pages later: ‘I merely maintain that property becomes the basis of the legal form only when it becomes something which can be freely disposed of in the market.’66 That is, under capitalism. This point is rammed home still further into the text: ‘Only in commodity production does the abstract legal form see the light: in other words, only there does the general capacity to possess a right become distinguished from concrete legal claims.’67 And ‘Only when bourgeois relations are fully developed does law become abstract in character … At the same time, the norm takes on the logically perfected form of abstract universal law.’68

66 Ibid, 110. 67 Ibid, 118. 68 Pashukanis (1983), 120–21. Pashukanis was conscious of writing in the context of the NEP. Commenting on Karl Marx’s comments in the Critique of the Gotha Programme on the ‘narrow horizon of bourgeois right’ by which, for a time, social relations will continue to be constrained in the transition period to socialism. Pashukanis argued that ‘Marx presupposes a social order in which the means of production are socially owned and in which the producers do not exchange their products. Consequently, he assumes a higher stage of development than the “new economic policy” which we are presently experiencing.’69 And, many pages later, Marx’s ‘horizon’ is once again to be seen: ‘Hence, in our transition period, the legal form as such does not contain within itself those unlimited possibilities which lay before it at the birth of bourgeois capitalist society. On the contrary, the legal form only encompasses us within its narrow horizon for the time being.’70

69 Ibid, 61. 70 Ibid, 133. Thus, Pashukanis risked becoming very repetitive indeed, but he made his point with absolute clarity. In his view, there was no law as such until capitalism, and law, as such, the legal form, can be found only in private law. Introduced into ‘public law’, the law of the constitution, it is the source of endless confusion. More importantly, if the legal form is necessarily to be found only in capitalism, then as a matter of logic there can be no such thing as ‘Soviet law’. Once capitalism has gone, law, like morality, will evaporate.

However, the question is posed straight away: can the form of law to be found in commodity exchange really serve the same role as the commodity, with its dual nature of use value and exchange value, played for Marx in Capital? That is to place law at the same level as the capitalist economy.





Criticisms of the General Theory


The 1983 English edition of the General theory ends with the 1930 evaluation of the volume by the German Marxist, Karl Korsch. Korsch accused Pashukanis of ‘deviating decisively, as he does in countless other instances which permeate his book as a homogenous thread, from the Marxist idea which regards the economic relation as the fundamental one, with the legal relation on the contrary, like the political relation, as derived from it’.71

71 Ibid, 195. From the standpoint of Marxist orthodoxy, Korsch was certainly right. And Pashukanis himself very soon abandoned his somewhat exotic stance.

In the first of several recantations, published in 1930, Pashukanis wrote the following about the genesis of the General Theory:

It is clear that much which was written in the first years of NEP deserves criticism and suffers from obvious anachronisms and now and then simply mistakes … But the question is not only that of particular formulations. The question concerns some defects of a general character. This was the overestimation of the role and significance of market relations which was without doubt characteristic of my first work. It is impermissible to hide from view the fact that this book was written at a time when the collective of Marxist legal scholars had not come together. It was written when I was alone, and it could not be exposed to the process of critical re-working. It was written finally, before the publication of Lenin’s notebooks on dialectics and on the works of Marx which were published in the ‘Archive’. It appeared before the discussions with the ‘mechanists’, before the discussions in the fields of political economy, literature etc. Therefore it was completely natural, that the book, which was written in 1923, and prepared still earlier in 1920–1921, displays defects, when we look at it from our higher present day theoretical and methodological point of view.72



72 Pashukanis (1930), 26. Bob Fine has criticised Pashukanis, pointing out that: ‘Whereas Marx derived law from relations of commodity production, Pashukanis derived it from commodity exchange.’73 This, according to Fine, leads Pashukanis to a conclusion that was plainly wrong:

73 Fine (2002), 157. Instead of seeing both the content and the forms of law as determined by and changing with the development of productive relations, Pashukanis isolated law from its content and reduced quite different forms of law, expressing quantitatively different social relations, to a single, static and illusory ‘legal form’.74



74 Ibid, 159. And any ‘legal form’ must be bourgeois. As Fine explained, this led Pashukanis in 1924 to argue that the Soviet Union of the NEP was not yet ready for the abolition of law and that, since law is in any event bourgeois, there can be no such thing as proletarian law. More to the point, Pashukanis was obliged by the logic of his own position to see the transition from capitalism to socialism simply as the replacement of commodity exchange by planned production, that is, the replacement of bourgeois (legal) forms by socialist (technical forms).75 Thus, as Fine points out, in 1929 he accepted Stalin’s view that communism was being achieved through the first Five Year Plan.76

75 Ibid, 167. 76 Ibid, 168.





Pashukanis and Revolution of law: ‘Lenin on questions of law’ – and self-determination


As noted earlier, the first issues of Revolution of law appeared in 1925, with the subheading Sbornik (Anthology).77

77 See Annex 1. Pashukanis’ article, ‘Lenin and questions of law’, has been translated into English.78 Pashukanis did not refer to his General theory, neither did he discuss the ‘legal form’ at all and certainly not in the sense that he so insistently explained in the General theory. The style and tone of the article are quite different from those in the General theory, published so recently. It is as if the article had been written by a different person altogether.

78 Pashukanis (1925/1980). In the first sentence of Section IV of the article, Pashukanis declared: ‘Marxist theory relegates legal forms to a secondary and even tertiary place in social development’ and the next paragraph started: ‘However, the correct Marxist analysis of the legal form as a superstructure dependent upon the base may, in certain circumstances, be turned into a caricature of Marxism, into a lifeless and determinist view. Here, the superstructure emerges “by itself” upon a given base, and form appears “by itself” at a certain level of development of the given material content. Increasing emphasis upon the regularity of social development is imperceptibly transformed into the assertion of a certain social automatism, or, as expressed in our militant political jargon, into “tailism”.’ This is a different world from that of the General Theory.

Counterposing Lenin and Goikhbarg on the question of private property, Pashukanis presented Lenin’s position as follows:

It is sufficient to observe in several specific cases the role that Lenin attributed to the legal form. He always did this by taking full account of the concrete historical situation, the relationship between the forces of the struggling classes etc. to realize that both the fetishism of the legal form and its complete opposite the failure to grasp the real significance that one or another legal form may have at a given stage were equally foreign to Vladimir Ilich.



Pashukanis presented as his and Lenin’s a completely different view from that presented in the General theory:

The revolutionary nature of Leninist tactics never degenerated into the fetishist denial of legality; this was never a revolutionary phrase. On the contrary, at given historical stages, he firmly appealed to use those ‘legal opportunities’ which the enemy, who was merely broken but not fully defeated, was forced to provide. Lenin knew not only how mercilessly to expose tsarist, bourgeois etc. legality, but also how to use it, where it was necessary and when it was necessary.



And Pashukanis gave an example from Lenin’s brief period of practice as an advocate in the city of Samara, after he graduated from the law faculty of Kazan University.

The attack on Goikhbarg was followed by a sharp attack on Trotsky.79 Pashukanis, referring back to Lenin’s 1904 One step forward, two steps back, accused Trotsky, citing Lenin, of ‘opportunism’ and ‘a complete absence of a dialectical approach’,80 continuing not only until 1914, but, by strong implication, into the present.

79 Pashukanis (1925a),55–6. 80 Ibid, 56. In Section V of the article, Pashukanis turned his attention to the issue of the ‘right to self-determination’. In his review81 of my 2008 book,82 Robert Knox rightly reproached me for failing to refer to Pashukanis’ 1925 article. Knox wrote: ‘This is the main text in which Pashukanis attempts to outline a specifically Marxist approach to legal strategy. For this reason I have always found it rather odd that it is never mentioned in the contemporary debates.’ In his law and disorder review, Knox concurred with Pashukanis’ account that, for Lenin, the demand for the right of nations to self-determination was an ‘“abstract”, “negative” demand of formal equal rights’ and that, in the context of Russian absolutism, this abstract formal equality of right was a revolutionary demand. Knox then turned to Pashukanis’ argument ‘that this right though is ultimately limited precisely because it remains within a legal, and therefore capitalist framework, therefore in a new concrete conjuncture’:

81 Knox (2008). 82 Bowring (2008b). This was a new stage, a new situation, a new and higher level of struggle. And new priorities corresponded to it. The bourgeois-democratic stage had passed, and with it the formal legal demand for national self-determination – characteristic of this stage – lost its former significance. The slogan ‘overthrow the rule of the bourgeoisie on a world scale and set up the international dictatorship of the proletariat’ became the immediate practical slogan. Does this mean that national self-determination lost all significance; that it could be replaced with the ‘self-determination of the proletariat’? Certainly not. This would have been to ignore the presence of backward countries which had not passed through the stage of bourgeois-democratic national revolutions. The communist proletariat of advanced countries had to support these movements; with all its strength it had to struggle so that the accumulation of centuries of ill will and the distrust by backward people of the dominant nations – and of the proletariat of these nations – was overcome as quickly as possible. It was impossible to achieve this goal without proclaiming and conducting in practice the right of national self-determination. Moreover, even for a socialist society moving towards the elimination of classes the question of national self-determination still remains a real one, since although based on economics, socialism by no means consists solely of economics.83



83 Pashukanis (1980), 162–63. A few pages earlier, Pashukanis reported that Lenin’s opponents – especially Rosa Luxemburg – had argued against the ‘right to self-determination’ ‘under the pretext that ‘in essence’ no ‘self-determination’ could exist under capitalism and that, under socialism, it was not necessary.’84 Lenin’s position as stated in 1916, correctly reported by Pashukanis, was that ‘[t]he dispute is related to one of the forms of political oppression, namely, the forceful domination of one nation by the state of another nation. This is simply an attempt to avoid political questions.’85 But Pashukanis went on to assert that no one apart from him (Pashukanis) had noted that Luxemburg’s position amounted to a ‘complete rejection of the legal form and the complete lack of understanding of its specific features’.86

84 Pashukanis (1980), 156–57. 85 Lenin (1916/1964),321. 86 Pashukanis (1980), 158. Pashukanis then cited a longer passage from Lenin’s 1914 major work on The right of nations to self-determination:87

87 Lenin (1914/1964). By the way, it is not difficult to see why, from a Social-Democratic point of view, the right to ‘self-determination’ means neither federation nor autonomy (although, speaking in the abstract, both come under the category of ‘self-determination’). The right to federation is simply meaningless, since federation implies a bilateral contract. It goes without saying that Marxists cannot include the defence of federalism in general in their programme. As far as autonomy is concerned, Marxists defend, not the ‘right’ to autonomy, but autonomy itself, as a general universal principle of a democratic state with a mixed national composition, and a great variety of geographical and other conditions. Consequently, the recognition of the ‘right of nations to autonomy’ is as absurd as that of the ‘right of nations to federation’.



It appears to me that Pashukanis took this passage completely out of context. It is actually one of Lenin’s footnotes to Chapter 8 of the work in question, ‘The utopian Karl Marx and the practical Rosa Luxemburg’. Lenin was attacking Luxemburg’s position that to call for Polish independence is ‘utopia’.She asked, ironically as she thought: why not raise the same demand for Ireland? This led Lenin straight to Marx’s highly principled stand on Ireland. At first, prior to the 1860s, Marx had thought that Ireland ‘would not be liberated by the national movement of the oppressed nation, but by the working-class movement of the oppressor nation.’ Lenin pointed out:

However, it so happened that the English working class fell under the influence of the liberals for a fairly long time, became an appendage to the liberals, and by adopting a liberal-labour policy left itself leaderless. The bourgeois liberation movement in Ireland grew stronger and assumed revolutionary forms. Marx reconsidered his view and corrected it.



Lenin cited the following passage. In his letter to Engels on 2 November 1867, Marx wrote:

The Fenian trial in Manchester was exactly as was to be expected. You will have seen what a scandal ‘our people’ have caused in the Reform League. I sought by every means at my disposal to incite the English workers to demonstrate in favour of Fenianism … I once believed the separation of Ireland from England to be impossible. I now regard it as inevitable, although Federation may follow upon separation.88



88 Marx (1867/1987)451. The trial in question was that of the ‘Manchester martyrs’ – William Philip Allen, Michael Larkin and Michael O’Brien – who were members of the Irish Republican Brotherhood. The men were executed after having been found guilty of the murder of a police officer during an escape that took place close to Manchester city centre in 1867.89

89 McGee (2005)36. Once Pashukanis’ quotation is placed in context, it is plain that Pashukanis had, deliberately or otherwise, misunderstood both Lenin and Marx. The issue at stake between Lenin and Luxemburg was, as I point out in my book, whether the component parts of the Russian Empire should have the right to self-determination and to break away to form new sovereign nations. Luxemburg was convinced that the Empire should be preserved and was as opposed to Polish liberation as she was to Irish liberation.

Lenin, by the same token remained unconditionally committed to the right of nations to self-determination until his death, especially within the former Tsarist Empire. His ‘last struggle’ with Stalin concerned independence for (Menshevik) Georgia – Lenin was for, Stalin against.





Pashukanis and international law


Earlier in 1925 in the Communist Academy bulletin, Pashukanis published two articles ‘The bourgeois state and the problem of sovereignty’90 and ‘Survey of the fundamental directions in the French literature of state law’.91 He also contributed in 1925 and 1926 several entries to the Encyclopedia of state and law, including ‘Leon Duguit’,92 ‘International law’93 and, in 1927, ‘The object of law’.94

90 Pashukanis (1925a). 91 Pashukanis (1925b). 92 Entsiklopediya gosudarstva i pravaMoscow: Communist Academy (1925–26), Moscow, Vol.1, 1064–68, in English at Evgeny Pashukanis, Selected writings on Marxism and law (eds Beirne and Sharlet), London and New York 1980, 166–68; http://www.marxists.org/archive/pashukanis/1925/xx/duguit.htm (accessed 30 July 2012). 93 Entsiklopediya gosudarstva i pravaMoscow, Communist Academy (1925–26), Vol. 2, 858–74; in English in Beirne and Sharlet (1980) ibid, 168–83, 184–85, at http://www.marxists.org/archive/pashukanis/1925/xx/intlaw.htm (accessed 30 July 2012). 94 Entsiklopediya gosudarstva i pravaMoscow, Communist Academy (1925–26), Vol. 3, 183–84; in English at Beirne and Sharlet (1980) ibid, 183–84, at http://www.marxists.org/archive/pashukanis/1925/xx/object.htm (accessed 30 July 2012). The entry on international law was included in full as an Appendix in China Miéville’s Between equal rights, which is the most notable contemporary rehabilitation of Pashukanis.95 However, Miéville noticed that in contrast to the General theory, Pashukanis seemed ‘to accept the existence of antique international law, and to deny its historical particularity’.96 That is, it would appear that there is no law as such until capitalism and only private law; but there has been international law throughout recorded history. Pashukanis rejected the positivist arguments of Austin and others that without a sovereign there can be no international law. Even for the young USSR there could be international law:

95 Miéville (2005), Appendix, 321–36. 96 Miéville (2005), 160; see also Beirne and Sharlet (1980), 175. The formalization of our relationship with bourgeois states, by way of treaties, is part of our foreign policy, and is its continuation in a special form. A treaty obligation is nothing other than a special form of the concretization of economic and political relationships. But once the appropriate degree of concretization is reached, it may then be taken into consideration and, within certain limits, studied as a special subject. The reality of this object is no less than the reality of any constitution – both may be overturned by the intrusion of a revolutionary squall.97



97 Beirne and Sharlet (1980), 181. Pashukanis, unlike later Soviet jurists, did not oppose the existence of customary international law as a source of international law, which, he said, was ‘the totality of norms regulating the relationships between states.’98 He continued: ‘To the extent that states have no external authority above them which could establish their norms of conduct, then in the technical legal sense the sources of international law are custom and treaty.’99

98 Beirne and Sharlet (1980), 168. 99 Beirne and Sharlet (1980), 181. This was noted in 1970 by G.I. Tunkin, the leading international legal scholar of the late Soviet period, who gave these passages of Pashukanis as evidence that Soviet international law had not rejected general (customary) international law.100 Tunkin pointed out that when Pashukanis in 1935 stated that with the help of international law the bourgeois states ‘divide the loot’,101 this was the ‘old’, pre-World War II international law.102 Pashukanis, as an international legal practitioner, an author of the Rapallo Treaty, was comfortable with orthodox conceptions of international law.

100 Tunkin (1970),34,n35. 101 Pashukanis (1925a),9. 102 Tunkin (1974), 246.





The debate between Stuchka and Pashukanis in Revolution of Law


The second issue of Revolution of Law did not appear until 1927 and Pashukanis did not publish in it, save for a book review.103

103 See Annex 2. Stuchka’s article has been translated into English.104 Its focus was the result of the 14th and 15th Party Conferences, namely the principle of the construction of socialism in one country.105 This led him straight to profound disagreements with Pashukanis, whom he accused of an incorrect evaluation of the process of the withering away of the state. Pashukanis, for Stuchka, had depicted this as ‘a direct transition from bourgeois law to non-law’.106 Turning to the Civil Code, Stuchka noted the fact that it was basically a reprint of bourgeois law, but:

104 This is translated into English in Stuchka (1988), 173–94. 105 Ibid, 173. 106 Ibid, 183. The fact that the relations of the Civil Code are protected by the class state and the class court of the proletariat already gives this code a Soviet character, not in words, but in fact: quantity is transformed into quality.



Pashukanis replied to Stuchka in the third issue of Revolution of Law in 1927.107

107 See Annex 3. Pashukanis’ article has also been translated into English.108 He answered Stuchka as follows:

108 ‘Marksistskaia teoriya prava i stroitel’stvo sotsializma’, Revoliutsiya Prava (1927), 3: 3–12. From Evgeny Pashukanis, Selected writings on Marxism and law (eds Beirne and Sharlet), London and New York 1980, 186–99. Of course, I did not view the process of the withering away of law as a ‘direct transition from bourgeois law to non-law.’ If one could get such an impression, then this was because I directed my main attention to commenting on the well-known place in Marx’s Critique of the Gotha programme’, which refers to the ‘narrow horizon of bourgeois law’… The class functionality of [bourgeois law] and not only of this, but also of our current Soviet law … is fundamentally different from genuine bourgeois law.109



109 Ibid, 194. Indeed, Pashukanis wrote that Stuchka’s work on ‘the law of the transitional period, or Soviet law’ is ‘among his outstanding contributions to the theory of law… I repeat that the great service of Comrade Stuchka is his continuous emphasis upon the particular nature of Soviet law which flows from its revolutionary origin.’110

110 Ibid, 194. It may clearly be seen that this was a very substantial shift from Pashukanis’ earlier position.

Issue 4 appeared in 1927.111 Pashukanis’ article on ‘Economics and legal regulation’ has also been translated into English.112 For the most part, it contained a close study of the English experience in regulation of the wartime economy in World War I; but in an extended footnote, Pashukanis made a further retreat from the positions he advanced in the General theory.113

111 See Annex 4. 112 Ibid, 237–72. 113 Ibid, 271, n. 10. Two more issues of Revolution of Law appeared, in 1928 and 1929. The issue for 1928 included Pashukanis’ article ‘The dictatorship of the proletariat and the opposition’, which was a thoroughly engaged nine-page attack on Trotsky and ‘Trotskyism’ (pp. 5–14). The issue for 1929 contained ‘The latest discovery of Karl Kautsky’ (pp. 15–41).





The situation on the ideological theoretical front


Pashukanis’ next major article appeared in Issue 11/12 of Soviet State and Revolution of Law in 1930. The issue had impressive contents.114

114 See Annex 5. The editorial, presumably by Pashukanis, was entitled ‘For an attack on the whole of the front’. This was a paraphrase of Stalin’s remarks at the 16th Party Congress and the editorial started with the quotation from Stalin that, in contrast to previous stages, this was the period of an attack on the whole front, of strengthened construction of socialism in the field of industry and agriculture. In conditions of heightened class struggle, against an enemy within in the form of Trotskyism, the absence of open self-criticism was a grave threat. According to the editorial, the Institute of Soviet Construction and Law had sought to minimise the disagreements between Pashukanis and Stuchka and had presented these disagreements in too abstract a manner. Both Stuchka and Pashukanis had made very grave errors, Pashukanis in particular in his General theory.

Pashukanis’ article was entitled ‘The situation on the theoretical legal front’. This was a stenogramme of Pashukanis’ report to the widened meeting of the Bureau of the Institute of Soviet Construction and Law.115

115 ‘Polozheniye na teoreticheskom pravovom fronte’, Sovetskoye gosudartsvo i revolutsiya prava (1930), 11–12: 16–49. On the first page, Pashukanis cited Stalin at the 16th Congress to the effect that victory over capitalist elements in industry had been won comprehensively. Next came agriculture, collectivisation and liquidation on that basis of kulaks as a class.116 He insisted also on the need for a merciless fight against petit-bourgeois liberalism and against the Trotskyist denial of the possibility of building socialism in one country, leading to adventurism and to opportunism.117 Turning to self-criticism, Pashukanis admitted that he had failed to see through Bukharin.118 He turned to the criticism of the General theory and wrote that it was a shame that criticisms had not been directed to a more mature work.119 He continued that he should have criticised this work much earlier; like many works written in the first years of the NEP it suffered from clear anachronisms and simple mistakes. These included exaggerating the role and significance of market relations. He wrote it alone and did not have the benefit of criticism. He started writing it in 1920 and 1921.120 Among its general deficiencies was the far too abstract and one-sided approach to the problem of law.121

116 Ibid, 16. 117 Ibid, 19. 118 Ibid, 20. 119 Ibid, 25. 120 Ibid, 26. 121 Ibid, 27. Pashukanis continued: ‘My fundamental mistake consisted in confusing the specific features of the bourgeois legal form with law as a whole; these are far from being one and the same. This identification pushed me in the direction of an external, formal unification of quite different things.’122 Stuchka followed with ‘The organisation of our work (Draft theses for a platform)’.123 These had been prepared before Pashukanis’ report and for technical reasons no changes had been made. As could be seen from the theses themselves, they had been prepared hastily and were presented for the purpose of evaluation. They did not amount to the self-criticism required by the new Stalinist turn.

122 Ibid, 34. 123 ‘Postanovka nashei raboty’, Sovetskoye gosudartsvo i revolutsiya prava (1930), 11–12: 50–57. The process of self-criticism continued in the next issue of Soviet State and Revolution of Law.124 Stuchka published what amounted to an extended intellectual autobiography, ‘My path and my mistakes’.125 In this essay, he also recalled the whole of his collaboration, stating in 1922, with V.V. Adoratskiy (1878–1945)126 and Pashukanis. While acknowledging the General theory as ‘the most outstanding work of the period’, he added:

124 See Annex 6. 125 Stuchka (1931). 126 V.V. Adoratskiy, a revolutionary from 1900, in exile in Berlin and Geneva, member of the RSDRP from 1904, in London in 1910–1911 where he met the Webbs, returned to Russia in 1918, became a leading archivist, and edited the first collected works of Marx and Engels in Russian. I nevertheless emphasised from the outset that Comrade Pashukanis’ conception encompasses only bourgeois law and, by declaring it to be law in general, he blurs the class nature of law i.e. he denies the existence of feudal law and now the law of the transition period, Soviet law, as well.127



127 Stuchka (1988), 223. In a footnote to this passage, Stuchka was at pains to point out that he first used the term ‘proletarian law’ in an article commissioned by the Central Committee of the Bolshevik Party in 1918, and reviewed by Lenin in flattering terms.128 He insisted that when he was appointed, against his wishes, Chairman of the Supreme Court of the RSFSR in 1923, he served for nine years and ‘did not ignore the class role … not for a minute, not for a single case’.129 Indeed, he dismissed Pashukanis’ attacks on him as ‘malicious slander’ and in effect sought to prove his own correctness on every issue in dispute, including a series of attacks by A.I. Angarov.

128 Ibid, 249. 129 Ibid, 226. Pashukanis responded with a short ‘Necessitated reply’.130 The real work of attacking Stuchka was carried out in the following article,131 by a hatchet man, A.I. Angarov (Zykov) (1898–1937), known as an operative of the Central Committee in the field of culture and propaganda, arrested in 1937.132 Pashukanis commented that Stuchka, rather than dealing with his own mistakes, had decided that the best form of defence is attack. He concluded: ‘If we reject the juridisation of the class struggle, reject turning law into a fetish, reject the attempt to see the whole policy of the proletariat through the prism of law, then this is very far from meaning that we demonstrate a dismissive attitude to law.’133

130 Pashukanis (1931). 131 Angarov (1931). 132 See http://www.memo.ru/history/arkiv/op1003.htm, a list of persons executed in the Stalin repressions (accessed 2 August 2012). 133 Pashukanis (1931), 102. In any event, within the year, Stuchka was dead and Pashukanis was just beginning a glorious career, abruptly halted six years later.





Annex 1


Revolyutsiya Prava (Revolution of Law) (1925) Sbornik (Anthology), 1, Communist Academy Section of Law and State; Press of the Communist Academy, Moscow The contents were as follows.

Our Tasks: 3–4





Articles


N.N. Bukharin ‘Towards a theory of the imperialist state’ 5–32; P.I. Stuchka ‘Lenin and the revolutionary decree’ 33–9; Ye.B. Pashukanis ‘Lenin and questions of law’ 40–60; I.P. Razumovskiy ‘The rebirth of the philosophy of law in German legal literature’ 61–86; G.S. Gurvich ‘With parliamentarians’ 87–98; I.S. Voitinskiy ‘Methods of distributing labour power under capitalism’ 99–118; S.I.Raevich ‘The experience of parliamentary law-creation in German social democracy’; P.I. Stuchka ‘The bourgeois revolution and civil legislation’.





Critical Notes


P.I. Stuchka ‘Soviet law as the “Whites” see it’ 140–47; P.I. Stuchka ‘The so-called Soviet law’ 148–54; S.I. Raevich Prof. M.M. Agarkov ‘One after another’ 155–57.





Articles from Encyclopedia of state and law


A. Vyshinskiy ‘The Bar’ 158–60; I.P. Razumovskiy ‘Aristotle’ 161–63; N.N. Maksimovskiy ‘Bureaucracy’ 164; E.B. Pashukanis ‘Intervention’ 165–68; G.S. Gurvich ‘Popular representation’ 169–71; N.N. Adoratskiy ‘Revolution’ 172–74; P.I. Stuchka ‘Family law’ 175.





Annex 2


1927 Revolyutsiya Prava 2 (Revolution of Law 2)





Articles


P. Stuchka ‘State and law in the period of socialist construction’ 3–26; N. Chelyapov ‘Towards the question of the fundamental division of law’ 27–39; A. Pavlov ‘The land belongs to no-one – or the land belongs to God’ 40–51; S-----iy ‘The bourgeois revolution and legal cretinism’ 52–82.





Work of Sections


Staroselskiy ‘Principles of construction of criminal repression in the proletarian state (co-report and comments)’ 83–105; A. Panfyorov ‘Common law in the way of life of the peasant homestead’ 6–14; C.B. ‘Overview of legislative activity’ 115–20.





Bibliography


P. Stuchka ‘Overview of literature on civil law’ 121–27; F. Gurvich ‘The Soviet state and foreign academic literature’ 128–135; S. Raevich ‘Soviet legislation in German academic literature’ 136–140; I. Razumovsky ‘General questions of law in foreign periodical literature’ 141–144.





Reviews


I.R. – I. Iliynskiy ‘The crisis of bourgeois jurisprudence’; A.P. – Prof. B. Cherepakhin ‘Towards the question of public and private law’; A.S. – F. Kornilov ‘Legal dogmatism and dialectical materialism’; E.P – G. Gurvich ‘The political system of contemporary states’; A.S. M. Reikhel ‘The USSR. Essays on the constitutional inter-relatedness of Soviet republics’; D.L.M. Tsimmerman ‘Essays on the new international law’.





Annex 3


1927 Revolyutsiya Prava 3 (Revolution of Law 3)





Articles


E. Pashukanis ‘The Marxist theory of law and the construction of socialism’ 3–12; I. Razumovskiy ‘The category of the subject in Soviet law’ 13–39; A. Angarov ‘Towards the question of class struggle in the dictatorship of the proletariat’ 40–47; A. Estrin ‘Agricultural construction and criminal law’ 48–65; S----iy ‘The bourgeois revolution and legal cretinism’ (conclusion) 66–98; D.L. ‘Revolution and consular immunity’ 99–114.





Work of Sections


Staroselskiy ‘The ideology of liberalism in collision with the revolution’ (Report on the 10th anniversary of the February Revolution of 1917) 115–54; Theses of the sections on the general foundations of the civil law of the USSR 155–59.





Comments and Communications


E.P. ‘On the institution of red professors’ 160–61; A. Estrin ‘The defence of law and order under the sign of the dollar’ 162–68; ‘The Fascist charter of labour’ 169–73.





Bibliography


E.P. ‘Overview of the literature on administrative law’ 174–77; L. Gintsburg ‘Overview of the literature on Soviet industrial law’ 178–83; P. Stuchka ‘Overview of the literature on civil law (conclusion)’ 184–90.





Reviews


M.K. – Lenin on the state apparatus; A.A. Marx on Bakunin. Journals of Marxism; A.S. Prof. Malitskiy ‘Soviet state law’; I.R. Friedrich Wieser – Das Gesetz der Macht; S.B. Die Juristische Literatur der Sowiet Union; A.S. B.N. Khatuntsev ‘On the nature of power’; G.R. – I. Boltinskiy ‘Mediative and arbitration procedure’; S.B. – I. Krastin ‘Criminal procedure of the RSFSR; G.A. – Fishman ‘The movement of the civil trial’; S.B. – V. Underich ‘Law and the function of the parties in the criminal procedural code of the RSFSR’ – 191.





Annex 4


1927 Revolyutsiya Prava 4 (Revolution of Law 4)





Articles


Foreword ‘The Five Year Plan and the Soviet State’ 3–11

E.B. Pashukanis ‘Economics and legal regulation’ 12–32; L.Ya Gintsburg ‘On the division between state and private property’ 33–51; A.A. Gertsenzon ‘Basic features of contemporary crime’ 52–70; M.D. Rezunov ‘Ludwig Feuerbach and the psychological school of law’ 71–88; A.I. Angarov ‘Constitutional drafts of independents and developers’ 89–113.





Our Tribune


I.D. Markov ‘Registering a patent in the USSR’ 114–28.





Comments and Communications


S. Bulatov ‘The white terror and class justice in 1928’ 129–32; A.G. ‘The rise in murders in the USA’ 133; E. Gershelman ‘The customary basis for family relations in Altai-Kizhi’ 134–40; S. Raevich ‘Questions of the present legislation in the field of civil law’ 141–44; A. Angarov ‘Liberal everyday life’ 144.





Bibliography


B.R. ‘Overview of the journal Archive of the Philosophy of Law and Economy’, vol. XXI.





Reviews


M.R. – J. Wittmayer – Demokratie und Parliamentarismus; M.R. – E. Sorin and V. Iezuitov ‘Town and village Soviets’; M.M.A. Luzhin and M. Rezunov ‘The lower-level Soviet apparatus’; R.R. Grave and Eibushits ‘‘Fundamentals of legislation on interior trade’; C.N. F.I. Volfson ‘Economic law (survey of lectures)’; G.S. F.B. Dyakov ‘Law of inheritance of the Azerbaijan Soviet Republic’; B.M. Prof. V.N. Shiraev ‘N. S. Tagantsev and his significance for the science of criminal law’; B.M. Prof. S.V. Pozdnyshev ‘Criminals as a result of aliments (maintenance), their types and methods of struggle’; B.M. Prof. M.M. Isaev ‘Criminal law – system of the general part’.





Annex 5


1930 Sovyetskoye Gosudarstvo i Revolyutsiya Prava 11–12 (Soviet State and Revolution of Law 11–12).





Editorial Board


Responsible Editor: E. Pashukanis.

A. Angarov, Ya. Berman, M. Klimov, P. Stuchka, I. Suvarov and I. Chelyapov Foreword ‘For an attack on the whole of the front’ 3–5.





General Theory of State and Law


Pashukanis, E. ‘The situation on the theoretical legal front’ 16–49; Stuchka, P. – ‘The plan of our work’ 50–57.

Rezunov, M. ‘Down with the mask’ 58–68.





Soviet Construction


Vasiliev, T. ‘National (ethnic) policy in the light of the decisions of the XVI Party Congress’ 69–78; Markov, I. ‘The next tasks of the Soviets and finance’ 79–87; Shkolvskiy, G. ‘Questions of organisation of external and internal trade’ 88–105.





Soviet Law and Revolutionary Legality


Ashrafyan, Z., Lvov, A., Kuzmin, P. ‘The programme of right opportunism and criminal policy’ 106–29; Voitiynskiy, I. ‘Regulation of labour and labour law at a new stage’ 130–45; Bratus, S. ‘The problem of economic-administrative law’ 146–67; Z.G. ‘On inadequacies and opportunist damage to labour legislation’ 168–75.





Tribune


Stalgevich, A. ‘Our mistakes and disagreements’ 176–88; Lutskiy, M. ‘The question of the interconnectedness of law and state’ 189–93.





Works of Marxist State Builders


Viss, O. ‘The actuality and appearance of bourgeois law’ 194–99.





Notes and Communications


Kaptyug, A. ‘Facing the district and village’ 200–205; Verlinskiy, Vl. ‘Liquidation of the district and the budget of the agricultural village’ 206–9; Solovyov, S. – ‘The system of local administration of Fascist Italy’ 210–13; Khaevskiy, M. ‘In the society of Marxist state-builders’ 218–21.





Critiques and Bibliography


Krylenko, N. ‘The next incorporation of Leninism in criminal law’ 222–37; Grishin and Zin ‘One should not write this way about Soviet social insurance’ 238–40; Prushitskiy, S. ‘The disgusting nature of privileged academicism’.





Annex 6


Sovyetskoye Gosudarstvo i Revolyutsiya Prava 5–6 (1931) (Soviet State and Revolution of Law 5–6).

Foreword ‘Concrete questions of Soviet work’ 3–9.





General Section


K. Marx and F. Engels ‘From the “German ideology’’ ‘10–36.





Soviet Construction


Grichmanov, A. ‘District and village cadres’ 37–48; Krynskaya, B. ‘The united financial plan and the budget’ 49–66.





Soviet Law and Revolutionary Legality


Stuchka, P. ‘My journey and my mistakes’ 67–97; Pashukanis, E. ‘Necessitated reply’ 98–102; Angarov, A. ‘Retreat from the struggle’ 103–9; Gintsburg, L. ‘On khosraschyot (balancing books)’ 110–34; Nyurina, F. ‘The socialist self-education of the masses and the procedure of comrades’ courts’ 135–50; Raevich, S. ‘Opportunism and lack of perspective in the draft of the Housing Code’ 151–61.





National Question


Velikovskiy, M. ‘The Mensheviks and the national question in the USSR’ 162–76.





Bourgeois State and Law


Levin, D. ‘Intervention under the mask of pacifism’ 177–96; Bulatov, S. ‘The fascisisation of political repression’ 197–212.





History


Boltinov, S. ‘The role of local Soviets in the creation of Soviet power’ 213–38.





Works of the Institute


Stuchka, P. ‘Tendencies of development and perspectives of Soviet Law’ 239–47.





Notes and communications


Levin, V. ‘Pan-Europe’ 248–165; Komissarov, Vl. ‘Chuvashiya on the road to socialism’ 266–71.





Reviews


G. Shostak ‘The school and Soviet elections’; S.B. Boryan, B.A. ‘State control in the USSR and Western Europe’; S. Raevichb Shiyk, A. ‘The race problem and Marxism’ 272–76.





Bibliography


Dragomirretskiy, K. and Kuzyatina, A. – ‘Literature on questions of Soviet construction and law to February–March 1931’, 277.





Chapter 5

Soviet international law and self-determination




DOI: 10.4324/9780203490211-6

In this chapter, I trace the trajectory of Soviet international legal theory and practice after the demise of Pashukanis. As in previous chapters, I do this by highlighting the particular issues of interest to me within the scope of this book. So this chapter does not pretend to present a complete narrative or description of the topic. But the reader may well find a great deal more in the next pages than in most summaries of the nearly 70 years’ experience of Soviet public international law. I have written on this topic previously,1 but the material contained in this chapter is the deepest I have yet dug into the questions of Soviet public international law.

1 Bowring (2008a), Chapter 1; Bowring (2008b).





The career of Yevgeniy Korovin


First, however, I examine some features of Soviet international law during the period before World War II. In the previous chapter, I mentioned Pashukanis’ contemporary and rival, Yevgeniy Korovin. Korovin’s two major works were International law of the transition period (1924) and Contemporary public international law (1927), but he was very much in Pashukanis’ shadow, and in 1935 admitted the correctness of Pashukanis’s position and his own errors.2

2 Letter of 5 May 1935 No. 4 Sovetskoye gosudarstvo (Soviet State), 171. However, he became better known to the English-speaking scholarly audience through translations of his work in US journals.

In 1927 Korovin published an article in Soviet Law on ‘Soviet treaties and international law’. A translation into English was published in the American Journal of International Law in 1928.3 Korovin’s emphasis was on the large number of individual agreements entered into between the USSR and individual ‘capitalist states’. Korovin declared that:

3 Korovin (1928). All the attempts at Genoa, at The Hague, and at Geneva, all these endeav-ours to effect a collective and universal agreement between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and other states have remained vain. The tower of Babel of world-wide unity is left in ruins.4



4 Korovin (1928), 753. This is plainly a reference to the League of Nations, which the USSR finally joined in 1934.

Korovin’s article proceeded to address ‘Ratification of treaties’, noting that Soviet law repudiated secret diplomacy and also a separation of powers by checks and balances (for example the US signature by the executive and ratification by the legislature) and treated ratification solely as a technical function of the government. Next, he explained the Soviet position on ‘The most favoured nation clauses’, which were included in most economic and commercial treaties of the USSR. An example was the agreement with Britain of 16 March 1921 – albeit one that was denounced by Britain in 1926.5 Korovin noted that ‘the national economy of the USSR in passing from “war Communism” to the “new economic policy”’ is enlarging the field of application of the most favoured nation clause. Finally, he turned to ‘The rebus sic stantibus clause’ and the ‘unilateral repudiation of treaties looked upon as superannuated’ – in this case, the memorial presented by the Soviet delegation at Genoa on 20 April 1922:

5 Korovin (1928), 755. The revolution of 1917, having completely destroyed all the old relationships, economic, social and political, and having replaced the old social order (class divisions) by the new social order, the sovereignty of an insurgent people, turning over the power of the Russian State to a new social class, did by this fact break the succession of those civil obligations which were component elements of the economic relations of the social order now extinct.6



6 Korovin (1928), 763. In 1933–1934 an English translation of an article by Korovin, published in Russian in 1929, ‘The problems of the international recognition of the Union of Socialist Soviet Republics in practice’ appeared in the Iowa Law Review.7 This article started with discussion of the ‘constitutive’ and ‘declaratory’ theories of state recognition and an approving reference to the ‘well-known Soviet jurist, E. Pachoucanis [sic]’.8 Korovin cited Pashukanis’ entry on the topic in the final volume of the Encyclopedia of state and law.9 Pashukanis there defined recognition as a: ‘formal act or a conclusive action of one or several states, expressing on their part the readiness to consider any fact as having a juristic meaning’.

7 Korovin (1933–34). 8 Korovin (1933–1934), 259. 9 Pashukanis (1927). Pashukanis also considered that the construction of recognition, as a declarative act, was: ‘the reflection of the epoch, when the bourgeoisie struggled for the national liberty and the formation of national states’.

The theories of constitutive recognition, by the same token, reflected the practice of ‘the imperialist policy of the greater power’. Korovin cited the position of the British government through the speech of R. Cecil on 24 November 1917: ‘There can be no question of diplomatic relations with them; nobody intends recognising such a government.’10 At that time all the ‘greater powers’ drew a distinction between Russia as a state and the Russian government. In the famous 12 May 1921 judgment in Luther v Sagor,11 the English Court of Appeal decided the case on the basis of a note by the British Foreign Office:

10 Korovin (1933–1934), 260. 11 [1921] 3 K.B. 532 [1920. A. 1861]. His Majesty’s Government recognises the Soviet Government as the de facto Government of Russia, and that the Soviet Government had succeeded to the Provisional Government (which had been recognised by His Majesty’s Government on 13 December 1917).



Circumstances changed. In a note of 2 February 1924, the British government informed the Soviet government that ‘they recognise the Union of the Soviet-Socialist Republics as government de jure of these territories of the former Russian empire which are under their rule.’12

12 Korovin (1933–1934), 261–62. Korovin’s other works during this period included (according to Russian biographical sources) Razoruzheniye (Disarmament) in 1930, Katolitisim kak factor sovremennoi mirovoi politiki (Catholicism as a factor in contemporary world politics) in 1931 and Yaponiya i mezhdunarodnoye pravo (Japan and international law) in 1936.

Pashukanis was, as I noted in the last chapter, tried and executed in 1937. His work was immediately subjected to severe criticism as outlined by his former student (but also friend of Korovin) John Hazard in 1938.13 His new critics declared that Pashukanis had attempted to prove that Soviet legal forms were merely successors of bourgeois legal forms. This was, in fact, they argued, an attempt to subordinate Soviet policy to the practice of bourgeois international law. This was linked to the attempt of Trotsky and Zinoviev to bring the Soviet system down to the level of the capitalist system. It was necessary to recognise that the USSR had developed a new form of international law, which had already borne fruit in the increasing number of non-aggression pacts and the internationalising of conflicts.14

13 Hazard (1938). 14 Hazard (1938), 249–50. Korovin and other scholars of international law were now required to emphasise the struggle for peace waged by the USSR and, contrary to Pashukanis, show how this struggle rested on the sanctity of treaties and the observance of international obligations.15

15 Hazard (1938), 252. In 1946 the American Journal of International Law published another article by Korovin, ‘The Second World War and international law’.16 This article, written in the immediate aftermath of World War II, started by citing the pre-revolutionary legal scholar Nikolay Korkunov, cited by me in Chapter 2, on Desnitskiy,17 for his definition of international law as ‘the sum-total of legal norms guaranteeing international protection of the democratic minimum’.18 That is, an impeccably liberal definition.

16 Korovin (1946). 17 Korkunov (1915). 18 Korovin (1946), 743. However, Korovin mentioned two additional factors, of great importance for the remainder of this chapter. First, he addressed the need, following the war, for a new and more profound treatment of international sovereignty, which is ‘the expression in international law of the principle of national self-determination’.19 From this, he turned to the question of subjects of international law, especially international recognition of national resistance movements.20 He lauded the concern of the USSR for ‘the fate of the peoples of the colonial countries and satisfying their national demands, of the sovereignty and independence of small peoples and states’.21

19 Korovin (1946), 743. 20 Korovin (1946), 744. 21 Korovin (1946), 754. Today the Soviet theory and practice of international law, if it is the subject of any consideration at all, is usually dismissed as a purely historical example of an extreme species of positivism and of no contemporary interest. Most often it is ignored. For example, in his article ‘What should international lawyers learn from Karl Marx?’,22 Martti Koskenniemi does not mention Soviet international law at all. Even an avowed Marxist scholar of international law does little more. In his article23 ‘An outline of a Marxist course on public international law’,24 B.S. Chimni contrasts the definition of ‘treaties’ in what he terms ‘mainstream international law scholarship’:

22 Koskenniemi (2004). 23 In the same special issue of a progressive international law journal, the Leiden 24 Chimni (2004). [W]ith the definitions offered by the Soviet scholars Korovin and Pashukanis: ‘Every international agreement is the expression of an established social order, with a certain balance of collective interests’;25 ‘A treaty obligation is nothing other than a special form of the concretization of economic and political relationships’.26 These definitions, through drawing in extra-textual reality, offer greater insight into the meaning of a treaty than the formal definition offered by MILS. They refer us to both the fact of an established (capitalist) social order and to its concretization as economic and political rules embodying a certain balance of collective (class) interests.27



25 Korovin (1928), 763(emphasisadded). 26 Pashukanis (1980), 181 (emphasisadded). 27 Chimni (2004), n. 3, n. 12. However, these authors are not introduced, save as ‘Soviet scholars’; no context at all is given; neither is the fact that they were rivals. Soviet international law even in this Marxist account barely exists; in the standard genre of the history of international law, it is mentioned only to be dismissed.





The contradictions of Soviet international legal theory


I wish to take a very different position. I seek to argue in this chapter that the contradictions of Soviet international law have generated some of the most important propositions and principles of contemporary international law and are of continuing relevance.

Western scholars are familiar with what is generally termed the ‘Marxist– Leninist theory’ in international law and with its standard characterisation.28 In a recent comparison of Soviet and ‘New Haven’29 theories, Ian Scobbie refers to ‘the pre-perestroika Soviet theory of international law propounded by G.I. Tunkin’, which he sees, like New Haven, as a theory that sets out ‘to bolster and justify the external projection of the political values of the … Soviet Union’.30 For Scobbie, ‘Soviet theory has the aim of realizing proletarian internationalism, and thus the global triumph of socialism.’ Furthermore, on the basis of historical materialism, or as Scobbie puts it ‘objective grounds of societal development’, that triumph is historically inevitable.

28 Scobbie (2010) ‘Wicked heresies or legitimate perspectives? Theory and international law’ in Malcolm Evans (ed.) International law (3rd edn, 2010), 58–94. 29 ‘New Haven’ (based at Yale) was the dominant US theoretical school after World War II, led by McDougal and Laswell, who trained generations of international lawyers, as policy-makers ‘for the ever more complete achievement of the democratic values that constitute the professed ends of American Polity’. Laswell and McDougal (1943), 206. 30 Scobbie (2010), 70. There can be no surprise that Scobbie refers only to Tunkin. William Butler’s translation of Tunkin’s textbook31 made available to a Western audience the only substantial Soviet text in English on international law.32 Tunkin, born in 1906, died aged 87 in 1993,33 while completing the last edition of his Theory of international law and having just submitted an article – on customary international law – to the European Journal of International Law. Here he wrote of the attempt ‘to create a new world order based on the rule of law’.34

31 Scobbie (2010), 77. 32 Tunkin (1974). 33 I met him at Moscow State University a year before his death; he was very lively, but completely ignorant of the fact that in 1991 the USSR had ratified the First Optional Protocol to the UN’s International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, giving those within USSR, and then Russian, jurisdiction the right to complain to the UN’s Human Rights Committee, in the event of a violation of their rights. 34 Tunkin (1993), 534. Scobbie comments that Soviet theory was structurally highly traditional and firmly rooted in Marxist–Leninist theory to the extent that ‘at time, it seems simply to amount to taking the dogma for a walk’.35 This was certainly true of Tunkin’s textbook. It was also strikingly conservative, recognising only rules and state consent to rules: as Damrosch and Müllerson explained it, Soviet theory treated ‘the existing corpus of international law as a system of sufficiently determinate principles and norms which all states are obliged to observe in their mutual relations’.36 As a direct consequence, Soviet theory rejected the ‘general principles of law recognised by the civilised nations’ referred to in the Statute of the International Court of Justice as one of the sources of international law.37

35 Scobbie (2010), 74. 36 Damrosch and Mullerson (1995), 9. 37 Article 38 (1)(c) of the Statute of the International Court of Justice. The existence of two opposed social systems meant that the only norms of ‘customary’ or ‘general’ international law could be those that were neither socialist nor capitalist: as Tunkin put it: ‘only those international legal norms which embrace the agreement of all states are norms of contemporary general international law.’38 Thus, Soviet theory recognised only treaties and custom – narrowly defined as above – as sources of international law.

38 Tunkin (1974), 250–51. The US scholar Alwyn Freeman (1910–1983),39 writing at the height of the Cold War, in 1968, also asserted that Soviet international law embraced:

39 Freeman was an editor of the American Journal on International Lawfrom 1955 to 1972, worked on international claims cases while in the US State Department and served in the Army Judge Advocate General’s Office in World War II, on the staff of the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations and as an official of the IAEA. [T]he most extreme form of positivism … The Soviet brand of positivism is much more restricted, much narrower, and is, in sum, a rejection of a great portion of international legal principles … Soviet positivism has been distinguished by the exclusion of customary practice as a source of international obligations. It views international law as embracing only those principles to which states have expressly consented through an international agreement or have otherwise manifested their acquiescence.40



40 Freeman (1968), 713. Indeed, writing in 1948, at the time of his frenetic activity in the United Nations as leader of the Soviet delegation, the notorious Andrey Vyshinsky41 wrote that the ‘Soviet theory of international law regards the treaty, resting on the principles of sovereign equality of peoples and the respect for mutual interests and rights as the basic source of international law. This secures for international law and its institutions full moral as well as juridical force since at their base will lie the obligations agreed to and voluntarily assumed by nations.’42

41 Andrey Vyshinsky was born in Odessa, Russia, on 28 November 1883. As a young man, he joined the Social Democratic Party. In the 1903 split, he sided with the Mensheviks. Vyshinsky became a lawyer and after the October Revolution he joined the Bolsheviks. He taught law at Moscow State University until becoming a state prosecutor. Between 1934 and 1938 Vyshinsky was the leading prosecutor in the ‘show trials’ of Stalin’s opponents. In 1940 he was given the responsibility of managing the (illegal) occupation of Latvia. He also helped establish communist rule in Romania before becoming Soviet Foreign Minister in March, 1949. He survived the purge that followed the death of Joseph Stalin in 1953 and continued as the Soviet representative in the United Nations. Vyshinsky died in New York on 22 November 1954. 42 Vyshinsky (1948a), 22, cited in Triska (1958), 713.





Sovereignty and self-determination


There is, however, a point at which this conservatism shows another, opposite side. Freeman did not fail to notice it, in his discussion of sovereignty. He explained that the Soviets:

[R]etain the classical, strict conception of states alone as the subjects of international law, with a rigid insistence on sovereignty in its most extreme form, a form which must deny the paramount nature of international law over national law. They do, however, recognise an exception in favour of peoples fighting for ‘national liberation’.43



43 Freeman (1968), 716. It is very odd, however, that Freeman did not notice the basis for such a claim: the right of peoples to self-determination. This ‘principle’ had become a ‘right’ as the common first article of the two international covenants of 1966 – the ‘International Bill of Rights’.

Scobbie notes in detail the so-called ‘Brezhnev doctrine’, that relations between socialist states are not based on ‘peaceful co-existence’, but on ‘proletarian internationalism’, which justified the invasions of Hungary in 1956, Czechoslovakia in 1968 and Afghanistan in 1980.44 But, curiously, he says nothing about the application of the ‘right of peoples to self-determination’ to Soviet support for the national liberation struggles of three decades from World War II.

44 Scobbie (2010), 77. In the third section of this chapter, therefore, I analyse the origins of the Soviet doctrine of the right of nations to self-determination. It should be noted that in Russian as in many other languages, ‘nation’ and ‘people’ are practically synonymous.

For Lenin, at least, self-determination was not a mere slogan, but a principle he put into practice with immediate effect within the former Russian Empire following the Bolshevik Revolution. I examine Lenin’s practice in Chapter 7. According to Igor Blishchenko (1930–2000), one of the best Soviet scholars of international law,45 in a text published, ironically, in 1968, the year that the USSR crushed the ‘Czech Spring’, Lenin’s Decree on Peace of 26 October 1917,46 for the first time extended the principle of the right to self-determination to all peoples, thereby discarding the imperialist distinction between ‘civilised’ and ‘uncivilised’ nations.47

45 I worked with Blishchenko for a number of years, in particular on the draft of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court; for a touching obituary by the International Committee of the Red Cross, see http://www.icrc.org/Web/eng/siteeng0.nsf/html/57JREV (accessed 22 October 2012). 46 Website:http://www.firstworldwar.com/source/decreeonpeace.htm (accessed 19 February 2013). 47 Blishchenko (1968), 69. In his article, Blishchenko moved next to answer a series of Western scholars who argued that the Decree was entirely hypocritical, first, having no application to peoples within the USSR and, second, having been applied only to Finland in the former Tsarist Empire. He pointed to the substantial autonomy, if short of secession, enjoyed by Union and autonomous republics in the USSR in accordance with Article 17 of its Constitution.

More importantly, he underlined the extent to which the principle was indeed put into practice by Lenin in the early years of the USSR. What he failed to point out, not surprisingly in 1968, is the fact that one of Lenin’s most bitter struggles with Stalin concerned independence for Georgia.48

48 See Lewin (2005). Writing in 1968,49 Blishchenko showed that the early Soviet government was entirely consistent in implementing self-determination. On 4 (17) December 1917 the Soviet government recognised the right to self-determination of Ukraine. In response to the request of the Finnish government, the Soviet of Peoples’ Commissars on 18 (31) December 1917 resolved to go to the Central Executive Committee with a proposal to recognise Finland’s independence. In fact, it was the Whites, seeking to restore the Empire, who opposed Finnish independence. By a Decree of 29 December 1917 (11 January 1918) the right of the people of ‘Turkish Armenia’ to self-determination was recognised. In answer to a request from the government of Soviet Estland, on 7 December 1918 Lenin signed a decree on recognition of the independence of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania.

49 Blishchenko (1998), 71; see also, on national liberation movements; Baratashvili (1967). On 5 February 1919 the Presidium of the All-Union Central Executive of Soviet Russia insisted, in a principled manner, that in implementing the principle of self-determination, the issue was resolved by the self-determining nation itself, by the people itself. The dictatorship of the proletariat was not a condition for self-determination, which applied equally to bourgeois independence movements. Thus, the Soviet government recognised the republics of Bukhara and Khorezm, which were not socialist.

Blishchenko celebrated the break-up of the colonial system of imperialism and the broad national liberation movements in Asia, Africa and Latin America after World War II, which had posited the right of peoples to self-determination with new force. He asserted, with reason, that the USSR had done everything to ensure that the right became one of the fundamental principles of contemporary international law. This was due in part the work of the Soviet delegation at the 1945 San Francisco Conference,50 which drafted the Charter of the UN, as a result of which Article 2(1) of the Charter refers to ‘respect for the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples’.51

50 United Nations Conference on International Organisation, 1945, Vol. III, 622; see also Tunkin (1970), 67. The Conference brought together delegates from 50 Allied nations and took place from 25 April to 26 June 1945 in San Francisco. The delegates reviewed and rewrote the Dumbarton Oaks agreements. The convention resulted in the creation of the United Nations Charter, which was opened for signature on 26 June 1945. 51 Blishchenko (1968), 75. The UN’s Universal Declaration on Human Rights was drafted in 1947–1948 just as the European empires began to break up. As Morsink points out,52 in 1914 Lenin calculated that more than half of the world’s population lived in colonies, which covered three-quarters of the world’s territory, a calculation that was still roughly correct at the end of the 1940s. Two leading participants, Malik from Lebanon and Romulo from the Philippines, were from countries that became independent in 1946, together with Syria. India, Burma, Pakistan gained their independence in 1947, together with Ceylon in 1948. India and Pakistan were both active players in the drafting process.

52 Morsink (1999), 96. Andrei Zhdanov, Stalin’s favourite, delivered the key speech at the founding meeting in September 1947 of the Cominform (Communist Information Bureau) and announced that the world was divided into two camps, ‘the imperialist and anti-democratic camp’ led by the United States and the ‘democratic and anti-imperialist camp’ led by the USSR. He asserted that there was a ‘crisis of the colonial system’ and that ‘the peoples of the colonies no longer wish to live in the old way. The ruling classes of the metropolitan countries can no longer govern the colonies on the old lines.’53

53 Cited in Morsink (1999), 97. Cassese relates that the 1944 Dumbarton Oaks Proposals,54 the basis for the UN Charter, did not contain any reference to self-determination, but this was reconsidered at the end of April 1945, at the UN Conference on International Organisation in San Francisco – at the insistence of the USSR.55 Thus, a draft was presented referring to ‘respect for the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples’.

54 The Dumbarton Oaks Conference sat in Washington DC from 21 August 1944 to 7 October 1944. 55 Cassese (1995), 38. As Tunkin noted in 1970, at the 2nd session of the UN General Assembly in 1947 the Soviet delegation proposed an article for the Universal Declaration on Human Rights as follows:

Each people and each nation has the right to national self-determination. A state which has responsibility for the administration of self-determining territories, including colonies, must ensure the realisation of that right, guided by the principles and goals of the United Nations in relation to the peoples of such territories.



However, under pressure from the colonial powers this proposal was rejected, with the result that the principle of self-determination does not appear in the UDHR.56

56 Tunkin (1970), 69. Dmitriy Grushkin of the Russian human rights organisation ‘Memorial’ noted57 that one key factor at the end of World War II was the strengthened role of the USSR and the appearance of a whole bloc of states oriented towards it. Further, a bipolar system took shape in international relations in which the contradictory interests of the two sides could be clearly traced. Third, the role of the mass character of politics significantly grew during World War II: 110 million people from 72 states took part. It was a war of peoples, not of governments. Fourth, in place of the League of Nations a global international organisation appeared with real resources and much more effective instruments. The UN sought to create on the basis of new principles (human rights, self-determination, sovereign equality of states) a powerful and effective international legal system. In the documents adopted by the UN, the idea of self-determination received new support, but also aroused bitter disputes. However, the USSR, with the support of the socialist countries and the newly independent states of Asia campaigned for the establishment of a practically unlimited right to self-determination of colonial and dependent countries and peoples.

57 Grushkin (1997), 10. At the 10th session of the UNGA in 1955 the those who opposed of including the right to self-determination into the covenants argued that the UN Charter only refers to a ‘principle’ and not a ‘right’ of peoples to self-determination and that in various instruments the principle is interpreted in different ways. To the extent that the right to self-determination is a collective right, then it was inconsistent to include it in a document setting out the rights of individuals. Supporters, however, responded that despite the fact that the right to self-determination is collective, it affects each person and that to remove it would be the precondition for limiting human rights. Furthermore, a state accepting the UN Charter and recognising it, must respect the ‘principle of self-determination’ and the ‘right’ flowing from it. The latter point of view triumphed and the new ‘right’ found its way into the common Article 1 of both the International Covenants on Civil and Political Rights and Social, Economic and Cultural Rights, respectively.58

58 Grushkin (1997), 12. In this context, there is interest in a rather scornful article in 1955 in the American Journal of International Law by W.W. Kulski of Syracuse University, ‘The Soviet interpretation of international law’. Kulski reviewed five issues of Sovetskoye Gosudarstvo i Pravo (Soviet State and Law) from 1954 and 1955. The discussion in these issues had been initiated by Korovin in his article ‘Some fundamental questions of contemporary international law’.59 While finding all manner of contradiuctions in Korovin’s text, Kulski did note Korovin’s position on recognition – ‘he says that the socialist states immediately grant recognition to a new state because of their respect for self-determination, while the capitalist states delay recognition to safeguard their former financial and commercial privileges.’60 Kulski argued that, for Korovin, ‘Sovereignty thus becomes a slogan of self-determination and loses its legal meaning as an attribute of statehood.’61 Another of Kulski’s targets was Professor S.B. Krylov. Krylov was subjected to irony because he accepted the existence of two kinds of subject of international law: states and dependent nationalities, which are subjects of international law in their own right. ‘He seems to grant to the latter subjects of international law only one right, namely, that of self-determination.’62 Finally, Kulski subjected V.V. Evgenyev to mockery for the following:

59 Korovin (1954). 60 Kulski (1955), 519. 61 Kulski (1955), 521. 62 Kulski (1955), 522. State sovereignty is the independence of the state of any other state; this independence amounts to the right to decide freely and according to its own judgment all its domestic and foreign affairs without interference on the part of other states. State sovereignty embodies the right to self-determination, the latter being the right to decide freely all questions relating to the national fate without, however, infringing in any way upon the rights of other nations. A nation has the right to choose autonomy as a form of its statehood or enter with other nations into a federation or finally to secede completely, because each nation is sovereign and all nations are equal.63



63 Kulski (1955), 525;Evgenyev (1955), 77. Kulski could not foresee that the right he mocked would become in a few years a full-fledged right in international law, an extraordinary achievement of Soviet diplomacy.





The triumph of Soviet diplomacy


Heather Wilson wrote64 that the admission of 17 newly independent states at the opening of the 15th session of the General Assembly had a decisive effect on the UN. On 23 September 1960 the Soviet Union, grasping the opportunity presented by this dramatic development, requested the addition of a ‘declaration on the granting of independence to colonial peoples and countries and peoples’ to the agenda.65 This was a truly climactic moment in the development of contemporary international law.

64 Wilson (1988), 67–8. 65 UN Doc. A/4501, 23 September 1960. It was the USSR that submitted to the 15th Session of the UN General Assembly the draft of the historic Resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, the ‘Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples’. This revolutionary resolution aroused a whole wave of reactions and protests, but was adopted nonetheless. This document noted the connection between the right of peoples to self-determination and individual freedoms.

Following on the heels of Resolution 1514 (XV) came a whole series of documents of a similar type: Resolution 1803 (XVII) of 14 December 1962 on ‘Inalienable sovereignty in relation to natural resources’; Resolution 2105 (XX) of 20 December 1965 ‘On the realisation of the Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples’ – the General Assembly recognised the legitimacy of the struggle of colonial peoples against colonial domination in the exercise of their right to self-determination and independence and it invited all states to provide material and moral support to national liberation movements in colonial territories.

Earlier I cited Alwyn Freeman’s contention in 1968 that ‘Soviet positivism has been distinguished by the exclusion of customary practice as a source of international obligations.’ But he seemed to have missed the article by G.I. Tunkin in the California Law Review in 1961, ‘Remarks on the juridical nature of customary norms of international law’.66 Tunkin’s thesis was, in part, that not one norm of international law has appeared as a result of international practice that had no interruption. Taking the principle of non-interference, he observed that this principle appeared for the first time in the eighteenth century in the context of the bourgeois revolutions. It was often violated in the nineteenth century, but nevertheless gradually became a generally recognised principle of international law.67 In a similar way, he continued, the Soviet state had advanced the principle of banning aggressive wars and treating such wars as crimes, the principle of self-determination of nations, the principle of peaceful coexistence, and others.

66 Tunkin (1961). 67 Tunkin (1961), 420. And, as we know now, the right of peoples to self-determination became a legal right in the ICCPR and ICESCR, achieved the status of customary law in the 1970 Declaration on Principles of International Law Concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations (General Assembly Resolution 2625). In its Judgment on the Case concerning East Timor (Portugal v Australia) of 30 June 1995 the UN’s International Court of Justice held at para. 29:

Portugal’s assertion that the right of peoples to self-determination, as it evolved from the Charter and from United Nations practice, has an erga omnes character, is irreproachable. The principle of self-determination of peoples has been recognized by the United Nations Charter and in the jurisprudence of the Court (see Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of South Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding Security Council Resolution 276 (1970), Advisory Opinion, I. C. J. Reports 1971, pp. 31–32, paras. 52–53; Western Sahara, Advisory Opinion, I. C. J. Reports 1975, pp. 3–33, paras. 54–59); it is one of the essential principles of contemporary international law.68



68 At http://www.icj-cij.org/docket/files/84/6949.pdf (accessed 24 October 2012). Erga omnes means that all states without exception have a vital interest is seeing that the right is vindicated.

And the ICJ’s Advisory Opinion of 9 July 2004 on the Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory 69 repeated its view as to the status of the right.

69 At http://www.icj-cij.org/docket/files/131/1671.pdf (accessed 24 October 2012). In the 1966 covenants on human rights (the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights – ICCPR – and International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights – ICESCR), which to begin with were developed as a single document, it was decided that the provision on self-determination be included on the basis that:

it ‘is the source or essential foundation for other human rights, since there cannot be authentic realisation of individual rights without realisation of the right to self-determination’;

in drafting the Covenants the realisation and protection of the principles and goals of the UN Charter must be taken into account, including the principles of equal rights and self-determination of peoples;

a series of provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights are directly connected to the right to self-determination;

if the right was not included in the Covenants, they would be incomplete and ineffective.70



70 Grushkin (1997), 12, citing A. Kristesky (1981) Pravo narodov na camoopredeleniye: istoricheskoye i sovremennoye pazvitiye (Right of peoples to self-determination: historical and contemporary development) (New York: ECOSOC). Writing in 1970, Tunkin also pointed out that if in 1919 as many as 64 per cent of the population of the planet lived in colonies and semi-colonies, then at the start of 1969 only 1 per cent of humanity remained in colonies. It was on this basis that both the international covenants have a common Article 1, on the right in international law of peoples to self-determination. This was a remarkable achievement by the USSR and its allies in the decolonised world.71

71 Tunkin (1970), 70. The success of the USSR and its allies in the 1960s had momentous consequences for the legal and political process of decolonisation. Later resolutions of the UNGA ensured that the so-called ‘national liberation movements’72 were recognised as the ‘sole legitimate representatives’ of the relevant peoples. In other words, ex-territorial social and political organisations were, in fact, made equal to sovereign subjects of international law. Examples were the Palestine Liberation Organisation (PLO), the South West African Peoples Organisation (SWAPO), the ANC (African National Congress) and PAC (Pan African Congress). In 1973 the UN declared that it recognised SWAPO as the ‘sole authentic representative of the people of Namibia’. And in 1974 the PLO was recognised by the majority of member states of the UN as the lawful representative of the Palestinians, with corresponding status at the UN.

72 SeeGolan (1988). There are writers, such as Christopher Quaye, who ignore the Soviet role in promoting the legal right to self-determination or supporting the national liberation movements.73 However, Galia Golan, although seemingly unaware of the international law dimension, wrote in the context of national liberation movements that: ‘The term preferred by the Soviets [to independence] as an overall, all-inclusive type of objective was self-determination.’74 Her book demonstrates the huge resources devoted by the USSR to support of all kinds for a very wide range of national liberation movements in the Third World. Tables she prepared list 43 movements in 26 countries, with 13 instruments of ‘Soviet behaviour’.75 Roger Kanet noted that ‘Soviet trade with the developing nations increased more than eleven times from 1955 to 1970’. In 1970 it increased an additional 15.7 per cent.76 Furthermore, Bhabani Sen Gupta pointed out that ‘in cultivating friendly, viable forces, the Soviet union has persistently tried to satisfy some of the felt needs of the power elites of Third World societies. In South Asia, they have come forward to provide aid for industrialisation programs in India, for which the Indians could not secure resources either domestically of from Western nations.’77

73 Quaye (1991). 74 Golan (1988), 136. 75 Golan (1988), 262–67. 76 Kanet (1974), 1. 77 Gupta (1974), 123. I would contend, contrary to these authors, that it was not as a result of Soviet propaganda, but through the logic of the new international law, developed through the efforts of the USSR and its allies, that a people with the right to self-determination faced with aggressive attempts to deny that right enjoyed the right of self-defence under Article 51 of the Charter and was in all respects be considered a subject of international law. Thus, Portugal was at that time waging war against the peoples of Angola and Mozambique; those peoples were therefore victims of aggression and enjoyed the right of self-defence and third-party states had the right and duty to come to their assistance.78 G.I. Tunkin, a year earlier, in a more formal article, defending the dubious concept of ‘proletarian internationalism’, also linked the ‘struggle for international peace and security’ with the ‘struggle for the freedom and independence of peoples’, with reference especially to Resolution 1514 (XV).79

78 Blishchenko (1968), 76–7. 79 Tunkin (1967), 144–46. 1968 was not only the year of the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia, but also a crucial moment in the US war in Vietnam. The invasion of Czechoslovakia took place against the background of the emergence of a new ‘socialist international law’, with a new approach to traditional concepts of sovereignty. G.I. Tunkin published a revised second edition of his textbook International law.80 According to him, it appeared to commentators in the United States that the new Soviet position could be dated back to Pashukanis’ conclusion in the 1920s that the Soviet Union could and did utilise generally accepted norms of domestic and international law both in the administration of the state affairs and in conducting relations with foreign states. Through this practice, it gave the bourgeois norms a new socialist content.81

80 Tunkin (1970). 81 Hazard (1971), 143. Dealing with the Czechoslovak events, Tunkin argued that these were a logical extension of the concept already well developed and applied in Hungary in 1956. This was the legal prevention of inroads by capitalist influences into a socialist state.82 The international law framework is provided through an analysis of the concept of sovereignty. Tunkin noted that both general and socialist international law respected the concept of ‘sovereignty’, but concluded that respect is not the same thing in the two systems.83 Socialist states would continue to insist on respect for the principle as developed in general international law when speaking of the relationships between themselves and capitalist states so as to prevent capitalist states from intervening in the internal affairs of socialist states, but the concept of sovereignty had evolved within the conceptual framework of ‘proletarian internationalism’ as regards the mutual relationships of socialist states. His translator, William Butler, commented: ‘The Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia plainly was a difficult moment for his approach to international law, and his treatment of a “socialist international law” impressed, rightly or wrongly, as something less than enthusiastic.’84

82 Tunkin (1970), 493, cited in Hazard (1971), 145. 83 Tunkin (1970), 495. 84 Butler (2002), 394. Tunkin’s arguments should be contrasted with what, in the same year, the US scholar Alwyn Freeman was able to write:

In the years following World War II increasing interest has been evidenced in the extent to which Soviet theory and practice may have influenced the development of the law of nations. This is to be expected in view of the prominence and power which the USSR has come to enjoy in the world community.85



85 Freeman (1968), 710–11. Freeman denounced what he saw as a ‘political dogma dressed in treacherous legal trappings’, namely the official Soviet doctrine of ‘peaceful coexistence’. He referred, as do so many American scholars of the period, as well as President Kennedy in his post-inauguration speeches, to an alleged address by Khrushchev to a Soviet Communist Party audience on 6 January 1961.86 In one account:

86 Quoted in the American Bar Association (1964) Peaceful coexistence: a communist blueprint for victory, 14. Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev delivered a speech behind closed doors in which he asserted that ‘a mighty upsurge of anti-imperialist, national-liberation revolutions’ was sweeping through the ‘third world.’ He went on to say that ‘Communists fully and unreservedly support such just wars… of national liberation.’87



87 Speed (2005). The impact of Khrushchev’s words was felt in the USA itself and in its subsequent policy:

The speech, published in the Soviet press just two days before the newly elected President John F. Kennedy took his oath of office, had a profound effect on the new administration which regarded it as a portent of wars to come. Kennedy and his advisers concluded that the Cold War was entering a new phase which would take place in the ‘third world,’ and would be characterized by guerrilla wars. Accordingly, they sought to improve the nation’s ability to conduct counter insurgency warfare by dramatically expanding the Army’s Special Forces or ‘green berets.’ Before Kennedy’s assassination in Dallas in 1963, he had dispatched over 16,000 of them to South Viet Nam in order to engage in just such a conflict. The war for the ‘third world,’ and a new phase of the Cold War had gotten under way in earnest.88



88 Speed (2005). This address may well be apocryphal; it has proved impossible for me to track down a definite reference. But there is every reason to believe that its effect was as described.

It had its effect on the scholars too. For Freeman, while accommodations of mutually acceptable principles were possible in 1968, no progress in international law was possible until the ‘Soviet Union is prepared to abjure its messianic and compulsive espousal of the doctrine of world revolution’.89 Freeman was of course writing at the height of the Vietnam War: he expresses outrage that the public opinion barrage orchestrated by the USSR ‘actually inhibited the United States from using tear gas where such use was in the interest of humane treatment of the civilian population.’90

89 Freeman (1968), 722. 90 Freeman (1968), 720.





Abandoning self-determination


The leading Soviet scholars were, in the end, obliged to abandon both positivism and the revolutionary content of self-determination. In 1989 Rein Müllerson,91 then Head of the Department of International Law at the Institute of State and Law of the Academy of Sciences of the USSR, was one of the first Soviet scholars to write on human rights and after 1991 was appointed a professor of law first at the London School of Economics then at King’s College London, contributed an article on ‘Sources of international law: new tendencies in Soviet thinking’.92 In his view, it was still possible to speak of a Soviet doctrine of international law, with some reservations.93 He explained that ‘our legal doctrine has many features in common with positivist legal thought in the sense that positivists consider norms of international law to be the creation of the will of states or other subjects of international law’. Soviet scholars also considered it of paramount importance to investigate ‘extralegal factors’ and the ‘entire social environment’.94 He strongly criticised the New Haven school – Lasswell, McDougal and Michael Reisman.

91 Müllerson has had an extraordinary career. He is an ethnic Estonian, although he was born in Leningrad on 23 March 1944. In 1972 he became a member of the Communist Party of the USSR and from 1978 to 1987 taught at Moscow State University. Between 1987 and 1991 he was the Head of the International Law Department of the Institute of State and Law of the Academy of Sciences in Moscow and adviser to the Chairman of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR (Mikhail Gorbachev). From 1988 to 1992 he was a member of the Human Rights Committee of the United Nations, and from 1991 to 1992 was Deputy Foreign Minister of the newly independent Estonia, a post from which he resigned when Estonia violated its treaty obligations towards Russia. In 1992 to 1994 he was Visiting Centennial Professor of the London School of Economics and Political Science, a post that his colleague on the Human Rights Committee, Professor Rosalyn Higgins (later President of the International Court of Justice) helped him to achieve. He then taught at Kings College London until 2011, when he returned to Estonia. 92 Müllerson (1989). 93 Müllerson (1989), 494. 94 Müllerson (1989), 496. He turned to the question of Soviet doctrine on customary international law (it will be recalled that a common criticism was that there was no such doctrine). This doctrine ‘proceeds from the premise that the process of creating norms of international law is a process of coordinating wills (positions) of states and other subjects of international law’. This proceeded in two stages: the first in which rules of behaviour are worked out, the second in which these rules are recognised as rules of international law. Thus, Soviet doctrine recognised state practice and opinion juris.95 Indeed, on Müllerson’s account, it would be very hard to distinguish the ‘Soviet doctrine’ from what has become an absolutely orthodox account of international law. He made no mention at all of the right of peoples to self-determination; although shortly after coming to London he delivered lectures in which he explored self-determination, but only to argue that, while the three Baltic states, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, had a perfect right to sovereignty, Belarus and Ukraine did not.96

95 Müllerson (1989), 502. 96 There is no record to my knowledge of these lectures; I attended them and this is my recollection. And writing in 1991, just before the dissolution of the USSR and using the new language of ‘perestroika’, ‘common human values’ and ‘common European home’, Igor Blishchenko also argued for ‘re-thinking the periodisation of the contemporary history of international law, and for reading its formation not in the October Revolution of 1917 but the French bourgeois revolution, for the first time promoting such generally recognised norms and principles of international law as the right of peoples to self-determination.’97 Blishchenko, of course, had rather more of a scholarly history with regard to self-determination.

97 Blishchenko (1991), 135–36. However, the principle, then right, of self-determination, in my view, played a much more significant role, both in its practical effects in the international order and as the ‘obscene other’98 of Soviet positivism in international law.

98 In the Žižekian sense of a scandalous and unacceptable underride.





Chapter 6

The collapse of the USSR and the ‘parade of sovereignties’




DOI: 10.4324/9780203490211-7

In the last chapter, I examined the trajectory of Soviet public international law, in its contradictory and paradoxical way a true landmark, at the very least in establishing the right of peoples to self-determination as a legal right in international law. In this chapter, I show how this right, promoted abroad but suppressed at home, came to bite the USSR rather hard, contributing significantly to its collapse.

The Russian Federation (RF) is the largest and most complex in the world. When I wrote about this topic in 2000,1 it was composed of no fewer than 89 ‘subjects of the Federation’. It now has 83. The reasons for this surprising ‘shrinkage’ are explored later. It is plain that since 2004 there has been a premeditated assault on the foundations of Russian federalism, with profound consequences for potential for ethnic conflict.

1 Bowring (2000a).





History of the formation of Russian federalism


This can be divided into three phases.2 First, however, a brief mention of the Tsarist and Soviet history is in order.

2 See also Kossikov (1996), 1. The Russian empire was organised on administrative principles, although there is a long history of varying degrees of autonomy, explored in the next chapter, the Grand Duchy of Finland being the extreme example.3 Peter the Great created eight guberniya (provinces) in 1708, in the wake of his victories against Sweden in the Great Northern War and Catherine I increased their number to 14. In 1775 Catherine the Great, with Prince Potemkin’s immense conquests, established 44 provinces and two regions with provincial status. By 1914 the Empire consisted of 81 provinces and 20 regions.4

3 Kutafin (2006). 4 Teague (2008). Despite the fact that, in reality, the USSR functioned as a state with strongly centralised power, under the control of the Communist Party with its principle of ‘democratic centralism,’ the formal, constitutional position was different – and quite different from the Tsarist Empire. The USSR presented itself as a confederation, a union of sovereign republics with the right of secession; and the Russian Socialist Federation of Soviet Republics (RSFSR) as a unitary state with strong elements of territorial autonomy.5 Of course, the ethnic populations that did not receive their ‘own’ territory, especially the indigenous peoples of the north, lost out in this competition. The goal of leaders of the ‘titular’ nationality in a particular territory was to preserve as much as possible of its ethnic character and territorial integrity. Dowley observed as follows:

5 Khazanov (1997). Elites in the ethnic autonomous republics and national level republics were appointed to represent the ethnic group interests in the larger state, and thus, their natural political base of support was supposed to be the ethnic group. Other political appointments in these regions were made on the basis of ethnicity, a Soviet form of affirmative action for the formally, institutionally, recognised ethnic groups referred to in the early years of the Soviet Union as korenizatsiya or nativisation.6



6 Dowley (1998), 363. The chairmen of the Supreme Soviets of Tatarstan and Bashkortostan, both of which aspired to the status of ‘union republics’, were always members of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR, along with those of the Union Republics – the only two ‘autonomous republics’ so represented.7 By the end of the 1970s more than half of the professional cadre in half of the Union Republics and 11 of the 21 autonomous republics in the RSFSR were composed of the titular ethnic group. Social mobility of ethnic groups was higher than that of Russians.8 As the Soviet Union weakened and finally collapsed, in December 1991, it is hardly surprising that the same leaders sought to turn symbolic authority into real power and had a strong base for doing so.

7 Shaimiev (1996), 1. 8 Drobizheva (1996), 2. The first document of constitutional significance of the late Soviet period was the Declaration on State Sovereignty of the RSFSR of 12 June 1990,9 adopted by the Congress of People’s Deputies.10 The basic idea behind the Declaration was the establishment of Russia as a sovereign democratic rule of law state on the basis of people’s power, separation of powers and federalism. It also called for greater rights for the autonomous republics, autonomous oblast and autonomous okrug, as well as administrative krai and oblast. But at this stage Russia was only formally speaking a federation. According to Umnova, there was the parallel development of two contradictory developments: ensuring the statehood of Russia, on the one hand, and its disintegration, on the other.11

9 Although, according to Henderson (2011a), three months earlier the Lithuanian Socialist Republic had adopted a ‘Declaration of Independence’. 10 Vedomosti of the Congress of People’s Deputies RSFSR and Supreme Soviet RSFSR, 1990, No. 2, Art. 22. 11 Umnova (1998), 57. The process of ‘sovereignisation’ of the subjects of the RSFSR was also exemplified in laws that followed the declaration: the laws of the USSR ‘On the foundations of economic relations of the USSR and union and autonomous republics’ (10 April 1990) and ‘On delimitation of competences between the USSR and subjects of the federation’ (26 April 1990).12 These laws raised the autonomous republics in the RSFSR to a significant extent to the level of subjects of the USSR, equal to the union republics in their interconnections with the USSR.

12 Vedomosti of the Congress of People’s Deputies of the USSR and the Supreme Soviet of the USSR, 1990, No. 16, Art. 270; and No. 19, Art. 329.





First phase of Russian federalism


The first step was the period of the collapse of the USSR and the adoption of the Russian Declaration of State Sovereignty, the second was the signature of the Federative Treaty and the enactment of necessary amendments to the Russian Constitution of 1978 and the third was the adoption of the Russian Constitution of 1993.

The period between 1990 and March 1992 has been described as the ‘parade of sovereignties’. The abortive coup d’état (or putsch as it is known in Russia) of 18 August 1991 swiftly led to the demise of the USSR. The three Baltic republics were recognised as independent by the State Council set up after the putsch. The Minsk Agreement of 8 December 1991 and the Alma-Ata Declaration of 21 December 199113 laid the USSR to rest. During this period an extraordinary process began. From July to November 1990 the majority of the ‘ethnic’ autonomous republics attempted to throw off their autonomous status and to take on sovereign statehood. They did this by way of a series of declarations.14

13 Rossiysskaya Gazeta, 10 December 1991, 24 December 1991. 14 Deklaratsiy o suverenitete soyuznikh i avtonomnikh respublikh, Moscow, 1991. Mikhailov has shown graphically (see Table 6.1) how a large number of subjects of the Federation declared state sovereignty even before the collapse of the USSR in December 1991.15

Table 6.1 Declarations of state sovereignty Subject of the Federation Declaration of state sovereignty

1990

Russian SFSR 12 June

Republic of Severnaya Osetiya 20 July

Republic of Kareliya 9 August

Republic of Khakassiya 15 August

Abkhaziya (breakaway from Georgia) 25 August

Republic of Komi 29 August

Republic of Tatarstan 30 August

Republic of Udmurtiya 20 September

Yuzhnaya Osetiya (breakaway from Georgia) 20 September

Republic of Yakutiya 27 September

Republic of Chukotka 29 September

Republic of Buryatiya 8 October

Koryakskiy Autonomous Okrug 9 October

Komi-Permyatskiy Autonomous Okrug 11 October

Republic of Bashkortostan 11 October

Republic of Kalmykiya 18 October

Yamalo-Nenetskiy Autonomous Okrug 18 October

Republic of Mari El 22 October

Republic of Chuvashiya 24 October

Republic of Gorniy Altai 25 October

Republic of Tyva 1 November

Republic of Karachaevo-Cherkessiya 17 November

Chechen-Ingush Republic 27 November

Republic of Mordoviya 8 December

1991

Republic of Kabardino-Balkariya 31 January

Republic of Dagestan 15 May

Republic of Adygeya 2 July



15 Mikhailov (2004), 106. These territories – two of them located in Georgia, soon to become an independent state – wanted to become full-fledged members of the USSR and to enter into treaty relations with the RSFSR. And some of the autonomous okrug unilaterally decided to become autonomous republics. Such decisions were taken in 1990 by the legislatures of the Chukotka and Yamalo-Nenets autonomous okrug. Chukotka successfully left the Magadan oblast to become a subject of the RF, according to the judgment of the Constitutional Court of the RF of 11 May 1993.16

16 Vestnik of the Constitutional Court of the RF 1994 No. 2–3, 53–9. Both Boris Yeltsin and Mintimer Shaimiev were democratically elected on 12 June 1991 – the former as the first president of the RSFSR, the latter as the first president of Tatarstan.17 One of the factors precipitating the abortive putsch of August 1991 was the real threat of ethnic separatism. The putsch leaders, who were the highest officials of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, believed they were saving the Union.

17 Shaimiev (1996a), 2. The real threat of the transformation of Russia into a confederation provided the direct impetus for a draft Federative Treaty. On 31 March 1992 the RSFSR and most of the subjects signed the Federative Treaty, setting out the division of powers. The Treaty was incorporated into the 1978 Constitution of the RSFSR, coming into effect 10 December 1992. In the view of Umnova, Russia turned from a unitary state into a half-federation or quasi-federal state.18 She also considered that for the regions other than the ethnic republics, the Treaty ‘won’ a status of autonomy similar to the regions of unitary decentralised states, such as Italy and Spain (both since the 1980s). One of the most important guarantees of autonomy was the principle, to be found in Article 84 of the Treaty and Article 84(9) of amended 1978 Constitution, that the territories of these formations could not be changed without their agreement.

18 Umnova (1998), 63. It is notable that not all the subjects of the RSFSR agreed with the provisions of the Federative Treaty. Neither Tatarstan nor the Chechen-Ingush Republic signed it. On 21 March 1992 Tatarstan, despite the decision of the Russian Constitutional Court of 13 March 1992,19 held, referendum confirming the status of Tatarstan as an independent republic and subject of international law, with its own relations with the RF and other republics and also with foreign states on the basis of treaties and legal equality.

19 Vestnik of the Constitutional Court of the RF 1993 No. 1, 40–52. The status of the Chechen-Ingush Republic was not at all clear; practically speaking, it escaped from the control of the federal authorities.20 The Republic of Bashkortostan also had a special relation to the Treaty. The process of ‘republicanisation’ at this point began to transgress the limits of legality. On 27 October 1993 Sverdlovsk oblast adopted a Constitution of the Urals Republic. This republic was proclaimed unilaterally.21 On 9 November 1993 President Yeltsin issued his decree ‘On stopping the activities of the Sverdlovsk Oblast deputies’ and declared that the actions of the Soviet in adopting its decisions of 1 July 1993 on the status of Sverdlovsk oblast within the RF and of 27 October 1993 on the Constitution of the Urals Republic were null and void from the moment of their enactment (see also Easter22 as to the attempt to create a new Urals Republic).23

20 Umnova (1998), 72. 21 Yekaterinburgskiy Vedomosti, 30 October 1993. 22 See also Easter (1997). 23 Collection of the acts of the president and government of the RF 1993 No. 46, Art. 4447. We may note the very different trajectories of Chechnya and Tatarstan since then.24 The history of Chechnya is an exception that proves the rule. The Chechen Republic was and is one of the most ethnically homogenous of all the Russian republics, with Chechens, unusually, in an absolute majority. The Chechens defied the Russian empire until 1864. They suffered the brutal deportation by Stalin of their whole population in 1944. On 9 June 1991 the Chechen Republic, arbitrarily carved out of the Chechno-Ingush Republic, decided to secede from the USSR and RSFSR. This did not automatically mean the use of armed force by Russia, but there was no possibility of compromise. This was not least because of the gross injustices suffered by Chechens in this and past centuries. Conflict followed almost as a matter of course and lasted from 1994 to 1997.

24 Derlugyan (2002). As noted elsewhere in this book, Russia acceded to the Council of Europe in 1996 and ratified the European Convention on Human Rights in 1998. Russia has, on a large number of occasions, been condemned by the European Court of Human Rights for serious violations of the human rights of Chechens.25 On 23 March 2003 a new Constitution of the Chechen Republic was adopted by referendum.26 That constitution was drafted by Putin’s supporter Akhmad Kadyrov, who was assassinated on 9 May 2004.27 His son Ramzan Kadyrov then ruled Chechnya, with the assistance of the ‘Kadyrovtsy’, fighters who until very recently had been fighting the Russians. The journalist Anna Politkovskaya, a fierce critic of Kadyrov, was murdered in Moscow on 7 October 2006, while carrying out an investigation of his autocratic rule.28 On 5 April 2007 Ramzan Kadyrov was installed as president,29 having reached the necessary age of 30, under President Putin’s new rules, discussed later. Kadyrov was nominated by Putin and confirmed the following day by 56 of 58 possible votes in the Chechen legislature. He has now asserted a greater degree of autonomy even than was sought in 1991–1992, and has been described as the ‘Warrior King’ of Chechnya.30

25 In 2002 the author founded the European Human Rights Advocacy Centre (EHRAC), which has now taken some 50 cases to the European Court of Human Rights on behalf of Chechens against the Russian Federation; there have already been significant victories. 26 BBC News, 24 March 2003 ‘Chechnya backs new constitution’ at http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/2879383.stm (accessed 29 October 2012). 27 Eurasia Daily Monitor1(6), Charles Gurin ‘Akhmad Kadyrov is assassinated’ 9 May 2004 at http://www.jamestown.org/single/?no_cache=1&tx_ttnews[tt_news]=26479 (accessed 29 October 2012). 28 Washington Post, 8 October 2006 ‘Editorial: murder in Moscow: the Putin era of brutality claims a victim of rare courage’ at http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2006/10/07/AR2006100700718.html (accessed 29 October 2012). 29 New York Times, 5 April 2007 ‘Ramzan Kadyrov, Chechnya strongman, installed as president’ at http://www.nytimes.com/2007/04/05/world/europe/05iht-web0405-chech.5161439.html (accessed 9 August 2009). 30 Osborn (2007). The trajectory of Tatarstan has been quite different. I have noted already Tatarstan’s Declaration of State Sovereignty, in which state sovereignty was declared as the ‘realisation of the inalienable right of the Tatar nation, of all people of the republic to self-determination’.31 Former President Shaimiev stresses the fact that the ‘people of Tatarstan’ was not divided into ethnic groups.32 In the referendum of that time, no less than 62 per cent of its population, Tatars and Russians, supported sovereignty. Tatarstan, like Chechnya, refused to sign the Federative Treaty in March 1992, but, unlike the Chechen leadership, Shaimiev entered into lengthy negotiations with the Russian government.

31 Tishkov (1997), 56. 32 Shaimiev (1996a), 5.





Second phase: the 1993 Constitution of the Russian Federation


During 1993, a so-called ‘budget and finance war’ developed between the federation and its subjects and turned into a full-fledged crisis in September 1993. The situation deteriorated sharply at the beginning of October 1993. On 3 October demonstrators who supported the Parliament removed police cordons placed around the White House, the seat of parliament (Supreme Soviet) by Yeltsin, took over the Mayor’s offices and tried to storm the Ostankino television centre. The army, which had initially declared its neutrality, was ordered by Yeltsin to storm the White House in the early morning of 4 October. The leaders of the opposition were arrested. This 10-day conflict was the first incident of street fighting in Moscow’s history since the 1917 Revolution. According to government estimates, 187 people were killed and 437 wounded, while sources close to Russian Communists put the death toll at as high as 2,000. Yeltsin tore up the existing Constitution and suspended the Constitutional Court.

This crisis was brought to an end only by the adoption of the new constitution, by dubious referendum, on 12 December 1993. The philosopher and constitutional expert Andrei Medushevskiy has described these events as ‘the constitutional revolution of 1993’. According to Medushevskiy, at the time of this revolution:

Russia passed through a constitutional cycle, the working out of which continues to the present day. The cycle contained three phases: the decisive rejection of nominal Soviet constitutionalism (the first phase), the transition to the real, connected with the revolutionary adoption of the 1993 Constitution (second phase), and the consequent establishment of an imprecise balance of the relation of norms and realities with the growing attraction of all systems towards authoritarianism (third phase).33



33 Medushevskiy (2007), 170. Indeed, the new constitution itself bore all the hallmarks of a compromise document. Article 76 provided that like the republics all subjects of the federation could enact their own laws and independently decide on their own executive system.

Moreover, in seven of the ethnic republics (Bashkortostan, Mordoviya, Chuvashiya, Adygeya, Dagestan, Karachaevo-Cherkessiya, Tyva) as well as in 10 oblasts the majority of voters voted against the new constitution. In two republics, Tatarstan and Chechnya, referendum did not take place at all. Unofficial sources suggest that 13 of the 21 republics voted against the new constitution, and altogether 31 subjects voted against. Thus the new constitution suffered a deficit of legitimacy from the outset.

The constitutions of a number of republics to the Russian Federation also varied sharply: three groups could be distinguished by Mikhailov in 2004.34 First, the constitutions of Tatarstan and Chechnya lacked any reference to the fact that they were part of the Russian Federation or to the supremacy of its Constitution and laws. Second, the constitutions of Bashkortostan, Ingushetiya, Tyva and Sakha (Yakutiya) recognised membership of the Federation but said nothing about the supremacy of the federal constitution or laws. Third, all the others recognised both membership and supremacy.

34 Mikhailov (2004), 409.





Third phase: post-1993 Russian federalism


Varlamova identified three stages in the evolution of Russian federalism from 1993.35 She termed the first stage, from 1994 to 1995, ‘subject treaty based’. During this period priority was given to individual regulation (at the level of the constitution or charter of the subject and bilateral agreements with the federal centre) and a growing tendency to asymmetry in the Federation and even movement toward confederation. Two leading commentators, Constitutional Court Judge B.S. Ebzeev and Professor L.M. Karapetyan took the view36 that Russia as a constitutional state could not be treaty based. Umnova strongly disagreed37 and she must be right. Thus, Article 70 of the Constitution of the Republic of Bashkortostan declares that its relation with the RF is based on treaties. By its Constitution, it retains the gamut of state power with the exception of those powers voluntarily ceded by it to the RF.

35 Varlamova (2001), 25. 36 Ebzeev and Karapetyan (1995). 37 Umnova (1998), 78. Many republics did not recognise any change to their status under the Federative Treaty as the result of the 1993 Constitution. Article 8 of the Constitution of Sakha (Yakutiya) declared that it is a subject of the RF on the basis of the Treaty. Article 1 of the Constitution of the Republic of Tyva recognised its inclusion in the RF on the basis of this and other treaties. Article 68 of the Constitution of the Republic of Buryatiya provided that it had the right to delegate voluntarily defined competences for defined periods to the RF.38

38 Umnova (1998), 79–80.





Bilateral treaties – between the federation and its subjects


What is, however, most extraordinary and probably unique to the RF was the number of bilateral treaties entered into between the federation and some 46 of its subjects. Very many of these treaties contradicted the express provisions of the 1993 Constitution. Thus, on 15 February 1994, Tatarstan signed the treaty ‘On the Demarcation of Competences between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of the Republic of Tatarstan’ and 12 agreements with Moscow, affirming its constitution and presidency, republican citizenship, a significant degree of sovereignty over oil and other natural resources, special provisions for military service and other rights and powers.39 Further examples are the treaties with Kabardino-Balkariya (June 1994), Bashkortostan (August 1994), Udmurtiya (October 1995) and Omsk Oblast (May 1996).40 As of June 1998, more than half the regions had concluded some 46 similar treaties.41 Frommeyer considered that this process ‘could lead to the disintegration of the Russian Federation’.42 Varlamova also points out that the Constitutional Court was rarely called on to decide issues arising between Federation and its subjects; these were for the most part resolved through informal and political means.43

39 Tishkov (1997), 243. 40 Shulzhenko (1998), 68; Lysenko (1998), 2. 41 Alekseyev et al. (1998a), 334. 42 Frommeyer (1992), 53. 43 Varlamova (2001), 26. In the second stage identified by Varlamova,44 the RF sought to unify the legal situation of subjects of the federation and guarantee the supremacy of the federal constitution. Thus, the presidential decree of 12 March 199645 made it clear that treaties must not change the constitutional status of a subject of the federation. However, treaties concluded between 1996 and 1998 continued to contain provisions violating the federal constitution, if not so obviously.46 For this reason, laws were enacted in June and October with detailed rules for the organisation subjects of the RF.47 The enactment of these laws gave rise to a series of judgments and decisions of the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation, at the request of regional bodies and private citizens, seeking authoritative adjudication of the powers and duties of subjects of the RF.48

44 Varlamova (2001), 29. 45 No. 370, Sobraniye zakonodatelstvo RF 1996 No. 12, 1058. 46 Ivanov (1999). 47 Law of 24 June 1999, ‘On principles and procedure for delimitation of matters of powers and competences between organs of state power of the RF, and organs of state power of subjects of the RF’, No. 119-FZ Sobraniye zakonodatelstvo RF 1999 No. 26, 3176. Law of 6 October 1999, ‘On general principles of the organisation of legislative (representative) and executive organs of state power of subjects of the RF’ No. 184-FZ Sobraniye zakonodatelstvo RF 1999 No. 43, 5005; 2000 No. 31, 3205; 2001 No. 7, 608. 48 Varlamova (2001), 30. The year 1996 also saw the beginning of Russia’s experiment in ‘national-cultural autonomy,’ that is, non-territorial autonomy, which I discuss in the next chapter.





The Russian Federation according to the 1993 Constitution


According to the 1993 Constitution, there are two equally correct names for the territory under discussion: ‘Russia’ and ‘the Russian Federation’. It should be noted first that the phrase Rossiyskaya Federatsiya (Russian Federation) cannot be directly translated into English. The Russian language has two words that can be translated into English as ‘Russian’. The first is ‘russkiy’, which means ‘ethnic Russian’, while the second is ‘rossiiyskiy’, ‘civic Russian’. The Federation is the ‘Rossiiyskaya’ not the ‘Russkaya’ federation – it is the country not of ethnic but of civic Russians, that is, of bearers of citizenship under the Constitution.

The subjects are as follows. First, and most important for our purposes, Russia has 21 ethnic republics, the successors of the ‘autonomous republics’ of the USSR, named after their ‘titular’ people, with their own presidents, constitutions and, in many cases, constitutional courts. There has been no reduction in the number of ethnic republics, not least because of the potential strength of their resistance.

Next, there are nine enormous krai, a word often translated as ‘region’, (but literally ‘Edge’) with their own appointed governors. In 2000 there were six, with elected governors.

The most numerous subjects of the Federation are the 46 oblasts, territorial formations inhabited primarily by ethnic Russians, also with governors. There were 49 oblasts in 2000.

The four autonomous okrugs (AO) are also ethnic formations and reflect a relative concentration of the indigenous peoples who give them their name. There were 10 of these in 2000; the six that have disappeared have been ‘united’ with larger neighbours, often in very controversial circumstances. For all their formal constitutional equality under the 1993 Constitution, they were for the most part located within other formations (krai and oblast), with consequences that will be explored later in this chapter. There is a Jewish autonomous oblast, located in the Russian Far East. Finally, two ‘cities of federal significance’, Moscow and St Petersburg, are also subjects of the Federation.

It is important to remember that of at least 150 nationalities in the Russian Federation, only 32 had their own territorial units.49 This number has now shrunk.

49 Kempton (1996), 609. The diversity and respective powers of subjects of the Federation, as set out in the 1993 Constitution, are shown in Table 6.2. This extraordinary ramification reflects both the Soviet nationalities policy and the multiethnic character of the Tsarist Empire, themes which will be explored in the next chapter.

Table 6.2 Types of subject of the Russian Federation The 21 ethnoterritorial republics, named after their ‘titular’ people, e.g. Bashkortostan (Bashkirs), Chechnya (Chechens), Khakassiya (Khakas), Mariy-El (Mari), Tatarstan (Tatars)1 Characterised by the 1993 Constitution as ‘states’ (Art. 5(2))

Have their own constitutions (Art. 5(2))

Cannot become part of other subjects of the RF (Art. 66(4))

Cannot include other subjects of the RF (Art. 66(4))

Have the right to determine their own state languages (Art. 68(2))





The 9 krais and 46 oblasts, territorial administrative units with majority ethnic Russian population Have their own charters (Art. 5(2))

Cannot become part of other subjects of the RF (Art. 66(4))

May include autonomous okrug (Art. 66(4))





The 2 ‘cities of federal significance’, Moscow and St Petersburg Have their own charters (Art. 5(2))

May not become part of other subjects of the RF (Art. 66(4))

May not include other subjects of the RF (Art. 66(4))





The (Jewish) autonomous oblast Has its own charter (Art. 5(2))

Is part of the RF as a unique entity (Art. 5(1))

May be subject to a federal law on autonomous oblast (Art. 66(3))

May not become part of other subjects of the RF (Art. 66(4))

May not include other subjects of the RF (Art. 66(4))





1 The full list: Adygeya; Bashkortostan; Buryatiya; Chechnya; Chukotka; Chuvashiya; Dagestan; Ingushetiya; Kabardino-Balkariya; Kalmykiya; Karachaevo-Cherkessiya; Kareliya; Khakassiya; Komi; Mariy El; Mordoviya; Severnaya Osetiya; Tatarstan; Tyva; Udmurtiya; Sakha; (Yakutiya).





The contradictory legal basis of Russian federalism


In her classic monograph, Irina Umnova observed that the legal foundations of the Russian Federation were to be found in a number of documents. These are: the Constitution of the Russian Federation of 1993, the Federal Treaty, the federal constitutional and federal laws, treaties between organs of state power of the Russian Federation and the organs of state power of the subjects of the federation, and, lastly, the constitutions (charters) of the subjects themselves.50

50 Umnova (1998), 44; Salikov (2004). Thus, there were two levels of federal relation. First, there were direct relations of state power between the Federation and its subjects as such. Second, there were relations between unmediated bearers of state power of the Federation and its subjects. These included the ‘people’ of the RF (its citizens, who by Article 3 of the Constitution make up its political community) and organs of state power. It follows that a series of complex relations were possible: the people of the RF and the people of a subject; the people of the RF and organs of state power of a subject; organs of federal state power and the people of a subject. However, Umnova pointed out that according to Article 66(2) of the RF Constitution, the constitution (charter) of a subject was adopted by its legislative organ; adoption by referendum was precluded. This, in her view, was an undemocratic exclusion of the unmediated bearer of state power (the people of the subject).51

51 Umnova (1998), 50. Varlamova also pointed out a number of competing, if not contradictory, principles at work in the Russian Constitution (Table 6.3).52 She added that there were no insurmountable contradictions between these principles, only that the future federal character of Russia depends on their interpretation: the broadening of the authority of central power or its decentralisation.53

Table 6.3 Contradictory principles of the Russian Federation Unity, integrity and equality of the Federation Principles tending to decentralisation and asymmetry

Reach of the sovereignty of the RF to all of its territory (Art. 4(1)); the integrity and inviolability of its territory (Art. 4(3)) Self-determination of the peoples of the RF (preamble, Art. 5(3)); plenitude of power of subjects of the RF outside the limits of competence of the RF for matters of joint competence of the RF and its subjects (Art. 73); recognition of (ethnic) republics within the RF and the existence of their rights to external state attributes: constitution, state language (Arts 5(2) and 68(2))

Supremacy of the RF Constitution and federal laws on the whole of its territory (Arts 4(2), 15); the unity of the legal and economic space (Arts 6(2), 8(1), 74, 75) Possibility of treaty-based delimitation of matters of competence and jurisdiction between organs of state power of the RF and those of its subjects (Art. 11(3)); right of subjects to establish their own legal regulation on matters outside the competence of the RF and outside joint competence (Art. 76(4), (6))

Unity of the system of state power (Arts 5(3), 77(2), 78) Right of subjects of the RF independently to establish their own system of organs of state power in accordance with the fundamental constitutional system of the RF and the general principles of the organisation of executive and legislative organs of state power provided by law (Art. 77(1))

Equal rights of subjects of the RF (Art. 5(1), (4)) Asymmetrical nature of the RF, and the differentiated constitutional and legal status of its subjects (Arts 5(1), 65(1), 66, and 68(2))



52 Varlamova (2001), 13. 53 Varlamova (2001), 14.





Asymmetric federations: a Russian view


Russia is frequently chosen by Western scholars as a case study in federalism. McGarry states that ‘Russia created an asymmetrical federation in the immediate years after the fall of the Soviet Union, although the Putin government has since sought to roll this back.’54 De Figueiredo and Weingast assert that ‘an appropriately structured federal system seems well suited for a country as large and diverse as Russia.’55 However, they consider that actual federalism in Russia displays a range of pathologies. First, they point to the ‘striking lack of cooperation between center and regions’.56 For Obydenkova, ‘asymmetry, as a result of “federal bargaining” and the flexibility of institutions, was unavoidable, especially in the process of regime change accompanied by miscalculation of multi-level reforms and mistakes’.57 Did it help to avoid conflict? She examined the Russian case, taking the republics of Bashkortostan, Tatarstan and Sakha-Yakutiya against three parameters: geopolitical, economic and ethnic. Her conclusion was that while these factors had an impact on centre–periphery relations, they did not determine the intensity of conflict or the scope of demands.58 While size, population, natural resources and the ethnic factor did stimulate a subject of the Federation to bargain for more independence, the intensity of conflict was also influenced by fiscal arrangements and by the nature and interpersonal relations of the elite.

54 McGarry (2005), 1. 55 De Figueiredo and Weingast (2002), 19. 56 De Figueiredo and Weingast (2002), 20. 57 Obydenkova (2004), 3. 58 Obydenkova (2004), 38. Umnova provided what remains, in my view, the strongest Russian analysis and prognosis of the genesis and fundamental features of Russia’s unique brand of federalism. She started from two types of federalism, delegated (where states join together in a union) and decentralised (where power is transferred from the center).59 The principle of a noncentralised state is subsidiarity,60 as in the United States. She argued that Russian political practice often mixes the principle of subsidiarity and the principle of delegation. For this she quoted the speaker (in 1993) of the Supreme Council of Tatarstan, F.K h. Mekhametshin, who insisted that a federation must be formed on the principle of subsidiarity, that is, from the bottom to the top on the basis of delegation.61

59 Umnova (1998), 29. 60 Umnova (1998), 31. 61 Umnova (1998), 33. Umnova described three types of federation: symmetrical, asymmetrical and symmetrical with aspects of asymmetry. The first, with subjects that are identical in nature and equal in status, was the ideal but exists nowhere. The second was the least successful and, as in the case of the Tanzanian Constitution of 1977, brought together two utterly dissimilar entities – Tanganika and Zanzibar. She distinguished three types of state in which the national factor has been brought into play. The first group were states that had undergone collapse and either disappeared or been reorganised – the USSR, Yugoslavia, Czechoslovakia, Nigeria. The second were states retaining their integrity but undergoing internal cataclysms in the form of local ethnic conflicts inspired by separatism – India, Canada, the Russian Federation. The third group consisted of stable and relatively peaceful federations – Belgium and Switzerland.62 In her view, the existence of this group showed that the combination of territorial and ethnic (national) factors in structuring a federation was possible. This would only succeed, however, if the following conditions were met: statehood was preserved; the rights and freedoms of the person and citizen were not violated, neither were the equal rights of nations and their right to self-determination; and the development of nationalism was not stimulated.

62 Umnova (1998)43.





Dismantling sovereignty after 2000: Putin’s policies


The third stage identified by Varlamova was the ‘strengthening of the “vertikal” of power’.63 This had three main objectives:

63 Varlamova (2001), 73. bringing the legislation of the subjects into line with the law of the RF;

weakening the influence (formal and informal) of leaders of the regions on the activities of federal organs of power;

strengthening responsibility toward federal power.



Following his election in 2000, President Putin on several occasions declared his strong opposition to the bilateral treaties and his determination to bring them to an end. According to Hyde, writing at the beginning of this process: ‘Putin’s reforms may represent only a brief departure from previous practices, only a temporary swing of the pendulum in favor of central power.’64 This was to underestimate Putin’s determination,65 exemplified by the Presidential Decree of May 2000,66 which, without amending the RF Constitution, created seven federal districts, each comprising six to 18 subjects of the RF, headed by pleni-potentiary representatives, drawn mostly from the military and FSB,67 and supported by senior representatives of the prosecutors, FSB, police and other federal organs. A federal register of all normative acts enacted by the subjects of the RF was created, to be held at the Ministry of Justice, and copies of all normative acts were required to be sent within seven days of their enactment in the regions.68 In February 2001 Deputy General Prosecutor Yu.S. Biryukov announced that in the previous six months 3,273 unlawful normative acts had been discovered, of which 2,544 had either been repealed or brought into line.69

64 Hyde (2001), 738. 65 SeeHahn (2001). 66 Decree of 13 May 2000 ‘On the plenipotentiary representatives of the President of the RF in the federal districts’ No. 849 Sobraniye zakonodatelstvo RF 2000 No. 20, 2112. 67 Jane Henderson has reminded me that all but one were drawn from the ‘power ministries’. 68 Decree of 10 August 2000 ‘On supplementary measures for guaranteeing the unity of the legal space of the RF’ No. 1486 Sobraniye zakonodatelstvo RF 2000 No. 33, 3356. 69 Yu.S. Biryukov, Prokuratura bystrovo reagirovaniya (Quick response prosecution service), Nezavisimaya Gazeta, 28 February 2001. In the view of V.E. Chirkin, the creation of the seven federal districts was a first step toward the strengthening and unifying of subjects of the RF with a view to a future federation, not, of course, of seven subjects, but of 25 to 30.70 However, Varlamova argued, in my view correctly, that given the historical roots of the present structure, a quick and artificial solution should be avoided in favor of a more cautious, step-by-step approach, even if this takes a number of years.71

70 Chirkin (2000), 48–9. 71 Varlamova (2001), 91. At last, the RF Constitutional Court issued a fundamental judgment on 7 June 2000,72 followed by a clarification on 27 June 2000,73 in response to a group of Duma deputies requesting investigation of a number of provisions of the constitutions of Altai in the first case and of the (ethnic) republics of Adygeya, Bashkortostan, Ingushetiya, Komi, Severnaya Osetiya-Alaniya (known as North Osetiya) and Tatarstan in the second. The Court held the following to be incompatible with the Constitution of the RF:

72 No.10-O. 73 No. 92-O. state sovereignty of the republics as subjects of the RF;

the assumption of the republics of supreme power within their territories;

recognising the people of the republic as the bearers of sovereignty and unique source of power;

asserting, following from the principle of sovereignty, the supremacy of the republic’s constitution and laws;

suspending the effect of legal acts of the RF in its territory;

asserting the treaty-based character of the status of the republic as a subject of the RF and the fact of its inclusion or remaining in the RF at all;

asserting the status of the republic as a subject of international law;

declaring the rules governing property relations with regard to natural resources.



Varlamova asked why it took seven years for the republics’ assertion of sovereignty to be challenged. The answer to that question is simple, she said: the deputies were instructed to do so by the new president, Vladimir Putin. She did not know, however, why only six of 21 republics were challenged.74

74 Varlamova (2001), 79. Varlamova also pointed out that the reaction of the republics could be characterised as ‘deaf dissatisfaction’.75 In Bashkortostan, there were serious problems with publication of the decision.76 Only Severnaya Osetiya-Alaniya (known as North Osetiya) made the necessary amendments to its Constitution. Adygeya, Altai, Ingushetiya and Tatarstan retained the provisions the Constitutional Court had found to be unconstitutional. There are very similar provisions in the Constitution of Bashkortostan adopted in November 2000.77

75 Varlamova (2001), 79. 76 Na net i publikatsiy net: Kto pryachet ot zhitelei Bashkortotstana resheiye Constitutsionnovo Suda Rossiy (No publication whatsoever: who is hiding the decision of the Constitutional Court of Russia from the inhabitants of Baskortostan), Rossiyskaya Gazeta, 2 September 2000. 77 Vedomosti gosudarstvennovo sobraniya, Presidenta i Kabineta Ministrov Respubliki Bashkortostan (Gazette of the State Council, President and Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic of Bashkortostan) 2000, No. 17, 1255. In the opinion of the General Prosecutor, the old Constitution had 44 articles that contradicted federal law, while the new one had 51.

Nevertheless, an amending law of July 2000 introduced strict mechanisms for responsibility, including individual criminal liability.78 In Varlamova’s view, the main problem of this law was that it contradicted the RF Constitution, since it purported to give to the parliament and president of the RF powers that they did not have.79

78 No. 106-FZ, Sobraniye zakonodatelstvo RF 2000, No. 31, 3205. 79 Varlamova (2001), 96. Finally, the Federal Law of 5 August 2000 provided that the Council of Federation was to be composed not, as previously, of the presidents and governors of the subjects of the Federation, but by elected representatives of the legislatures of the subjects and appointed representatives of the president or governor.80 On the one hand, this could be said to increase the likelihood that members would focus on the business of the Council. On the other hand, however, in Varlamova’s view, the Council’s status as an independent and influential body, able to act as part of a system of checks and balances, was radically reduced.81

80 ‘On the procedure for composition of the Council of the Federation (Upper House) of the Federal Assembly (Parliament) of the RF’ No. 113-FZ, Sobraniye zakonodatelstvo RF 2000, No. 32, 3336. 81 Varlamova (2001), 103. At the same time, President Putin continued to take measures to eliminate treaty-based relations within the RF. By 2003 some 30 of the 42 treaties had been abrogated.82 And on 9 February 2007 the Russian State Duma ratified a new power-sharing agreement ‘giving Tatarstan a degree of economic and political autonomy that no other region enjoys’. This development directly contradicted Putin’s policy of centralisation and was seen as a serious defeat for the siloviki, the representatives of the ‘power ministries’, Ministry of the Interior, Ministry of Defence, FSB, etc., and for the ‘party of power’, United Russia.83 On 11 July 2007 the Federation Council, having first rejected the law in February, voted 122 to four in favour of the new treaty.84 President Shaimaiev said in an interview: ‘First of all, I want to say that although this agreement is shorter in length, it is very significant, particularly from a political perspective, because the 1994 agreement was prepared under very difficult conditions.’ He explained that the original power-sharing treaty between Tatarstan and Russia dealt mostly with property issues, while the new treaty bore a mostly political significance and gave Tatarstan more autonomy than other Russian Federation subjects. Most importantly, Shaimiev said, it marked a first in Russian history.85 The treaty inter alia obliged the Tatar president to speak the Tatar language in addition to Russian and allowed regional authorities to issue ‘internal passports’ with an insert in the Tatar language.

82 Sharlet (2003), 338. 83 Smirnov (2007). 84 Arnold (2007). 85 Gilfanov (2007).





Putin’s eradication of directly elected presidents and governors


From 2000 on Putin used administrative and judicial pressure to keep politically inconvenient governors and other leaders from seeking reelection. Hashim adds: ‘Only a few defiant regional leaders, like Republican presidents of donor and ethnic regions such as Tatarstan and Bashkortostan, have maintained sufficient autonomy in spite of increased federal intervention in order to strengthen the power vertical.’86 In the view of Yuri Filippov, the basic idea was to ‘remove excessive politicisation … and to replace politicians with managers and bureaucrats’.87

86 Hashim (2005), 36. 87 Filippov (2004). The 3 September 2004 massacre at the Beslan school provided Putin with the pretext for replacing direct election of presidents and governors.88 As Lemaître put it: ‘The Kremlin wants us to believe that Beslan was possible because the vertical of power was imperfect and there was still too little managed democracy in Russia. We disagree … It had become clear, well before September 2004, that the Kremlin was more concerned with consolidating its grip on power than with the rule of law.’89 On 13 September at a session of the Government of the Russian Federation with the participation of the heads of the subjects of the federation – the presidents and governors – Putin simply announced that henceforward, as part of the response to terrorism, the heads of the subjects would no longer be directly elected but that the president would nominate a candidate to be elected, formally, by the subject’s legislature.

88 On the massacre: The Guardian, ‘The Beslan school tragedy’ at http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/beslan (accessed 9 August 2009); on Putin’s action: Website of the President of Russia 4 September 2004 at http://president.kremlin.ru/appears/2004/09/04/1752_type63374type82634_76320.shtml (accessed 29 October 2012). 89 Lemaître(2006), 410. The opposition politician Irina Khakamada described this as nothing short of a coup d’état and unconstitutional.90 But most governors did not protest.91 The requisite federal law was signed by Putin on 12 December 2004 – ironically, on Constitution Day.92 Under the new law, if the president’s candidate were rejected twice by the subject, he could dissolve the legislature and impose his own choice as acting governor.93

90 Regnum.ru information agency, 14 September 2004, Inititsiativy po izmeneniyu sistemy gosudarstvennovo ustroistva – eto fakticheski perevorot – Irina Khakamada at http://www.regnum.ru/news/324418.html (accessed 29 October 2012). 91 See, e.g. Rossisskaya Gazeta, 15 September 2004, printing the responses of a number of heads, at http://www.rg.ru/2004/09/15/gubernatory.html (accessed 9 August 2009). 92 No. 160-FZ, at http://document.kremlin.ru/doc.asp?ID=025563 (accessed 9 August 2009); http://www.rg.ru/2004/12/15/gubernatory-dok.html (accessed 9 August 2009). 93 Bransten (2004); and McFaul and Stoner-Weiss (2008).





The asymmetric federation under threat? ‘Forced’ mergers


Has the Kremlin been looking to dissolve the ethnic republics altogether?94 Yasmann95 noted the series of mergers that were taking place as of 2006, which had led to the ‘shrinkage’ of the number of subjects of the Russian Federation with which I started this chapter. In his view, ‘there are many signs that political considerations are behind the merger efforts, and that the Kremlin’s real goal is effectively to dissolve the troublesome ethnic republics in the North Caucasus and Volga region.’96 However, research in 2008 showed that ‘the economic rationale of keeping the republic’s wealth motivates both Russians and titulars to support separatism’ in republics such as Tatarstan.97 Whatever the desire of the Kremlin for administrative logic, the desire of the ethnic republics for greater autonomy will persist and may grow stronger.

94 Yasmann (2006). 95 Yasmann (2006). 96 Yasmann (2006). 97 Hagendoorn, Poppe and Minescu (2008), 370; and see Badretdin (1997). As noted earlier, the regions concerned are the autonomous okrugs, precisely those ethnic autonomies created in the Soviet period. One reform plan published in 2006 envisaged 28, instead of 83, subjects of the RF, merging all ethnic republics with neighbouring Slav administrative areas to form new provinces, eliminating any reference to ethnicity in their names.98 The proposed mergers would be:

98 Yasmann (2006). the Republic of Tatarstan with Ulyanovsk Oblast to create Volgo-Kama Province;

the Republic of Bashkortostan with Orenburg Oblast to create Yuzno-Ural Province;

the Republic of Udmurtiya with Perm Krai to create Zapadno-Ural Province;

the Republics of Mariy El and Chuvashiya with Kirov Oblast to create Volgo-Vyatka Province;

the Republic of Kalmykiya with Astrakhan, Volgograd and Rostov oblast to create Volgo-Don Province;

the Republics of Chechnya, Ingushetiya, Dagestan, Kabardino-Balkariya, and Severnaya Osetiya with Stavropol Krai to create North Caucasus Province;

the Republics of Adygeya and Karachayevo-Cherkessiya with Krasnodar Krai to create Prichenornormskaya Province.



This process was named the ‘parade of mergers’ by Pimenov,99 echoing Yeltsin’s ‘parade of sovereignties’. Bazhenov argued100 that Russia should be composed ideally of 35–50 regions, which all should be named krai rather than the Tsarist guberniya, in keeping with Russian history. Table 6.4 lists the mergers that have taken place so far, starting at the end of 2003, just before Putin’s election to a second term. The process has, without doubt, been driven by the Kremlin.

Table 6.4 Mergers Date of referendum Merger Date in force

7 December 2003 Perm oblast and Komi-Permyanskiy autonomous okrug, creating Perm krai. Proposal on merger approved by ‘an overwhelming majority’. It is said that the ethnic Komi of the AO would have preferred a merger with Republic of Komi. 1 December 2005

17 April 2005 Taimyr (with a population of 37,000) and Evenkiyski (population less than 18,000) autonomous okrug into Krasnoyarsk krai (population 3 million). Proposal on merger ‘approved by an overwhelming majority’. Evenskiy AO now a ‘municipal district’. 1 January 2007

23 October 2005 Kamchatka oblast and the Koryakskiy autonomous okrug to create Kamchatka krai. Proposal on merger approved by an overwhelming majority.1 1 July 2007

April 2006 Majority of voters approved a merger between Irkutsk oblast and Ust-Ordyn Buryat autonomous oblast, now home to about 15% of Russia’s 400,000 ethnic Buryats.2 1 January 2008

11 March 2007 Merger between Chita oblast and Aginskiy Buryat autonomous okrug to form a united Zabaikalskiy krai (meaning ‘the other side of Lake Baikal’). Proposal on merger approved by ‘an overwhelming majority’.3 1 March 2008

Preparatory work had begun on merger of Arkhangelsk oblast and Nenets autonomous oblast. Process on merger is frozen. Problem is that Arkhangelsk is poor, while Nenets AO is rich.4

1 Bigg (2005). 2 Boykewych (2005). 3 Trunov (2007). 4 On merger with Komi, see website in Russian at http://www.perm.ru (accessed 20 August 2008); on Evenskiy AO, http://www.evenkya.ru (accessed 20 August 2008); on Kamchatka krai, Legislative Assembly website, containing a history, http://www.zaksobr.kamchatka.ru/common/3.html (accessed 20 August 2008); on Irkutsk oblast, http://www.govirk.ru (accessed 20 August 2008); on the AO, its website is still in existence, http://www.aginskoe.ru (accessed 20 August 2008); see also http://www.chita.ru (accessed 20 August 2008), site for Zabaikalskiy krai; on Arkhangelsk and Nenets, see Vetrov and Tirmaste (2008).



99 Pimenov (2005). 100 Bazhenov (2007). As Dmitriyev observes,101 the apparently large votes in favour of each merger concealed considerable opposition to the process of merger. For example, protests by the Buryat intelligentsia, led by the historians Nikolai Tsyrempilov and Shirap Chimitdorzhiyev, have been ignored. They demanded the restoration of the borders of the Buryat-Mongol Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic, which was abolished by Stalin in 1937 and divided into three parts, following allegations of ‘pan-Mongolism’ and irredentism – seeking to leave the USSR.

101 Dmitriyev (2007) In 2006 the Moscow Helsinki Group published a detailed report102 on gross irregularities committed during the 16 April 2006 referendum on the Irkutsk merger. They pointed out that the proportion of those voting in Irkutsk was barely 50 per cent in the March 2004 presidential elections, and the minimum turnout for local elections is only 20 per cent. More than 50 per cent was required for referendum. The ‘result’ was a vote in favour of 99.51 per cent in the Ust-Ordynski Buryat AO – reminiscent of the extraordinary ‘turnout’ in the 2007 and 2008 parliamentary and presidential elections – and 68.98 per cent in Irkutsk.

102 Moscow Helsinki Group (2006). I noted earlier that the Transbaikal (Zabaikalskiy) krai came into existence on 1 March 2008, eliminating another of the ‘fragments’ of the Buryat-Mongol autonomy. In an interview, the governor of Chita, Ravil Geniatulin, was quite clear as to the rationale behind merger: ‘the strengthening of the state as a whole’.103 He had nothing to say concerning the fate of the Buryat people.

103 Trunov (2007).





Research carried out on behalf of President Medvedev


In 2010 President Medvedev’s INSOR Research Institute, with a team of researchers headed by Yevgenij Gontmakher, published a thorough and extensive (175 page) report entitled ‘Merger of the subjects of the Russian Federation: for and against’.104

104 INSOR (2010). Their analysis led them to the following conclusions:

Mergers to the date of publications had had a null effect. It was quite possible that in the future the country would need a new ATD (administrative-territorial division), not excluding the merger of subjects, but this would need thought out reforms, not separate uncoordinated actions.

The campaign to strengthen subjects was supposed to demonstrate the power of the centre, but demonstrated its weak competence and insufficient professionalism.

Mergers did not raise the governability of the country.

Continuation of the policy will lead to all kinds of conflict, from ecological to ethnic.

The present campaign for mergers is practically exhausted: tasks are not implemented, the prestige of the centre in the regions, especially in the autonomous okrug has seriously suffered.

The only way out is to abandon directed democracy in favour of normal democracy and to return to a decentralised federative state.

The centre’s problems are connected not with the large number of subjects, but with the desire of the ‘federals’ to regulate everything and everyone. De jure the country is a federation (with independent local government), but de facto it is a unitary state (with a vertical of power that penetrates all territorial levels).

Merger is not so much harmful as senseless. Much money and political capital has been expended with zero effectiveness, even in the field of PR.

Merger is a mistake that is very hard to put right. There are not the conditions or the cadres for this. One has to feel sorry for the population.

Reform of ATD should be attempted only when political, economic and social stability has been achieved in the country as a whole.

The institutions of state power have practically ignored their own analytical departments, have hardly used independent consultants and have often considered scientific research as a waste of money and time.

The people taking the decisions have hardly known either Russian or foreign experience in the sphere of deciding territorial problems.



This is indeed a devastating critique of the policy driven by President Putin.





Conclusion


As I indicated at the start of the chapter, the complex, contradictory, but ultimately rather effective Russian form of asymmetric federalism has helped Russia to maintain its territorial integrity and, with the exception of Chechnya, to avoid ethnonational conflict. I have shown how recent ‘reforms’, ostensibly designed to strengthen the Russian state and its unity, have the potential for reopening past conflict and creating new ones. Writing in 2007, Oversloot observed: ‘That V.V. Putin has, thus far, not attempted to change the text of the 1993 Constitution, and that he has not tried to remove the limits which the 1993 Constitution also sets upon presidential power, is, nevertheless, considered to be of great importance.’105 However, two years later he concluded that: ‘A reduction in the number of subjects to merely a few dozen … may prove to be much more difficult, and even politically risky.’106

105 Oversloot (2007), 64. 106 Oversloot (2009).





Annex


By the time of the census carried out in 2010, the population of Russia had fallen to 142,856,536. Of these, 13,227,107 declared a ‘national’ or ethnic membership other than Russian.107 The Russian and ethnic populations were as shown in Table 6.6. They are set out in the same order as in Table 6.5. If arranged by population number, the order would be rather different.

107 Website:http://www.gks.ru/free_doc/new_site/perepis2010/croc/Documents/Vol4/pub-04–01.pdf (accessed 18 November 2012). Table 6.5 ‘National’ (ethnic) populations of Russia by self-description, 2002 Census as against 1989 People (millions) >2002 % of 1989 Percentage of total

>1989 >2002 >1989 >2002

Total 147.02 145.16 98.7 >100 >100

Russians 119.87 115.87 96.7 81.5 79.8

Tatars 5.52 5.56 100.7 3.8 3.8

Ukrainians 4.36 2.94 67.5 3.0 2.0

Bashkirs 1.35 1.67 124.4 0.9 1.2

Chuvash 1.77 1.64 92.3 1.2 1.1

Chechens 0.90 1.36 by 1.5 0.6 0.9

Armenians 0.53 1.13 by 2.1 0.4 0.8

Mordovians 1.07 0.84 78.7 0.7 0.6

Belarusians 1.21 0.81 67.5 0.8 0.6

Avars 0.54 0.76 139.2 0.4 0.5

Kazakhs 0.64 0.66 103.0 0.4 0.5

Udmurts 0.71 0.64 89.1 0.5 0.4

Azerbaijanis 0.34 0.62 by 1.9 0.2 0.4

Mari 0.64 0.60 94.0 0.4 0.4

Germans 0.84 0.60 70.9 0.6 0.4

Kabardians 0.39 0.52 134.7 0.3 0.4

Ossetians 0.40 0.51 128.0 0.3 0.4

Dargins 0.35 0.51 144.4 0.2 0.4

Buryats 0.42 0.45 106.7 0.3 0.3

Yakuts 0.38 0.44 116.8 0.3 0.3

Kumyks 0.28 0.42 by 1.5 0.2 0.3

Ingushes 0.22 0.41 by 1.9 0.1 0.3

Lezgins 0.26 0.41 by 1.6 0.2 0.3



Table 6.6 Russian and ethnic populations by self-description, 2010 Census Russians 111,016,896

Tatars 5,310,649 – small fall from 2002

Ukrainians 1,927,988 – rather larger fall from 2002

Bashkirs 1,584,554 – fall from 2002

Chuvash 1,435,872 – fall from 2002

Chechens 1,431,360 – significant rise in population since 2002

Armenians 1,182,388 – rise, the result of immigration

Mordovians 744,237 – significant fall

Belarussians 521,443 – large fall

Avars 912,090 – large rise, overtaking Mordovians and Belarussians

Kazakhs 647,732 – small fall

Udmurts 552,299 – small fall

Azerbaijanis 603,070 – small fall

Mari 547,605 – small fall

Germans 394,138 – fall of nearly half

Kabardians 516,826 – slight fall

Ossetians 528,515 – small rise

Dargins 589,386 – significant rise

Buryats 461,389 – small rise

Yakuts 478,085 – significant rise

Kumyks 503,060 – large rise

Ingushes 444,833 – large rise

Lezgins 473,722 – substantial rise

Roma (Tsygan) 204,958

Tajiks 200,303 – increasingly significant immigrant population

Jews 156,801 – many Jews did not emigrate

Nogai 103,360 – population is beginning to demand greater recognition





Chapter 7

Russian autonomy




DOI: 10.4324/9780203490211-8





Introduction


In the last chapter, I described and analysed the turbulent events and constitutional crises surrounding the sudden and unexpected collapse of the Soviet Union. In this chapter, I turn to another aspect of Russia’s legal and constitutional system: the extraordinary popularity of forms of non-territorial autonomy.

First, it should be noted that Article 9(3) of the Federal Law of 11 July 2001 No. 95-FZ, ‘On political parties’,1 provides:

1 Website:http://base.garant.ru/183523/1/#100 (accessed 18 November 2012). I was reminded of this point by Jane Henderson. The formation of political parties on professional, racial, national (ethnic) or religious affiliation is forbidden.

By professional, racial, national or religious affiliation in the present Federal Law is meant the indication in the charter and programme of the political party of the purpose of protecting professional, racial, national or religious interests, and also the reflection of these purposes in the name of the political party.

A political party may not consist of members of one profession.2



2 Mytranslation. On 15 December 2004 the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation, on the application of the ‘Orthodox Party of Russia’, upheld the constitutionality of this provision.3 The Court declared: ‘Thus, the constitutional principle of a democratic and secular state in relation to the concrete historical realities in the Russian Federation as a multi-ethnic and multi-religious country, does not permit the establishment of political parties based on national or religious affiliation.’ In the Court’s view, the formation of such parties could exacerbate racial and ethnic tension. This judgment of the Constitutional Court has been adversely commented on by Tatars and others.4

3 Website:http://www.rg.ru/2004/12/24/partii-ks-dok.html (accessed 18 November 2012). 4 See Rakhmetov, Zapret tatarskoi/tyurskoi/musulmanskoi politicheskikh partii v RF (The ban on Tatar/Turkish/Muslim political parties in the RF) at http://forum.tatar.info/index.php?showtopic=5247 (accessed 18 November 2012). Since 2002 I have published two journal articles and a book chapter on the question of the Russian experiment in national–cultural autonomy (NCA).5 My particular focus has been the history of the hotly contested struggle in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries between the Austro-Marxist conception of non-territorial personal cultural autonomy, taken up with enthusiasm by the Jewish Bund and by Muslim activists; and the Social-Democratic and Bolshevik orthodoxy of territorial autonomy under Lenin’s banner of the right of nations to self-determination. This chapter takes a different direction, with, for me, completely new materials and sources.

5 Bowring (2002); Bowring (2005b); Bowring (2007). My initial interest was spurred by an invitation in 2000 from Antti Korkeakivi at the Secretariat of the Council of Europe (CoE) to comment on Russia’s first state report,6 dated 8 March 2000, following ratification of the CoE’s 1994 Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities (FCNM). Russia joined the CoE in 1996, signed the FCNM on 28 February 1996, ratified it on 21 August 1998 and it entered into force on 1 December 1998. This Report highlighted (p. 12 and elsewhere) the experiment in non-territorial, personal autonomy initiated by the Federal Law ‘On national – cultural autonomy’ of 19 June 1996. I had never come across this concept before, and my curiosity drove me to the work of Ephraim Nimni and others – and back to the Austro-Marxists.

6 At http://www.coe.int/t/dghl/monitoring/minorities/3_FCNMdocs/PDF_1st_SR_RussianFederation_en.pdf. My own estimation in 2002 was that this was an astonishing reversal of the Soviet hostility to non-territorial autonomy, dating back to the series of substantial polemics against this Austro-Marxist proposal written by Lenin, Stalin and Trotsky, to name but three. At the same time, it represented a significant victory on the part of Professor Valeriy Tishkov and his co-thinkers including the politician Gavriil Popov, in their contemporaneous campaign against the very concept ‘nation’.7

7 See Tishkov (1996); Tishkov (1997); Tishkov (1998). Dr Aleksandr Osipov has provided the most cogent and searching critique of the NKA experiment in Russia, which commenced in 1996.8 There is a paradox. The evident weaknesses of the NCA form notwithstanding, it is surprisingly popular. Osipov has noted:9

8 See, e.g. Osipov (2004); Osipov (2010). 9 Osipov (2010), 42–3. The concept of ‘autonomy’ still sounds attractive to ethnic activists. Despite legislative restrictions and bureaucratic burdens, the number of NCAs has grown over the years. By early 1999, 227 NCAs had been registered, of which 160 were local, 60 regional, and 7 federal. The respective figures for the beginning of 2005 were: 315, 173, and 16 (in total, 504). On 1 January 2009, there were 717 organizations, of which: 488 were local, 211 regional, and 18 federal.

NCAs represent more than 60 ethnicities – in particular, federal NCAs have been established on behalf of Armenians, Assyrians, Azeris, Belarusians, Chuvash, Germans, Jews, Karachais, Kazakhs, Koreans, Kurds, Lezghins, Lithuanians, Poles, Roma, Serbs, Tatars, and Ukrainians. Regional and local NCAs have been set up in 72 of 83 constituent units (subjects) of the Russian Federation. Several NCAs represent ethnic groups officially acknowledged as small indigenous peoples of Russia.



This chapter addresses this paradox – why does the concept sound attractive? My aim is to show that autonomy has rather deeper roots in Russia than might at first be supposed. I have been much assisted in this by the late Professor Oleg Kutafin’s10 monumental work.11

10 Oleg Emelyanovich Kutafin (1937–2008) Soviet then Russian constitutional legal scholar, President of the Moscow State Legal Academy, which is now named after him. 11 Kutafin (2006). I start with autonomy in the Russian Empire. This took a wide variety of forms and I give an overview of a number of cases: Ukraine, Georgia, Poland, Khiva and Bukhara, Finland, the Baltics, Russian Germans, Tatars and Inorodtsy. Second, I turn to religious diversity in Russia, after Catherine II’s reforms. Third, I look at the extensive scholarly literature on the constitutional role of autonomy in the later years of the Russian Empire. Fourth, I examine Bolshevik nationalities policy before and after the 1917 Revolution and the creation of the territorial autonomies in 1920–1922. Fifth, I have a number of criticisms of Terry Martin’s The affirmative action empire and turn to a Tatar case study. My conclusion emphasises the deep roots of autonomy in Russia.





Autonomy in Tsarist Russia


Robert Suny points out that: ‘With Ivan IV’s conquests of Kazan and Astrakhan in the mid-sixteenth century, the Muscovite state incorporated ethnically compact non-Russian territories, indeed and alien polity, and transformed a relatively homogenized Russia into a multinational empire … when the problem of security was settled, Moscow allowed local elites, though no longer sovereign, to rule and atraditional customs and laws to continue in force.’12 Kutafin makes the point that, as it expanded, the Russian Empire often preserved in the territories it incorporated their local laws and institutions, and accorded them more or less broad autonomy.13 He reminds his readers that the legal status of Russian regions changed continually over time.14

12 Suny (1997), 21–2. 13 Kutafin (2006), 41. 14 Kutafin (2006), 42.





Finland


The most famous example of autonomy in the Russian Empire was Finland, about which Russian scholars have conflicting views. Some consider Finland to have been an independent state in de facto union with Russia. Others see it as a province with a high degree of autonomy. A third camp see Finland as a non-sovereign state united with Russia on the basis of subordination. The late nineteenth-century scholar N.M. Korkunov15 considered these distinctions to have enormous practical significance.16 Thus, the Grand Duchy of Finland was considered to be a special independent state united with Russia only through the Romanov dynasty.

15 Nikolai Mikhailovich Korkunov (1853–1904) leading scholar at St Petersburg University. I referred to him in Chapter 2. 16 N.M. Korkunov Russkiye gosudarstvennoye pravo (Russian state law), Vol. 1, St Petersburg (1892), 134; Kutafin (2006), 46. Finland was incorporated into the Empire in three stages. With the Treaty of Nystad, on 30 August 1721, at the end of the Great Northern War, Estonia, Livonia, Ingria and southeast Finland (Kexholmslän and part of Karelia) were transferred to Russia. The Peace Treaty of 1743 transferred more territory; and on 5 September 1809 by the Treaty of Fredrikshamn, the remainder of Finland was annexed to Russia. During 1808–1809 Aleksandr I by degrees recognised Finnish autonomy and, on 16 March 1809, the Emperor opened the four-chamber Seim, or legislature, which had been elected according to Swedish electoral law. The chambers were: knighthood and nobility; spiritual leaders; town-dwellers; and peasants. Legislation was considered to have been adopted if it passed three out of four chambers. That is, the full Swedish model of that time.

The linguistic situation was extremely interesting.17 On 25 October 1858 Finnish was allowed to be used in legal disputes and dissertations; on 1 August 1863 the Finnish language received equal status with Swedish for all purposes; and on 9 February 1863 the Russian language ceased to be a compulsory subject in primary schools. On 20 February 1865 the Finnish language became the working language in judicial and administrative institutions along with Swedish and on 30 November 1871 the Finnish Senate was given the right to determine the language of secondary education.

17 Kutafin (2006), 55. Thus from 1863 it could be said that Finland was part of the Russian Empire with its own laws and judicial and administrative institutions. On 3 September 1863 Aleksandr II opened the Seim with the words that he preserved the basis of a constitutional monarchy reflecting the spirit of the Finnish people. From that date the Seim was elected every five years. Other parts of the Empire, although not autonomous in the sense that Finland enjoyed, nevertheless had administrative or legal status giving the impression that they were on the way to autonomous status.





The Baltics


Thus, the Baltic territories were incorporated into Russia in the eighteenth century. Ingeborg Fleischhauer18 points out that the Peace of Nystadt in 1721 reconfirmed the Baltic Germans’ freedom of religion and cultus, that is, Protestantism including a Protestant University at Dorpat, German administration in town and country and German law. The Baltic territories were divided into the Estlyandskiy, Liflyandskiy and Kurlyandskiy governorates, as part of one general-governorate with Ostzeiskiy Krai. The inhabitants of these krai maintained their own religious observance, as well as their own laws – the German, Swedish, Polish laws in operation before Russian rule.

18 Fleischhauer (1981). With the great judicial reforms of Aleksandr II in 1864, the Baltics obtained their own judicial organs. They had their own system of local government. The Baltic nobility provided the Empire with soldiers, diplomats, senior civil servants and members of the court.





Russian Germans


Not in fact mentioned by Kutafin were the Russian Germans as a whole. Fleishhauer points out that the Russian Empire’s attitude to non-Russians was ‘based on pragmatic and not on racial grounds’.19 National groups considered useful for imperial purposes were to be attracted and favoured by the state. The Russian Germans comprised three groups: the Baltic Germans, often called ostseizskiye nemtsy; the urban population; and the colonists.

19 Fleischhauer (1981), D1066. According to the 1897 census the three together numbered about 2 million, with 1.3 million colonists; half a million urban-dwellers (375,000 in industry, 100,000 in trade and commerce, 50,000 in academic professions and 35,000 in the civil service and army, as well as more than 50,00 belonging to the hereditary or personal nobility or honorary citizens).20 By the outbreak of World War I the German population was much greater and very wealthy.

20 Fleischhauer (1981), D1072–3. According to Fleischhauer, this success was in part the result of their legally privileged situation. I have already mentioned the privileges of the Baltic Germans. The urban Germans enjoyed 10 years’ exemption from taxes outside the cities and five years within them; free movement in Russia and the right to leave when they wishes; large state loans for new factories; tax-free imports and exports in the first years; use of local Russian labour including serfs; and membership of the Russian guilds with all their privileges.21

21 Fleischhauer (1981), D1078. German peasants settling in Russia had the following privileges. According to the ‘call’ of 1763, every male farmer was given 30 to 60 desyatiny of arable land, granted by the Crown as community property belonging to the colony in which the farmer settled; 30 years’ exemption from taxes; exemption from all forms of military service for ever; freedom of movement; the right to acquire goods, chattels and land in the whole Empire; freedom to leave and to export all legally acquired property; free transition to another social estate; state loans; etc.22

22 Fleischhauer (1981), D1082–3. The oldest German colonies were those on the Volga, with about 30,000 settlers after the first two decades of settlement. Colonies were established in other parts of Russia. And at the beginning of the twentieth-century colonies were established in Siberia. There were some 300 colonies in all.





Ukraine


Ukraine by degrees lost all its initial autonomy. Thus, the Pereyaslavskaya Rada of 8 January 1654 decided on the union of Ukraine and Russia (in 1954 Khrushchev celebrated its anniversary by ‘giving’ Crimea to Ukraine). The Martovskiy Statei of 1654 created the autonomous status of Ukraine within Russia, together with the rights and privileges of the Cossack elders and Ukrainian institutions and clerics. The territory of Ukraine was divided into three parts: Left Bank Ukraine, divided into polka; Slobodskiy Ukraine, also divided into five polki; and the Zaparozhskiy Sech, the most autonomous part of Ukraine. Polki and ‘hundreds’ (sotni) were the territorial administrative units of Ukraine. Power was concentrated in the hands of the hetman, who commanded military forces and made and administered the laws. Control over the activities of the Ukrainian authorities was instituted in 1663 by the Malorossiyskaya Prikaz, replaced in 1722 by the Malorossiyskaya Kollegiya.

In 1734 the power of the hetman was abolished and the Cossack forces came under Russian command. However, in 1747, the hetman institution was revived, with control over the Zaparozhskiy Sech.

In 1764 the hetman was again abolished and the Malorossiyskaya Kollegiya was again put in charge of Ukraine, with a presidency of four Russians and four Ukrainians. However, Ukrainians were not able to participate and the general-governorate of Malaya Rossiya was created. The laws effective in Ukraine were the second and third Lithuanian Statutes and Magdeburg (town) law. In 1728 a commission was established for the codification of Ukrainian law, which in 1743 completed preparation of the Svod ‘Law by which the Malaya Rossiyskaya people are to be judged’. It had three books: Lithuanian Statute, Saxon Zertsala and the book ‘Order’. Courts were established in 1763 on the basis of the Lithuanian statutes. In 1796 Left Bank Ukraine became the Malorossiyskaya Guberniya (governorate); and Slobodskaya Ukraine became the Slobodsko-Ukrainsko Guberbniya. Right Bank Ukraine was divided into the Kiev, Volynsk and Podolsk governorates, in 1832 renamed the Kiev general-governorate. In this way, Ukraine lost all its autonomy.





Georgia


Initially, Georgia was seen as a state under Russia’s protection. Closer ties were instituted by the Treaty of 1783, according to which Georgia’s Tsar Irakliy recognised no authority higher than himself save the Russian Empress, who, for her part, undertook to protect him from external foes. The final unification of Russia and Georgia took place in 1801 at the request in 1800 of Tsar Georgiy to Paul I. On 12 January 1801 Aleksandr I explained to the Georgian people in a manifesto that, although he desired to preserve the independence of Georgia, he was obliged by force of circumstances to preserve the Tsardom of Georgia for Russia. The Ulozheniye of Tsar Vakhtang was preserved as the law of Georgia. Much blood was shed subsequently for Georgia’s independence: Lenin’s last struggle was against Stalin, on the question of independence for Georgia, which Lenin supported.23

23 Lewin (2005).





Poland


In the same way as Ukraine and Georgia, Poland continuously lost its autonomy.

As a result of the three Partitions of the eighteenth century and, as a result of the decision of the Congress of Vienna in 1814, Russia gained part of the territory of Poland, on which the Polish Tsardom (kingdom) was organised. In 1815 Poland received a Constitutional Charter and the status of kingdom. The Russian Emperor became also the King of Poland. Its legislature was the Seim, with elections in 1820 and 1825. The Seim contained a Senate, composed of the Polish nobility, and the Posolskiy Izby, elected in the localities. The Seim had full legislative competence, including fiscal. The official state language was Polish.

However, after the Polish uprising of 1830, the organic status was published, amending the Polish constitution and making Poland an inseparable part of the Empire. The customs border between Russia and Poland was abolished in 1850.24

24 Kutafin (2006), 44–5. After the further uprisings in 1863–1864, the last traces of autonomy were extinguished. However, even after the end of autonomy the Code Civile of Napoleon and other French legislation were preserved, with obligatory force in the Duchy of Poland from 1 May 1808 and extended in 1810 to the governorates taken from Austria.





Khiva and Bukhara


However, Kutafin points out,25 far from all the states incorporated into Russia lost their autonomy. For example, Khiva, now in Uzbekistan, was to a large extent independent even though de facto fully subordinated to Russia. According to the Treaty of 12 August 1873 Said-Mukhamed Rakhim-Bogodur Khan maintained executive power.

25 Kutafin (2006), 45. Bukhara, also now in Uzbekistan, had even higher autonomy. Its status was defined in a Treaty of 28 September 1873. The Emir of Bukhara exercised power from Tashkent and from 1893 Russia maintained an ambassador. Of course, neither Khiva nor Bukhara was formally part of the Russian Empire. They were considered to be states under Russia’s protection.





Tatars


Kutafin says little about the Tatars, who have been the focus of some of my own work. Professor Uli Schamiloglu, born in New York of Kazan Tatar ancestry, now professor at Wisconsin-Madison,26 provides a more complete picture.27 His 1990 article concerns Sihabäddin Märcani (1818–1889), the father of modern Kazan Tatar historiography, who wrote in the nineteenth century, during the Tatar revival within the Russian Empire. Schamiloglu examines the process by which the ‘modern identity of the Kazan Tatars was created’. My own first response is that if the creation of Tatar national identity was crystallised in the nineteenth century, that is proof positive that the Tsarist Empire had not destroyed Tatar consciousness: on the contrary. Thus, Märcani was one of the leading Kazan Tatar intellectuals of the nineteenth century: following early education in a village madrassa in Taşkiçü, he received an Islamic education in Bukhara and Samarkand and returned to positions in a mosque and madrassa and was appointed teacher at the Russo-Tatar Teacher’s School.28

26 See his home page http://www.turko-tatar.com/uli/ (accessed 19 February 2013), and http://lca.wisc.edu/new_web/?q=node/50. 27 Schamiloglu (1990). 28 Schamiloglu (1990), 41–2. Schamiloglu points out that the name ‘Tatar’ was ‘originally not the self-appellation of the Muslim Turks of the Middle Volga region. Before the Mongol conquests they were known as ‘Bulğars’. The name ‘Tatar’ was introduced during the Mongol period and gained broad acceptance by the Kazan Tatars only in the nineteenth century. Märcani wanted, for nationalist reasons, to emphasise that under the ‘Tatar yoke’ (1223–1480) ‘the Russian dukes could not act without the permission of the Tatar Khans’ and emphasised the Russians’ role as tax collectors.29 It is no surprise that many Russian words – for money, treasury, etc. – are of Turkic origin.

29 Schamiloglu (1990), 45. But Schamiloglu points out that there is a dearth of historical sources for the period of the Khanate of Kazan from the 1430s to 1552, when Kazan was conquered by Ivan IV, not least because of Russian destruction of libraries and archives. He reminds us that:

Following the fall of the Khanate in 1552 as the first foreign conquest of the emerging Russian Empire, elements of the dynastic and tribal elite of the Khanate of Kazan either fled to other states, were incorporated into the developing Russian aristocracy, or were simply vanquished. The indigenous Muslim Turkic population in or around the city of Kazan was resettled beyond a perimeter extending many kilometres away from the city. The indigenous and newly-resettled population of the surrounding territories (again including the former core territories of the Volga Bulğarian state) would later form the core group of the modern Kazak Tatars. In the 19th century these Muslim Turks of the Middle Volga region began to acquire a shared identity under the name ‘Kazan Tatar’.30



30 Schamiloglu (1990), 40–41. Märcani’s work was not only an astonishing achievement in adverse circumstances, but more importantly a classic nineteenth-century ‘creation of an ideology of national identity’, as described by Eric Hobsbawm.31 It was also an essential ingredient for the creation of the Tatar ASSR in 1920–1921.

31 Hobsbawm (1983).





Inorodtsy


Russian legislation defined the situation of the so-called inorodtsy, the non-Slavic population of the Empire.32 These included the samoyedy of Arkhangelsk guberniya, the kocheviye inorodtsy of Stavropol guberniya, the Kalmyks of Astrakhan and Stavropol, the Kyrgyz of the Inner Horde, the inorodtsy of the Akmola and Semipalatinsk regions of present-day Kazakhstan and the Urals and Turgan regions, the inorodtsy of the Zakaspian regions and Jews.33 Inorodtsy enjoyed local government differing from the norm according to need. Inorodtsy in different localities used the Kitaiskoye Ulozheniye of 1725, the Mongolskoye Ulozheniye of 1798, the Ulozheniye of the Mongol and Kalmyk peoples of 1690.

32 Kutafin (2006), 77. 33 Svodof laws of the Russian Empire, v.9, Art.1. The Bashkirs were seminomadic tribes inhabiting the territory, forest and steppe, beyond the Volga. Robert Baumann pointed out that ‘despite its relative proximity to Moscow Bashkiria remain unassimilated by the late nineteenth century … an apt indication of Russia’s inability to impose civil administration on the vast realms to which it had laid claim.’34 Ivan IV penetrated the Bashkir lands following his conquest of Kazan and Astrakhan in the 1550s and a fort was established at Ufa in 1586. There were uprisings in 1662–1664, in 1676, from 1681–1683 and from 1705–1711. Following the creation of the fortified town of Orenburg on the Ural River in 1735, Empress Anna’s agent Ivan Kirillov mercilessly crushed the consequent uprising. Finally, after the influx of many Russians, bringing the population of Orenburg to 884,787, and the defeat of the Pugachev Rebellion (1773–1775), the Empire established a military administration for the Bashkirs similar to that of the Cossacks, named the Bashkirskoye voisko or Bashkir Host, with 11 cantons, each with a nachalnik.35 They fought splendidly in the war with Napoleon.

34 Baumann (1987), 490–91. 35 Baumann (1987), 493. In this way, paradoxically, the Bashkirs maintained their identity into the Soviet period and the creation of present-day Bashkortostan.

Suny also observes that ‘some elites like the Tatar and Ukrainian nobles, dissolved into the Russian dvoryanstvo, but others, like the German barons of the Baltic or the Swedish aristocrats of Finland, retained privileges and separate identities.’36

36 Suny (1997), 27.





Religious autonomy in Tsarist Russia


Crews37 points out that, as he was informed by a Tatar interlocutor, Islam arrived in Russia before Orthodox Christianity, so that Islam is the most ‘traditional’ of Russian religions. By the tenth century there were substantial Muslim communities along the River Volga, in Siberia, in the Caucasus and the oasis towns of Central Asia.38 By the reign of Catherine II Russia had ruled the Muslim peoples settled along the River Volga for more than two centuries, while she incorporated the Muslims of Crimea and the regions north of the Caucasus and Caspian Sea. By the late nineteenth century Muslims resided in 89 provinces and territories of the Empire, together with the protectorates of Khiva and Bukhara. The 1897 first Imperial census registered 14 million Muslims (out of a total population of 125,640,021),39 although the true number was probably 20 million. Three and a half million lived in European Russia and 12 million spoke languages of the ‘Turkic-Tatar’ group.40

37 Crews (2006). 38 Crews (2006), 11. 39 See http://www.demoscope.ru/weekly/ssp/census.php?cy=0 (accessed 18 November 2012). 40 Crews (2006), 12–14. While Peter the Great had oppressed the Muslim, especially Tatar, nobility, Catherine the Great, inspired by Enlightenment rationality, ordered in 1787 the printing of the Qur’an for distribution free of charge to Kazakhs on the frontier and in September 1788 ordered the establishment in Ufa of an ‘Ecclesiastical Assembly of the Muhammedan Creed’ (Dukhovnoye sobraniye Magometanskovo zakona).41 Mukhamedzhan Khusainov was given the title of mufti, with a salary, and was to be aided by ‘two or three Mullahs chosen from the Kazan Tatars’. By 1800 the mufti and three judges attached to the Assembly administered oral examinations for more than 1,900 clerics.42 The first mosque was built in Moscow in 1823, despite protests from the Orthodox Church.43 Kazan had Tatar schools in the time of Catherine II.44

41 Crews (2006), 52–3. 42 Crews (2006), 56. 43 Crews (2006), 93. 44 Crews (2006), 200.





Late Tsarist scholars on territorial and personal autonomy


Kutafin was not the first to analyse questions of territorial and non-territorial autonomy in Russia and his book uncovers a rich array of previous scholarship and opinion on the topic.

At the end of the nineteenth century leading Russian scholars argued at length as to the nature of autonomy in the Russian Empire. In 1892 N.M. Korkunov45 discussed the various forms of autonomy, preserving local laws and institutions, a greater of lesser extent.46 V.V. Sokolovskiy also sought to prove that the existence of autonomy did not contradict the integrity of the Russian Empire.47 In 1905 F.F. Kokoshkin48 argued that regional autonomy did not mean the creation of a state within a state.49 All these authors insisted that autonomy should not be confused with federation. For Kokoshkin, if there were to be local laws, as existed in Russia, there must be local legislatures. The state Duma could legislate for all-Russian matters and local legislatures on the local scale.50 The Empire retained its legislative supremacy.51 According to him, regional autonomy was the highest stage of the development of decentralisation. In 1908 he distinguished between autonomous krai and autonomous oblast.52 Kokoshkin returned to this question in 1917 and emphasised its close connection with the national (ethnic) question.53 He argued that decentralisation to a greater or lesser extent was a powerful means for satisfying the demands of ethnic groups to self-determination, especially cultural self-determination, and that this could take the form of territorial decentralisation, but also in other forms. He made the case that in Russia it would be impossible to build a federation on the basis of national territorial autonomy. For example, Ukraine with a population of 25–30 million, more than that of Spain, would far outweigh other regions of Russia. To give unequal competences to the component parts of Russia would also lead to a blind alley, he thought.54 Or, rather than a federation, to confederation.

45 Nikolai Mikhailovich Korkunov (1853–1904). Lectured at St Petersburg State University. 46 Korkunov (1892), 133; Kutafin (2006), 5. 47 Sokolovskiy (1890), cited in Kutafin (2006), 6. 48 Fyodor Fyodorovich Kokoshkin (1871–1918), jurist, leading member of the Constitutional Democratic (Cadet) party, member of the provisional government in 1917. 49 F.F. Kokoshkin Oblastnaya avtonomiy I yedinstvo Rossiy (Regional autonomy and the unity of Russia) Moscow (1905), 3. 50 Kokoshkin (1905), 9–10. 51 Kokoshkin (1905), 12. 52 F.F. Kokoshkin, Russkoye gosudarstvennor pravo (Russian state law), 2nd edn, Moscow (1908), 154–55; see also his Lektsiy po obsehmu gosudarstvennomu pravu (Lectures on general state law), 2nd edn, Moscow (1912), 305–6. 53 F.F. Kokoshkin Avtonomiya i federatsiya (Autonomy and federation), Petrograd (1917), 3–5. 54 Kokoshkin (1917), 9–10. In 1906 a collection Autonomy, federation and the national (ethnic) question 55 appeared edited by V.M. Gessen,56 arguing that national autonomy should precede the establishment of a parliamentary, rule of law state. Autonomy or other forms of political independence were the best way of resolving ethnic tensions. The authors pointed out57 that the centralised political government of Russia notwithstanding, it preserved within itself a series of local laws. In Privislenskiy Krai, the Code Civile of Napoleon I had been in force since 1808. In Ostzeiskiu Krai, a whole range of laws including Roman law were in force. In Finland, the Swedish laws on 1734 were in operation. Because of its Byzantine past, Bassarabiya had laws with Byzantine roots. In the governorates of Chernigov and Poltava, the Lithuanian statutes remained in force. In the Caucasus and many other places, special, particular laws were applied. Whole regions of the Russian Empire lived and had lived their own juridical life. The question of the unity of the state was also analysed by E. Pimenova,58 who argued that regional autonomy could be an efficient way of resolving the national (ethnic) problem in Russia.

55 Gessen (ed.) (1906) Avtonomiya, federatsiya i natsionalniy vopros (Autonomy, federation and the national (ethnic) question) St Petersburg. 56 Vladimir Matveevich Gessen (1868–1920), doctorate from Moscow State University, official of the Ministry of the Interior. 57 Gessen et al. (1906), 21–2, cited in Kutafin (2006), 19. 58 Pimenova (1906). G. Novotorzhskiy59 argued60 that the contemporary state has come into being through conquest and therefore consists of a whole range of regions, formed on a national as well as administrative basis. In Russia, these were Finland, Poland, Ukraine, Caucasus, the Pribaltiskiy Krai, Lithuania, Siberia and, finally, ‘Great Russia’. He wrote:61

59 Author of What is a rule of law state? (Paris 1914); The significance of the right to land for the working class; and The socialisation of land. 60 Novotorzhskiy (1906), 14–15. 61 Novotorzhskiy (1906), 21, cited in Kutafin (2006), 26. Finland at the present time has almost complete autonomy. The question of Polish autonomy demands resolution in the shortest possible time, as soon as the police state is abolished. The question of autonomy for the Caucasus is more complex, since many ethnicities are living there, mixed with each other. The Jewish question can be resolved by giving the Jews the full rights enjoyed by other ethnicities in Russia, and by guaranteeing the rights of the minorities which they will constitute in Poland, Ukraine, Great Russia and Byelorussia. As concerns the autonomies of Ukraine, Siberia autonomous regions in Great Russia, they can be created as required. As, so to say, autonomies of the second rank.



Other works of the same nature included A.T. Snarskiy’s 1907 Autonomy or federation? and the survey published in 1907 by the Pole, K. Kulchitskij (Mazovetskiy), Autonomy and federation in contemporary constitutional states.62

62 Kutafin (2006), 28. Kulchitskiy was one of a number of Russian authors who discussed ‘cultural–national autonomy’, although the Latvian Jewish scholar and politician M.Ya. Lazerson63 wrote in 1917 a book entitled Autonomy and federation,64 which argued forcefully for ‘personal autonomy’ – that is, non-territorial autonomy – drawing on Karl Renner’s writings. In his view, one should not, in a contemporary state, consider the population as tied to particular territories. Such a state, with many ethnicities cannot be divided into territories in each of which there is a single ethnicity.65 However, he argued strongly against the term ‘national–cultural autonomy’, which, in his view, confused the territorial principles and the personal principle.66

63 Maksim Yakovlevich Lazerson (1887–1952) sociologist and professor at St Petersburg then Petrograd State University, member of the Saime (Parliament) of inter-War independent Latvia, leader of the Jewish Ceire Cion party; from 1939 lectured at Columbia University, NewYork. 64 Lazerson (1917). 65 Lazerson (1917), 23–4. 66 Lazerson (1917), 25–6, cited in Kutafin (2006), 704.





Bolshevik policy on territorial autonomy


Kutafin makes the point that the Bolsheviks, as convinced centralists, approached the idea of national (ethnic) autonomy very cautiously.67 In my contributions referred to earlier, I have investigated in detail the way in which Lenin developed his position on the right of nations to self-determination in fierce argument with those like the Jewish Bund espoused non-territorial personal cultural autonomy on the Austro-Marxist model.

67 Kutafin (2006), 81. In October 1913 Lenin wrote the following, having stated that: ‘The right of nations to self-determination, i.e., the right to secede and form independent national states, will be dealt with elsewhere’:

Marxists are, of course, opposed to federation and decentralisation, for the simple reason that capitalism requires for its development the largest and most centralised possible states. Other conditions being equal, the class-conscious proletariat will always stand for the larger state. It will always fight against medieval particularism, and will always welcome the closest possible economic amalgamation of large territories in which the proletariat’s struggle against the bourgeoisie can develop on a broad basis.

Capitalism’s broad and rapid development of the productive forces calls for large, politically compact and united territories, since only here can the bourgeois class – together with its inevitable antipode, the proletarian class – unite and sweep away all the old, medieval, caste, parochial, petty-national, religious and other barriers.68



68 Lenin (1913). He emphasised that centralism must be understood only as democratic centralism: ‘Far from precluding local self-government, with autonomy for regions having special economic and social conditions, a distinct national composition of the population, and so forth, democratic centralism necessarily demands both.69

69 Lenin (1913). And on this basis he was in favour of local autonomy:

Obviously, one cannot conceive of a modern, truly democratic state that did not grant such autonomy to every region having any appreciably distinct economic and social features, populations of a specific national composition, etc. The principle of centralism, which is essential for the development of capitalism, is not violated by this (local and regional) autonomy, but on the contrary is applied by it democratically, not bureaucratically. The broad, free and rapid development of capitalism would be impossible, or at least greatly impeded, by the absence of such autonomy, which facilitates the concentration of capital, the development of the productive forces, the unity of the bourgeoisie and the unity of the proletariat on a country-wide scale; for bureaucratic interference in purely local (regional, national, and other) questions is one of the greatest obstacles to economic and political development in general, and an obstacle to centralism in serious, important and fundamental matters in particular.70



70 Lenin (1913). And further:

Why national areas with populations, not only of half a million, but even of 50,000, should not be able to enjoy autonomy; why such areas should not be able to unite in the most diverse ways with neighbouring areas of different dimensions into a single autonomous ‘territory’ if that is convenient or necessary for economic intercourse – these things remain the secret of the Bundist Medem.71



71 Lenin (1913). Lenin returned to this question in 1916, when he wrote:

But as everyone knows, in practice, a reform is often merely a step towards revolution. It is autonomy that enables a nation forcibly retained within the boundaries of a given state to crystallise into a nation, to gather, assess and organise its forces, and to select the most opportune moment for a declaration … in the ‘Norwegian’ spirit: We, the autonomous diet of such-and-such a nation, or of such-and-such a territory, declare that the Emperor of all the Russias has ceased to be King of Poland, etc.72



72 Lenin (1916/64). Thus it was clear that before the October Revolution, Lenin and the Bolsheviks were in favour of the idea of creating broad regional autonomies in Russia. This continued after the Revolution. In 1918 Lenin wrote:

We are for democratic centralism. And it must be clearly understood how vastly different democratic centralism is from bureaucratic centralism on the one hand and from anarchism on the other. The opponents of centralism continually put forward autonomy and federation as a means of struggle against the uncertainties of centralism. As a matter of fact, democratic centralism in no way excludes autonomy, on the contrary, it presupposes the necessity of it … The example of the Russian Soviet Republic shows us particularly clearly that federation, which we are introducing and will introduce, is now the surest step towards the most lasting union of the various nationalities of Russia into a single democratic centralised Soviet state.73



73 Lenin (1918/1965), 207. In his letter of 26 September 1922, at the time of increasing conflict with Stalin as to the right of Georgia to gain independence outside the USSR – to secede – he wrote: ‘[W]e consider ourselves, the Ukrainian S.S.R. and others, equal, and enter with them, on an equal basis, into a new union, a new federation, the Union of the Soviet Republics of Europe and Asia.’74

74 Lenin (1922). In his Last Testament, written in 1922–1923, Lenin wrote, warning against Stalin:

It is quite natural that in such circumstances the ‘freedom to secede from the union’ by which we justify ourselves will be a mere scrap of paper, unable to defend the non-Russians from the onslaught of that really Russian man, the Great-Russian chauvinist, in substance a rascal and a tyrant, such as the typical Russian bureaucrat is.75



75 Lenin (1922–23). Lenin by then regarded Stalin as just such a Great Russian chauvinist.

Thus, the 1918 Constitution of the RSFSR76 provided in Article 1, Chapter 4:

76 See English translation at http://www.marxists.org/history/ussr/government/constitution/1918/index.htm (accessed 28 March 2011). 8. In its effort to create a league – free and voluntary, and for that reason all the more complete and secure – of the working classes of all the peoples of Russia, the Third Congress of Soviets merely establishes the fundamental principles of the Federation of Russian Soviet Republics, leaving to the workers and peasants of every people to decide the following question at their plenary sessions of their soviets, namely, whether or not they desire to participate, and on what basis, in the Federal government and other Federal soviet institutions.



And in Article 2, Chapter 5:

11. The soviets of those regions which differentiate themselves by a special form of existence and national character may unite in autonomous regional unions, ruled by the local congress of the soviets and their executive organs.

These autonomous regional unions participate in the Russian Socialist Federated Soviet Republic upon a Federal basis.77



77 Website:http://www.marxists.org/history/ussr/government/constitution/1918/article2.htm (accessed 19 February 2013). On this basis, the Labouring Commune of Germans of the Volga was organised at the end of 1918, which in 1924 became an autonomous republic. The Bashkir ASSR was organised within the RSFSR in 1919, followed in 1920–1921 by the Kirgiz (Kazakh) ASSR and the Tatar, Dagestan and Gorkiy autonomous republics, the Karelian Labouring Commune and the Chuvash, Kalmyk, Mariy, Botskaya (Udmurtskaya) autonomous oblast (regions). In 1921–1922 the Yakutsk ASSR, the Karachaev-Cherkess, Kabardino-Balkar, Komi, Mongol-Buryat and a series of other autonomous oblast were created.78

78 Kutafin (2006), 133–34. The 1924 Constitution of the USSR79 contained the following:

79 English translation at http://www.answers.com/topic/1924-constitution-of-the-ussr (accessed 28 March 2011). CHAPTER II Sovereign Rights of the Member Republics

ARTICLE 3.

The sovereignty of the member Republics is limited only in the matters indicated in the present Constitution, as coming within the competence of the Union. Outside of those limits, each member Republic exerts its public powers independently; the USSR protects the rights of the member Republics.

ARTICLE 4.

Each one of the member Republics retains the right to freely withdraw from the Union.

ARTICLE 5.

The member Republics will make changes in their Constitutions to conform with the present Constitution.

ARTICLE 6.

The territory of the member Republics cannot be modified without their consent; also, any limitation or modification or suppression of Article 4 must have the approval of all the member Republics of the Union.

ARTICLE 7.

Just one federal nationality is established for the citizens of the member Republics.





The affirmative action Empire?


In his book of that title,80 Terry Martin starts with the question ‘Why did the Bolsheviks adopt this radical strategy?’. His answer starts: ‘When they seized power in October 1917, they did not yet possess a coherent nationalities policy.’81 As we have seen already, that is not quite right. He acknowledges that they had a ‘powerful slogan’ but states that it was shared with Woodrow Wilson, a surprising proposition. It seems that Martin is not sufficiently aware of the passionate debates of the pre-war years on the question of the right of nations to self-determination, as against personal cultural non-territorial autonomy.82

80 Martin (2001). 81 Martin (2001), 2. 82 Although he cites a number of Lenin’s key works at n. 10 on 3. According to Martin, the content of Soviet nationalities policy was ‘finally delineated’ at the 12th Party Congress in April 1923 and at a special Central Committee conference on nationalities policy in June 1923.83 That is, in the very last months of Lenin’s life and after he had written to Stalin, with whom as already noted he was in bitter conflict over Georgian independence, on 5 March 1923:

83 Martin (2001), 9. You have been so rude as to summon my wife to the telephone and use bad language. Although she had told you that she was prepared to forget this, the fact nevertheless became known through her to Zinoviev and Kamenev. I have no intention of forgetting so easily what has been done against me, and it goes without saying that what has been done against my wife I consider having been done against me as well. I ask you, therefore, to think it over whether you are prepared to withdraw what you have said and to make your apologies, or whether you prefer that relations between us should be broken off.84



84 At http://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1923/mar/05.htm (accessed 28 March 2011). This was Lenin’s last written text.

Martin, therefore, cannot explain how, well before April 1923, most of the territorial autonomies that have continued in existence until the present day had already been created.

Neither does Martin have anything to say about the rich history of autonomy in the Tsarist Empire. The obvious point is this: Soviet nationalities policy did not come from nothing. It had deep roots not only in Bolshevik ideology, but also in Tsarist history.

However, Martin does provide series of case studies showing in detail how the Bolsheviks responded to the rising tide of nationalism ‘by systematically promoting the national consciousness of its ethnic minorities and establishing for many of then the characteristic institutional forms of the nation-state.’85

85 Martin (2001), 1. Thus, he notes that:

The Tatar national movement was among the strongest in the Soviet Union, and certainly the strongest in the Soviet era. The Tatar nationalist elite lobbied aggressively for and vigorously supported to Soviet policy of korenizatsiya: the formation of a Tatar republic, the promotion of Tatars into leadership positions, the use of the Tatar language in government and education, and support for Tatar national culture. However, this movement also faced formidable resistance. Tatars formed a narrow plurality in their own republic (48.7% Tatar and 43.1% Russian).86



86 Martin (2001), 58. But he had not seen Schamiloglu’s work, apparently.





A Tatar case study


Peter Frank provided a fascinating study of the CPSU First Secretary, including details of the careers of the first and second secretaries of the Tatar Obkom of the CPSU, based on the Tatar ASSR.87 Terry Martin did not see this work either.

87 Frank (1971). As was the usual Soviet practice, Fikret Akhmedzhanovich Tabeev,88 the First Secretary, was a Tatar and Nikonov, his Second Secretary, was a Russian.89 Tabeev was born into a Tatar peasant family in 1928 and became a collective farmer, before attending Kazan University, one of the oldest in Russia. In 1951 he became a Party member and was appointed assistant lecturer at the university. In six years he rose to be reader and head of the department of political economy, having successfully defended his kandidat thesis. He moved to full-time Party work in 1957 and in 1960 at the very young age of 32 he was appointed First Secretary.

88 See biography and picture at http://gazetart.su/articles/43–44_24859/48306/ (accessed 28 March 2011). 89 Frank (1971), 181. I can add to Frank’s account that Tabeev served as First Secretary from 28 October 1960 to 2 November 1979 and from 1979 to 1986 was USSR Ambassador to Afghanistan. In 1989 he became a People’s Deputy of the USSR. In 2008 he was awarded the medal ‘For services to the Republic of Tatarstan’. As far as I know he is still alive. Tabeev’s successor as First Secretary was Rashid Musinovich Musin (1927–1982), who served until his death in 1982. His successor, Gumer Ismailovich Usmanov90 (b. 1932), who was Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Tatar ASSR from 1966 to 1982, served as First Secretary of the Obkom from 1982 until 23 September 1989. In 1986 he became a Member of the Central Committee of the CPSU and in 1989 a Secretary of the CC. His successor was none other than Mintimer Sharipovich Shaimiev, the first President of the Republic of Tatarstan from 12 June 1991 to 25 March 2010.

90 Biography and picture at http://www.hrono.info/biograf/bio_u/usmanov_gi.html (accessed 28 March 2011). These details show how the ‘affirmative action’ policies of the USSR were no ‘Potyomkin village’. The ethnic first secretaries were substantial political and administrative figures and there was a strong continuity.





Conclusion


It should be no surprise at all that the word ‘autonomy’ resonates so strongly in contemporary Russia. I have shown that this was no Soviet trick or show, but that territorial and indeed the concepts of non-territorial autonomy have deep roots in Russia and its history.





Chapter 8

Human rights in the Yeltsin period




DOI: 10.4324/9780203490211-9

In this chapter, I delve into the rich and surprising history of Russia’s unexpected plunge into the new world of European human rightswithin one year and ratify within standards – ironically developed in Western Europe as an ideological instrument in the Cold War. In order to place this momentous event into its proper context, I first survey the USSR’s approach to human rights, before asking two questions: first, why did the Council of Europe member states in 1996 permit Russia’s accession in the midst of the First Chechen War (1994–1997). And, second, why did Russia decide to subject itself to unprecedented (in its history) interference in its internal affairs. After all, the two pillars of Soviet international law had been state sovereignty, and the prohibition of interference in a state’s internal affairs.

Writing in 1993, Viktor Zaslavsky declared:

Today’s Russian youth is thoroughly Westernised. Global Western culture, with its emphasis on democracy, human rights and individual freedoms, is become a viable substitution for the traditional political culture in several crucial groups.1



1 Zaslavsky (1993), 49–50. In an anxious response, Rittersporn asked:

Why is he discovering the heuristic merits of categories such a ‘Western values’, ‘Market’ or ‘democracy’ without trying to see what they denote in the context in which he uses them and without asking himself if they have a clear and unambiguous meaning?2



2 Rittersporn (1993), 59–60. What was the USSR’s attitude to contemporary human rights?3 A new Soviet Constitution was unanimously approved on 5 December 1933. In September 1934 the USSR joined the League of Nations and was elected a permanent member of the Council. According to Andrey Vyshinsky, notorious as prosecutor of the Moscow show trials, the 1936 (Stalin) Constitution reflected the following changes:

3 See Bowring (1995). The complete triumph of the socialist system in all branches of the national economy, the fundamental realisation of socialism, the liquidation of the exploiter classes, the annihilation of man’s exploitat ion by man … all these factors evoked the necessity of changing the Constitution of the USSR so that the new Constitution should reflect all the changes … since 1924.4



4 Vyshinsky (1948a), 120. The first Constitution of the USSR was adopted on 31 January 1924.

Nikolai Bukharin, one of the most sophisticated and intellectually attractive members of the Bolshevik leadership, was a member of the drafting Commission, and later boasted that he had written the document from the first word to the last. He was reported as saying that the new Constitution was a document ‘which would make it impossible for the people any longer to be pushed aside’.5

5 KochanandAbraham (1990), 377.





The 1936 Stalin Constitution


The Stalin Constitution6 contained Chapter X, ‘Fundamental rights and duties of citizens’. Naturally, the first right guaranteed was the right to work (Article 118): ‘Citizens of the U.S.S.R. have the right to work, that is, are guaranteed the right to employment and payment for their work in accordance with its quantity and quality.’ This was followed by other social and economic rights: rest and leisure (Article 119); old age pensions and social security (Article 120); free education (Article 121); equal rights for women (Article 122); non-discrimination (Article 123); and freedom of conscience and religious belief (Article 124).

6 English translation at http://www.departments.bucknell.edu/russian/const/1936toc.html (accessed 12 October 2012). Freedom of speech, freedom of the press, freedom of assembly and freedom of demonstrations were all guaranteed in the following highly qualified form: ‘In conformity with the interests of the working people, and in order to strengthen the socialist system’ (Article 125). And freedom of association and self-organisation were similarly qualified: ‘In conformity with the interests of the working people, and in order to develop the organisational initiative and political activity of the masses of the people’ (Article 126).

It is a surprise, therefore, that the Constitution gave guarantees of freedom from arbitrary arrest (Article 127) and inviolability of the home and secrecy of correspondence (Article 128) without qualification.

That Bukharin believed sincerely that the Constitution would be respected shows that he imagined that a genuine relaxation was taking place.7 But as is now well known the last months of 1936 were a lull in the Great Purge of 1934 to 1938, in which at least 10 to 15 million people died. The rights enshrined in the new Constitution were unenforceable: there were no remedies. Vyshinsky was not at all embarrassed by this:

7 Conquest (1971), 134. Proletarian declarations of rights frankly manifest their class essence, reflecting nothing of the desire of bourgeois declarations to shade off and mask the class character of the rights they proclaim.8



8 Vyshinsky (1948a), 554. Bukharin was tried in the Trial of the Twenty One on 2–13 March 1938 and was executed on 15 March 1938.





The USSR and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights


By a supreme irony of history, Vyshinsky was, at Stalin’s death in March 1953, appointed the USSR’s permanent delegate to the United Nations, of which the USSR was a founder member. Vyshinsky became Foreign Minister of the USSR in March 1949,9 having attended the Third Session of the UN General Assembly at the end of 1948. That was the session which adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, on 10 December 1948. Forty-eight states voted in favour of the Declaration, while eight, including the USSR, abstained.

9 Vaksberg (1990), 279. In the introduction to a collection of Russian translations of major human rights instruments, published in the last year of the USSR, Lev Shestakov10 asked why the USSR abstained. He gave three reasons,11 which were also Vyshinsky’s reasons. First, in the opinion of the Soviet delegation, the draft Declaration had limited itself only to fixing formal rights and did not contain measures for the material and legislative guaranteeing of those rights. Second, the draft failed to enshrine the right of peoples to self-determination, on which the USSR had insisted, as a principled question. Third, Articles 19 and 20 (freedom of expression and freedom of association) had been drafted in such a way as to permit fascist propaganda; the USSR wished to include in Article 19 the words ‘the inalienable right of every human being is … the fight against fascism in the field of ideology, politics, state and social life’. Despite this abstention, the USSR ratified every one of the UN human rights treaties thereafter.

10 .03.1937–31.05.2009, Head of the Department of International Law at Moscow State University, until his death. I met him in 1993, with Grigoriy Tunkin (30.09.1906–23.08.1993). 11 Shestakov (1990), 6–7. The Brezhnev Constitution of 1977 followed the same model in Chapter 7, entitled ‘The basic rights, freedoms and obligations of citizens of the USSR’. On 11 March 1985 the Politburo of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union elected Mikhail Gorbachev General Secretary. He was 54 years old. At the 27th Congress of the CPSU in February 1986 he announced new policies of glasnost (‘openness’), perestroika (‘restructuring’), demokratizatsiya (‘democratisation’) and uskoreniye (‘acceleration’ of economic development). In place of Marxism–Leninism, there was a turn to ‘common human values’.12 Watching TV in Krasnodar in the summer of 1986, I saw Gorbachev addressing a conference of party officials in Khabarovsk, in the far east of Russia, informing them ‘Comrades, there will be a revolution!’ They looked aghast. One of the innovations under his leadership was the law of the USSR of 30 June 1987 ‘On judicial review of administrative acts’.

12 Gorbachev (1987) Perestroika i novoye mishleniye dlya nashei strany i dlya vsevo mira(Perestrioka and new thinking for our country and the whole world) (Moscow: Politizdat).





The Committee for Constitutional Supervision


In December 1988 Gorbachev proposed the creation of a Committee for Constitutional Supervision (CCS) of the USSR, the forerunner of the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation. On 23 December 1988 the law ‘On constitutional supervision in the USSR’ was adopted. According to the 19th All-Union Conference of the CPSU in 1988 the CCS had ‘the goal of guaranteeing the strictest correspondence of laws and Government decrees with the Constitution of the USSR’. It started work in April 1990.

Decisive steps had already been taken towards a greater respect for international law. On 10 February 1989 the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet passed a Decree recognising the compulsory jurisdiction of the UN’s International Court of Justice (ICJ) with respect to six human rights treaties, including the 1948 Genocide Convention and the 1984 Convention against Torture.13 This Decree reversed the reservation entered by the USSR when ratifying the Genocide Convention, refusing the compulsory jurisdiction of the ICJ, which led to one of the most important early advisory opinions of the ICJ, the Reservations to the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide opinion of 28 May 1951.14 Schweisfurth commented that ‘this move marked a positive shift in the previously negative attitude of the Soviet Union towards the principle judicial organ of the United Nations.’15 He saw, rightly I think, these developments as exemplifying a farewell to the traditional strict positivistic approach to human rights.16

13 Reported in 1989 (4) Interights Bulletin; the other treaties were the 1949 Convention for the Suppression of Traffic in Persons; the 1952 Convention on Political Rights of Women; the 1965 Convention on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination; and the 1979 Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women. 14 Website:http://www.icj-cij.org/docket/files/12/4283.pdf (accessed 13 October 2012). 15 Schweisfurth (1990), 111. 16 Bowring (2008). The USSR had always ratified UN human rights treaties, but with no intention that they should apply within the Soviet Union, much less that there should be the possibility of interference in internal affairs. During its short existence the CCS heard 29 cases. Some of these were of considerable significance, demonstrating the seriousness with which the CCS took human rights.

Here are a few examples. First, in the Unpublished Laws Case of 29 November 1990 the CCS ruled that all unpublished USSR regulations (there were many such ‘secret’ laws) violated international human rights standards and would lose their force unless published within three months.17 Second, in the Right to Defence Counsel Case, the CCS (petitioned by the Union of Advocates), decided that the USSR law of 10 April 1990 on reforms to the criminal law, which restricted the right to defence counsel, violated both the Constitution and international standards.

17 Vedomosti Syezda Narodnikh Deputatov SSSR i Verkhovnovo Sovyeta SSSR, 1990 No. 50, 1080. Third, in the Ratification of the Optional Protocol Case (4 April 1991), in a move which put the USSR ahead of the UK and the USA, the CCS requested the Supreme Soviet to secure ratification by the USSR of the First Optional Protocol to the UN International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR).18 The USSR had ratified the ICCPR– in 1973 – but not the Protocol, which enables individual complaint to the UN’s Human Rights Committee by a person complaining of a violation. There was a commendably prompt and positive response. On 5 July 1991 the Supreme Soviet adopted two Resolutions acceding to the Optional protocol and recognising the jurisdiction of the HRC.19 Fourth, in the Dismissal on Attainment of Pensionable Age Case, the CCS considered the USSR Presidium Decree amending labour law by adding as a ground for termination by the employer ‘attainment by the worker of pensionable age with entitlement to old age pension’. The CCS declared: ‘The rights and freedoms granted to citizens in carrying out any form of activity in the field of work and occupation not forbidden by law form a most important part of human rights, and indicate the level of social protection attained in a society. In a law-governed state every human must be guaranteed equality of opportunity in the possession and use of these rights … The principle of equality before the law is enshrined in the Constitution, in statutes, and in international legal acts on human rights and freedoms … and its main guarantee is the prohibition of discrimination.’20

18 VSND SSSR ibid, 1991 No. 17, 502; see also Sovyetskaya Iustitsiya I 23 December 1991, 17. 19 Vedomosti SSSR, 1991 No. 29, 842, 843. 20 Vedomosti SSSR, 1991 No. 17, 501. Finally, there was the Residence Permit Case of 11 October 1991, where the CCS decided that propiska, the Soviet system of registration and residence permit, plainly contradicted that rights freely to move around and to choose one’s place of residence, which is to be found in several international human rights treaties, but was not then part of the Soviet Constitution (although it was in Article 21 of the USSR Declaration of the Rights and Freedoms of Man adopted on 5 September 1991). This is an issue that has continued to exercise the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation.

Savitskiy believed that the role of the CCS ‘was a secondary one and amounted to the publication of a number of purely symbolic “conclusions” that were binding on no-one’.21

21 Savitskiy (1993). I disagree. Indeed, in the view of van den Berg, the work of the CCS ‘in the field of human rights on the whole was positive’; it was not an illogical institution; he considered that ‘[I]n fact it had much more power than most constitutional courts in the world ….22 The examples I gave earlier show that its work brought about substantial changes.

22 vandenBerg (1992), 106–7. Further significant steps taken before the collapse of the USSR included the publication of the Conception of Judicial Reform published on 24 October 1991, after several years work, by Sergei Pashin,23 Sergei Vitsin,24 Tamara Morshchakova25 and others and the enactment on 22 November 1991 of the Declaration of the Rights and Freedoms of the Person and Citizen by the Supreme Soviet of the RSFSR.

23 He was born in 1962 and was from 1990 to 1996 the leading expert on judicial reform at the legal department of the President’s Administration, and introduced the first experiment in jury trial in nine regions of Russia in 1993. Following his fall from grace and dismissal, was twice (being once dismissed and reinstated) dismissed and is now a leading scholar and critic of Russian constitutionalism and the Constitutional Court. 24 Born in 1929, for many years professor and general of police at the Moscow University of the Ministry of the Interior; one of the most respected reformers in Russia. 25 She was born on 28 March 1936. From 1958 to 1991 she was a senior legal researcher and professor. She was elected a justice of the Constitutional Court on 29 October 1991 and from February 1995 to April 2002 she was Deputy Chairman of the Court. An amendment to the Law on the Constitutional Court enacted in January 2001 forced her to retire by reason of age. Many consider that this was a deliberate ploy to remove her, in view of her independent and principled stance. The Law of the RSFSR on the Constitutional Court of the RSFSR, drafted by Sergei Pashin, was signed by President Yeltsin on 12 July 1991.26 Pashin was only 29 years of age. Thirteen justices were elected by the Congress of People’s Deputies of the RSFSR on 30 October 1991. The justices elected Valeriy Zorkin (born 1943) as their Chairman. Zorkin has proved to be a great survivor: on 10 February 2012, the then President Medvedev appointed Zorkin to a further six-year term.27 Zorkin was Chairman of the Court from 1991 to 1993 and again from 2003 to 2006, and 2006 to 2009. Justices Gadis Gadzhiev (b. 1953, from Dagestan) and Yuriy Rudkin (b. 1951) are also still members of the Court. Tamara Morshchakova (b. 1936) was Vice-Chairman of the Court from 1995 to 2002 and a leading proponent of human rights, but was forced to retire on reaching the age of 65 in 2001 (see n. 25). She remains one of the most trenchant commentators on the Russian Constitution and court and critics of the Putin regime.

26 See Trochev (2008) for a complete history; also Henderson (2011a). 27 Website:http://www.brookings.edu/opinions/2012/0213_russia_zorkin_partlett.aspx (accessed 29 September 2012). The Court started work in January 1992. Pashin commented that the law represented ‘an important guarantee of the right of the citizen to judicial protection’. He wrote that the provisions of the new law were based on Chapter 4, Article 93 of the German Constitution, which provides that the Federal Constitutional Court considers cases ‘by way of petition on constitutionality, which may be laid by any person considering that one of his basic rights has been infringed by the state power’.28 Article 32 of the Constitution of the RSFSR, as amended in April 1992, stated that universally accepted human rights norms have precedence over the laws of the RSFSR and have direct effect.

28 Pashin (1992). From 6 July 1992 to 30 November 1992 the Court was occupied by the Case of the Communist Party, which did not produce the hoped for (by the applicants) definitive condemnation of the Communist Party, a Russian Nuremberg, but instead in a compromise decision ruled that President Yeltsin rightly dissolved the highest bodies of the Party, but also ruled that the Party could continue to exist at the local level.29 The Communist Party of the Russian Federation is to this day the only significant opposition party organised in every region of Russia.

29 Henderson (2011a). However, prior to July it rendered significant decisions. In its very first case, decided on 14 January 1992, the Formation of the Ministry of Security and Internal Affairs case.30 it held that President Yeltsin’s Decree of 19 December 1991 merging the KGB and the militia (police) was unconstitutional. President Yeltsin backed down, albeit reluctantly. In its judgment in the Tatarstan Sovereignty case, on 13 March 1992,31 the Court ruled that the provisions of Article 5(3) and Article 6 of the Declaration of State Sovereignty of theRepublic of Tatarstan of 30 August 1990, limiting the jurisdiction of RSFSR laws on the territory of Tatarstan, violated the RSFSR Constitution. Furthermore, it ruled that the Order of the Supreme Soviet of Tatarstan ‘On holding a referendum on the question of the state status of Tatarstan’ was unconstitutional to the extent that the formulation of the question presupposed that Tatarstan was a subject of international law and built its relations with the RSFSR and other republics and states on the basis of equal treaties, signifying that Tatarstan was not part of the RSFSR.

30 1-P-U/1992; the text of all judgments decisions is to be found at http://www.ksrf.ru/ru/Decision/Pages/default.aspx (accessed 13 October 2012). 31 P-R3–1/1992. Its decisions on human rights concerned social and economic rights. In the Age Discrimination case (4 February 1992),32 it set aside the dismissal of two workers for having reached pensionable age and ordered an amendment to the Labour Code. It applied not only the Declaration of Rights and Freedoms (not by then incorporated into the Constitution), but also the UN’s 1966 International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and a range of International Labour Organisation conventions ratified by the USSR. In the Time Limits for Challenging Unfair Dismissal, a number of workers filed petitions complaining of the unconstitutionality of amended legislation providing for two-year time limits. On 23 June 199233 the Court held that the amendments violated five norms of international law and 14 articles of the Constitution.

32 Vedomosti Verkhovnovo Soveta RSFSRNo. 13, Art. 669. 33 Vedomosti Verkhovnovo Soveta RSFSRNo. 30, Art. 1809. There were further progressive moves on 26 June 1992 with the enactment of the law ‘On the status of judges of the Russian Federation’, giving judges unlimited tenure until a fixed retirement age and on 27 April 1993 with the enactment of the law ‘On complaining to court about activities and decisions which violate the rights and freedoms of citizens’. This vitally important law on judicial review continues in force. On 16 July 1993 a great experiment, led by Sergei Pashin, began with enactment of the new Part X to the Criminal Procedural Code (UPK), which introduced jury trial, as an experiment, in nine Russian regions.34

34 For analysis of these developments, see F.J.M. Feldbrugge, Russian law: the end of the Soviet system and the role of law (1993); G. Smith, Reforming the Russian legal system (1996); Solomon, ‘Courts and their reform in Russian history’ in Reforming justice in Russia, 1864–1996. Power, culture, and the limits of legal order (1997), 3–20. The Court was suspended by Yeltsin on 6 October 1993, after he tore up the 1978 Constitution, disbanded parliament and finally shelled the White House, seat of the parliament. The Court had sat all night following Yeltsin’s decree of 21 September 1993 and held that his actions violated the Constitution. The Court did not sit again until February 1995. To Yeltsin’s credit Valeriy Zorkin and his colleagues continued to sit in the reconstituted court, but the number of judges was increased from 13 to 19.

An initial test of the renewed Constitutional Court was presented by the First Chechen War. On 31 July 1995 the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation delivered its judgment on the constitutionality of President Yeltsin’s decrees sending federal forces into Chechnya.35 The Court was obliged in particular to consider the consequences of Russia’s participation in the 1977 Additional Protocol II to the 1949 Geneva Conventions.36 As Gaeta pointed out:

35 An unofficial English translation of this judgment was published by the European Commission for Democracy through Law (Venice Commission) of the Council of Europe, CDL-INF (96), 1. 36 The RF is a party to the 1949 Geneva conventions. The Soviet Union ratified both the 1977 additional protocols on 29 September 1989 to become effective on 29 March1990. The Russian Federation deposited a notification of continuation on 13 January1992. The Court determined that at the international level the provisions of Protocol II were binding on both parties to the armed conflict and that the actions of the Russian armed forces in the conduct of the Chechen conflict violated Russia’s international obligations under Additional Protocol II to the 1949 Geneva Conventions. Nonetheless, the Court sought to excuse this non-compliance because Protocol II had not been incorporated into the Russian legal system.37



37 Gaeta (1996), 568. Despite the order of the Court, incorporation has still not taken place. And Chechnya was de facto independent for two years from 1997 to 1999, having defeated the federal forces, although it was not recognised by any state.





Accession to the Council of Europe38


38 See Bowring (1997). Russia applied to join the Council of Europe on 7 May 1992, at a time when, as noted already, there were a number of progressive developments, legislative and in the work of the Constitutional Court. Despite the fact that it was by then engaged in bitter internal armed conflict in Chechnya, Russia became a full member of the Council of Europe on 28 February 1996. The Council now has 47 member states, including nine of the former ‘Union Republics’ of the USSR.39 The process has been completed whereby the Council of Europe, which began life in 1949 as (in the words of Ian Brownlie and Guy Goodwin-Gill)40 ‘a sort of social and ideological counterpart to the military aspects of European co-operation represented in the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation … inspired partly by interests in promotion of European unity and partly by the political desire for solidarity in the face of the ideology of Communism’, now includes almost all the formerly ‘communist’ states. This is an extraordinary ‘irony of destiny’, to poach the title of the ever popular Soviet film Ironiya sudby, ili s lyogkim parom! (1975).

39 Armenia, Azerbaijan, Estonia, Georgia, Latvia, Lithuania, Moldova, Russia, Ukraine. 40 BrownlieandGoodwin-Gill (2010). Following the application, the Council’s executive body, the Committee of Ministers, by Resolution (92) 27 of 25 June 1992, asked the Parliamentary Assembly (PACE) to give an opinion, in accordance with Statutory Resolution (51) 30 A. Four experts visited Russia in May and June 1994, in order to report to the Parliamentary Assembly. Rudolf Bernhardt reported in general on the human rights situation; Felix Ermacora reported on national minorities; Albert Weitzel reported on those aspects of human rights of particular importance to democratic development; and Stefan Trechsel made findings as to Articles 3, 5 and 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights.41 It was their impression that Russia had ‘embarked upon the road to democracy’. However, the rule of law, as enshrined in the Constitution, particularly the provisions as to human rights and incorporation of international standards, seemed to them to be more a matter of theory than practice. Furthermore, conditions in pre-trial detention centres were degrading if not inhuman and the guarantee of individual liberty was far behind the requirements of Article 5 of the European Convention. They concluded that the Russian Federation ‘does not yet fulfil the condition of the enjoyment by all persons within its jurisdiction of human rights and fundamental freedoms’.42

41 Their reports are set out in full at (1994) Vol. 15 Human Rights Law Journal, 7:250–300. 42 Ibid, 287. In July 1994, the UN Special Rapporteur on the question of the human rights of all persons subjected to any form of detention or imprisonment and, in particular, torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, Nigel S. Rodley (now Professor Sir Nigel Rodley) visited Russia at the request of the government. His Report to the 51st Session of the Human Rights Commission in 1995,43 which has been published and widely disseminated in Russia,44 was devastating. He commented as follows on what he found in one prison:

43 E/CN.4/1995/34/Add.1: Report of the Special Rapporteur on the question of the human rights of all persons subjected to any form of detention or imprisonment in particular: torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment: visit to the Russian Federation. 44 In Prava Cheloveka v. Rossiy – Mezhdunarodnoye Izmereniye (Human Rights in Russia –International Perspectives), Issue 1 (Human Rights Publishers, 1995), 281–308; and in (1995) 2 Pravo-Zashchitnik (Human Rights Defender), 37–55. The Special Rapporteur would need the poetic skills of a Dante or the artistic skills of a Bosch adequately to describe the infernal conditions he found in these cells. The senses of smell, touch, taste and sight are repulsively assailed. The conditions are cruel, inhuman and degrading; they are torturous. To the extent that suspects are confined there to facilitate the investigation by breaking their wills with a view to eliciting confessions and information, they can properly be described as being subjected to torture.



His conclusion was uncompromising:

The prohibition of torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment is absolute under international law. Indeed, according to article 3 of the Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,45 even ‘exceptional circumstances such as a state of war or a threat of war, internal political instability or any other public emergency may not be invoked as a justification of torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment’ (art. 3). It follows inexorably that the Government of the Russian Federation is obliged to put an immediate end to this situation.



45 General Assembly Resolution 3452 (XXX) of 9 December 1975, annex. Similar views were taken by the President’s own Human Rights Commission, at that time headed by the redoubtable human rights activist Sergei Kovalyov, who was also for a period Russia’s first Human Rights Ombudsman (his period of office as Human Rights Plenipotentiary lasted only from 17 January 1994 to 10 March 1995, when he was dismissed for his uncompromising stance on the Chechnya conflict).46

46 For accounts of Kovalyov’s activities, see Mariana Katzarova and Antti Korkeakivi, The price of independence: the Office of Ombudsman and human rights in the Russian federation (NewYork: Lawyers’ Committee for Human Rights) 1995; Antti Korkeakivi, ‘The Russian human rights commissioner’ (1995), Parker School Journal of East European Law: 236–38; and Bowring (1998). On 14 June 1994 the Commission published their report on the Observance of Human Rights in the Russian Federation in 1993.47 They pointed out very serious violations relating to refugees and forced migrants; to freedom of movement and the right to choice of place of residence; to human rights of detained persons; to human rights in the armed forces; in the observance of labour rights; and in particular very serious violations during the state of emergency in Moscow in autumn 1993 and its consequences. Their second and last report was dated 5 February 199648 and covered the period 1994–1995. Their conclusion49 was that the situation in relation to observance of human rights in 1994–1995 remained extremely unsatisfactory. The Russian Constitution, particularly as concerns human rights, remained essentially a declaratory document. The development of legislation proceeded slowly and with many contradictions. Social and economic rights, in particular, were under threat.

47 O Soblyudeniy Prav Cheloveka i Grazhdanina v. Rossiskoi Federatsiy za 1993 god (Moscow: Yuridicheskaya Literatura, 1994). 48 O Soblyudeniy Prav Cheloveka i Grazhdanina v Rossiskoi Federatsiy v. 1994–5 godakh (Moscow: Yuridicheskaya Literatura, 1996). 49 Ibid, 79.





Debate in the Council of Europe


All this critical expert comment notwithstanding, Russia was finally accepted into membership on 28 February 1996. This followed a controversial vote50 that took place on the evening of 25 January 1996 in the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE), when more than two-thirds of the votes cast supported a resolution point 10 of which read: ‘To recommend to the Cabinet of Ministers of the Council of Europe to invite the Russian Federation to become a member of the Council of Europe; and to allot to the Russian Federation 18 places in the Parliamentary Assembly.’ As many as 58 of the members took part in the debate, as well as three rapporteurs: Muehleman (Switzerland); Binding (Germany); and Atkinson (United Kingdom), and deputies of the Russian State Duma: V. Lukin (Yabloko); G. Zyuganov (KPRF); V. Zhirinovsky (LDPR); and A. Abdulatov (Russian Regions). Lukin is now the Ombudsman of the Russian Federation for Human Rights; and Zyuganov and Zhirinovsky still lead their respective parties.

50 This information, and much more, is to be found in Glotov (1996). Some 214 of the 263 members of the Assembly took part in the vote. Of them, 164 voted for the resolution, with 35 against and 15 abstentions. Significantly, at the request of more than 10 members, the voting was by roll call. The members who insisted on this procedure included those from the formerly Soviet Baltic states, as well as members from Austria and Norway. Russian membership was supported firmly by the United Left (Communist), Socialist and Liberal Reform groups, and less energetically by the Christian Democrats and Conservatives.

Speakers for Russian membership included former PACE Chairman M. Martinez (Spain) who said ‘With Russia’s participation the Council of Europe will be able to play a big role in the construction of Europe’; Shiller (Austria), who said ‘Russia is most of all a great power and without it a complete Europe cannot be’; Boldtzer (Switzerland) who said ‘Europe cannot be secure without Russia’; Karakas (Greece) who said ‘Russia has a vast population with a powerful culture and history, and they must be Europeans with full rights’; E. Laaksa of the United Left who said ‘Acceptance of Russia will help to develop the rule of law and will protect civil liberties’; Boris Oleinik (Ukraine) who said ‘If Russia is not accepted today, there will be a political Chernobyl’; and Paunescu (Romania) who said ‘Russia cannot be sent home from Strasbourg like a school-child who has not learnt her lesson.’ It is notable that most speakers in favour of Russian accession concentrated on European security and the future of the project of European unity, rather than on the protection of human rights in Russia.

This was not the case with speakers against, particularly those with recent experience of Soviet rule. They included Colomberg (Switzerland) who said: ‘There has been progress in Russia, but Russia is not a rule of law state, there are victims in Chechnya, and bad prison conditions’; Sinko (Latvia) who said ‘Peaceloving people in Chechnya must be free’; Kelam (Estonia) who said ‘Things are going very badly for human rights in Russia’; and Kalus (Czech Republic) who said ‘Russia must stop its imperialist policy and withdraw its occupation forces. Chechnya must be free.’





Debate in the Russian state Duma


Domestic political opinion was for the most part more straightforward, focusing largely on Russian national interest. On 21 February 1996 the Russian state Duma approved membership of the Council of Europe by 204 votes to 18, by adopting the federal law ‘On the Russian Federation joining the Council of Europe’.51 First Deputy Foreign Minister Igor Ivanov told the Duma that joining the Council was in Russia’s national interest. He added that membership would permit Russia better to defend the interests of ethnic Russians living abroad, particularly in the Baltic republics. The Chair of the Duma’s International Affairs Committee, Vladimir Lukin, assured deputies that the benefits of Council membership would more than justify the $25 million a year dues that Russia must pay.52 The upper house, the Federation Council, unanimously approved the Duma’s two bills on the subject. They were signed by the President on 23 February 1996.

51 Federal Law No. 19-F3. The text is set out in Glotov (1996), 118. 52 Scott Parish (1996) OMRI Daily Digest, 22 February 1996. The debate that had taken place in the State Duma a few days earlier, on 16 February 1996 was much more controversial and revealing.53 Vladimir Lukin, Head of the Russian delegation to the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, introduced the debate on the question ‘On the entry of Russia into the Council of Europe’. He pointed out that Russia is ‘a great Euro-Asian country, two thirds of whose territory is in Asia, but four fifths of whose population lives in Europe’. Russia, he said, is a more European state than Turkey, which is already a member of the Council. In answer to questions from members of the Communist Party, he said that despite his own negative views about Stalin, under Stalin the USSR had joined the United Nations and signed [sic] the Charter on Human Rights of the UN and Stalin was in his own way not stupid in advancing Russia’s interests. Deputy A.G. Ghekhoyev specifically took up54 the issue of the obligations to ratify within a specified time, set out in Opinion No. 193 (1996). Was this not an instruction to the Russian parliament? Did Lukin not have the feeling that Russia was being spoken to as if it were Honduras?

53 The transcript of the debate is reproduced in Glotov (1996), 95–117. 54 See Glotov (1996), 103–4. Lukin replied that this was not the case. The essence of the opinion was that the Parliamentary Assembly expected of Russia that it would, within a specified time, conform to what the other 38 members of the Council had already accepted. This was an expectation; therefore the opinion had a recommendatory character. He added that a number of things had been placed in the opinion by Russia’s enemies, who wished that Russia would not join the Council of Europe. He insisted that it was necessary for Russia to join and then ‘to see what we shall do with each of these recommendations’. In answer to a specific question, from Deputy V.D. Rozhkov, about the death penalty, he replied that if Russia had a problem with regard to a moratorium and eventual abolition, so did a number of other member states, which had been members for a number of years without having abolished the death penalty (he probably had in mind states like the UK and Belgium).

In the debate on joining, the position of the KPRF (through its spokesman Anatoliy Lukyanov, who spent a year in detention following the unsuccessful putsch of August 1991) was, contrary to expectation, that Russia should join.55 The rights of workers would be better protected; political rights to meetings and demonstrations would be guaranteed; parliamentary control on the executive would be enhanced, as would the role of local government. It would, therefore, be useful for the Communist Party’s constituents.

55 Glotov (1996), 107. Vladimir Zhirinovsky, however, for the LDPR, went straight to the point. He disagreed with Lukin’s assessment of the provisions of the opinion; they were indeed obligations, not recommendations. In his view, Russian norms were in many respects quite different from those of the Council of Europe. S.A. Glotov himself told the Duma, on behalf of the ‘Narodovlastiye’ (People’s Power) faction, that they would vote in favour of entry; he focused mainly on the expected benefits to Russian national interests.

It is quite clear from this debate that most members of the state Duma did not understand Russia’s obligations to be obligations at all, but simply recommendations, a number of which were to be taken as provocative attempts to keep Russia out of the Council of Europe and which could be adopted or discarded at will. It is not surprising, then, that Sergei Kovalyov had already on 26 January 1996 expressed deep ambivalence about membership, saying: ‘I fear the Council does not realise the responsibility it bears.’56 On the same day Viktor Ilyushin, Chair of the Security Committee, said that Russia would be unable to end its use of the death penalty in the near future since its prisons do not have the capacity to keep large numbers of life prisoners. A senior Interior Ministry official said it would be ‘premature’ to ban the death penalty and that two-thirds of the population agreed.57

56 Scott Parish (1996) OMRI Daily Digest, 26 January 1996. 57 Penny Morvant (1996) OMRI Daily Digest, 29 January 1996. On 12 March 1996 President Boris Yeltsin addressed the 12 deputies who would represent Russia in the Parliamentary Assembly and insisted that the Council’s four basic Conventions should be ratified as soon as possible. He said Russia had ‘earned’ Council membership by making progress on democratisation and human rights; but added that Russia could not immediately implement the Council’s standards, including abolition of the death penalty. He urged the deputies to defend vigorously the rights of ethnic Russians in the Baltic and CIS states, and, referring to Chechnya, to ‘rebuff resolutely attempts to pressure Russia, interfere in its internal affairs, and apply double standards’. Leni Fischer, speaker of the Parliamentary Assembly, reacted quickly, saying that ‘human rights are never a domestic issue’.58

58 Scott Parish (1996) OMRI Daily Digest, 13 March 1996.





Why did the Council of Europe need Russia; why did Russia need the Council of Europe?


S.A. Glotov, himself a deputy of the state Duma and member of the ‘Narodovlastiye’ (People’s Power) faction59 gave the following reasons why the Council of Europe should wish to have Russia as a member, on the basis, of course, that Russia had fulfilled most of the demands of the Council of Europe – the holding of new elections to parliament, the abolition of the Congress of People’s Deputies of the RSFSR, the promulgation of an extensive report on the state of law and order and perspectives for improving it. First, the acceptance of Russia gave the Council of Europe a ‘second wind’, as well as the opportunity to encourage the spread of Western European values and norms in this country of millions of people. Second, European security was likely to be better safeguarded. Third, Russia’s accession significantly strengthened a more united Europe in its rivalry with the United States and Japan. Fourth, the Council of Europe was able to give further support to Russia’s ‘reformers’ – in Glotov’s view this serves the interests of major Western financial companies and political groups. Fifth, failure to accept Russia could tend to support the growth of terrorism in Russia.

59 Glotov (1996), 11. Why should Russia wish to join the Council of Europe? First, because Russia would have a sound international tribune from which to express its interests and help form public opinion. In particular, this tribune could be used for the protection of the Russian-speaking populations in the Baltic states (Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania) and for the purpose of expressing Russia’s negative attitude towards the expansion of NATO. Second, joining would help with the establishment of legal and social reform. Third, Russia’s joining the Council would permit the organisation of international humanitarian cooperation. Fourth, although this appears paradoxical, the Council of Europe would provide an arena for promoting integration between Russia and states of the former USSR. Fifth, membership of the Council of Europe would permit direct cooperation (within the Congress of local and regional authorities) between regions of other member states and the republics, krai and oblast of the CIS. Sixth, the long experience of European states in the political struggle of various parties and groups supplies the basis for norms that guarantee the functioning of the opposition and the handing over of power.





The CIS Convention on Human Rights


One of the most controversial problems surrounding Russian accession was Russia’s promotion of a separate regional instrument, the ‘CIS Convention on Human Rights’,60 which was signed at Minsk, Belarus’ on 26 May 1995 by seven of the 12 member states of the Commonwealth of Independent States.61 Jeremy McBride commented that ‘the apparent width of the Convention guarantee may actually be at the expense of its depth’. He raised a number of serious questions as to its effectiveness and its compatibility with European standards.62 By Article 38, it comes into force after it has been ratified by three states. Moldova was a signatory to the Convention and became a member of the Council of Europe on 13 July 1995. Russia was the only state to have ratified this Convention. Opinion No. 188 (1995) on Moldova’s application to join the Council of Europe stipulated that Moldova enter into a commitment ‘to withhold ratification of the CIS Convention until the implications of the co-existence of this Convention and the ECHR, especially as the control mechanisms are concerned, have been clarified’ and not to ratify without the consent of the Council. On 20 October 1995, the Russian Duma adopted a law on ratification of the CIS Convention and on 25 October this was approved by the Federation Council, with signature and promulgation by President Yeltsin following on 4 November 1995.63 However, nothing more was heard of the CIS Convention, for reasons that are explained later.

60 The text appears at Vol. 17 (1996) Human Rights Law Journal: 159–62. 61 SeeDrzemscewski (1996). 62 McBride (1995). 63 Rossiskaya Gazeta, 11 November 1995. In a letter dated 23 June 1995, the Council of Europe’s then Secretary General, Daniel Tarschys, asked two eminent human rights experts, Professor Antonio Augusto Cancado Trindade and Jochen A. Frowein, to carry out an analysis of the legal implications for states that intend to ratify both the ECHR and the CIS Convention, so as to know what practical solutions might be envisaged so as to ensure the highest possible degree of effective protection of human rights by states parties to both instruments. These two studies were dated 6 October and 10 August 1995, respectively.64 Professor Trindade concluded that ‘to try to erect the CIS Human Rights Convention into an alleged “regional remedy” to be exhausted before recourse can be made to the European Convention on Human Rights’ would be ‘highly objectionable … weakening the international protection of human rights’.65 Professor Frowein was concerned to avoid a situation where a degree of protection might be established that was in violation of the European Convention on Human Rights, but that would continue to exist in practice.66

64 They are reproduced at Vol. 17 (1996) Human Rights Law Journal: 164–84. 65 Ibid, 178. 66 Ibid, 184.





Russia’s obligations to the Council of Europe on accession


At a ceremony held in Strasbourg on 28 February 1996 to mark Russia’s entry into the Council of Europe, the Russian Foreign Minister, Yevgeniy Primakov, handed over the documents affirming Russia’s adherence to the Council’s Charter. He also signed the European Convention on Human Rights, the European Convention against Torture, the European Charter on Local Self-Government and the Framework Convention on Protection of National Minorities He did this pursuant to the obligations placed on Russia in Parliamentary Assembly Opinion 193 (1996) of 25 January 1996,67 confirmed in Committee of Ministers Resolution No. 96/2.

67 This is set out in Glotov (1996), 82–9. Point 7 of the opinion set out a number of respects in which Russia was already seeking to conform with the fundamental principles of the Council of Europe (more precisely, as set out in Article 3 – ‘Every member of the Council of Europe must accept the principles of the rule of law and the enjoyment by all persons within its jurisdiction of human rights and fundamental freedoms, and collaborate sincerely and effectively in the realisation of the aim of the Council’):

Since 1992 Russia had taken part in various activities of the Council of Europe, connected with the carrying out of the inter-governmental programme on ‘cooperation and assistance’ (in particular in the fields of legal reform and human rights) and had sent its own delegation, with specially invited status, to participate in the work of the Parliamentary Assembly and its commissions;

From May 7, 1992 ‘political dialogue’ was established between Russia and the Committee of Ministers;

Russia had acceded to a series of Council of Europe Conventions including the European Cultural Conventions;

With immediate effect, with the use of international expertise, the following statutes are being drafted: new Criminal and Criminal Procedural Codes, new Civil and Civil Procedural Codes and a Criminal Correctional Code. On the basis of these, the principles and standards of the Council of Europe will be implemented;

It is expected that new laws will be adopted, in accordance with Council of Europe standards, as follows: on the role, activities and organisation of the Procurator’s Office and the Office of the Commissioner for Human Rights; on the protection of national minorities; and on freedom of assembly and freedom of religion;

The status of the legal profession will be protected by law; a professional bar association will be set up;

Persons, found responsible for human rights violations, especially in connection with the events in Chechnya, will be brought to justice;

Effective exercise will be guaranteed of the rights enshrined in Article 27 of the Constitution and in the law on freedom of movement and choice of place of residence;

Conditions of detention will be improved in accordance with Recommendation A (87)3 on common European prison rules, in particular the practically inhuman conditions in many pre-trial detention centres will be ameliorated without delay;

The responsibility for the prison administration and the execution of judgments will be transferred to the Ministry of Justice as soon as possible;

The state and progress of law reform will permit the signature and ratification, within the delays indicated, of the Council of Europe conventions listed in paragraph 10;

The Russian Federation will assist persons formerly deported from the occupied Baltic states or those belonging to the descendants of deportees, to return home in accordance with special repatriation and compensation programmes which must be worked out.



Under paragraph 10, the Parliamentary Assembly noted that ‘the Russian Federation shares fully its understanding and interpretation of the commitments entered into as spelt out in paragraph 7, and intends’:

to sign the European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms at the moment of accession; to ratify the Convention and Protocols Nos: 1, 2, 4, 7 and 11 within a year; to recognise, pending the entry into force of Protocol No. 11, the right of individual petition to the European Commission on Human Rights and the compulsory jurisdiction of the European Court of Human Rights (Articles 25 and 46 of the Convention);

to sign within one year and ratify within three years from the time of accession, Protocol No. 6 to the European Convention on Human Rights on the abolition of the death penalty in time of peace, and to put into place a moratorium on executions with effect from the day of accession;

to sign and ratify within a year from the time of accession the European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman and Degrading Treatment or Punishment;

to sign and ratify within a year from the time of accession the European Framework Convention on the Protection of National Minorities, to conduct its policy towards minorities on the principles set out in Assembly Recommendation 1201 (1993), and to incorporate these principles into the legal and administrative system and practice of the country;

to sign and ratify within a year from the date of accession the European Charter of Local Self-Government and the Charter for Regional and Minority Languages; to study, with a view to ratification, the European Social Charter; and meanwhile to conduct its policy in accordance with the principles of these conventions;

to sign and ratify and meanwhile to apply the basic principles of other conventions of the Council of Europe – notably those on extradition; on mutual assistance in criminal matters; on transfer of sentenced persons; on laundering, search, seizure and confiscation of proceeds from crime;

to settle international as well as internal conflicts by peaceful means (an obligation incumbent on all member states of the Council of Europe), rejecting resolutely any forms of threat to use force against its neighbours;

– not strictly human rights issues;

to ensure that the application of the CIS Convention on Human Rights does not in any way interfere with the procedure and guarantees of the European Convention on Human Rights;

to revise the law on federal security services in order to bring it into line with Council of Europe principles and standards within one year from the time of accession, in particular, the right of the Federal Security Service (FSB) to possess and run pre-trial detention centres should be withdrawn;

to adopt a law on alternative military service, as foreseen by Article 59 of the Constitution;

to reduce, if not eliminate, incidents of ill-treatment and deaths in the armed forces outside military conflicts;

to pursue legal reform with a view to bringing all legislation in line with Council of Europe principles and standards; amongst other legislation, Presidential Decree No. 1226 should be revised without delay;

– not strictly human rights issues;

to co-operate fully in the implementation of Assembly Order No. 508 (1995) on the honouring of obligations and commitments by member states of the Council of Europe, as well as in monitoring processes established by virtue of the Committee of Ministers’ Declaration of 10 November 1994 (95th session);

to respect strictly the provisions of international humanitarian law, including the cases of armed conflicts on its territory;

to co-operate in good faith with international humanitarian organ-isations and to enable them to carry on their activities on its territory in conformity with their mandate.



In paragraph 11, these are further described as ‘commitments and understandings’ – certainly not as ‘recommendations’. The list is almost overwhelmingly extensive and it was immediately apparent that a number of Council of Europe member states had not ratified all of these – in Britain’s case Protocols 4 and 6 to the ECHR and the Charter on Local Self-Government. It is not difficult to understand the sense of many Russians that unreasonable and humiliating demands were being made.

A number of speeches were made at the ceremony. Leni Fischer, Chairman of PACE, stressed that with Russia’s admission, the Council of Europe’s relations with the European Union and the OSCE would be transformed.68 Daniel Tarschys, the General Secretary, recalled Russia’s role, led by President Gorbachev, in bringing about democratic change in eastern Europe and Gorbachev’s speech at Strasbourg in 1994, when he spoke of a ‘common European home’. In answer to the question whether Russia was a European country, he said that it was now beyond doubt that Russia was part of Europe and that the wealth of Russia’s culture was an inalienable part of Europe’s common heritage. However, Russia’s parliament and government had undertaken important obligations in relation to the Council of Europe.

68 Transcriptions of the speeches made at the ceremony are to be found in Glotov (1996), 120–29. Finally, Russian Foreign Minister Yevgeniy M. Primakov outlined the importance of entry into membership both for Russia and for the Council of Europe. For Russia, this confirmed the depth and integrity of the democratic changes taking place in Russia, as well as showing that the whole European community believed that it would continue its democratic reforms. For the Council of Europe, this meant that the organisation now had a truly universal character. Russia did not join with empty hands; its enormous cultural, scientific and intellectual potential would enrich the Council’s activities. He said nothing about Russia’s obligations, other than acceptance of the right of individual petition to the Commission on Human Rights and of the Court’s compulsory jurisdiction.

But in his comments that day, Sergei Kovalyov urged the Council to monitor Russian compliance with its obligations very carefully, especially in Chechnya. Otherwise, he said, ‘nothing good will come’ of Russian membership.69

69 Scott Parish, (1996) OMRI Daily Digest, 29 February 1996.





Russia’s compliance with its obligations in the first year


Russia’s compliance in the first year after accession was far from complete. The death penalty is a prime example. On 24 September 1996 at a press conference in Moscow, Anatoly Pristavkin, Chairman of the Presidential Clemency Commission and Valery Borshchev, representative of the Human Rights Commission, reported that 53 executions had been carried out in 1996. They also said that judicial errors had been made in 30 per cent of death penalty cases. Despite the fact that the Clemency Commission regularly recommends clemency, Amnesty International received information that President Yeltsin had granted clemency in only five cases in 1995. Seven hundred prisoners remained on death row. On 3 October 1996 Amnesty International issued a statement saying that Russia was treating its Council of Europe commitments with contempt.70 This was followed by a resolution of the Parliamentary Assembly on 29 January 1997, calling on Russia to honour the obligations it undertook to end executions and threatening to exclude Russian delegates unless a moratorium was quickly imposed.71

70 Amnesty International, AI Index: E.U.R. 46/43/96, 3 October 1996. 71 Penny Morvant (1997) OMRI Daily Digest, 30 January 1997. It was no surprise, therefore, when on 3 March 1997 the General Secretary of the Council of Europe, Daniel Tarschys, visited Moscow with a view to reviewing Russia’s progress in fulfilling its obligations.72 According to research carried out by journalist Svetlana Sukhova, Russia had done a great deal in the space of a year. The list is impressive, and worth setting out in full:

The European Convention on Human Rights was signed on 29 February 1996. A draft law entrenching the right of individual petition was to be presented to the state Duma in spring 1997.

The new Criminal Code entered into force on 1 January 1997.73 A draft law has been prepared on the introduction of a moratorium on the death penalty. On 28 February 1997 President Yeltsin instructed the Russian Foreign Ministry to sign Protocol 6 of the ECHR and the Ministry of Justice to prepare a scheme for its implementation.

The following instruments had been signed, but not yet ratified:

the European Convention on Prevention of Torture and Inhuman and Degrading Treatment

the Framework Convention on the Protection of National Minorities

the European Charter on Local Self-Government

the Charter on Regional or Minority Languages.





Two parts of the Civil Code had been enacted74 and the third – concerned with rights of inheritance – is in the process of drafting.

The working out of the Criminal Procedural Code had not yet started.

The Law on Advocates received its first reading in November 1996.

The Law on the Human Rights Ombudsman had been enacted and signed by the President,75 although, at time of writing, a new ombudsman to replace Sergei Kovalyov had not yet been appointed.

The Law on Freedom of Association had received readings in the state Duma and the Federation Council, but had been returned by the President.

The Law on National–Cultural Autonomy was being drafted.

On 7 November 1996 the European Conventions on Reciprocal Assistance in the Criminal Justice Field and on the Transfer of Prisoners had been signed.

In connection with the Russian government’s review of the question ‘On the state and measures for securing the conditions of persons in custody in the investigating isolators and prisons of the Russian Interior Ministry’, a proposal has been made for amendments to the law ‘On the organs of the federal security service’, as well as an analysis of measures previously taken for their adoption in a series of investigative isolators (SIZOs – remand prisons).

The Law on Alternative Military Service had received its first reading in the state Duma on 14 December 1994.



72 Svetlana Sukhova, Rossiya stala na god blizhe k Evrope (In a year Russia has become closer to Europe), Sevodnya, 7 March 1997. 73 Adopted by the State Duma on 24 May 1996, approved by the Council of the Federation on 5 June 1996 and signed by President Yeltsin on 13 June 1996. A commentary was published by the journal Yuridicheskiy Biulletien Predprinimatelya (Moscow, 1996). 74 Part 1 came into force on 1 January 1995, while Part 2 came into force on 1 March 1996. 75 The Bill was based by the Duma on 25 December 1996 and by the Federation Council on 12 February 1997. It was signed by President Yeltsin on 26 February 1997 – see Penny Morvant (1997) OMRI Daily Digest, 27 February 1997. Tarschys carried out an exhaustive inquiry. He met the speakers of both houses of parliament, the heads of the Ministries of Foreign Affairs and the Interior, the Presidential Administration, the Constitutional Court and the General Procurator. The Russian side was frank in its admission of shortcomings. Yelena Mizulina, Deputy Chairman of the state Duma’s Committee on Legislation, told Svetlana Sukhova that while a number of draft laws – for example on freedom of assembly, on national minorities, the criminal procedural code – were the subject of active work, it had to be said that the draft law on the introduction of a moratorium on the death penalty had many opponents in the state Duma and its acceptance was doubtful. Similarly, the draft law on alternative military service had already been heard three times and had now been ‘buried’ in the depths of the Committee on Defence.

There were even greater problems with implementation of the Council of Europe’s recommendation on normalisation of conditions of detained persons. There were some successes, for example the adoption of a programme of reforms, and Yuriy Shcherbanenko, head of the Prokuratura’s Administration for Supervision of Detention, said that in the last year there had been a reduction in the growth of numbers of prisoners. The numbers held in SIZOs fell by 7,000. This was partly due to pressure exerted on the courts to speed up the trial procedure. But Shcherbanenko noted that so far there is no law limiting the period of investigation.

As the President’s Commission on Human Rights pointed out on 25 February 1997, and the Coordination Conference of the Prokuratura confirmed on 3 March 1997, problems in the prison system continued as before. Within the SIZOs there was gross overcrowding, lack of medicines (in 1996 some 12,000–13,000 detainees were released, ill with active tuberculosis), lack of food (only 3,700 roubles a day was spent feeding each detainee three meals – at that time, there were 5,700 roubles to the dollar). In these conditions, which were ‘inhuman’ in the words of the Prokuratura, alcoholism and drug addiction flourished. In 1996 alone, 19,000 litres of vodka and 125 kilograms of narcotics had been seized. There was insufficient money for reform: the prison system received only 66 per cent of the budget planned for 1996.

It should only, perhaps, be added that throughout her article Svetlana Sukhova persisted in referring to Russia’s obligations as Council of Europe ‘recommendations’. As has already been pointed out, the use of this terminology was not restricted to journalists and posed considerable problems for continued Russian participation in the Council of Europe.





Ratification of the ECHR


On 28 February 1998 the state Duma of the Russian Federation voted to ratify the ECHR. A total of 294 (65.3 per cent) deputies voted for, with only 11 (2.4 per cent) against and two (0.4 per cent) abstentions. Thus, 307 of the deputies voted, but many members failed to vote at all. The upper chamber of the Russian parliament, the Federation Council, approved this decision on 13 March 1998, and the federal law of the Russian Federation ‘On ratification of the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms and the Protocols to it’ entered into force on 30 March 1998. The ECHR itself entered into force for Russia on 1 November 1998.76 In this way, Russia fulfilled one of the most important commitments that it made on accession to the Council of Europe.

76 It should be noted that on the same day the state Duma voted, by an even larger majority, to ratify the European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman and Degrading Treatment (CPT). Questions and speeches from the deputies, in general, addressed three themes. First, some deputies asked why ratification was necessary at all. For example: how would ratification help to pay wages and pensions? How would it help those deputies who were prevented from travelling when they wished to go to Iraq or Libya? How would it prevent nationalist and far-right deputies like Govorukhin, Kobzon and Zhirinovsky from being refused visas for Germany? How would it prevent Iraqi children from starving as a result of the US embargo? How would it prevent NATO’s eastward expansion? Second, questions were raised as to the real cost of ratification. Third, deputies were anxious as to the extent that the ECHR’s demands were consistent with the Russian legislation in force and how and why the legislation should be changed.

All these questions, and more, were answered to the satisfaction of most of the deputies, by I.S. Ivanov, the Foreign Minister of the Russian Federation, and by V.P. Lukin, Chairman of the Duma’s Committee on International Affairs. Lukin had to remind deputies that the USA is not a member of the Council of Europe, which would not be an appropriate forum for addressing their concerns. Ivanov pointed out that Russia was already bound to pay the Council’s subscription of $24 million a year and that ratification of the ECHR would not incur additional indirect costs – until and if Russia begins to lose cases at the Court.

Thus, in the Duma debate on 20 February 1998,77 Yu.P. Ivanov, speaking on behalf of the Agrarian Party, repeated that his party did not recognise the argument that Russia signed the ECHR under Opinion No. 193 as an obligation. In his party’s view, the opinion had only a recommendatory character. But he wanted his colleagues to recognise the reality that Russia’s integration into the world legal process was essential. Moreover, he said, the more than 200 conventions adopted by the world community contained an enormous quantity of positive norms, many of which were for the amelioration of the social position of working people and the protection of human rights. V.D. Filomonov, of Zhirinovsky’s Liberal Democratic Party of Russia, was deeply convinced that ratification of the Convention would fulfil the interests both of the Russian state and of its citizens.78 First, it would strengthen the provisions of Russian legislation protecting the rights and freedoms of citizens regardless of their political persuasion. Second, it would guarantee their protection not only in Russia but in the whole of Europe, especially in the Baltic states. S.A. Glotov of the ‘Narodovlastiye (People’s Power)’ group,79 added that Russia would gain a very serious and authoritative tribunal for expressing the national state interests of Russia in the European space. L.P. Andreyev, of ‘Nash Dom – Rossiya’ (Our Home – Russia)80 made the other, essential point, that, ‘to speak openly, the Convention will stimulate above all the judicial and legal reforms taking place in our country and will create the essential conditions for bringing our legislation into accordance with international norms, which also, in our view, positively reflects the interests of the inhabitants of Russia.’

77 This is recorded in Yevropeiskye konventsiy i Rossiskiye zakonodateli(European Convention and Russian Lawmakers), Rossiskiy Byulleten po Pravam Cheloveka, 1998, 10: 76–81. 78 Ibid, 79. 79 Ibid, 81. 80 Ibid, 80.





Russia’s reservations


Russia made two reservations when depositing its instrument of ratification of the ECHR on 5 May 1998,81 both relating to the then existing Russian Criminal Procedural Code. Before turning to these in detail, I explore the legal basis for such reservations.

81 See http://sim.law.uu.nl/SIM/Library/RATIF.nsf/be2c697381d495be41256bfb003493b1/1647bf9d4202c07b41256bfe00489a28? Open Document (accessed 13 October 2012). Article 57 (formerly Article 64) of earrested or detained in accordancet ECHR provides that a state may, when signing the Convention or when depositing its instrument of ratification, make a reservation in respect of any particular provision of the Convention to the extent that any law then in force in its territory is not in conformity with the provision. Reservations of a general character are not permitted under this article. This is a controversial provision. P. van Dijk and G. van Hoof82 commented at the time that the possibility for states to make reservations would seem to be at odds with the presumption of universality of human rights. They added:83

82 Van Dijk and van Hoof (1998), 773. 83 Ibid, 783. If one of the purposes of the Convention, according to its Preamble, is to pursue the achievement of greater unity between the Member States of the Council of Europe through the maintenance and further realisation of human rights, then the unity aimed at may have reached a certain stage where there is no longer room for differences on important issues between those Member States in its obligations which they have accepted concerning the protection of human rights.



Nevertheless, a reservation is permitted, subject to review by the European Court of Human Rights and a number of cases have been decided.84 Russia’s reservations relate to Article 5(3) and (4), of the ECHR. These provide:

84 Belilos v. Switzerland (Judgment of 29 April 1988, Series A, No. 132), Temeltasch (1983) D. & R. 31 (1983), 120 (144–45), Loizidou v. Turkey (Judgment of 23 March 1995, Series A, No. 310). 3. Everyone arrested or detained in accordance with the provisions of para graph 1(c) of this article shall be brought promptly before a judge or other officer authorised by law to exercise judicial power and shall be entitled to trial within a reasonable time or to release pending trial. Release may be conditioned by guarantees to appear for trial.

4. Everyone who is deprived of his liberty by arrest or detention shall be entitled to bring proceedings by which the lawfulness of his detention shall be decided speedily by a court and his release ordered if the detention is not lawful.



Russia’s reservation was as follows:

In accordance with Article 64 of the Convention, the Russian Federation declares that the provisions of Article 5(3) and (4), shall not prevent the application of the following provisions of the legislation of the Russian Federation:

The temporary application, sanctioned by the second paragraph of point 6 of Section Two of the 1993 Constitution of the Russian Federation, of the procedure for the arrest, holding in custody and detention of persons suspected of having committed a criminal offence, established by Article 11, paragraph 1, Article 89, paragraph 1, Articles 90, 92, 96–1, 96–2, 97, 101 and 122 of the RSFSR Code of Criminal Procedure of October 27, 1960, with subsequent amendments and additions;

Articles 51–53 and 62 of the Disciplinary Regulations of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation, approved by Decree No. 2140 of the President of the Russian Federation of December 14, 1993 – based on Article 26, paragraph 2, of the Law of the Russian Federation ‘On the status of servicemen’ of January 22, 1993 – instituting arrest and detention in the guard-house as a disciplinary measure imposed under extra-judicial procedure on servicemen – private soldiers, seamen, conscripted non-commissioned officers, non-commissioned officers and officers;

The period of validity of these reservations shall be the period required to introduce amendments to the Russian federal legislation which will completely eliminate the incompatibilities between the said provisions and the provisions of the Convention.





These reservations had been anticipated in Section Two of the 1993 Constitution (adopted by referendum of 12 December 1993), which contained concluding and interim provisions. The second paragraph of Point 6 provides: ‘Until the criminal procedural legislation of the Russian Federation has been brought into line with the provisions of this Constitution, the previous procedure for the arrest, detention and keeping in custody of persons suspected of committing a crime shall apply.’85

85 The reference is to Art. 22 of the 1993 Constitution, which provides: ‘1. Everyone shall have the right to freedom and personal inviolability. 2. Arrest, detention and keeping in custody shall be permissible only under a court order. A person may not be detained for more than 48 hours without a court order.’ It should be noted that the reservation as to Article 5(4) applied only to the case of military detention, since in all other cases of arrest and detention in custody an application to a court is possible. This was implemented by the 1992 amendments to the Russian Criminal Procedural Code, contained in Article 220–1 (complaint to a court of arrest or the continuation of the period of detention in custody) and 220–2 (judicial review of the lawfulness and grounds for arrest or the continuation of the period of detention in custody).86 Thus, the provisions in Part Two of the Constitution made no provision for military detention.

86 However, the Russian Code itself contained a serious flaw. The authoritative commentary to the Russian CPC noted later, stated (390) that on receiving a complaint against detention, the court had power only to verify the legality and grounds for detention, arrest or the prolongation of a period of detention in custody, but not the substance of the accusation itself. In particular, the court could not make a judgment as to the guilt of the detained person or the crime of which he is accused. This had been established in Orders of the Supreme Court of 1993 and 1995. The main problem for Russia lay in the fact that it had not yet succeeded in enacting a new Criminal Procedural Code (CPC) and criminal proceedings were still governed by the CPC of the Russian Socialist Federation of Soviet Republics (RSFSR) of 27 October 1960, a Soviet code, albeit many times amended.87 This Code enshrined the decisive role of the prokuratura in the criminal justice system. Thus, Article 11 of the CPC, on ‘Inviolability of the person’, provided that arrest was possible not only on the basis of a judicial decision, but by order of a prokuror. The prokuror, with the investigator and court, could take decisions as to mery presecheniye, ‘preventive measures’ or ‘measures of restraint’ (bail or custody), under Article 89 and usually does. Article 90 provided that it was the prokuror who gave the sanction for arrest and, under Article 97, decided on the period of detention in custody pending trial and its extension, for up to one and a half years. Changes in the ‘measures of prevention’, where these had been ordered by the prokuror, could only be changed by the prokuror, according to Article 101. Under Article 122, where a suspect had been detained by the militia (police), it was the prokuror who sanctioned detention. Finally, the prokuror was also responsible for reviewing the lawfulness of opening a criminal case (Article 116) and, generally, reviewing the lawfulness of the activities of the police and investigators (Articles 211–217), as well as conditions in places of detention.

87 For an excellent contemporaneous commentary, which took full account of the ECHR, see V. Radchenko (ed.), Kommentariy k Ugolovnovo-protsessualnomu Kodeksu RSFSR (Commentary on the CPC of the Russian Socialist Federation of Soviet Republics) (Moscow), 1999. Radchenko was then the First Deputy Chairman of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation. He worked on the new Criminal Procedural Code. The fact that the prokuror, rather than a court or judicial officer, decided on the lawfulness of arrest and also whether the accused should receive bail or detention in custody awaiting trial was not only an undiluted inheritance from the Soviet period. It also contradicted a clearly established principle of European human rights law. The jurisprudence of the ECHR did not recognise a prokuror as an ‘other officer authorised by law to exercise judicial power’.15 Thus, in the case of Brincat v. Italy,88 the Commission held that: ‘[O]nly the objective appearances at the time of the decision are material: if it then appears that the “officer authorised by law to exercise judicial power” may later intervene, in the subsequent proceedings, as a representative of the prosecuting authority, there is a risk that his impartiality may arouse doubts which are to be held objectively justified.’

88 Judgment of 26 November 1992, Series A, No. 249-A, 12. This was precisely the situation with Russia, where the prokuratura was directly involved at all stages. Indeed, there was a longstanding problem. The USSR ratified the United Nations’ 1966 International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) as long ago as 1973 and ratified its Optional Protocol, permitting individual complaints to the UN Human Rights Committee, in September 1991, shortly before the collapse of the USSR itself. Article 9(3) of the ICCPR provides that anyone arrested or detained on a criminal charge ‘shall be brought promptly before a judge or other officer authorised by the law to exercise judicial power’.

Of course, the continued role of the prokuratura was not the only problem faced by Russia. There were too few judges and these are underpaid.89

89 See Bowring (2000). There are two further respects, according to Professor Igor Petrukhin,90 in which the CPC contradicted the ECHR. First, Article 89, ‘Adoption of (preventive measures)’, contains, as a basis for choosing preventive measures the ‘presence of sufficient facts as to the fact … that the accused person may obstruct the establishment of the truth in a criminal case’. This ground for detention was not to be found in the list in Article 5(1) of the ECHR, which includes at (c) the ‘lawful arrest or detention … on reasonable suspicion of having committed an offence’. Professor Petrukhin also believed91 that the reservations, so far as they concerned Articles 96–1 and 96–2 (the procedure for detaining persons in custody), sought to take account of the fact that the law of the Russian Federation ‘On detaining in custody persons suspected and accused of committing criminal offences’92 did not sufficiently secure the conditions of detained persons so as to comply with the provisions of Article 3 of the ECHR relating to the prevention of torture and inhuman and degrading treatment.

90 Petrukhin (2000). 91 Ibid, 67. 92 Federal Law of 15 July 1995, No. 103-FZ. Moreover, Article 97 of the CPC, ‘Periods of detention in custody’, violated the requirement of the ECHR that the period in custody before trial must be ‘reasonable’. The problem was that, in Russia, a person might be detained for a period of two years before trial, whereas the period in Germany was one year, in Scotland, 110 days and in the USA (not, of course, a member of the Council of Europe), 120 days. In all these countries, the period of pre-trial detention was under the control of the court.

The Information Report of 2 June 199893 to the Committee of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) noted in paragraph 14 that despite the fact that these reservations to some extent limited the protection of persons under arrest, as concerns the necessity of the written permission of the court, they did not belittle the significance of Russia’s recognition of all the other provisions of the ECHR. However, it was recommended that the PACE must follow this issue up so that the reservations were withdrawn as soon as possible and in any event within a period not exceeding one year.

93 Honouring of obligations and commitments by the Russian Federation, Information Report, Doc. 8127, 2 June 1998, Committee on the Honouring of Obligations and Commitments by Member States of the Council of Europe. Co-Rapporteurs: Mr Rudolf Bindig, Germany, Socialist Group and Mr Ernst Muehlmann, Switzerland, Liberal Democrat and Reformers’ Group. Since the report, there was a further positive development. According to Articles 218 and 220 of the CPC complaints about the activities of organs of investigation or investigators may be considered only by the prokuror and complaints about the prokuror to the more senior prokuror. On 23 March 199994 the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation heard the complaints of four citizens and firms whose complaints to courts of general jurisdiction had been refused on this ground. Their complaints concerned the suspension of investigation of the case, the extension of the length of preliminary examination, the execution of a search, imposition of arrest on property and the instigating of a criminal case. The Court held that these articles of the CPC violated Articles 46 and 52 of the Constitution, which guarantee legal protection of rights and freedoms and the right of access to justice and compensation for damage caused by abuse of office. Thus, all the activities of the prokuror in relation to a criminal case must be complained about to the court.

94 Decision of 23 March 1999, No. 5. There remained the most important problem for Russia: that a person in custody would not be brought automatically before a court, as the ECHR and the ICCPR require, and the fact that he or she had a right to appeal to a court did not satisfy the requirement. This was a continuing violation that could, in principle, easily be remedied by amending the Code.





Putin in power


From 2000 to 2003 President Putin expressly referred to himself as following in the footsteps of the great reforming Tsar, Aleksandr II, and his law reforms of 1864 (see Chapter 3 in this book). Putin too presided over creation of a system of justices of the peace; installation of jury trial throughout Russia with the exception of Chechnya; enhanced judicial status; a much reduced role for the prosecutor in criminal and civil trials. I have analysed Putin’s speeches and the events of this period.95 The reforms of 2001 to 2003 were driven through the Russian parliament by Dmitriy Kozak of the President’s Administration.96 These included the three new procedural codes enacted from 2001 to 2003, Criminal,97 Arbitrazh (Commercial)98 and Civil,99 as well as the radical improvements to Yeltsin’s Criminal Code of 1996, 257 amendments in all, which were enacted on 8 December 2003.100 The Council of Europe had substantial expert input into all of this new legislation. However, the initial phase of legal reform from 2000, which included enactment of the new procedural codes referred to in the following, came to a definitive end in late 2003, simultaneously with the arrest of Khodorkovsky and the destruction of YUKOS.

95 Bowring (2005). 96 I worked as an expert for the Council of Europe with Mr Kozak on the draft of the new Criminal Procedural Code; in my view, Kozak is the most effective public servant in Russia. 97 Into force on 1 July 2002. 98 Into force in September 2002. 99 Into force in January 2003. 100 Federal Law No.162-FZ ‘On amendments and modifications of the criminal code of the Russian federation’. However, simultaneously with the speeches just reported, Putin was prosecuting with unprecedented ruthlessness a new conflict in Chechnya.

Following from the decision of the CCS referred to earlier, and in accordance with the 1993 Constitution, generally recognised principles and norms of international law and international treaties of the Russian Federation shall be an integral part of its legal system. If other rules have been established by an international treaty of the Russian federation than provided for by law, the rules of the international treaty shall apply. The apotheosis of this new relationship seemed to have truly arrived with the Resolution of the Plenum of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation of 10 October 2003. The Resolution was entitled On application by courts of general jurisdiction of the commonly recognised principles and norms of the international law and the international treaties of the Russian Federation.101 The Supreme Court consulted widely in composing this Resolution: participants in discussion included justices of the RCC, Justice Kovler and other experts.

101 In English at http://www.supcourt.ru/catalog.php?c1=English&c2=Documents&c3=&id=6801 (accessed 13 October 2012). However, Russia began to lose a number of high-profile cases in the Strasbourg Court. In May 2004, in Gusinskiy v. Russia,102 the Court held that Russia had acted in bad faith in using the criminal justice system to force a commercial deal, by arresting the TV magnate. In July 2004, in Ilaşcu and Others v. Moldova and Russia,103 the majority of the Grand Chamber of the Court found that Russia rendered support to Transdniestria, which broke away from Moldova, amounting to ‘effective control’. The first six Chechen applicants against Russia won their applications to Strasbourg in February 2005.104 In April 2005, in Shamayev and 12 others v. Russia and Georgia,105 the Court condemned Russia for deliberately refusing to cooperate with the Court despite diplomatic assurances; and in October 2002 the Court had given ‘interim measures’ indicating to Georgia that Chechens who had fled to Georgia should not extradited to Russia pending the Court’s consideration.

102 Gusinskiy v. Russia, ECHR, Application no. 70276/01, decision of 19 May 2004. 103 Ilaşcu and Others v. Moldova and Russia, ECHR, Application no. 48787/99, decision of 8 July 2004. 104 These applicants were represented, from 2000, by me and my colleagues from the European Human Rights Advocacy Centre, which I founded, in partnership with the Russian human rights NGO ‘Memorial’, with €1 million EU funding, in 2002. 105 Shamayev and 12 others v. Russia and Georgia, ECHR, Application no. 36378/02, decision of 12 April 2005. Under Putin, Medvedev and now Putin again the human rights situation in Russia has continued to deteriorate. Russia has found itself subject to the new ‘pilot judgment’ procedure of the European Court of Human Rights.

On 10 January 2012 the Court delivered a pilot judgment against Russia in the case of Ananyev and Others v. Russia.106 Ananyev was held in the Smolensk remand prison IZ-67/1 from 20 January to 23 March 2007. During his two months’ stay he was accommodated in a cell that measured 15 square metres and featured 13 sleeping places. He had under 1.25 square metres of personal space and the number of detainees significantly exceeded the number of sleeping places available. This was inhuman and degrading treatment, violating Article 3 of the Convention.

106 Applications Nos 42525/07 and 60800/08. The Court further noted that inadequate conditions of detention were a recurrent problem in Russia that had led the Court to find violations of Articles 3 and 13 of the Convention in more than 80 judgments since the first such finding in the Kalashnikov case in 2002. There were also approximately 250 prima facie meritorious applications against Russia awaiting first examination that featured, as their primary grievance, a complaint about inadequate conditions of detention. These violations was substantially similar: detainees suffered inhuman and degrading treatment on account of an acute lack of personal space in their cells, a shortage of sleeping places, unjustified restrictions on access to natural light and air and non-existent privacy when using the sanitary facilities. It appeared, therefore, that the violations were neither prompted by an isolated incident nor attributable to a particular turn of events in those cases, but originated in a widespread problem resulting from a malfunctioning of the Russian penitentiary system and insufficient legal and administrative safeguards against the proscribed kind of treatment. Russia was given six months to work out, with the Committee of Ministers, a comprehensive programme for improvement.

The Council of Europe has continued to monitor Russia’s progress or lack of it in complying with the undertakings it gave on accession in 1996. On 14 September 2012 the PACE published the latest report of its rapporteurs, Mr György Frunda (Romanian) and Mr Andreas Gross (Swiss), on ‘The honouring of obligations and commitments by the Russian Federation’,107 covering the previous seven years from 2005. The rapporteurs considered that lack of independence and the interconnected question of the lack of confidence of the public in the judiciary were the main problems in the Russian judicial system. These problems have deep roots in the legal and political culture, as in Soviet times judges were often seen not as arbiters, but rather as defenders of the interests of the state. They reported:

107 Doc. 13018, at http://assembly.coe.int/ASP/Doc/XrefViewHTML.asp?FileID=18998&Language=EN (accessed 19 February 2013). 317. The poor state of judicial independence is clearly facilitated by a legislative and administrative framework that fails to protect judges from undue influence by State or private interests. The way the judiciary operates puts pressure on judges through a complex system which is not always apparent or visible and includes not only external pressure, but also internal mechanisms and bureaucracy.

318. These internal mechanisms have become more significant as a result of the government’s drive to strengthen the powers of the executive, known in Russia as ‘strengthening the vertical power’. Political interference has increased under laws brought into force in the wake of the Beslan siege, allegedly for ‘counter-terrorism’ purposes.



The rapporteurs were particularly struck by events at the Constitutional Court:

327. In a 2009 interview with the Spanish newspaper, El País, Constitutional Court Judge Vladimir Yaroslavtsev claimed that the presidential executive office and security services had undermined judicial independence in Russia. In October 2009, the Constitutional Court, in an unprecedented motion, accused Mr Yaroslavtsev of ‘undermining the authority of the judiciary’ in violation of the judicial code and forced him to resign from the Council of Judges.

328. Judge Anatoly Kononov, who has frequently dissented from decisions taken by the majority of the court, in his interview to Sobesednik, supported Mr Yaroslavtsev, claiming that there was no independent judiciary in Russia. Mr Kononov was forced to step down from the Constitutional Court on 1 January 2010, seven years ahead of schedule.



These were two of the most hard-working, intelligent and independent judges on the Constitutional Court.

On 2 October 2012 PACE adopted a Resolution108 based on the report. The European Parliament of the European Union has also expressed grave concern. On 13 September 2012 a plenary sitting of the European Parliament passed a Resolution on ‘The political use of justice in Russia’.109 The preamble to the Resolution noted as follows:

108 Resolution 1896 (2012), Assembly debate on 2 October 2012 (30th and 31st sittings) (see Doc. 13018 and addendum, report of the Committee on the Honouring of Obligations and Commitments by member states of the Council of Europe (Monitoring Committee), co-rapporteurs: Frunda and Gross). Text adopted by the Assembly on 2 October 2012 (31st Sitting), at http://assembly.coe.int/ASP/Doc/XrefViewHTML.asp?FileID=19116&Language=EN (accessed 13 October 2012). 109 See http://www.europarl.europa.eu/document/activities/cont/201209/20120924ATT52181/20120924ATT52181EN.pdf (accessed 29 September 2012). C. [T]he human rights situation in Russia has deteriorated drastically in the last few months and the Russian authorities have recently adopted a series of laws which contain ambiguous provisions and could be used to further restrict opposition and civil society actors and hinder freedom of expression and assembly.



This was followed by a list of burning individual cases:

D. whereas the deaths of Anna Politkovskaya, Natalia Estemirova, Anastasia Barburova, Stanislav Markelov and Sergei Magnitsky remain unaccounted for;

E. whereas Mikhail Khordorkovsky and his business associate Platon Lebedev were given a guilty verdict for embezzlement by Moscow’s Khamovnichesky district court on 30 December 2010; whereas the prosecution, the trial and the verdict were internationally portrayed as being politically motivated;

F. whereas the case of Sergei Magnitsky is only one of several cases of abuse of power by the Russian law enforcement authorities, strongly violating the rule of law and leaving those guilty of causing his death still unpunished; whereas there are a multitude of other judicial cases where politically constructed reasons are being used to eliminate political competition and threaten civil society;

G. whereas the sentencing of the members of the Russian punk group Pussy Riot to two years’ imprisonment for a protest performance against President Vladimir Putin in a Moscow Orthodox cathedral is disproportionate;

H. whereas the Duma is scheduled to vote on 12 September 2012 to lift the mandate of Gennady Gudkov for business activities during his mandate without following the necessary democratic procedures; whereas, for the sake of the rule of law, parliamentary rules should apply equally and impartially to all members of the Duma; whereas other members of the Fair Russia faction such as Dimitri Gudkov and Ilya Ponomarev face similar accusations;

I. whereas the new NGO legislation and the legislation on the right to freedom of assembly could be used to suppress civil society, stifle opposing political views and harass NGOs, democratic opposition and the media; whereas the Russian Parliament adopted a bill in July 2012 granting the status of ‘foreign agent’ to Russian non-commercial organisations engaged in political activities and financed from abroad.



The Resolution declared as follows:

2. Takes the view that Russia, as a member of the Council of Europe and the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe, should meet the obligations it has signed up to; points out that recent developments have moved in the opposite direction to the reforms necessary to improve democratic standards, the rule of law and the independence of the judiciary in Russia.



As at the time of writing this book, it is plain that, on the one hand, many significant changes have been made in Russia since its accession to the Council of Europe nearly 20 years ago and it will be impossible to put the clock back. Russia now regularly accepts a level of interference that would have been quite unthinkable in Soviet times. The fact that so many of the reforms were in effect restorations of Aleksandr II’s Great Reforms has made the process more complex but also more lasting. On the other hand, the current regime in Russia, while paying respect to Aleksandr’s reforms, is also strongly influenced by anti-Western and anti-liberal thinking, as I show in the final chapter of this book. Continued monitoring by the Council of Europe is a sign that in a number of respects, especially conditions of detention, and independence of the judiciary, especially the latter, Russia has a long way to go to catch up even with the 1860s.





Chapter 9

Russia and the death penalty




DOI: 10.4324/9780203490211-10





Introduction


Following the last chapter, which reviewed and explored Russia’s accession to the Council of Europe, this chapter goes back to the beginning in order to set the scene for one of the most burning questions troubling Moscow’s relations with Strasbourg: the death penalty.

As a result of the 2005 judgment in Öcalan v. Turkey,1 the use of the death penalty has effectively been prohibited in the whole of the territory of the Council of Europe, with its 47 states and over 811 million inhabitants. When Russia joined the Council of Europe in 1996 it entered into an obligation to ratify Protocol No. 6 to the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR), prohibiting the death penalty, within three years. President Yeltsin moved swiftly to impose a moratorium on executions – in Russia, by shooting. Russia signed the Protocol on 16 April 1997.2 Yet Russia is the only remaining Council of Europe member state to have failed, 13 years on, to ratify Protocol No. 6 so far.

1 Öcalan v. Turkey, Application no. 46221/99, 12 May 2005. 2 See the Council of Europe’s chart of signatures and ratifications at http://conventions.coe.int/Treaty/Commun/ChercheSig.asp?NT=114&CM=8&DF=18/09/2009&CL=ENG (accessed 19 February 2013). In the Öcalan v. Turkey case, the Grand Chamber agreed with the Chamber’s view:

[E]qually the Court observes that the legal position as regards the death penalty has undergone a considerable evolution since Soering was decided. The de facto abolition noted in that case in respect of twenty-two Contracting States in 1989 has developed into a de jure abolition in forty-three of the forty-four Contracting States and a moratorium in the remaining State that has not yet abolished the penalty, namely Russia. This almost complete abandonment of the death penalty in times of peace in Europe is reflected in the fact that all the Contracting States have signed Protocol No. 6 and forty-one States have ratified it, that is to say, all except Turkey, Armenia and Russia. It is further reflected in the policy of the Council of Europe, which requires that new member States undertake to abolish capital punishment as a condition of their admission into the organisation. As a result of these developments the territories encompassed by the member States of the Council of Europe have become a zone free of capital punishment.3



3 Öcalan v. Turkey, para. 163. Since then, Armenia ratified the Protocol on 29 September 2003 and Turkey ratified on 12 November 2003. Russia now stands alone.

The Russian Constitution of 1993 does not prohibit the death penalty, but provides, in Article 20, that every citizen threatened with the death penalty has the right to a jury trial. From the nine regions in which an experiment in jury trial began in 2003 (see the previous chapter), all 83 regions of the Russia Federation now have trial by jury, since the coming into force of the Criminal Procedural Code of 2002, including, from 1 January 2010, the Republic of Chechnya. On 26 April 2010 the first jury trial took place in Chechnya. The jury list comprised more than 6,000 persons, with 1,000 spares.4

4 See V Chechnye vperviye costoitsya sud s uchastiem prisyazhnikh(In Chechnya the first jury trial is taking place), 26 April 2010 at http://grani.ru/Politics/Russia/m.177451.html (accessed on 28 October 2012). In 1999 the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation ruled that the death penalty cannot be imposed in Russia until jury trial is guaranteed in every part of Russia. Jury trial should have come into force for Chechnya on 1 January 2007, but at the last moment the state Duma intervened to delay jury trial until 1 January 2010, when, in fact, Chechnya introduced jury trial.

The issue has never ceased to be prominent in the Russian media and public discussion.5 As in many countries of the world, the death penalty is enormously popular with the general public. And if Russia were to restore the death penalty, it would join an illustrious group of states that between them execute some 1,500 persons a year. In September 2009 Russian Newsweek provided a list of 15 states for its readers, in order of executions carried out (see Table 9.1).

Table 9.1 Death penalty executions State Executions Sentences Methods Public?

China 1,718 7,003 Firing squad, lethal injection Yes

Iran 346 No data Firing squad, hanging, stoning Yes

Saudi Arabia 102 No data Beheading, firing squad, stoning Yes

USA 37 111 Lethal injection, electric chair, firing squad, gas, hanging No

Pakistan 36 236 Hanging, stoning Yes

Iraq 34 285 Hanging No

Vietnam 19 59 Firing squad No

Afghanistan 17 131 Firing squad, hanging No

North Korea 15 No data Firing squad, hanging Yes

Japan 15 27 Hanging No

Yemen 13 No data Firing squad Yes

Indonesia 10 10 Firing squad No

Libya 8 No data Firing squad, hanging No

Bangladesh 5 185 Hanging No

Belarus 4 1 Firing squad No



5 Taratuta and Zygar (2009). In this chapter, I first explore the religious and philosophical arguments for and against the death penalty in Russia. Second, I explain the curious trajectory of the death penalty in Tsarist Russia, followed, third, by the USSR. Fourth, I chart the halting progress that has been made in post-Communist Russia. Fifth, I examine the current tensions between Russia and the Council of Europe. Finally, I conclude by bringing matters up to date and offering a tentative diagnosis and – possible hopeful – prognosis.





Religious, political and philosophical issues


The Christian religion (indeed, any religion) ought, one would think, to be incompatible with the death penalty and Communism would seem in theory to be the type of society able to dispense with it.6 Although the great rational-ist Spinoza, whose philosophy I revere, had no problem with the death penalty – see Ethics Part IV (Of human bondage) proposition 63, scholium: ‘a judge who condemns a guilty man to death – not from hate and anger and the like, but only from a love of the general welfare – is guided only by reason.’ And the debate concerning the Terror in revolutionary France has recently been re-opened.7 But the debate concerning abolition or retention has taken some surprising turns in Russia. Will Adams has described8 a tradition of Russian hostility to the death penalty, which was exemplified by a passage from the Testament of the Grand Prince of Kiev, Vladimir Monomakh, in 1125: ‘[D]o not kill anyone, either guilty or not, nor do you order to kill. Do not destroy a Christian soul, even in case death is well deserved.’ Adams points out that capital punishment did not reappear in Russian codes until the end of the fourteenth century, although the Mongol Tatars brought the death penalty as part of their rule in the meantime.9

6 Spinoza (1996), 150. 7 Wahnich (2012). 8 Adams (1970). 9 Adams (1970), citing Vernadsky (1947).





The death penalty in the Russian Enlightenment


Donald Barry and Eric Williams have pointed out10 that capital punishment has been part of Russian law throughout most of the country’s history. Mikhail Gernet11 explained that in seventeenth-century Russia about 60 articles of the Ulozheniye (Code) of 1649 provided for various forms of the death penalty. But in practice alternative penalties were often imposed. In the sixteenth to seventeenth centuries the death penalty was prescribed for unlawful picking of crops, sale of prohibited goods, purchase of fur without payment of excise, inaccurate weighing of salt when affixing excise duty, helping to hide deserting soldiers and many religious and state crimes.

10 Barry and Williams (1997), 232. 11 Gernet (1913). The Empress Elizabeth abolished the death penalty in 1735, but abolition was short lived.12 Gernet explained13 that an example of the total abolition of the death penalty in legislation was given to Russians when in 1744 the Empress Elizabeth decreed that all death sentences should be submitted to her for reconsideration. On 30 September 1754 the Senate decreed that the death penalty be abolished and replaced by a life sentence of imprisonment with hard labour and branding the offender on the forehead with the word ‘thief’ and cutting off the tip of the nose. This decree was based on the Royal Instruction of 29 March 1753, replacing the death sentence by hard labour. According to Adams,14 Elizabeth exiled rather than executing her opponents and ‘[o]n this basis, Russia could claim to be the first European country in the modern era to abolish capital punishment, although abolition was never complete de facto.’ However, Gernet pointed out,15 later judicial practice interpreted this decree as not abolishing the death penalty for all crimes and therefore death sentences were handed down and carried out, for example, in 1764, 1771, 1775 and on others occasions.

12 Mikhlin (1997). 13 Gernet (1913). 14 Adams (1970), 576. 15 Gernet (1913). As Barry and Williams observe,16 several other Russian rulers instituted moratoriums or near moratoriums on executions for parts of their reign, while leaving the legal provisions permitting the death penalty untouched.

16 Barry and Williams (1997), 232. The eighteenth century was a formative period for the development of Russian law. The great work of Cesare Beccaria, On crimes and punishments, first published in 1764, had a powerful impact in the Tsarist Russia of that period and later, as T. Cizova shows in an extraordinary work of scholarship.17 Beccaria focused on torture, mitigation of penalties and capital punishment. His argument against the death penalty was that it was unnecessary for the protection of society. In defence of his argument, Beccaria cited the fact that, in Russia, the death penalty had been abolished and that this had not led to an increase in crime18 and almost one-third of Catherine II’s Nakaz of 1766 came directly from Beccaria’s On crimes and punishments. Catherine had received, through d’Alembert, a copy of the French translation of Beccaria’s book,19 a Russian translation did not appear until 1803. Beccaria’s ideas had decisive influence on the leaders of the Decembrist uprising of 1825. According to Cizova, ‘they were the first intellectual group who fearlessly brought Beccaria’s arguments to their logical conclusion in the framework of Russian reality’.20

17 Cizova (1962). 18 Cizova (1962), 388. 19 Cizova (1962), 392. 20 Cizova (1962), 404. Adams also points out that the death penalty did not reappear in Russia’s ordinary criminal legislation until the Speransky codification of 1833, although landowners could and did execute their serfs. Offences such as murder and rape were not capital.21 Beccaria also strongly influenced those who drafted the laws that made up the Great Reforms of Aleksandr II in 1864. Cizova states:

21 Adams (1970), 576. [O]n 20 November 1864, law reform was introduced and, reading the Sudebnyye Ustavy, one realises that their creators adhered to the rules laid down in On Crimes and Punishments. It was not a coincidence that the man who contributed most to the compilation of the Ustavy, S. I. Zarudniy, published in 1879 a new translation of Beccaria and compared it to Chapter X of Catherine’s Nakaz.22



22 Cizova (1962), 407. It is an ineluctable feature of Russian history that the achievements of the liberals and ‘Westernisers’ are balanced if not overwhelmed not only by ‘Slavophile’ intellectuals, but especially by the Russian Orthodox Church. According to Mikhail Gernet:23 ‘[M]any facts bear witness to the welcoming attitude of the higher echelons of the Russian Orthodox clergy.’ This was especially the case in the aftermath of the 1905 Revolution. Reasonably reliable contemporary sources show that between 2,000 and 3,000 persons were executed in the period 1905 to 1908.24 Stephen Wheatcroft has argued25 in an analysis of the crackdown following 1905, with an upsurge in mass executions, that ‘it is here, in the reversal of this liberal trend in the post-1905 period, that we can see the roots of the monstrous developments that were to come during the First World War, Civil War, collectivisation and the Ezhovshchina.’ The liberal trend in question was that of Aleksandr II, who, in the aftermath of Russian defeat in the Crimean War, abolished serf-dom in 1861 and in 1864, in his great legal reforms, instituted an independent judiciary as well as jury trials, as I explored in Chapter 3 of this book.26

23 Gernet (1913). 24 See http://www.law.edu.ru/script/cntSource.asp?cntID=100066404 (accessed 19 February 2013). 25 Wheat croft (2002); see also http://www.h-net.org/reviews/showrev.php?id=9524 (accessed 19 February 2013). 26 See Bowring (2009). Gernet27 cites, among others, the fact that at the session of the State Council on 27 June 1906 the Protodeacon (protoierei) T.I. Butkevich made a long speech in favour of the death penalty, although he held himself out as a dedicated opponent of spilling even one drop of blood. But, he said, there were special political moments when the use of the ‘exclusive measure’ was necessary. Turning his attention to the opinions against the death penalty, he said ‘those commentaries on the teachings of the New Testament which say the Evangelists had a direct condemnation of the death penalty are too bold … I find no such condemnation.’ He was inclined to think that the death penalty was not the most severe punishment. He had seen one of the cells in the old Shlisselburg Fortress and ‘was horrified at the human cruelty … I do not have the spirit to ask you, dear statesmen, what is worse for the human being: the momentary death penalty or many years of confinement in the Shlisselburg Fortress.’

27 Gernet (1913). Another Protodeacon, E. A-ov, wrote in the journal Christian Teachings at great length, discussing various texts of holy writers and hotly defending the death penalty. What was interesting for Gernet was the tone, quite unbecoming to a spiritual person, in which the article was written. Thus, ‘in the name of love of humanity’ this holy man was ready to advise the authorities to seize the noose and ‘use it for the preparation of a forgotten but none the less in some cases effective means for making some of those who have been led astray understand’. He found that it was not popular conscience in the state Duma that uttered the decisive sentence of execution, but the ‘sad inability to think things out of those Duma neveglasov (heathens – an archaic word) who after what the unforgettable Lyapkin-Tyapkins28 thought up for themselves, with their own wisdom get to the creation of the world’. In fact, Gernet observed that there were relatively few protests against the death penalty by the clergy. Some of those who protested were held responsible by the higher spiritual leadership. Thus, five priests from Kharkov and one from Tiflis (Tbilisi) were condemned for protesting against the death penalty.

28 Lyapkin-Tyapkin – a vindictive judge, one of Nikolai Gogol’s satirical inventions in Dead souls (Gogol 2004). And the many executions following 1905 were not based on the criminal code, but were the product of military courts and codes and extraordinary decrees. During the late Tsarist period leading scholars, on the basis of analysis of international research and practice, began to argue against the death penalty.29 They were joined by literary giants such as Radishchev, Dostoevsky and Tolstoy.30

29 Kistyakovsky (1896). 30 Adams (1970), 577. The Russian Communists were equally contradictory in their approach. In his essential study of ‘The Soviet Union and the death penalty’, Ger van den Berg31 was anxious to show that the foundation for the bloodthirsty excesses of the Soviet period was provided by Karl Marx himself. The youthful Marx is cited by him as saying in 1849: ‘We are merciless and we do not ask for mercy for us. When it is our turn, we will not conceal the terror behind the hypocritical phrases.’32 The English translation of Marx’s article in the final issue of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung (Marx 1849) is rather different:

31 van den Berg (1983). 32 van den Berg (1983), 154. [D]id we therefore have to advance our social republican tendency only in the ‘last pieces’ of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung? Did you not read our articles about the June revolution, and was not the essence of the June revolution the essence of our paper?

Why then your hypocritical phrases, your attempt to find an impossible pretext? We have no compassion and we ask no compassion from you. When our turn comes, we shall not make excuses for the terror. But the royal terrorists, the terrorists by the grace of God and the law, are in practice brutal, disdainful, and mean, in theory cowardly, secretive, and deceitful, and in both respects disreputable.



Will Adams cites33 a rather different passage, from an article written by Marx in 1853 for the New-York Daily Tribune: ‘[I]t would be very difficult, if not altogether impossible, to establish any principle upon which the justice or expediency of capital punishment could be founded, in a society glorying in its civilization.’ Robert Bohm has provided34 a detailed analysis of Marx’s article, drawing out its implications for the debate concerning the death penalty.

33 Adams (1970), 578. 34 Bohm (2008).





The Bolsheviks and the death penalty


Lenin opposed the death penalty prior to the Bolshevik revolution for reasons broadly similar to those expressed by Marx. In July 1917 he wrote: ‘[I]nstead of liberty, the old tyranny is coming back. The death penalty is being introduced for the soldiers at the front.’35 However, in the conditions of intervention and civil war after 1917, Lenin wrote36 differently: ‘[S]o long as martial law introduced on the railways by the Council of Defence continues, the district transport departments of the Cheka are to be given the right to apply capital punishment to persons found guilty of bribery, theft of freights and railway material, and systematic abuse on the part of officials.’ And in 1920 he explained that the death penalty had been reintroduced strictly for reasons of expediency and that it was his firm intention to renounce it again as soon as possible.37 He argued that his sincerity had been proved by the facts:

35 Lenin (1917/1977). 36 Lenin (1919/1971). 37 Lenin (1922/1964). [W]e were forced to use terror in response to the terror employed by the Entente, when the mighty powers of the world flung their hordes against us, stopping at nothing. We could not have lasted two days had we not replied to these attempts of officers and whiteguards in a merciless fashion. This meant the use of terror, but this was forced on us by the terrorist methods of the Entente. But as soon as we had gained a decisive victory, even before the end of the war, immediately after the capture of Rostov, we renounced capital punishment, and have therefore proved that we intend to carry out our own programme as we had promised. We say that the use of violence arises from the need to crush the exploiters, the landowners and capitalists. When this is accomplished we shall renounce all extraordinary measures. We have proved this in practice. And I think, I hope, and I am confident that the All-Russia Central Executive Committee will unanimously endorse this measure of the Council of People’s Commissars and will implement it in such a way that it will be impossible to apply the death penalty in Russia.



Of course, he died in 1924 and then the real terror began.

Officially, the death penalty was restored by a decree of 5 September 1918, ‘On Red Terror’,38 although the first death sentence by a Soviet court had already been pronounced on 21 June 1918 by the Supreme Tribunal of the Russian Socialist Federation of Soviet Republics (RSFSR) in the case of Aleksei Shchastny, the Admiral of the Baltic Fleet.39 However, on 17 January 1920, in keeping with Lenin’s arguments mentioned earlier, the Soviet state once again declared the death penalty abolished.40 And abolition applied only to the ordinary courts, since military and revolutionary tribunal could still sentence to death. However, with the Polish advance on Ukraine, capital punishment was again restored.

38 SU RSFSR1918, No. 65, item 710. 39 van den Berg (1983), 155. 40 SU RSFSR1920 No. 4–5, item 22. The RSFSR Criminal Code of 24 May 192241 provided for the death penalty for political, military and some economic crimes. The new Code enacted in 192642 also included the death penalty as ‘an exceptional measure for the protection of the worker’s state … until its abolition’.43 Stalin consolidated his power following Lenin’s death in 1924 and in 1927 began his campaign of collectivisation, which, combined with his policy of ‘liquidation of the kulaks (richer peasants)’ led inexorably to the great famine of 1932–1933 in which many millions died, not executed, but from starvation. From 7 August 1932 the collectivisation campaign extended the use of the death penalty to cases of theft of property from trains, ships and collective farms (kolzhozy).44

41 SU RSFSR1922, No. 15, item 153. 42 SU RSFSR1926, No. 80, item 600. 43 Art. 21 of the 1926 Code. 44 SZ SSSR1932, No. 62, item 360. Van den Berg identifies45 a third period in the history of the death penalty in the USSR, the period from 1934 until Stalin’s death. In 1934 the penalty was imposed in peacetime on theft of weapons, murder committed by servicemen under aggravating circumstances, and treason. The death penalty could not be imposed on people under 18. Precise information as to the numbers of people killed in the purges of 1937–1938 is not available, but as many as one million may have been executed. In 1947 the death penalty was abolished in peacetime,46 but it was revived again in 1950, but only for certain crimes against the state.47 It would seem that at Stalin’s death very few executions were taking place.48

45 van den Berg (1983), 158. 46 Ved. SSSR 1947, No.17. 47 Ved. SSSR 1950, No. 3. 48 van den Berg (1983), 159. Ironically, the last edition of Beccaria’s work in Russia appeared at an extraordinarily unpropitious time. It was done:

[B]y the well-known Russian jurist, Professor M. M. Isayev in I939. It was published in Moscow by the then people’s commissariat of justice. It is prefaced by an essay; terse in style, scholarly and comprehensive in its content … One cannot help wondering at the fact that the new translation and edition of the work which passionately defended the dignity and the rights of the individual was being prepared at the very time when the people of the Soviet Union experienced injustice and arbitrariness on a scale unparalleled in the whole of Russian history.49



49 Cizova (1962), 408.





The death penalty after Stalin


There was a dramatic change in 1954, when a decree of 30 April 1954 imposed the death penalty for intentional homicide under aggravating circumstances.50 According to van den Berg, the reason for this dramatic change was its demand by public opinion. The reason was the closing by Beria of a number of prison camps, releasing large numbers of hardened criminals, followed by a steep rise in the rate of serious crime. This has been dramatised in the film Cold Summer of 1953 (Aleksandr Proshkin). However, the Principles for Criminal Legislation of the USSR and the Union Republics promulgated on 25 December 195851 retained the death penalty as an ‘exceptional measure of punishment until its complete abolition’ for certain crimes against the state, some military crimes and aggravated intentional murder. In 1961–1962 economic crimes and some other specified crimes attracted the death penalty and in 1973 hijacking became a capital crime.52

50 Ved. SSSR 1954, No. 11, item 221. 51 Ved. SSSR 1959, No.1, item 12. 52 van den Berg (1983), 159. W. Cary Quillin wrote a few years later53 in terms indicating that there were many similarities between the USA and USSR in the attitude to the death penalty, with an equally small prospect of abolition. By the time van den Berg composed his article, in 1983 (the year this author first visited the USSR), the death penalty in peace time was possible for 17 crimes (see Table 9.2).54

Table 9.2 Seventeen crimes for which the death penalty was possible, 1983 Political crimes Criminal code

Treason Article 64

Espionage Article 65

Terrorist acts against a public official or representative of a foreign state Articles 66, 67

Sabotage Article 68

The crimes above, committed by an organised group Article 72

The crimes above, committed against another workers’ state Article 73

Banditry Article 77

Action disrupting the work of prison camps Article 77–1

Economic crimes

Counterfeiting Article 87

Speculation in currency, speculation as a business Article 88

Stealing of state property on an especially large scale Article 93–1

Taking of bribes by an official under certain circumstances Article 173

Crimes against the person

Intentional homicide under aggravating circumstances Article 102

Rape under certain circumstances Article 117

Killing a police officer or people’s guard Article 191–2

Hijacking an aircraft with grave consequences Article 213–2

Military crimes

Intentional homicide, in conjunction with resisting a superior, by a person subject to military service Article 240



53 Quillin (1977). 54 van den Berg (1983), 160. According to van den Berg,55 at a conservative estimate, about 2,000 death sentences were pronounced each year during the 1960s and 1970s, although only one-third were actually carried out. Andrei Sakharov estimated in 197556 that between 700 and 1,000 criminals were shot each year. In one well-known case, Yuri Sokolov, the manager of the most prestigious food store in Moscow, Gastronom No.1 in Gorky Street, was arrested in April 1983 on charges of corruption and shot in July 1984.57

55 van den Berg (1983), 162. 56 Sakharov (1975), 43. 57 Website:http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,926717,00.html (accessed 21 October 2012).





The post-Soviet period


When Barry and Williams published their study in 1997,58 attitudes had substantially changed. In 1987 in the context of Gorbachov’s glasnost and perestroika, a substantial public debate began in the mass media. By 1989 it was possible for the leading official law journal, Soviet State and Law to publish a translation of a chapter from the Amnesty International book When the state kills: the death penalty and the human rights issue.59

58 Barry and Williams (1997). 59 Kelina (1989); see also Barry and Williams (1997), 234, n. 11. A new draft of the USSR Principles of Criminal Legislation, which appeared in 1988, had six rather than 17 capital crimes and when the Principles were finally adopted in July 1991 (to come into force one year later, by which time the USSR had collapsed), just a few months before the USSR ceased to exist, there were five capital crimes: treason, premeditated murder under aggravating circumstances, rape of a minor under aggravating circumstances, child kidnapping resulting in particularly grave circumstances and especially grave crimes against the peace and security of mankind.60 However, the RSFSR chose not to follow the USSR and in December 1991 legislated61 that three of the economic crimes (illegal currency operations, theft of state property and bribery) should cease to be capital offences, but leaving counterfeiting as a capital crime until its removal as a offence carrying the death penalty in 1994.62

60 Ved. SSSR 1991, No. 30, item 82, art. 40. 61 Rossiyskaya Gazeta25 December 1991, 6. 62 Rossiyskaya Gazeta7 July 1994, 3; see also Barry and Williams (1997), 235.





The Yeltsin period


Until 1992 pardons and commutation of sentences was within the jurisdiction of the Presidium of the RSFSR Supreme Soviet and then by a Supreme Soviet Clemency Commission. When in 1991, for the first time in its history, the RSFSR elected a president, Boris Yeltsin, he was given authority over pardons.63 On 12 January 1992 very shortly after the collapse of the USSR, President Yeltsin decreed the creation of a Clemency (pomilovaniye)Commission within the President’s Administration. This body, composed of 15 members and led by the well-known writer Anatoly Pristavkin, met once a week and reviewed between 100 and 150 cases.64 Of these some 7 to 10 were capital cases. The Commission then made a recommendation to the President, who would write ‘agree’ or ‘don’t agree’ on the draft.

63 RSFSR Law of 24 April 1991, Sovetskaya Rossiya 20 April 1991, 1. 64 Barry and Williams (1997), 237. However, as Robert Kushen points out,65 the fractured and dynamic political situation of the time, when President Yeltsin’s future was in doubt, made any substantive reform or abolition highly unlikely. Nevertheless, abolition remained a longer term goal of the reformers. They succeeded in cutting out over half the population by an amendment to the Code of Criminal Procedure on 29 April 1993 making the death penalty applicable only to men aged between 18 and 65.66 The new Constitution of the Russian Federation, adopted by referendum in December 1993 following Yeltsin’s ‘constitutional coup d’état’, contained the following Article 20:

Each person shall have the right to life.

The death penalty, until its abolition, may be prescribed by federal law as an exceptional penalty for particularly grave crimes against life with the granting to the accused of the right to have the case heard by a court with the participation of jurors.



65 Kushen (1993). 66 I am indebted for this point to Jane Henderson. A new Criminal Code of the Russian Federation was not enacted until May 1996 and came into force on 1 January 1997.67 This contained the following capital crimes: premeditated murder under aggravating circumstances; murder or attempted murder of a state or pubic official; murder or attempted murder of a law enforcement officer; and genocide. The death penalty for offences against minors had gone, as well as crimes against peace and security of mankind. Article 59 provides:

The death penalty as an exceptional measure of punishment may be established only for exceptionally grave crimes which are life threatening.

The death penalty is not imposed upon women, nor upon persons who committed the crime prior to 18 years of age, nor upon men who had reached the age of 65 at the time of sentencing.

When clemency is granted, the death penalty may be replaced by life imprisonment or imprisonment for a term of 25 years.



67 Naumov (1997); English translation at http://www.legislationline.org/documents/section/criminal-codes/country/7 (accessed 19 February 2013). Barry and Williams provided68 an analysis of the numbers of executions carried out from 1985, when death penalty data, albeit containing discrepancies, began to be released. There was a significant drop in the numbers executed in the USSR, from 770 in 1985, to 526 in 1986, 344 in 1987, 271 in 1988, 276 in 1989 and 195 in 1990. Numbers granted clemency varied from 20 in 1985 to 72 in 1988. The Russian Federation is, of course, smaller than the USSR, but from 1989 the statistics show that 93 persons were executed in 1989, 76 in 1990, 59 (or 15 according to the Clemency Commission)69 in 1991, 18 (or one) in 1993, four in 1993, 19 in 1994, 86 in 1995 and 56 in 1996.

68 Barry and Williams (1997), 239–42. 69 See Pristavkin (1997). Amnesty International70 estimated that 140 persons were executed in Russia in 1996, the year Russia joined the Council of Europe. Anatoly Pristavkin wrote71 that the Council of Europe considered the total of 16 executions reported to its officials unacceptably high. When Pristavkin explained that the true number was 86, he was told that, had this been known, Russia would never have been admitted.

70 Amnesty International (1997), 5. 71 Pristavkin (1997), 5; Barry and Williams (1997), 241. The sudden increase in the number of executions in 1995–1996 is striking. In the same period there are practically no instances of clemency. According to Barry and Williams72 Yeltsin was responsible for a harsher policy following the murder of the famous journalist Vladislav Listyev and was influenced by senior law enforcement officials for whom ‘an act of clemency is equivalent to weakening the struggle against crime’.73 And a study published in early 1995 based on reputable polling showed that 25 per cent of respondents wanted an expansion of the death penalty; 37 per cent preferred retaining the death penalty as contained in the USSR Criminal Code; and only 15 per cent advocated moving gradually to its abolition.74 Of course, Russia is not the only country in which a large majority of the population is in favour of the death penalty.

72 Barry and Williams (1997), 242. 73 Pristavkin (1997), 5. 74 Levada (1995); see also Barry and Williams (1997), 251, n. 62.





Obligations undertaken on joining the Council of Europe


As already noted, on accession to the Council of Europe in 1996, Russia entered into an obligation: ‘[T]o sign within one year and ratify within three years from the time of accession, Protocol No. 6 to the European Convention on Human Rights on the abolition of the death penalty in time of peace, and to put into place a moratorium on executions with effect from the day of accession.’

Accordingly, and as noted already, Russia signed Protocol No. 6 on 16 April 1997. It should be noted that as a matter of international law, enshrined in the 1969 UN Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties,75 a state which has signed a treaty is prohibited, pending ratification, from acting in such a way as to violate the substance of the treaty it has signed.

75 At http://untreaty.un.org/ilc/texts/instruments/english/conventions/1_1_1969.pdf (accessed 19 February 2013). On 16 May 1996 President Yeltsin issued a Decree76 ‘On the gradual curtailing of the application of the death penalty in connection with the admission of Russia to the Council of Europe’.77 Barry and Williams observe78 that the decree had four substantive provisions. It:

charged the Russian government within one month to prepare the draft of a law ratifying Protocol No. 6;

recommended that both houses of parliament speed up the process for amending the criminal legislation;

instructed the Ministry of Internal Affairs to submit within three months proposals for the facilities for life imprisonment, in accordance with UN standards;

recommended that the Prosecutor General increase supervision over the implementation of laws on conditions under which capital prisoners are held.



76 Decree No. 724 (16 May 1996). 77 Barry and Williams (1997), 244. 78 Barry and Williams (1997), 245. It was unfortunate that the very first sentence of the Decree referred to Council of Europe ‘recommendations’, when it was perfectly clear that Russia had entered into an obligation on joining. Furthermore, the parliament was not called on to eliminate capital punishment, but only to curtail it. According to Pristavkin,79 a paragraph instituting a moratorium was dropped from the draft Decree following ‘intense pressure from officials of the Office of the Prosecutor General, the Ministry of the Interior and the Russian Supreme Court.’ The Decree, moreover, was promulgated only a few weeks before the presidential elections, in which he was seeking a second term, against a very strong challenge from the Communist Party.

79 Pristavkin (1996), 10; Barry and Williams (1997), 245, n. 45. A further indication of the discrepancy between Russia’s expressions of good faith towards the Council of Europe and reality was the enactment in 1996 of the new Criminal Code, noted earlier, that came into force on 1 January 1997, containing five offences attracting the death penalty, several of them new. On 2 August 1996 Yeltsin announced an unofficial moratorium on executions. One typical response was that of Vladimir Guliev:

[L]iberals, in our opinion, completely ignore Russian sociocultural ‘background’. Among us there has always existed an extremely significant number of people who are not deterred from committing murder either by prison or in particular by labor colonies… And the succession of wars and cruel repressions [that we have experienced] has lowered catastrophically the value of the human personality, of life itself … And this applies even more so to present Russia.80



80 Guliev (1996). Catherine Merridale supported this view:

Russian attitudes to death and to the value of life have probably been affected, in the medium term, by repeated exposure to unmourned, unvalued death. What others have described as the brutalization of society may have some applicability to Russia, though distinctions need to be made between those directly exposed to violence and those who experienced it at second hand or as children.81



81 Merridale (1996), 16. In March 1997 the Duma refused to ratify Protocol No. 6 and also refused to enact a law on moratorium. However, at the same time the Clemency Commission simply stopped sending cases to the President, so executions ceased for that reason if no other.82 In August 1999 the Russian Government once more submitted Protocol No. 6 to the Duma for ratification. This met a similar fate. However, the matter was resolved indirectly when, in February 1999, the Federal Constitutional Court held83 that in order for the death penalty to be applied in Russia, the accused must in have the right to a trial by jury every part of Russia: then trial by jury existed in only 9 of 89 regions of Russia. Igor Petrukhin, a leading expert on criminal law and procedure, was one of many scholars and experts calling for full abolition.84 Following a detailed legal analysis, he concluded: ‘[T]he death penalty breeds cruelty in society and nourishes the illusion that crime can only be resolved through measures of horror. It is impossible to fight cruelty with cruelty.’

82 Barry and Williams (1997), 247. 83 Decision of 2 February 1999, No. 3-P, Rossiskaya Gazeta, 10 February 1999, English summary in Venice Commission, Bulletin on Constitutional Case-Law, Edition 1999–1: 96–8. 84 Petrukhin (1999). And Sergei Pashin, who was the driving force behind the reintroduction of trial by jury in Russia, described the desire to restore the death penalty as ‘disgraceful atavism’.85 His close colleague Sergei Vitsin, a member of the Clemency Commission, wrote:

85 Pashin (2001). [T]here has now appeared in Russia a great historical chance once and for all to rid ourselves of the punishment which brings disgrace to our country. This is necessary for our own benefit, and not that of other countries or the Council of Europe. The impermissible retention of the death penalty in a society’ as Karl Marx once wrote ‘which plumes itself on its own civilisation’.86



86 Vitsin (2009).





Will the death penalty return to Russia?


Russia has not executed an accused since 1999. But the Criminal Procedural Code of 2001 extended jury trial to the whole of Russia except Chechnya, where it was to have been introduced not later than 1 January 2007. This would then, of course, have triggered the automatic restoration of the death penalty, following the judgment of the Constitutional Court referred to earlier.

However, on 15 November 2006 the state Duma adopted at first reading a draft law that changes the date for introduction of jury trials in Chechnya from 1 January 2007 to 1 January 2010. The (good) reason they gave was that lists of potential jurors must be compiled by municipalities, which did not yet exist in Chechnya. On 27 December 2006 the draft law was signed by the President; and it was published in the Russian Gazette and came into force on 31 December 2006, in the nick of time. So Russia had only until 1 January 2010 before the death penalty would automatically become available once more.

By the same token, as Roger Hood pointed out,87 on 18 December 2007 at the United Nations General Assembly Russia voted with 103 other states for a resolution calling for a moratorium on the use of the death penalty with a view to its abolition. All the other former Soviet states, except Belarus, which as Table 9.1 shows, retains the death penalty, were in support; and Belarus abstained rather than opposing. There is now renewed speculation that the death penalty will indeed return to Russia. The Beslan school siege tragedy led to renewed calls for restoration. On 9 September 2004 the influential Governor of Kemerovo Oblast, Aman Tuleev, demanded that parliamentarians reintroduce capital punishment for terrorist offences. He was joined by the then Deputy Speaker of the state Duma, the leader of the nationalist Liberal Democrat party, Vladimir Zhirinovsky.88

87 Hood (2008). 88 Website:http://www.newsru.com/arch/russia/09sep2004/tuleev.html (accessed 21 October 2012). Further, Nikolai Petrov of the Moscow Carnegie Centre has been quoted as saying:

[T]he time to revise Russia’s foreign policy concept may not have come, but there have been lots of signals suggesting the need to improve relations with European structures. Reintroducing the death penalty would directly contradict all the signals President Dmitry Medvedev has been sending.89



89 Oliphant (2009). And on Wednesday 9 September 2009 President Medvedev sent a strong signal, when his spokeswoman, Natalia Timakova, denied that reintroducing the death penalty was even under discussion (ibid), apparently in direct response to the Newsweek article referred to earlier.90

90 Taratuta and Zygar (2009).





Conclusion – and a happy ending?


Sociologists joke that the current opinion poll rating of capital punishment in Russia is, at 80 per cent, even higher than that of Vladimir Putin. The former Deputy Chairman of the Constitutional Court and renowned law reformer, Tamara Morshchakova, said that ‘[O]ur parliamentary deputies suffer from dependence on populism. They say that society does not want to abolish the death penalty. So what? In no country in the world does society want to abolish the death penalty. Even in England, in that ethical old democracy. But there society is not asked.’91 At the root of the continuing debate is a perplexing paradox. Mikhail Margelov wrote:

91 Taratuta and Zygar (2009). [T]he will of the Russian people is bewildering. They have no trust in punitive bodies yet two-thirds of the population want the death penalty, that is, they are ready to entrust to these bodies the right to decide who must live and who must die. The average Russian seems to be more inclined to act on his conviction rather than on the rational assessment of possible consequences.92



92 Margelov (2006). Russia is often portrayed as a primitive and bloodthirsty society, ruled by the authoritarian governments it deserves. Yet, as has been shown in this chapter, Russia was the first European state to abolish the death penalty in the eighteenth century, if not permanently, and throughout its contemporary history there has been an engaged and informed debate on the question of abolition. There have now been no executions for more than a decade and the present political leadership has shown no desire for the restoration of capital punishment.

There appears to be a happy ending to this tale. The Russian Constitutional Court has once again appeared as a deus ex machine and may well have secured an almost final abolition of the death penalty in Russia. Following a request from the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation, and with unprecedented speed, on 19 November 2009 the Constitutional Court handed down its Decision (Opredeleniye), clarifying its Resolution (Postanovleniye) of 2 February 1999 referred to already.93

93 In Rossiyskaya Gazetaon 27 November 2009, at http://www.rg.ru/2009/11/27/postanovlenie-ks-dok.html (accessed 12 January 2010). The Decision ruled that the death penalty may not be reintroduced even when trial by jury becomes available in the whole of the Federation, including Chechnya. The basis for the decision is very significant. The Court noted that Russia signed Protocol 6 to the ECHR on 16 April 1997 and is therefore obliged, by virtue of Article 18 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties 196994 ‘to refrain from acts which would defeat the object and purpose’ of the Protocol. Thus, the moratorium presently in place continues until ratification by Russia of the Protocol. As the commentator Anna Zakatnova pointed out,95 three judges (out of 19), Sergei Kazantsev, Mikhail Kleandrov and Yuriy Rudkin, voted against the Decision and the Court’s Chairman, Valeriy Zorkin, could not predict what the Russian parliament would do in the future. But Judge Kononov, one of the majority of judges who voted in favour, insisted that the Constitutional Court had not exceeded its jurisdiction and that the effective abolition of the death penalty in Russia is irreversible.

94 Website:http://untreaty.un.org/ilc/texts/instruments/english/conventions/1_1_1969.pdf (accessed 12 January 2010). 95 In Rossiyskaya Gazeta20 November 2009, at http://www.rg.ru/2009/11/20/kazn.html (accessed 12 January 2010). Celebration of the Constitutional Court’s decision was swiftly tempered by disturbing news. On 2 December 2009 Judge Kononov and his colleague Judge Yaroslavtsev, both of them leading advocates of human rights on the Court, were forced to resign their positions following public criticism by them of political control of the Russia judiciary.96 Yaroslavtsev was criticised and recommended to stand down as the CCRF representative on the RF Council of Judges. This he did on 1 December 2009, but remained a judge. At the same time, Anatoliy Kononov, a criminal law expert and one of the longest serving CCRF judges, resigned his tenure.97

96 In Russian in the daily Kommersant, at http://www.kommersant.ru/doc.aspx?DocsID=1284828 (accessed 12 January 2010); see also Nikolaus von Twickel, ‘2 Senior Judges Quit after Criticism’, Moscow Times, 3 December 2009. 97 Henderson (2011b). Ten years have passed since Russia signed Protocol 6 and there is no sign that the state Duma will enact legislation for ratification. But in order to restore the death penalty Russia would be obliged to leave the Council of Europe, a step it is presently unlikely to take. But, as always, the future of the rule of law in Russia is clouded by uncertainty.





Chapter 10

Sovereign democracy




DOI: 10.4324/9780203490211-11





Introduction


My final chapter brings the wheel full circle and shows how ideas which have their roots in the mindset of the Slavophiles, with a significant dose of Messianism, and language borrowed from Eurasianism, have a strong influence on the ideology and policy of the current Russian regime and on its attitude to its European human rights commitments.

Both Britain and Russia are showing signs of rebellion against the European Court of Human Rights. This is not a chapter on British radical conservatism, but my readers may well be familiar with the refusal to obey the Strasbourg Court’s judgment in Hirst v. UK (No. 2) (2005) on prisoners’ voting rights. In November 2010 the Court ruled that the UK had failed to comply with the 2005 judgment and the Grand Chamber refused an appeal by the UK. On 10 February 2011 Conservative members of Parliament were allowed a free vote and defied the Court. In April 2011 Kenneth Clarke said: ‘[A]t times, the court has been rather too ready to substitute its own judgment for that of national courts, without giving enough weight to the strength of the domestic legal system or allowing for genuine differences of national approach.’1 At the time of writing, Kenneth Clarke’s successor as Minister of Justice, Chris Grayling, insisted, on 28 October 2012, that Parliament has a ‘clear’ right not to accept the European Court of Human Rights’ ruling prisoners must get the vote. But he warned there would be ‘consequences’ for the UK’s position in Europe if MPs chose to defy the judgment. The government has insisted it will not support the granting of voting rights to prisoners and most MPs agree. Mr Grayling said he was thinking ‘very carefully’ about how to act.2

1 Website:http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/justice-secretary-warning-over-echr-judgments-2274962.html (accessed 22 October 2012). 2 Grayling, ‘MPs to decide on prisoner votes’, 28 October 2012 at http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-20115675 (accessed 28 October 2012). Russia is not immune from such difficulties. On 8 June 2011 the Grand Chamber of the European Court of Human Rights held an oral hearing on Russia’s appeal against the Chamber judgment of 7 October 2010 in Markin v. Russia, on the Russian authorities’ refusal to grant the male applicant parental leave, which represented a difference in treatment compared to female military personnel and civilians. This was an appeal from the judgment of the Chamber, which for the first time directly criticised the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation.3 I analyse the Russian reaction later in the chapter.

3 Application No. 30078/06, Judgment of 15 January 2009. The focus of this chapter is the concept of ‘sovereign democracy’, the brain-child of Vladislav Yuryevich Surkov (b. 1964 – one year older than Dmitry Medvedev), previously First Deputy Head of the President’s Administration and also previously the acknowledged ideologist of the regime.4 Surkov, although no longer in the President’s Administration, is now a Deputy Prime Minister, with a crucially important role in government.

4 Interestingly, his father’s name was Dudaev and he may have been born in Chechnya, although his claimed birthplace is in Lipetsk Oblast. In 2006 the collection Suverenitet (Sovereignty) appeared, edited by the ‘young conservative’ Nikita Garadzha. This book contained articles by Putin, Medevedev and Surkov himself. It has been said that the doctrine of ‘sovereign democracy’ has no content. But I argue in this chapter that there is indeed a determinate content to the doctrine – and a controversial one at that. Policymakers and even scholars in the West are, I think, insufficiently aware of this content.

What I show is that this doctrine has a direct impact on law and on human rights. That is where I start in this chapter. I continue with an article in the journal Radical Philosophy, which initially sparked my interest in these developments in Russia. At the centre of this chapter is the startling (for me) influence of Carl Schmitt, the ‘crown jurist’ of the Third Reich, on contemporary Russian debates. The next two sections look more closely at the Sovereignty question and one of its authors; and then at a leading figure among the ‘young conservatives’, Mikhail Remizov. My conclusion places these debates in their Russian historical context.





The Russian rebellion in late 2010


The contemporary significance of the word ‘sovereignty’ in Russia was demonstrated on 29 October 2010 when Valeriy Zorkin, Chairman of the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation, published a long article in the Rossiyskaya Gazeta entitled ‘Limits of compromise’, expressing defiance of the European Court of Human Rights.5 Zorkin was especially agitated by the Markin case and argued:

5 Zorkin (2010). The principles of state sovereignty and the supremacy of the Constitution in the legal system of Russia lie at the foundation of its constitutional system. The Convention as an international treaty of Russia is a component part of its legal system, but it is not higher than the Constitution … Each decision of the European Court is not only a legal but a political act. When such as decision is taken in the interests of the protection of the rights and freedoms of the citizen and the development of our country, Russia will always precisely obey it. But when it or another decision of the Strasbourg court is doubtful from the point of view of the goal of the European Convention on Human Rights and moreover in a direct fashion concerns national sovereignty, and fundamental constitutional principles, Russia has the right to work out a defence mechanism against such decisions. Precisely through the prism of the Constitution the problem of the relationship between orders of the CC and the ECtHR must also be worked out … Like any other European state, Russia must fight as much for the preservation of its sovereignty, as for the careful relationship with the European Convention, and defence of its sovereignty against inadequate, doubtful decisions. [Emphasis added.]



On Thursday 18 November 20106 the Strasbourg Court communicated to Russia the United Opposition case, in which complaints were made about the 2003 elections. Zorkin complained that the Court’s decision was ‘connected with political reasons’ and said: ‘Not all decisions of the ECtHR are obligatory for execution, in particular, those concerning sovereignty’ (emphasis added). This was followed by heated exchanges with Jean-Paul Costa, the ECtHR’s then President and others in St Petersburg in November 2010.

6 Website:http://www.newsru.com/arch/russia/18nov2010/zorkin.html (accessed 21 October 2012). On 11 December 2010, at a meeting at former President Medvedev’s residence with Constitutional Court judges, Judge Zorkin referred to the St Petersburg discussions of the previous month. The President replied: ‘As it seems to me, we all the same never transferred such a part of our sovereignty, the sovereignty of Russia, as would permit any international court or foreign court to take a decision, changing our national legislation.’7

7 Website:http://kremlin.ru/news/9792 (accessed 21 October 2012). On 12 April 2011 Zorkin and his fellow thinkers were further outraged by the Strasbourg Court’s judgment in Republican Party v. Russia, holding that dissolution of the party in 2007 violated its rights under Article 11.

On 16 May 2011 Zorkin continued his challenge, at a conference dedicated to the anniversary of the Nuremberg trials.8 Zorkin presented a paper entitled ‘Legal results of the Nuremburg trials and their contemporary significance’ and once more spoke out against the ‘liberal-globalist’ principle of ‘the priority of international law over national law’, which he defined as ‘the attempt at senseless extension’ of the unprecedented situation of the Nuremburg trials in relation to ‘private and dubious international collisions’. At the same conference, the Minister of Justice, Aleksandr Konovalov, delivered a paper ‘Legal traditions in the contemporary global world’, giving some ‘nuances’ to Zorkin’s presentation. In his view, the general tendency of public law was ‘an inadequate legal reaction to new threats – from terrorism to illegal migration, which leads to an absence of balance between the rule of law and police and administrative aspects of expediency.’

8 Website:http://www.kommersant.ru/doc/1642018 (accessed 21 October 2012) Zorkin is not the only senior Russian judge to have expounded on the nature of sovereignty. On 17 July 2012 the commentator and political scientist Nikolai Zlobin published an article entitled ‘Anton Ivanov as the last stronghold of Russian sovereignty’.9 Anton Ivanov (b. 1965), a fellow student of Dmitry Medevedev’s at the law department of Leningrad State University, is the Chairman of Russia’s Supreme Commercial Court. Zlobin started by commenting on the recent Berezovsky v. Abramovich case at the London Commercial Court. He and colleagues were impressed by the general atmosphere of objectivity and supremacy of law; for him, that is what is now needed in Russia. But this is not the case in the view of the Russian judges. Ivanov and other senior judges propose ‘defending sovereignty’ from the London and other foreign courts:

9 Nikolai Zlobin Anton Ivanov kak poslednij oplot rossiyskovo suverenitetaon his blog at http://nzlobin.livejournal.com/73343.html, and on Radio Ekho Moskvy at http://echo.msk.ru/blog/nzlobin/909838-echo/ (accessed 1 October 2012). Ivanov wants not simply to overrule in Russia their decisions, but even to confiscate the property of companies and persons who run to foreign courts, and to refuse the foreign judges entry to Russia. The judicial claims of foreigners against Russians, accusing them of corruption, Ivanov considers to be an ‘abuse of law’ and he demands that Russian courts be given the possibility of overruling such decisions. And this is in a situation in which foreign investors are not standing in line at the Kremlin, and the flight of capital grows, and Russian entrepreneurs hold all their interests offshore.

D. Afanasiev of the leading lawyers firm ‘Yegorov, Puginskiy, Afanasiev and Partners’ not long ago asserted that not more than 10% of significant deals are concluded in the Russian jurisdiction, and that businessmen prefer English law as the proper law of the contract. The Chairman of the Duma Committee for Economic Policy Ye. Fyodorov recognises that 95% of the largest Russian firms are to be found in foreign jurisdictions.





Zorkin as an early participant in the sovereignty discussion


Zorkin is no newcomer to debates about ‘sovereignty’. On 17 November 2006 he participated in and led a discussion on ‘The sovereign state in conditions of globalisation: democracy and national identity’, together with leading intellectual and scholarly figures such as Vladislav Fronin, Sergey Karaganov, Ivan Melnikov, Andrei Isaev, Gleb Pavlovskiy, Igor Bunin, Dmitriy Orlov, Aleksandr Babakov, Sergey Ivanenko, Nikolai Levichev, Vyacheslav Volodin, Andryanik Migranyan, Leonid Polyakov, Yegor Solomatin and Vladislav Surkov.10

10 Surkov (2008). The roundtable discussion followed publication on 22 August 2004 of Zorkin’s article ‘Apology for the Westphalian system’ in Rossiyskaya Gazeta.11 Zorkin declared at the discussion’s conclusion that ‘From this point of view Russian democracy – is sovereign, and the sovereignty of the Russian state – is democratic … Precisely for this reason in the globalising world the defence of the interests of the state demands the uniting and not the breaking up of sovereignties.’

11 Zorkin (2004).





The Radical Philosophy article


My curiosity was originally aroused by the article in Radical Philosophy by Julia Svetlichnaja with James Heartfield12 ‘Sovereign democracy. Dictatorship over capitalism in contemporary Russia’,13 which appeared in January 2010. Svetlichnaja, whose intervention with Heartfield in the Litvinenko murder case stirred up something of a storm,14 is a PhD student with Chantal Mouffe at the University of Westminster. Mouffe is well known as a serious student of Carl Schmitt (see her 1993 and 1999 books). Garadja’s 2006 collection Suverenitet is also the centre of their attention.15 They correctly point out that the collection is ‘rooted, theoretically in François Guizot’s political rationalism and Carl Schmitt’s “decisionism” … [and] endorses their contempt towards key concepts of the liberal “democratic” age … the new Russian theorists of sovereign democracy prefer instead to understand democracy as an ‘identity of the governors and the governed’.

12 James Heartfield was prior to 1997, when it disbanded, a theoretician of the Revolutionary Communist Party and is now involved in the RCP’s successors the Institute of Ideas and Spiked Online. 13 Svetlichnaya with Heartfield (2010). 14 Website:http://larussophobe.wordpress.com/2006/12/12/the-kremlins-litvinenko-disinformation-campaign-exposed-2/ (accessed 21 October 2012). 15 Garadja (2006). This was also noted by Andrey Makarychev, who wrote in 2005 that:

Putin’s reforms in this sense rely on the logic of Carl Schmitt: both understand the core of the problems to lie in the fact that the state is turning into one among many institutions (groups, associations) and as a result is in a relation of dependency on other institutions. A ‘relativisation’ of the state takes place: it has to take part in discussions, and conclude formal or informal agreements with other instances which claim political status. As a result the state becomes derivative on the interrelations of forces between conflicting group interests, and the central power becomes in the end only an ‘arbiter’ or ‘peacemaker’.16



16 Makarychev (2005). Makarychev went on:

The paradoxical nature of Putin’s answer to the ‘Schmittean problem’ lies in the fact that with the help of depoliticised methods he tries to resolve the political – in their foundations – problems of the restoration of the subjectivity of the state. But then again, this means, to speak the language of C. Schmitt, the question of norm or exception – this is the question which is still completely open for evaluation.



He cited Mouffe, Žižek, Agamben, Schmitt and others. The translation by Svetlichnaja and Heartfield, by the way, is incorrect and misleading in my view.

My curiosity was aroused by the fact that – especially in a journal of radical philosophy – Schmitt made such an unproblematised appearance. The authors concluded:

Unlike the governing classes in Western Europe and North America, the Russian elite is engaged in a political struggle for authority. Authority in the West is evasive, difficult to pin down, diffuse. No so in Russia, where the elite are forcefully politicising events, for good or ill. That might hold dangers, but, as Makarichev suggests, it may at least open the possibility for an engagement, a contest for a different interpretation of events.



Thus, they are, one might think, attempting a Schmittean justification for the Putin regime.





Fascination with a fascist


This fascination with Schmitt and his disciple Agamben is shared by other – erstwhile leftist – intellectuals in USA and British academe. For reasons why this might be misplaced, see Jan Werner Muller’s A dangerous mind: Carl Schmitt in post-war European thought,17 on Schmitt’s post-war trajectory. See also Empire and human rights by my Birkbeck colleague Costas Douzinas,18 a thoroughly Schmittean book, in which Schmitt is frequently called on as an authority, without context or critique, and drawing on William Rasch’s 2004 Sovereignty and its discontents: on the primacy of conflict and the structure of the political. This last is a text crying out to be translated into Russian, as its title suggests.

17 Muller (2003). 18 Douzinas (2007). Schmitt has his own trajectory in Russia. In 1992 Aleksandr Dugin, who has made a remarkable transition from ideologue for Limonov and his National Bolshevik Party to the leading exponent of Eurasianism and now Professor of Sociology at Moscow State University, published in Nash Sovremennik (Our Contemporary) a seminal article entitled: ‘Conservative revolution. Carl Schmitt, 5 lessons for Russia’. Dugin displayed a detailed knowledge of Schmitt’s writings and rehearsed the familiar Schmittean themes: friend/ enemy, political theology, the nomos of the earth, etc. He concluded:

Russia – this is the Great Space and Great Thought which its people bear in their gigantic continental Eurasian spirit. If the German Genius will serve our Awakening, then those very Teutons will deserve for themselves a privileged place among the ‘friends of Great Russia’, will become ‘ours’, will become ‘our own’, will become ‘Asians’, Huns’, ‘Scythians’, like us, the autochtonous people of the Great Forest and the Great Steppe.



In 2008 Aleksandr Mikhailovskiy (b. 1977), a dotsent in philosophy at the Higher School of Economics and expert on the ‘conservative revolutionary’ Ernst Jünger (1895–1998), published in the prestigious journal Questions of Philosophy an article entitled ‘The struggle for Carl Schmitt: on the reception and actuality of the concept of the political’.19 He started:

19 Mikhailovsky (2008). The German theoretician of law Carl Schmitt is one of the most powerful conservative intellects of the last century, whose ideas not only have not lost their actuality, but on the contrary, arouse more and more interest among those who try to comprehend the political situation of the contemporary world.



He recognised that Schmitt became the ‘court jurist’ of the Third Reich. He cited Agamben, Negri, Žižek and Mouffe as those who have found resources in Schmitt, from the left.





The Sovereignty collection of 2006 – and Carl Schmitt


Which brings me back to the collection to which Putin and Medvedev contributed. A key chapter in Garadzha’s Suverenitet collection was the Schmitt-infused ‘Sovereignty as a political choice’20 by Aleksandr Filippov (b. 1958), for six years Dean of Sociology at the Moscow Higher School of Social and Economic Science and now head of the Kafedra (Chair) of Practical Philosophy at the prestigious National Research University – Higher School of Economics and Head of the Centre for Fundamental Sociology. He defended his kandidat of science (PhD) thesis on the sociology of the German systems theorist Niklas Luhmann, but is now a leading adept of Carl Schmitt. In 2009 he published in the journal Sociological Observer a translation into Russian of Schmitt’s 1923 Crisis of parliamentary democracy, together with a lengthy analysis of Schmitt’s ‘political and legal philosophy of space’.21 Filippov’s chapter in the Sovereignty collection starts with the question: ‘Do we live in a sovereign state?’ He states in conclusion:

20 Filippov (2006), 92. 21 Filippov (2009c), 92. Therefore both the recognition of sovereignty and its denial are not simply rhetorical figures. The question is of political communication, which proposes that the consolidation of political agents (whether citizens, official institutions or representatives of self-organisation, or other significant figures of politics) proposes the consolidation of sovereignty. This means that any really consolidated ‘we’ as a political or politically relevant unity, in the final analysis, without exception, which could appear as the subject source of the decision, must in defined circumstances in general speak of the decision (and not the depersonalised force of circumstances and events).



In 2008, in the philosophical journal Siniy Divan (Blue Divan), Filippov published his translation of Schmitt’s 1954 dialogue ‘Discussion on power and access to the power-holder’ (Gespräch über die Macht und den Zugang zum Machthaber, not yet translated into English).22 This is plainly his chosen academic focus and one that fits well with the ideology of the regime. In the same year, he published an article in the Russkiy Zhurnal entitled ‘The Leviathan grown fat: do they read Carl Schmitt in the Kremlin?’ It is plainly his ambition that they should.23

22 Filippov (2008a). 23 Filippov (2008b).





The Russian young conservatives – and Mr Remizov


One of the leading ‘young conservatives’ along with Garadzha is the prolific Mikhail Vitalyevich Remizov (b. 1978), now President of the Institute of National Strategy founded by Stanislas Belkovskiy.

His writings also have a clear direction. On 2 February 2011 he published an article ‘A collection of superstitions. The nationalisms of the ruling class’,24 in which he accused the ruling elite of having no ‘joined-up conception of national (ethnic) policy’, but only ‘a collection of superstitions, handed down from the Soviet time, which make the approach of the state to the national (ethnic) sphere completely contradictory’.

24 Remizov (2011). The first contradiction he identifies is that between the idea of a united political nation and the principle of a multinational (ethnic) state. The second contradiction is that between the status in the state of national (ethnic) minorities and the absence of an analogical status for the national (ethnic) majority. He adds that in the Russian Federation there is no form of self-determination for Russians, as opposed to Chechnya for the Chechens, Tatarstan for the Tatars, etc. He adds:

When power has a transcendental source of legitimacy, it can permit itself to play with multi-nationalism, and its point of support in general is above the nation. The problem of Russian power consists in the fact that it lost its highest point of support, but kept multi-nationalism as a principle. And precisely that principle blocks the democratic evolution of Russian power.



He referred to the 1789 French Declaration of Rights of Man and of the Citizen, to the effect that the source of sovereign power can only be the nation. In this context, the idea of the nation reflects the fact that power cannot issue from the people, if that people does not express the collectivity of self-knowledge and cultural singularity (odnorostnost), necessary, as a minimum, for mutual understanding and interconnected trust between people and as a maximum, for the development of the effects of ‘common destiny’ and ‘general will’. He cited President Medvedev who, after the recent race riots on the Manyezh Square in central Moscow, said that if we do not form a Russian national identity, then ‘the destiny of our country will be very sad’.

And in 2008 Remizov wrote an article ‘Because we are conservatives’, for the website APN (Agency for Political News), which he headed before becoming President of the Institute for National Strategy.25 He defined his position as follows: ‘Marxism was sharpened against another enemy – against liberalism, that is, in some way, against the market, elevated to the rank of ideology. But conservatism is the alternative – to Marxism – ideology of limiting the market.’

25 Remizov (2008). In his view, the Marxist critique of conservatism was precisely vulgar rather than scientific. He admitted that fascism has nothing in common with conservatism, but if ‘one has in mind classical, Italian fascism, and not Hitler’s “racial experiment”, then, by and large, it represented nothing other than the unification of conservative thought with futuristic ethics and the methods of street terror.’

For Remizov, the fundamental concept is ‘inheritance’. Thus, he says, each of the three great ideologies, liberal, Marxist and conservative, has its own basis for demanding power. In the liberal model, taxes are the basis: ‘We pay taxes, consequently, we can make demands on those who spend them.’ For the Marxists, this role is played by surplus value: the state as agent for capital lives off the surplus product created by our labour. According to conservative logic, demand on the state is based on the fact that it disposes of a shared inheritance, directly or by defining the rules for its use. For Remizov, each of these foundations has a right to existence. But in contemporary Russia the first two are absolutely fictitious: ‘We present our bill to the contemporary state not because we are tax-payers. And not because we are labourers. But because we are inheritors, therefore we are conservatives.’

The origins of present-day ‘young conservatism’, which without shame bases itself on Nazi ideology and ‘classical fascism’, as Parland also points out,26 the Messianism identified by Peter Duncan,27 with its roots in 1511, can be traced through the Soviet period; and the Eurasianism which, with its origins in the White emigration after 1917, has become one of the main sources of vocabulary and outlook for Russia’s conservative elite.28 Its main exponent, Aleksandr Dugin, has moved from overt neo-fascism and occultism to authoring key textbooks on international relations, or geopolitics, and is now a professor at Moscow State University. From a slightly different direction the late Vadim Tsymburskiy, author of the hugely influential The island of Russia,29 drew heavily from the geopolitics of Klaus Haushofer (1869–1946) and Halford Mackinder (1861–1947), both of them inspirations for Nazi ideology. All these sources feed the current Russian debates on ‘national identity’.

26 Parland (2005). 27 Duncan (2000). 28 Shlapentokh (2007). 29 Tsymbursky (2007). And, as I showed at the start with my reference to Valeriy Zorkin, who is known to have the support of the great majority of justices of the Russian Constitutional Court, this ideological brew exercises a strong influence not only on political discourse, but on the ideology of law and relations between Russia and the European Court of Human Rights.





Zorkin and sovereignty again


Indeed, on 16 May 2012, Zorkin published again in the Rossiyskaya Gazeta – a long (more than 7,000 words) essay entitled ‘The supremacy of law and the imperative of security’.30 Zorkin started by presenting his account of the supremacy of law, which was the supremacy of human rights, as set out in Article 2 of the 1993 Constitution of the Russian Federation:

30 Zorkin (2012). Article 2

Man, his rights and freedoms are the supreme value. The recognition, observance and protection of the rights and freedoms of man and citizen shall be the obligation of the State.31



31 At http://www.constitution.ru/en/10003000-02.htm (accessed 29 October 2012). However, he was at pains to point out that he meant human rights in the classical liberal sense, that is, starting from the equality of human rights and freedoms, in which it is understood that people are different and have different hierarchies of values, ideals and preferences. Thus, the rights and freedoms of one person finish where the rights and freedoms of another person begin. Zorkin distinguished this ‘classical liberalism’ from what he described as ‘aggressive “liberalisation”‘, whose apologists confuse freedom with ‘everything is permitted’. In practice, this meant social individualism and state egoism. This led Zorkin to a discussion of multiculturalism:

[W]ithin the one-sided concept of ‘liberalisation of democracy’ there is more and more to be found a priority of the minority over the majority. This tendency is especially apparent in the USA and a number of countries of Western Europe, where for some time now they argue that the protection of minority rights must become the fundamental task of key legal institutions which regulate the life of society. And they say this in such a way that in fact signifies the right of the minority to aggressive propaganda of its values, norms and way of life.



This tendency was exemplified for Zorkin by such human rights organisat ions as Amnesty International and Freedom House which propagate the assertion that to the extent that the self-expression of the person is one of the highest freedoms, this freedom is acceptable even when it shocks, discredits, and defames other people. Zorkin also saw dangers in the process of formation of a unified legal space within the Council of Europe, in which the key player is the European Court of Human Rights: ‘In their desire to take on themselves the function of “norm control” on the quality of national legislation, they turn, in this way, into a general European legislator.’ He further pointed out that if the Strasbourg court is now a legislator, there is no general European system of checks and balances.

This led Zorkin into a discussion – of sovereignty:

I consider very dangerous the assertion, popular nowadays, that the withdrawal from or even rejection of the principle of state sovereignty is a movement to the side of integration of world society. On the contrary, we must try to prove that it is the only means of guaranteeing security and the protection of human rights in conditions of globalisation, when the national state only is capable of resolving these tasks.



In Zorkin’s view, the UN itself exists only thanks to the will of sovereign states that decided to create the UN in the aftermath of World War II. He insisted that the concept of state sovereignty, starting with Westphalia, lies at the foundation of the supremacy of national constitutions in the legal system. This is the only basis for a person-centred system of international law.

According to Zorkin, the most active idea for ‘wiping out’ state sovereignty is developed by lawyers who support a relation between international and national law a concept that can be called ‘radical legal monism’. They consider that it is essential to create a global legal system in which international law will have absolute priority over national legal norms and over the national legal system as a whole, including the constitution. Zorkin considered this either to be very short sighted or a provocation. His conclusion was that the most important step in improving the system of international law would be:

[T]o make the formulation of the basic documents of the UN more precise, defining legal boundaries and the relation and hierarchy of basic concepts such as sovereignty, non-interference in the internal affairs of sovereign states, territorial integrity, the right of nations to self-determination, the protection of human rights and so on.



This is not so far at all from the Soviet conception of international law.





Russia’s continuing conflict with Strasbourg


Nothing has been resolved in Russia either as far as the European Court of Human Rights is concerned. On 22 March 2012 in the case of Markin the Grand Chamber held by 16 votes to 1 that Russia had indeed violated Article 14 of the ECHR (non-discrimination) taken in conjunction with Article 8 (right to respect for family and private life). The Grand Chamber considered that:

[T]he exclusion of servicemen from the entitlement to parental leave, while servicewomen are entitled to such leave, cannot be said to be reasonably or objectively justified. The Court concludes that this difference in treatment, of which the applicant was a victim, amounted to discrimination on grounds of sex. (para. 151)



The Grand Chamber avoided the criticism of the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation to which the Chamber had devoted some strong language. My colleague Kirill Koroteev commented on the day of the judgment:

It has to be said that the Grand Chamber judgment, although identical in argumentation and conclusion, is written rather more diplomatically [than the Chamber]. All comments on the reasoning of the Constitutional Court have been replaced by reference to the Government’s arguments. If that suits V. D. Zorkin, so be it (although it is regrettable that the ECHR succumbed to the pressure of one person).32



32 Kirill Koroteev, 22 March 2012, at http://zakon.ru/Blogs/OneBlog/2525 (accessed 28 October 2012). Koroteev further commented in the June–August issue of the journal Sravnitelnoye Konstitutsinnoye Obozreniye (Comparative Constitutional Observer), under the heading ‘The conflict which never was’.33

33 Summarised at http://www.ilpru/page_pid_610_abc_26_lang_1.aspx (accessed 28 October 2012). On 30 August 2012 it was reported that the Military Court of St Petersburg had rendered a further judgment in the case of Markin, again refusing his claim.34 Russia had decided to ignore the judgment of the European Court of Human Rights and not to amend the relevant law. Such an amendment was the logical consequence of the Grand Chamber’s judgment. On 31 August 2012 Dmitriy Marakulin and Anna Pushkarskaya of Kommersant daily business paper reported, under the headline ‘The Military Court of St Petersburg did not subordinate itself to the European Court’, that Markin was determined to appeal and in the event of losing again would take his case back to Strasbourg on the basis of Russia’s failure to implement the Grand Chamber’s judgment.35

34 Website:http://www.gazeta.ru/social/2012/08/30/4745729.shtml (accessed 28 October 2012). 35 Website:http://www.kommersant.ru/doc/2011935 (accessed 28 October 2012).





Conclusion


DOI: 10.4324/9780203490211-12

This brings me to some concluding remarks.

First, as to ‘law’. It is a fact that the Russian Empire, the Soviet Union and the contemporary Russian Federation, far from ever being a space of ‘no law’, have all been suffused, even saturated, with law. The great debates have, even in the midst of the Civil War that followed the Bolshevik revolution, almost all been conducted in terms of and in the name of law. I have tried to show that at crucial moments, my landmarks, the debate has not only been richly varied but has been fully informed by developments elsewhere, especially in the West. The foundation of law as an academic discipline in Russia and Catherine’s own direction drew directly from the most recent intellectual achievements in England and in Scotland. Academic discourse in Russia at that time can be seen as a struggle between German abstraction and the new thought emanating from the British Isles.

However, it is in my view a tragedy that so little Russian legal scholarship is translated into English, given the very rich and strong traditions established in Russia since the eighteenth century. I hope that an ‘added value’ of this book is the extent to which I have drawn from Russian legal scholarship on all the landmark events I have investigated.

There is another aspect to this, which is the close relationship that developed between Russia and England, since the sixteenth century, when Ivan IV (the Terrible) proposed marriage to Elizabeth I.1 Subsequently England (later Britain) and Russia were on the same side in every major international conflict except the Crimean War. This was in large part because Moscow became the centre of a great continental empire, whereas ‘Britannia ruled the waves’. Even the Great Game for Central Asia never went beyond pushing and shoving.

1 See John Vincent ‘Ivan the terribly rude’, Daily Telegraph, 1 February 2003, at http://www.freerepublic.com/focus/f-news/1051442/posts (accessed 31 October 2012). However, Russian law since the twentieth century is German law; the Russian Constitutional Court is modelled on the German Bundesverfassungsgericht 2 and the 1993 Russian Constitution bears strong traces of the German Constitution, especially the Sozialstaatsprinzip, the constitutional commitment to a social state.3

2 Website:http://www.bverfg.de/en/index.html (accessed 31 October 2012). 3 For this central principle of the German legal and political order, see http://www.bpb.de/politik/grundfragen/deutsche-demokratie/39302/sozialstaat?p=all (accessed 31 October 2012). Turning to ‘rights’, it is my contention that the inhabitants of the Russian Empire had in some respects more rights than those of countries such as Britain, France and the United States. Serfdom was abolished in Russia several years before slavery was abolished in the USA. And, although it is not the subject matter of this book, there is increasing evidence that the Russian Empire was considerably kinder to its subjects than was the British Empire to its.4 At the time of writing a court in London ruled that three elderly Kenyans who were tortured under British rule in the 1950s could pursue their claim for damages from Britain, in the words of the Financial Times: ‘a judgment likely to encourage other claims from victims of colonial-era brutality’.5 I wrote ‘Russian Empire’ deliberately: I have already referred to the atrocities carried out by Russian Federal forces in Chechnya in the First (1994–1997) and Second (1999–) Chechen Wars.

4 See, e.g. Newsinger (2000); see also Cobain (2012). 5 Financial Times, 5 October 2012, ‘Kenya torture victims win UK court ruling’, http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/88d457a6–0ee9–11e2–9343–00144feabdc0.html#axzz2AtUyD5Wi (accessed 31 October 2012). I have also traced in my final chapter the sinister commonality between the UK and the Russian Federation as concerns compliance with the European Court of Human Rights (although I have more sympathy for Justice Zorkin’s arguments than those of David Cameron).

Finally, ‘ideology’. Both Britain and Russia have found it very hard to cope with the loss of empire in very recent years and demotion from superpower, even hegemonic, status. But while Britain is now an average-sized member of the European Union, and having to live with its new ranking as best it can, Russia remains a very large and important country indeed, which has suffered a demographic nightmare that is now stabilising. I have great sympathy with those who argue – and this is maybe my only point of agreement with Vladimir Putin – that it is essential for the future of global politics that Russia remains a great power and realises the potential of its location in Europe and in Asia, as a great Christian and Muslim country. I have shown how the current ideology of ‘sovereignty’ does not provide the answer, especially not when informed by the ruminations of Carl Schmitt.

An autobiographical note follows; but I am obliged to state that I fell in love with Russia, its language and people(s) on my first visit in 1983 and that passion had already been latent for many years.





Autobiographical note


DOI: 10.4324/9780203490211-13

This note explains how and why I became so enthusiastically interested in Russia and its history.

My parents were both born in the USA. My father was born to an English family in 1910 near what is now San José in California; his father had moved to California in 1890. He was educated in England after the age of 13 and fought in the British Army in World War II. My mother was born in 1924 in Clinton, Missouri, of a Dutch-American family – her maiden name was Schuyler – and grew up in St Louis, where she made her undergraduate studies. She won her masters’ degree in biochemistry at Boulder, Colorado. She came to work in the US Embassy in London after World War II and my parents were introduced through mutual relatives in California and settled in England.

My mother was a passionate Russophile – that fact is at the origin of this book.

My mother became a Russophile in an unusual way. Her lifelong friend, Tilghman B. (Skip) Koons, also Dutch-American, was born in 1926, entered Princeton in 1943 and majored in 1946 in the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs. He was then taught Russian at the language school at the university in Boulder, Colorado, which is where he met my mother. They were very close friends for the rest of her life. Skip was in government service in Washington and then in China – Shanghai, Peking and Manchuria – for two and a half years. 1 The notice of his death on the Princeton alumni page states that he ‘did a tour in China’. 2 In fact, he was an officer in the Office of Strategic Services (OSS), the predecessor of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), and served with White Russian officers fighting with the Kuomintang. His Russian was perfect. Skip was awarded a Fulbright Scholarship in 1952 and his PhD from the Sorbonne in Paris traced the political ideas and activities of the Russian émigrés from the Russian Revolution to the outbreak of World War II. He was a senior CIA officer until 1959. He visited Russia on several occasions before and after the collapse of the USSR in 1991, especially to attend the Kirov Opera and ballet in St Petersburg.

1 Website:http://ucblibraries.colorado.edu/archives/collections/jlsp/interpreter127.doc (accessed 17 September 2011). 2 Website:http://paw.princeton.edu/memorials/13/71/index.xml (accessed 17 September 2011). While my mother was at Boulder with Skip she attended lectures given by Lenin’s chief opponent in 1917, Aleksandr Kerensky (1881–1970) and made friends in the White Russian émigré community. She learned a great deal of Russian culture, especially art and music. Through Skip my mother developed a fascination with Russia and love of its culture, and her Russophilia was passed on to me.

I studied philosophy at university and, not uncommonly for my generation, was a very active Trotskyist from 1969 to 1974, thereby receiving an excellent grounding in the works of Marx, Engels, Lenin and Trotsky and became rather well read, even expert, in Russian history, especially the 1905 and 1917 revolutions, and the ‘Revolution betrayed’ under Stalin.

Having found that work as a philosopher is hard to come by, I took the quick two-year route to the bar and started to practise as a barrister in 1975; in 1990 I started to teach at East London Polytechnic and have since taught at Essex University, the University of North London (later London Metropolitan University) and, since 2006, at Birkbeck College, University of London.

I first visited Russia and learned the Russian language in the following way. From 1978 to 1986 I was a borough councillor in the London borough of Lambeth, elected twice for the Labour Party. Since World War II Lambeth had been twinned with Moskvoretskiy Rayon, a district of Moscow on the south bank of the Moscow River opposite the Kremlin, just as Lambeth is situated on the south bank of the Thames opposite Westminster. I travelled for the first time to Moscow in 1983 with a Lambeth delegation and I fell in love with Russia and the Russian language. The Executive Committee (Ispolkom) of the rayon was located in Bakhrushina Ulitsa, near Paveletskiy Station, near the Bakhrushina Theatre Museum, the Tretiakov Gallery and Pyatnitskaya Ulitsa (Good Friday Street).

I began to study Russian in 1985 with a brilliant teacher, Lara Bushell (Putsello). Her father was Bashkir and her mother Jewish; she grew up in Ufa, the capital of Bashkortotstan. She is tall with Asiatic features, a permanent leather cap and a stormy temperament. She studied at Moscow State University in the 1980s, but avoided raspredeleniye, the system by which graduates were sent to employment anywhere in the USSR, becaming instead a limitchitsa, living illegally in Moscow. She was a fanatic for the acting and singing of the Soviet semi-underground bard, Vladimir Visotskiy. This was the time when Visotskiy performed at the Taganka Theatre, under Lyubimov. My two years learning Russian with Lara, two hours a week one to one, and homework including memorising poetry each week, meant that my head is full of Vysotskiy, Yesenin, Akhmatova as well as Pushkin, Lermontov and many others. I benefited from a classically Soviet education in Russian.

In October 1987 my translation of Boris Vasiliev’s Zaftra byla voina (Tomorrow was war) provided the simultaneous translation into English when the Mayakovsky Theatre under Andrei Goncharov performed for a week at the National Theatre in London, to enthusiastic audiences and reviews. 3 I also translated Yevgeniya Ginsburg’s Krutoi marshrut (known in English as Into the whirlwind). In 1988 the Russian journal Soviet Literature published my translation of a story in a special issue on science fiction. 4 I am an enthusiastic theatre goer (teatralnik) in Russia and read Russian texts voraciously; but I have pursued an academic rather than a literary career.

3 Michael Billington ‘Intimations of mortality. A moving tribute to the Class of “40” and “A tale of two survivors”. Michael Golfarb talks to a writer and director about telling it like it was’, The Guardian, 30 October 1987, 29 – interview with Boris Vassiliev and Andrei Goncharov. 4 Vyacheslav Bukur, ‘He Repaired Me’ translated by Bill Bowring, no. 12 (1988) Soviet Literature 6–45. Since 1983 I have visited Russia several times a year, have worked as an expert in projects of the UN, EU, the Council of Europe, OSCE as well as for DFID and have taught at a large number of universities in Russia from Kaliningrad to Khabarovsk, including St Petersburg and Moscow State Universities and MGIMO. I have published scholarly articles in Russian in several academic journals. I was deported from Russia in 2005 (on my way to observe the trial of Stas Dmitrievsky – for ‘incitement to racial hatred’ as a result of his activities in the Russia-Chechnya Friendship Society – in Nizhny Novgorod) and in 2007 (arrested by the Federal Migration Service while teaching senior judges in Astrakhan). I took judicial review proceedings in the Khimki City Court in 2006 and was granted another visa; in 2007 I was saved by General (retd) Saltykov, the Human Rights Ombudsman of Astrakhan Oblast.

Skip died on 7 July 2005, a few years after my mother, in 2001; I got to know him well, as did my wife Olga, who was born in Ulyanovsk and attended the same gymnasium at which Lenin and Kerensky were both pupils; Kerensky’s father was the headmaster, Lenin’s father was the schools’ inspector. We married in 1989 in Moscow – she was a young member of the circle of Sergei Adamovich Kovalyov, the first Russian Human Rights Ombudsman, and to this day one of the two (the other is Liudmila Alekseeva) senior figures in the Russian human rights movement. In 1996 I assisted Rachel Walker in securing an honorary doctorate from Essex University, where I then taught, for Sergei Kovalyov.

In the 1990s I worked with the Kurdish Human Rights Project, representing Turkish Kurds against Turkey at the European Court of Human Rights. Russia joined the Council of Europe in 1996 and ratified the European Convention on Human Rights in 1998. In late 1999 Prime Minister Putin started the Second Chechen War and in 2000 I started working with Memorial, of which Sergei Kovalyov is President, assisting Chechen victims of gross human rights violations – my association with Memorial began in the late 1980s. In 2002 I was awarded €1 million from the EC and founded the European Human Rights Advocacy Centre (EHRAC), with 12 lawyers in Russia and an office in London, in partnership with Memorial. In 2005 the first six Chechen applicants won their cases at Strasbourg and since then we have taken hundreds of Chechen, environmental and other cases.

I visit Russia almost every month, for EHRAC, to teach and to take part in seminars, roundtables and conferences. My wife, Olga, and our children, Vanya and Masha, have all shown extraordinary patience while this book was being written.





References


Adams, W. (1970) Capital punishment in imperial and Soviet criminal law, 18 American Journal of Comparative Law, 575

Agadjanian, A. (2001) Public religion and the quest for national ideology: Russia’s media discourse, 40(3) Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, 35–365

Alekseev, A. (2007) Vladimir Sovolyov i sudba Rossiy (Vladimir Sovolyov and the destiny of Russia) (Moscow: ROSSPEN)

Alekseev, S. et al. (1998) Ideologicheskiye orientiry Rossiy (Russia’s ideological orientation), Vol. 1 (Moscow: Kniga i Biznes)

Alexander, J. (2004) Federal reforms in Russia: Putin’s challenge to the republics, 12(2) Demokratizatsiya, at http://vlex.ru/vid/federal-reforms-challenge-republics-61741072 (accessed 29 October 2012)

Amnesty International (1997) Torture in Russia (April)

Anderson, P. (1977) The antinomies of Antonio Gramsci, 100 New Left Review, 5–78

Andreyev, N. (1959) Filofei and his epistle to Ivan Vasilievich, 38 Slavonic and East European Review, 1–31

Angarov, A. (1931) ‘Otstupleniye s boem’ (Retreat from the fight), 5–6 Sovyetskoye gosudarstvo i revolyutsiya prava (Soviet state and revolution of law), 103–109

Antonov, M. (2012) Istoriya pravovoi mysli Rossiy (History of legal thought in Russia) (St Petersburg: National Research University – Higher School of Economics)

Arnold, C. (2007) Russia: Federation Council backs Tatarstan power-sharing bill, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, 11 July, at http://www.rferl.org/content/article/1077565.html (accessed 29 October 2012)

Arthur, C. (1983) Introduction, in Ye.B. Pashukanis, Law and Marxism: a general theory. Towards a critique of the fundamental juridical concepts (London: Pluto Press)

Badretdin, S. (1997) Russia’s future breakup and Tatarstan’s independence, 97 Turkistan Newsletter (25 July), 1–27

Baratashvili, D. (1967) Natsionalno-osvoboditelnoye dvizheniye i razvitiye mezhdunarodod-novo prava (The national liberation movement and the development of international law), 9 Sovetsoye gosudarstvo i pravo (Soviet state and law), 69–75

Barry, D. and Williams, E. (1997) Russia’s death penalty dilemmas, 8 Criminal Law Forum, 231–258

Bassin, M. (2001) Classical Eurasianism and the geopolitics of Russian identity, at http://www.dartmouth.edu/~crn/crn_papers/Bassin.pdf (accessed 12 July 2012)

Baumann, R. (1987) Subject nationalities in the military service of imperial Russia: the case of the Baskirs, 46 (3/4) Slavic Review, 489–502

Bazhenov, Yu. (2007) Krai dalyokiy, krai rodnoi (Distant krai, my own krai), 24 April, at http://www.pravaya.ru/look/11987?print=1 (accessed 29 October 2012)

BBC (1999) ‘Russia suspends death penalty’, 2 February, at http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/europe/270713

Belyavskiy, M. (1969) Semyon Desnitskiy i noviye dokumety o yevo deyatelnosti (Semyon Desnitskiy and new documents about his activities), 4 Vestnik Moskovksovo Universiteta (Bulletin of Moscow University), 61–74

Berg, G. van den (1983) The Soviet Union and the death penalty, 35 Soviet Studies, 154

Berg, G. van den (1992) Human rights in the legislation and the draft constitution of the Russian Federation, 18 Review of Central and East European Law, 197–251

Berman, I. (2001) Slouching toward Eurasia?, XII(1) Perspective, at http://www.bu.edu/iscip/vol12/berman.html (accessed 12 July 2012)

Berman, I. (2002) Putin’s problem: the war on terrorism gets in the way of the Eurasian dream, at http://www.ilanberman.com/5949/putins-problem (accessed 12 July 2012)

Bhat, G. (1997) The moralization of guilt in late imperial Russian trial by jury: the early reform era, 15(1) Law and History Review, 77–103

Bigg, C. (2005) Russia: regions continue to merge, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, 11 August, at http://www.rferl.org/content/article/1062375.html (accessed 29 October 2012)

Blishchenko, I. (1968) Antisovyetism i mezhdunarodnoye pravo (Antisovietism and international law) (Moscow: Mezhdunarodniye Otnosheniya (International Relations))

Blishchenko, I. (1991) Nekotoriye problemy sovetskoi nauki mezhdunarodonovo prava (Some problems of the Soviet science of international law), 3 Sovetskoye gosudarstvo i pravo (Soviet state and law), 134–175

Blishchenko, I. (1998) Soderzhaniye prava narodov na samoopredeleniye (The content of the right of peoples to self-determination), in A. Ossipov, Pravo narodov na samoopre-deleniye: ideya i voploshcheniye (Right of peoples to self-determination: idea and realisation) (Moscow: Zvenya)

Bohm, R. (2008) Karl Marx and the death penalty, 16 Critical Criminology, 285

Bonnett, A. (2002) Communists like us: ethnicised modernity and the idea of ‘the West’ in the Soviet Union, 2 (4) Ethnicities, 435–467

Bowring, B. (1995) Human rights in Russia: a discourse of emancipation or just another mirage?, in I. Pogany (ed.), Human rights in Eastern Europe (London: Edward Elgar), 87–110

Bowring, B. (1997) Russia’s accession to the Council of Europe and human rights: compliance or cross-purposes?, 6 European Human Rights Law Review, 628–643 [Russian translation in (1998) 10 Rossiyskiy byulleten po prava cheloveka (Russian bulletin on human rights), 12]

Bowring, B. (1998) Sergei Kovalyov: the first Russian human rights ombudsman – and the last?, in R. Mullerson, M. Fitzmaurice and M. Adenas (eds), Constitutional reform and international law in Central and Eastern Europe (The Hague: Kluwer Law International), 235–254

Bowring, B. (2000a) Politics, the rule of law, and the judiciary, in N. Robinson (ed.), Institutions and political change in Russia (London: Macmillan), 69–84

Bowring, B. (2000b) Ancient peoples and new nations in the Russian Federation: questions of theory and practice, in S. Tierney (ed.), Accommodating national identity: new approaches in international and domestic law (The Hague: Kluwer Law International), 211–232

Bowring, B. (2002) Austro-Marxism’s last laugh?: the struggle for recognition of national–cultural autonomy for Russia and Russians, 54 (2) Europe-Asia Studies 229–250

Bowring, B. (2003) Postcolonial transitions on the southern borders of the former Soviet Union: the return of Eurasianism?, 12 (2) Griffith Law Review, special issue, Tracking the postcolonial in law, 238–262

Bowring, B. (2004) Russia’s accession to the Council of Europe and human rights four years on, 4 European Human Rights Law Review, 362

Bowring, B. (2005a) Russia in a common European legal space. Developing effective remedies for the violations of rights by public bodies: compliance with the European Convention on Human Rights, in K. Hober (ed.), The Uppsala yearbook of East European law 2004 (London: Wildy, Simmonds & Hill), 89–116

Bowring, B. (2005b) Burial and resurrection: Karl Renner’s controversial influence on the ‘national question’ in Russia, in E. Nimni (ed.), National–cultural autonomy and its contemporary critics (Abingdon: Routledge), 191–206

Bowring, B. (2007) The Tatars of the Russian Federation and national–cultural autonomy: a contradiction in terms?, in K. Cordell and D. Smith (eds), 6(3) Ethnopolitics, special issue, The theory and practice of cultural autonomy in Central and Eastern Europe: historical and contemporary perspectives, 417–435

Bowring, B. (2008a) Positivism versus self-determination: the contradictions of Soviet international law, in S. Marks (ed.), International law on the left: re-examining Marxist legacies, 133–168

Bowring, B. (2008b) The degradation of the international legal order? The rehabilitation of law and the possibility of politics (Abingdon: Routledge-Cavendish)

Bowring, B. (2008c) Legal and policy developments in the Russian Federation in 2007 with regard to the protection of minorities, in European yearbook of minority issues, Vol. 6 (Leiden: Martinus Nijhoff), 529–544

Bowring, B. (2009) Russia and human rights: incompatible opposites?, 1 Göttingen Journal of International Law, 257

Boykewich, S. (2005) Planned merger worries Buryats, Moscow Times, 13 November, at http://www.buryat-mongolia.info/?p=303&language=en (accessed 29 October 2012)

Bransten, J. (2004) Russia: Putin signs bill eliminating direct elections of governors, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, 13 December, at http://www.rferl.org/content/article/1056377.html (accessed 29 October 2012)

Bransten, J. (2005) Russia: Kremlin approves regions’ decision to merge, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, 19 April, at http://www.rferl.org/content/article/1058551.html (accessed 29 October 2012)

Broadie, A. (1997) The Scottish enlightenment: an anthology (Edinburgh: Canongate Classics)

Brown, A. (1969) S. E. Desnitskiy i I. A. Tretyakov v Glazgovskom Universitete (1761–1767) (S. E. Desnitskiy and I. A. Tretyakov in Glasgow University (1761–1767), 4 Vestnik Moskovksovo Universiteta (Bulletin of Moscow University), 75–88

Brown, A. (1975) Adam Smith’s first Russian followers, in A. Skinner and T. Wilson (eds), Essays on Adam Smith (Oxford: Clarendon Press)

Brown, A. (1977) The father of Russian jurisprudence: the legal thought of S.E. Desnitskiy, in W.E. Butler, Russian law: historical and political perspectives (Leiden: Martinus Nijhoff)

Brownlie, I. and Goodwin-Gill, G. (2010) Brownlie’s documents on human rights, 6th edn (Oxford: Oxford University Press)

Butler, W. (2002) The learned writings of Professor G.I. Tunkin, 4(2) Journal of the History of International Law, 394–423

Cassese, A. (1995) Self-determination of peoples: a legal reappraisal (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press)

Chimni, B. (2004) An outline of a Marxist course on public international law, 17 Leiden Journal of International Law, 1–30

Chirkin, V. (2000) Noviy rossiysskiy federalizm: strategiya i taktika (The new Russian federalism: strategy and tactics), 12 Pravo i Politika, 45–63

Cizova, T. (1962) Beccaria in Russia, 40 Slavonic and East European Review, 384

Clark, K. (2011) Moscow, the fourth Rome. Stalinism, cosmopolitanism, and the evolution of Soviet culture, 1931–1941 (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press)

Cobain, I. (2012) Cruel Britannia: a secret history of torture (London: Portobello Books)

Conquest, R. (1971) The great terror (London: Penguin)

Crews, R. (2006) For prophet and tsar: Islam and empire in Russia and Central Asia (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press)

Dagbaev, E. (2008) Politicheskiye strategiy aktorov v protsesse ukrupleniya regionov (The political strategy of actors in the process of enlarging regions), in R.F. Turovski (ed.), Regionalistika i etnopolitologiya (Regional studies and ethno-politics) (Moscow: ROSSPEN)

Damrosch, L. and Mullerson, R. (1995) The role of international law in the contemporary world, in L. Damrosch, G. Danilenko and R. Mullerson (eds), Beyond confrontation: international law for the post-Cold War era (Boulder, CO: West view Press)

Derlugyan, G. (2002) Mir na slome epoch: Chechnya i Tatarstan v perspective vsemirnoi istoriy (The world at the scrapping of the epoch: Chechnya and Tatarstan from the perspective of world history), Druzhba Narodov (Peoples’ Friendship), 3, at http://magazines.russ.ru/druzhba/2002/3/del.html (accessed 29 October 2012)

Desnitskiy, S. (1768) Slovo o pryamom i blizhaishem sposob k izucheniyu iurisprudentsiy (On the direct and immediate means of teaching jurisprudence), at http://www.svn-s.ru/sbook08.php (accessed 29 October 2012)

Desnitskiy, S. (2008) Predstavleniye o uchrezhdeniy zakonodatelnoi, sudutelnoy i nakazatelnoi vlasti v rossiysskoi imperiy (Proposal for establishing legislative, judicial and executive power in the Russian Empire), at http://www.modernlib.ru/books/semen_desnickiy/predstavlenie_o_uchrezhdenii_zakonodatelnoy_suditelnoy_i_nakazatelnoy_vlasti_v_rossiyskoy_imperii/ (accessed 29 October 2012)

Diunov, M. (2009) Mladokonservatizm. Yevo istoriya, evo znacheniye (Young conservatism. Its history, its significance), at http://www.russ.ru/pole/Mladokonservatizm-Ego-istoriya-ego-znachenie (accessed 29 October 2012)

Dmitriyev, I. (2007) Federal misalliance robbing Peter to pay Paul, Moscow News, 10 December

Douzinas, C. (2007) Human rights and empire: the political philosophy of cosmopolitanism (Abingdon: Routledge)

Dowley, K. (1998) Striking the federal balance in Russia: comparative regional government strategies, 31 Communist and Post-Communist Studies, 359–380

Drobizheva, L. (1996) Power sharing in the Russian Federation: the view from the center and from the republics, in G. W. Lapidus (ed.) with S. Tsalik, Preventing deadly conflict: strategies and institution. Proceedings of a conference in Moscow (New York: Carnegie Corporation) [Report to the Carnegie Commission on preventing deadly conflict] at http://www.dartmouth.edu/~crn/crn_papers/Drobizheva2.pdf (accessed 29 October 2012)

Drobizheva, L. (1997) Natsionalizm v respublikakh Rossiyskoi Federatsiy: ideologiya elity i massovoye Soznaniye (Nationalism in the republics of the Russian Federation: ideology of the elite and mass consciousness), 9 Panorama-Forum, at http://www.kcn.ru/tat_ru/politics/pan/tom9/t86.zip (accessed 29 October 2012)

Drzemscewski, A. (1996) The legal implications for states ratifying both the ECHR and the Convention on Human Rights of the CIS, 17 Human Rights Law Journal 157–158

Dugin, A. (1994) Konservativnaya revolutsiya. Karl Shmitt: 5 urokov dlya Rossiy (Conservative revolution. Carl Schmitt: 5 lessons for Russia), at http://arctogaia.org.ru/article23 (accessed 19 February 2013)

Dugin, A. (1997) Osnovy geopolitiki: geopoliticheskoye budushee Rossiy (The foundations of geopolitics: the geopolitical future of Russia) (Moscow: Arktogea)

Duncan, P. (2000) Russian Messianism: third Rome, revolution, Communism and after (Abingdon: Routledge)

Easter, G. (1997) Redefining centre–regional relations in the Russian Federation: Sverdlovsk Oblast, 49 Europe-Asia Studies, 617–635

Ebzeev, B. and Karapetyan, L.M. (1995) Rossisskiy federalism: ravnopraviye i assimetriya konstitutsionnovo statusa subyektov (The Russian federation: equal rights and asymmetry of the constitutional status of its subjects), 11 (3) Gosudarstvo i Pravo (State and Law), 8–12

Engels, F. and Kautsky, K. (1977) Juridical socialism, 7(2) Politics & Society, 203–220

Evgenyev, V. (1955) Subjects of law, sovereignty and non-interference in international law, 2 Sovetskoye Gosudarstvo i Pravo, 75–84

Fawn, R. (2001) Death penalty as democratisation: is the Council of Europe hanging itself?, 8 Democratization, 69

Fennell, J. (1995) A history of the Russian church to 1448 (London: Longman)

Figueiredo, R. de and Weingast, B. (2002) Pathologies of federalism, Russian style: political institutions and economic transition. Paper for the conference ‘Fiscal Federalism in the Russian Federation: Problems and Prospects for Reform’, Higher School of Economics, Moscow, 29–30 January 2001, rev. March 2002, at http://faculty.haas.berkeley.edu/rui/mpfrussia.pdf (accessed 29 October 2012)

Filippov, A. (2005) Prostranstvo polticheskikh sobytiy (The space of political events), 2 Polis, 4, at http://www.hse.ru/news/112244.html

Filippov, A. (2006) Suverenitet kak politicheskiy vybor (Sovereignty as a political choice), in N. Garadzha, Suverenitet (Moscow: Yevropa)

Filippov, A. (2008a) Vlast kak sredstvo i sreda: dva rassuzhdenniya na temu Karla Shmitta (Power as means and material: two reflections on a theme of Carl Schmitt), 12 Siniy Divan, at http://www.polit.ru/research/2008/11/26/karlschmitt.html (accessed 19 February 2013)

Filippov, A. (2008b) Ozhirevshiy leviafan: chitayut li v Kremle Karla Schmitta (The Leviathan grown fat: do they read Carl Schmitt in the Kremlin?), May Russkiy Zhurnal, at http://www.russ.ru/Media/Files/Aleksandr-Filippov-Ozhirevshij-Leviafan.-Chitayut-li-v-Kremle-Karla-Schmitta.

Filippov, A. (2009a) Aktualnost politicheskikh romatikov (The actuality of political romantics), at http://www.russ.ru/pole/akyual-nost-politicheskih-romatikov

Filippov, A. (2009b) Shag vperyod v diskussiy. Kritika polticheskovo razuma (A step forward in discussion. The critique of political reason [On Carl Schmitt]), 9 June Russkiy Zhurnal, at http://www.hse.ru/news/8353726.html (accessed 19 February 2013)

Filippov, A. (2009c) K politico-pravovoi filosofiy prostranstva Karla Shmitta (The political and legal philosophy of space of Carl Schmitt), 8 (2) Sotsiologicheskoye obozreniye, 41–52

Filippov, A. (2010) Stariy poryadok i revolutsiya. Nauchnaya revolutsiya v sotsiologiy (The old order and revolution. The scientific revolution in sociology), at http://www.russ.ru/pole/Staryj-poryadok-i-revolyuciya (accessed 19 February 2013)

Filippov, A. and Pligin, V. (2008) Philosoph i politik (Philosopher and politician), 3 July Russkiy Reporter, at http://www.hse.ru/news/2981341.html

Filippov, V. (1998) Natsionalno–kulturnaya avtonomiya: Problemy i suzhdeniya (National–cultural autonomy: Problems and assessment) (Moscow: Ethnosphere Centre)

Filippov, Yu. (2004) State duma ponders Russia’s future, RIA-Novostiy, 29 October, at http://en.rian.ru/analysis/20041029/39772326.html (accessed 29 October 2012)

Fine, B. (2002) Democracy and the rule of law. Marx’s critique of the legal form (Caldwell, NJ: Blackburn Press)

Fleischhauer, I. (1981) The nationalities policy of the tsars reconsidered – the case of the Russian Germans, 53(1) Journal of Modern History, D1065–D1090

Foinitskiy, I. (2001) Otsenka smertnoi kazni (Evaluation of the death penalty), Ucheniye o Makazaniy (Studies on Punishments), at http://deathpenalty.narod.ru/nauka/foini.htm (accessed 19 February 2013)

Frank, P. (1971) The CPSU obkom first secretary: a profile, 1(2) British Journal of Political Science, 173–190

Freeman, A. (1968) Some aspects of Soviet influence on international law, 62(3) American Journal of International Law, 710–722

Frommeyer, T. (1999) Power sharing treaties in Russia’s federal system, 21(1) Loyola of Los Angeles International and Comparative Law Journal, 1–53

Gaeta, P. (1996) The armed conflict in Chechnya before the Russian Constitutional Court, 7(4) European Journal of International Law, 563–570

Garadzha, N. (ed.) (2006a) Suverenitet (Sovereignty) (Moscow: Yevropa)

Garadzha, N. (2006b) Ot realnovo k absoluyutnomu suverenitetu (From real to absolute sovereignty), in Suverenitet (Sovereignty) (Moscow: Yevropa)

Gernet, M.N. (1913) Smertnaya kazn i obshchestvennoye mneniye (The death penalty and public opinion), in Smertnaya kazn (The death penalty), at http://deathpenalty.narod.ru/nauka/gernet.htm (accessed 19 February 2013)

Gershenzon, M. (1909/2011) Vekhi. Sbornik statei o russkoi intelligentsia (Landmarks. Collection of articles about the Russian intelligentsia) (St Petersburg: Azbuka)

Gilfanov, R. (2007) Tatarstan: president following democracy ‘in the best interests of our people’. Interview with President Mintimer Shamaiev, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, 3 August, at http://www.rferl.org/content/article/1077969.html (accessed 29 October 2012)

Giulano, E. (2000) Who determines the self in the politics of self-determination? Ethnicity and preference formation in Tatarstan’s nationalist mobilisation, 32, 3 Comparative Politics, 295–316.

Giuliano, E. (2006) Do grievances matter in nationalist mobilization? Evidence from Russia, working draft, at http://citation.allacademic.com/meta/p_mla_apa_research_citation/1/5/1/2/4/p151247_index.html (accessed 29 October 2012)

Glotov, S.A. (1996) Pravo Soveta Evropi i Rossiy (The Law of the Council of Europe and Russia) (Krasnodar: Sovetskaya Kuban)

Gogol, N. (2004) Dead souls (trans. Robert Maguire) (London: Penguin Classics)

Goikhbarg, A. (1925) Neskolko zamechaniy o prave (Some reflections on law), 1 Soviet Law, 3–4

Golan, G. (1988) The Soviet Union and national liberation movements in the Third World (Boston, MA: Unwin Hyman)

Gorenburg, D. (1999) Regional separatism in Russia: ethnic mobilisation or power grab?, 51 Europe–Asia Studies, 245–274

Grushkin, D. (1997) Pravo narodov na samoopredeleniye: istoriya razvitiya i voploshcheniye ideyi (Right of peoples to self-determination: history of the development and realisation of the idea), in A. Ossipov (ed.), Pravo narodov na samoopredeleniye: ideya i voploshcheniye (Right of peoples to self-determination: idea and realisation) (Moscow: Zvenya); at http://www.memo.ru/hr/referats/selfdet/chapter2.htm (accessed 21 October 2012)

Guliev, V. (1996) Moratoriy na smertnuiu kazn’ prezhdevremenen (The moratorium on the death penalty is premature), Nezavisimaya Gazeta, 21 December

Gupta, B. (1974) The Soviet Union in South Asia, in R. Kanet (ed.), The Soviet Union and the developing nations (Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press)

Hagendoorn, L., Poppe, E. and Minescu, A. (2008) Support for separatism in ethnic republics of the Russian Federation, 60 (3) Europe–Asia Studies, 353–373

Hahn, G. (2001) Putin’s federal reforms: reintegrating Russia’s legal space or upsetting the metastability of Russia’s asymmetrical federalism, 9 Demokratizatsiya, 4, at http://www.questia.com/library/1G1-85238439/putin-s-federal-reforms-reintegrating-russia-s-legal (accessed 29 October 2012)

Hahn, G. (2002) The rebirth of Eurasianism, 14 Russia Journal, at http://russiajour-nal.com/archive/The_Russia_Journal/2002/July/12.07.2002/Analysis/Jul.12-12.pdf (accessed 12 July 2012)

Hashim, S. (2005) Putin’s etatization project and limits to democratic reforms in Russia, 38 Communist and Post-Communist Studies, 25–48

Hazard, J. (1938a) Housecleaning in Soviet law, 1 American Quarterly on the Soviet Union, 5–16, at http://www.unz.org/Pub/AmQSovietUnion-1938apr-00005?View=PDF (accessed 27 July 2012)

Hazard, J. (1938b) Cleansing Soviet international law of anti-Marxist theories, 32(2) American Journal of International Law, 244–252

Hazard, J. (1957) Pashukanis is no traitor, 51(2) American Journal of International Law 385–388

Hazard, J. (1971) Renewed emphasis upon a socialist international law, 65(1) American Journal of International Law, 142–148

Hazard, J. (1980) Memories of Pashukanis, in Evgeny Pashukanis: selected writings on Marxism and law (London: Academic Press), at http://www.marxists.org/archive/pashukanis/biog/memoir.htm (accessed 25 July 2012)

Henderson, J. (2011a) The constitution of the Russian Federation: a contextual analysis (Oxford: Hart)

Henderson, J. (2011b) Tenure and discipline developments in Russia, 17(1) European Public Law, 1–10

Hinada, S. (1975) On the meaning in our time of the drafts of Marx’s letter to Vera Zasulich (1881) with textual criticism, Hokkaido University Slavic Review, 69–80, at http://eprints2008.lib.hokudai.ac.jp/dspace/bitstream/2115/5050/1/KJ00000113012.pdf (accessed 14 October 2012)

Hobsbawm, E. (1983) Mass-producing traditions: Europe, 1870–1914, in E. Hobsbawm and T. Ranger (eds), Inventing traditions (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press)

Hood, R. (2008) Russia and its death penalty, 1 October, Open Democracy, at http://www.opendemocracy.net/article/russia-theme/russia-and-its-death-penalty

Hosking, G. (2001) Russia and the Russians: a history from Rus to the Russian Federation (London: Allen Lane/Penguin)

Hutcheson, D. (2005) Review of The dynamics of Russian politics: Putin’s reform of federal-regional relations, Vol. 1, P. Reddaway and R. Orttung (eds), 64(1) Slavic Review, 209–210

Hyde, M. (2001) Putin’s federal reforms and their implications for presidential power in Russia, 53(3) Europe–Asia Studies, 719–743

INSOR (2010) Obyedineniye subyektov Rossiyskoi federatsiy: za i protiv (Merger of the subjects of the Russian Federation: for and against), at http://www/insor- (accessed 30 October 2012)

Isaev, I. (1988) U istokov khozaistvennovo prava: lyudi i kontseptsiy (On the sources of economic law: people and concepts), 11 Socialist Legality, 76

Ivanov, V. (1999) Vnutrifederalniye dogovory 1998 god: noviye shagi v storonu indiviuali-zatsiyi federativnikh otnosheniy (Intrafederal treaties in 1998: further steps toward individualization of federative relations), 2(27) Konstitutsionnoye Pravo: Vostochnoevropeiskoye Obozreniye, 47–57

Ivashko, S. (2001) Duma discusses Abolishment of death penalty, 10 December, http://www.gazeta.ru

Jones, W. (2010) Russia’s eighteenth-century enlightenment, in W. Leatherbarrow and D. Offord (eds), A history of Russian thought (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press)

Kanet, R. (1974) The Soviet Union and the colonial question 1917–1953, in R. Kanet (ed.), The Soviet Union and the developing nations (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press)

Kashin, O. (n.d.) Ekh, Garadja, Garadja, at http://scepsis.ru/library/id_729.html (accessed 19 February 2013)

Kazantsev, S. (1991) Sud prisyazhnikh v Rossiy: gromkiye ugolovniye protsessy 1864–1917 (Trial by jury in Russia: famous criminal trials 1864–1917) (Leningrad: Lenizdat)

Kelina, S. (1989) Kogda ubivaet gosudarstvo: smerrnaya kazn protiv prav cheloveka, (when the state kills: death penalty against human rights), 12 Sovetskoye Gosudarstvoi Pravo, 127

Kempton, D. (1996) The republic of Sakha (Yakutia): the evolution of centre– periphery relations in the Russian Federation, 48 Europe–Asia Studies, 587–613

Khakimov, R. (2005) The Tatars: an afterword, 43 Anthropology and Archeology of Eurasia, 345–361

Khazanov, A. (1997) Ethnic nationalism in the Russian Federation, 126 Daedalus 121–142

Khenkin, S. (1997) Separatizm v Rossiy – pozady ili vperedi? (Separatism in Russia–backward or forward?), 2(2) Pro et Contra, at http://uisrussia.msu.ru/docs/nov/pec/1997/2/ProEtContra_1997_2_01.htm (accessed 29 October 2012)

Kistyakovskiy, A. (1896) Issledovaniye o smertnoi kazni (Research on the death penalty), at http://deathpenalty.narod.ru/nauka/kist.htm (accessed 19 February 2013)

Knox, R. (2008) Review of Degradation of the international legal order?: the rehabilitation of law and the possibility of politics by Bill Bowring, 2 April, Law and Disorder, at http://pashukanis.blogspot.com/2008/04/book-review-degradation-of.html (accessed 30 April 2012)

Kochan, L. and Abraham, R. (1990) The Making of Modern Russia, 2nd edn (London: Penguin)

Kolokolov, N. (1998) Smertnaya kazn glazami sudi (The death penalty through the eyes of judges) 7 Rossiyskaya Iustitsiya, at http://deathpenalty.narod.ru/nauka/kolok.htm (accessed 19 February 2013)

Koni, A. (1991) Prisyazhniye zasedateli (Jurors), in S.M. Kazantsev (ed.), Sud prisyazh-nikh v Rossiy: gromkiye ugolovniye proysessy 1864–1917 (Trial by jury in Russia: famous criminal trials 1864–1917) (Leningrad: Lenizdat)

Korkunov, N. (1915) Moskovskiy universitet v XVIII v. i S. E. Desnitskiy (Moscow University in the XVIII century and S. E. Desnitskiy), in Istoriya filosofiy prava: posobiye k lektsiyam (History of philosophy of law: textbook from lectures), 6th edn (St Petersburg: M.M. Stasyulevicha)

Korovin, E. (1924) Mezhdunarodnoye pravo perekhodnovo vremeni (International law of the transition period) (Moscow: Moskva-Petrograd)

Korovin, E. (1927) Sovremmenoye mezhdunarodnoye publichnoye pravo (Contemporary public international law) (Moscow: Gosizdat)

Korovin, E. (1928) Soviet treaties and international law, 22 American Journal of International Law, 753–763

Korovin, E. (1933–34) The problems of the international recognition of the Union of Socialist Soviet Republics in practice, 19 Iowa Law Review, 259–271

Korovin, E. (1946) The Second World War and international law, 40 American Journal of International Law, 742–755

Korovin, E. (1954) Some fundamental questions of contemporary international law, 6 Sovetskoye Gosudarstvo i Pravo, 34–44

Koskenniemi, M. (2004) What should international lawyers learn from Karl Marx?, 17 Leiden Journal of International Law, 229–246

Kossikov, I. (1996) Federalism and regionalism in contemporary Russia. Paper for the Thirteenth International Seminar of the European Union, ‘Federalism and International Democracy’, Ventotene on 1–8 September

Kovalev, N. (2008) Trial by jury in Russian military courts, 8 Journal of Power Institutions in Post-Soviet Societies, 2

Krylov, S. (1954) A contribution to the discussion of questions of the theory of international law, 7 Sovetskoye Gosudarstvo i Pravo, 74–79

Kullberg, A. (2001) From neo-Eurasianism to national paranoia: renaissance of geopolitics in Russia, 4 Eurasian Politician

Kulski, W. (1955) The Soviet interpretation of international law, 49 American Journal of International Law, 518–534

Kushen, R. (1993) The death penalty and the crisis of criminal justice in Russia, 19(2) Brooklyn Journal of International Law, 523–581

Kutafin, O.E. (2006) Rossiyskaya avtonomiya (Russian autonomy) (Moscow: Prospekt)

Kvashis, V. (2008) Smertnaya kazn. Mirovoye tendentsiy, problemy i perspektivi (The death penalty. World tendencies, problems and perspectives) (Moscow: Yurait)

Kvashis, V. and Albrecht, G.I. (2001) Kuda idyot smertnaya kazn? (Where is the death penalty going?), 6 Pravo i Politika, at http://deathpenalty.narod.ru/nauka/kuda.zip

Lapin, V. (ed.) (2012) Aleksandr II: tragediya reformatora. Lyudi v sudbakh reform, reformy v sudbakh lyudei (Aleksandr II: the tragedy of a reformer. People in the destiny of reforms, reforms in the destiny of people) (St Petersburg: European University Press)

Laswell, H. and McDougal, M. (1943) Legal education and public policy: professional training in the public interest, 52 Yale Law Journal, 203

Lazerson, M. (1917) Avtonomiya i federatsiya (Autonomy and federation) (Petrograd)

Lemaître, R. (2006) The rollback of democracy in Russia after Beslan, 31 Review of Central and East European Law, 369–411

Lenin, V. (1909/63) Concerning vekhi (landmarks), in Collected works, Vol. 16 (London: Lawrence & Wishart)

Lenin, V. (1913) Critical remarks on the national question, at http://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1913/crnq/6.htm#v20pp72-045 (accessed 28 March 2011)

Lenin, V. (1914/64) The right of nations to self-determination, in Collected works, Vol. 20 (Moscow: Progress Publishers)

Lenin, V. (1916/64) The discussion on self-determination summed up, in Collected works, Vol. 22 (Moscow: Progress Publishers)

Lenin, V. (1917/77) Lessons of the Revolution, in Collected works (Moscow: Progress Publishers), at http://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1917/sep/06.htm (accessed 19 February 2013)

Lenin, V. (1918/65) The immediate tasks of the Soviet government, in Collected works, Vol. 27 (Moscow: Progress Publishers)

Lenin, V. (1919/71) Draft decision for the Council of Defence on regulating relations between the Vecheka, the Railway Cheka and the Commissariat for Railways and a letter to the members of the Council of Defence, February 28, 1919, in Collected works, 2nd edn, Vol. 42 (Moscow: Progress Publishers) at http://www.marx.org/archive/lenin/works/1919/feb/28.htm (accessed 19 February 2013)

Lenin, V. (1922) On the establishment of the U.S.S.R., at http://www/marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1922/sep/26.htm (accessed 28 March 2011)

Lenin, V. (1922/64) Speech at a plenary session of the Moscow Soviet, 20 November 1922, in Collected Works, Vol. 45 (Moscow: Progress Publishers)

Lenin, V. (1922–23) The question of nationalities or ‘autonomisation’, at http://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1922/dec/testamnt/autonomy.htm (accessed 28 March 2011)

Lenin, V. (1965) Report on the work of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee and the Council of People’s Commissars delivered at the first session of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee, Seventh Convocation, 2 February 1920, in Collected works, 4th edn, Vol. 30 (Moscow: Progress Publishers), at http://www.marx.org/archive/lenin/works/1920/feb/02.htm (accessed 19 February 2013)

Lenin, V. (2010) O natsionalnoi gordosti velikorossov (On the national pride of the Great Russians) (St Petersburg: Azbuka-Klassika)

Lester, J. (1995) Modern tsars and princes: the struggle for hegemony in Russia (London: Verso)

Levada, Y. (1995) The Soviet man five years later: 1989–1994 (preliminary results of a comparative study), 24 Sevodnya

Levintova, E. (2003) Government-affiliated intellectuals, official discourse and public opinion in post-Communist societies (Russia and Poland). Paper for the 2003 Annual Meeting of the American Political Science Association, 28–31 August, at http://apsa03_proceeding_63043.pdf

Lewin, M. (2005) Lenin’s last struggle (Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press)

Lieven, D. (2010) Russia against Napoleon: the battle for Europe, 1807 to 1814 (London: Penguin)

Lincoln, W. (1975) Reform and reaction in Russia: A. V. Golovin’s critique of the 1860s, XVI(2) Cahiers du Monde Russe et Sovietique, 167–179

Lincoln, W. (1976) The ministers of Alexander II: a survey of their backgrounds and service careers, XVII(4) Cahiers du Monde Russe et Sovietique, 467–483

Lincoln, W. (1981) Russia on the eve of reform: a chinovnik’s view, 59(2) Slavonic and East European Review, 264–271

Luks, L. (1996) Yevraziystvo i konservativnaya revolutsiya: soblazn antizapadnichestva v Rossiy i Germaniy (Eurasianism and the conservative revolution: the temptation of anti-Westernism in Russia and Germany), 6 Voprosi Filosophii (Questions of Philosophy), 57–69

Lysenko, V. (1998) Distribution of power: the experience of the Russian Federation, in G.W. Lapidus (ed.) with S. Tsalik, Preventing deadly conflict: strategies and institutions. Proceedings of a conference in Moscow (New York: Carnegie Corporation) [Report to the Carnegie Commission on preventing deadly conflict], at http://carnegie.org/fileadmin/Media/Publications/PDF/Preventing%20Deadly%20Conflict%20Strategies%20&%20Institutions.pdf (accessed 29 October 2012)

Makaryche, A. (2005) Depolitizirovanniy federalism (Depoliticised federalism), 25 July, Russkiy Zhurnal, at http://old.russ.ru/culture/20050725makarichev.html (accessed 19 February 2013)

Malik, H. (1994) Tatarstan’s treaty with Russia: autonomy or independence?, 18 Journal of South Asian and Middle Eastern Studies, 1

Malik, H. (2000) Introduction, in H. Malik (ed.), Russian-American relations: Islamic and Turkic dimensions in the Volga-Ural Basin (London: Palgrave), at http://www.palgrave.com/pdfs/0333733894.pdf (accessed 29 October 2012)

Malinova, O. (2000) Liberal nationalism: a historical and critical analysis of conceptions (Research Support Scheme), at http://nationalism.org/library/science/nationalism/malinova/malinova.pdf (accessed 14 October 2012)

Malinova, O. (2005–06) Natsionalnaya samobytnost i progress: interpretatsiy ‘idee natsiy’ v poreformennoi Rossiy (National authenticity and progress: interpretations of the ‘idea of the nation’ in post-reform Russia), 4 (14) Kosmopolis, 59–83

Malinova, O. (2006) Obrazy ‘Zapada’ i modely russkoi identichnosti v diskussiakh serediniy XIX veka (Images of ‘the West’ and models of Russian identity in the discussions of the mid-19th century), 2 (212) Kosmopolis, 38–59

Malinova, O. (2007) Konstruirovaniye identichnosti: vozmozhnosti i ogranicheniye (The construction of identity: possibilities and limitation), 60 Pro et Contra, 60–65

Malinova, O. (2008) Creating meanings and traps: competing interpretations of the idea of nation in the debates of Russian Slavophiles and Westernisers in the 1840s, 15(1) European Review of History [Revue europeenne d’histoire], 41–54

Malinova, O. (2009) Rossiya i ‘zapad’ v XX veke: transformatsiya diskursa o kollektivnoi identichniosti (Russia and the ‘west’ in the XX century: the transformation of discourse on collective identity) (Moscow: ROSSPEN)

Malinova, O. (2010) Idei kak nezavisimiye peremenniye v politicheskikh issledovaniyakh: v poiskakh adekvatnoi metolologiy (Ideas as independent variables in political research: in search of an adequate methodology), 3 Polis, 90–99

Malinova, O. (2011) Tema proshlovo v ritorike prezidentov Rossiy (The theme of the past in the rhetoric of the presidents of Russia), 11 Pro et Contra, 106–122

Malko, A.V. (1998) The death penalty: contemporary problems, 1 Pravovedeniye, at http://deathpenalty.narod.ru/nauka/malko.htm (accessed 19 February 2013)

Margelov, M. (2006) The specter of capital punishment in Russia, 1 Russia in Global Affairs, at http://www.eng.globalaffairs.ru/numbers/14/1006.html

Martin, T. (2001) The affirmative action empire: nations and nationalism in the Soviet Union, 1923–1939 (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press)

Marx, K. (1849) Suppression of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, 301 Neue Rheinische Zeitung, at http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1849/05/19c.htm (accessed 19 February 2013)

Marx, K. (1852/1912) Revolution and counter-revolution, or Germany in 1848 (Chicago, IL: Charles H. Kerr), at http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1852/germany/ch09.htm (accessed 14 October 2012)

Marx, K. (1853) Capital punishment, New-York Daily Tribune, 17–18 February, at http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1853/02/18.htm (accessed 19 February 2013)

Marx, K. (1856/1899/1986) Revelations of the diplomatic history of the 18th century, in Marx–Engels collected works, Vol. 15 (London: Lawrence & Wishart) at http://onlinebooks.library.upenn.edu/webbin/gutbook/lookup?num=32370 (accessed 14 October 2012); http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1857/russia/index.htm (accessed 14 October 2012)

Marx, K. (1867/1987) Marx to Engels in Manchester, 2 November 1867, in Marx–Engels Collected Works, Vol. 42 (London: Lawrence & Wishart)

McBride, J. (1995) A treaty of dubious value: the CIS Human Rights Convention, 9 Interights Bulletin, 137–140

McFaul, M. (2004) The Putin paradox, Center for American Progress, 24 June, at http://www.americanprogress.org/issues/2004/06/b99061.html (accessed 29 October 2012)

McFaul, M. and Stoner-Weiss, K. (2008) The myth of the authoritarian model: how Putin’s crackdown holds Russia back, 87 Foreign Affairs, 1 at http://iys-db.stanford.edu/pubs/22072/Myth_of_the_Authoritarian_Model.pdf (accessed 29 October 2012)

McGarry, J. (2005) Asymmetrical federalism and the plurinational state. Paper for the Third International Conference on Federalism, Brussels, 3–5 March

McGarry, J. (2007) Asymmetrical autonomy and conflict regulation: a response to Adeney, Conversi, Hechter and Rezvani, 6 (1) Ethnopolitics, 133–136

McGee, O. (2005) The IRB: the Irish Republican Brotherhood from the Land League to Sinn Féin (Dublin: Four Courts Press)

McReynolds, L. (2010) Witnesses for the defense: the adversarial court and narratives of criminal behaviour in nineteenth-century Russia, 69 (3) Slavic Review 620–644

Medushevskiy, A. (2007) Pazmyshleniya o sovremennom rossiyskom konstitutionalizme (Reflections on contemporary Russian constitutionalism) (Moscow: ROSSPEN)

Meek R., Raphael, D.D. and Stein, P.G. (eds) (1978) Adam Smith: lectures on jurisprudence (Oxford: Oxford University Press)

Mernikova, N. (2000) Semyon Yefimovich Desnitskiy – patriarx rossiysskoi pravovedcheskoi professury (Semyon Yefimovich Desnitskiy – the patriarch of the Russian law pro-fessoriat), 7 Upravleniye personalom, at http://hrm.ru/db/hrm/DF0549F43B8158EBC3256AAB00420EF5/category.html (accessed 17 July 2012)

Merridale, C. (1996) Death and memory in modern Russia, 42 History Workshop Journal, 1

Miéville, C. (2005) Between equal rights: a Marxist theory of international law (Leiden: Brill Academic Publishers)

Mikhailov, V. (2004) Respublika Tatarstan: demokratiya ili suverenitet? (The Republic of Tatarstan: democracy or sovereignty?) (Moscow: Institute of Africa, Russian Academy of Science)

Mikhailovskiy, A. (2008) Borba za Karla Shmitta: o retseptsiy i aktualnosti ponyatiya politicheskovo (The struggle for Carl Schmitt: on the reception and actuality of the concept of the political), 7 Voprosi Filosophii (Questions of Philosophy), 158–171, at http://www.phil63.ru/borba-za-karla-shmitta (2009) 40(4) Social Sciences. A Quarterly Journal of the Russian Academy of Sciences, 56–73

Mikhlin, A. (1997) Sposoby primeneniya smertnoi kazni: istoriya i sovremennost (Ways of introducing the death penalty: history and the present day), 1 Gosudarstvo i Pravo (State and Law), 72

Mikhlin, A.S. (2002) Pozhizhnennoye lisheniye svobody kak vid ugolovnovo nakazaniya (Life imprisonment as a form of criminal punishment), 5 Rossiysskaya Iustitsiya at http://deathpenalty.narod.ru/nauka/pls.htm (accessed 19 February 2013)

Morozov, A. (2002) Vtoroi konservativniy modern (The second conservative modern), review of Mikhail Remizov’s Opyt konservativnoi kritiki, at http://www.russ.ru/pushkin/Vtoroj-konservativnyj-modern (accessed 19 February 2013)

Morsink, J. (1999) The Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Origins, drafting and intent (Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press)

Moscow Helsinki Group (2006) On violations committed in the course of organising and carrying out referendum on merging Irkutsk region and Ust-Ordynski Buryatskyi Autonomous District. Report, at http://www.mhg.ru/files/Report062.doc (accessed 29 October 2012)

Mouffe, C. (ed.) (1999) The challenge of Carl Schmitt (London: Verso)

Muller, J.W. (2003) A dangerous mind: Carl Schmitt in post-war European thought (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press)

Müllerson, R. (1989) Sources of international law: new tendencies in Soviet thinking, 83(3) American Journal of International Law, 494–512

Naumov, A. (1997) The new Russian Criminal Code as a reflection of ongoing reforms, 8 Criminal Law Forum, 191

Newsinger, J. (2000) The Blood never dried: a people’s history of the British Empire (London: Bookmarks)

Novotorzhskiy, G. (1906) Natsionalniy vopros, avtonomiya i federatsiya (The national question, autonomy and federation) (Moscow: ROSSPEN)

Obydenkova, A. (2004) The role of asymmetrical federalism in ethnic-territorial con-flicts in the era of democratisation: the RF as a case study. European University Institute Working Papers SPS no. 2004/16 (Badia Fiesolana: EUI)

Okara, A. (2007) Sovereign democracy: a new Russian idea or a PR project?, 2 Russia in Global Affairs, 123, at http://eng.globalaffairs.ru/number/n_9123 (accessed 19 February 2013)

Oliphant, R. (2009) Capital offences, Russia Profile, 10 September, at http://www.russiaprofile.org/page.php?pageid=Politics&articleid=a1252609152 (accessed 19 February 2013)

Orlov, D. (2008) The new Russian age and sovereign democracy, 46(5) Russian Politics and Law, 72–76

Orlov, D. et al. (2006) Sovereign democracy: collection of articles (Moscow: Yevropa)

Osborn, A. (2007) Ramzan Kadyrov: the warrior king of Chechnya, The Independent, 4 January, at http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/ramzan-kadyrov-the-warrior-king-of-chechnya-430738.html (accessed 29 October 2012)

Osipov, A. (1998) (ed) Pravo narodov na samoopredeleniye: ideya i voploshcheniye (Right of peoples to self-determination: idea and realisation) (Moscow: Zvenya)

Osipov, A. (2004) Natsionalno–kulturnaya avtonomiya. Idei, resheniya, instituty (National–cultural autonomy. Ideas, decisions, institutions) (St Petersburg: Centre for Independent Sociological Research)

Osipov, A. (2010) National–cultural autonomy in Russia: a case of symbolic law, 35(1) Review of Central and East European Law, 27–57

Ostrowski, D. (1993) Why did the Metropolitan move from Kiev to Vladimir in the thirteenth century?, 16 California Slavic Studies, 83–101

Oversloot, H. (2007) Reordering the state (without changing the constitution): Russia under Putin’s rule, 2000–2008, 32 Review of Central and East European Law 41–64

Oversloot, H. (2009) The merger of federal subjects of the Russian Federation during Putin’s presidency and after, 34 Review of Central and Eastern European Law, 119–135

Parland, T. (2005) The extreme nationalist threat in Russia (Abingdon: Routledge)

Pashin, S. (1992) Konstitutsionniy sud Rossiy: obrashchatsya mogut vsye (The Constitutional Court of Russia: all may apply), Sovetskaya Iustitsiya, 2 January

Pashin, S. (2001) O prirode smertnoi kazni (On the nature of the death penalty), 14 Index on Censorship, at http://deathpenalty.narod.ru/nauka/Pashin.htm (accessed 13 October 2012)

Pashukanis, Ye. (1921) Burzhuazniy yurist o prirode gosudarstvo (A bourgeois jurist on the nature of the state), 3 Krasnaya Nov (Red Virgin Soil), 223–232 at http://www.ruthenia.ru/sovlit/j/106.html (accessed 27 July 2012)

Pashukanis, Ye. (1922) Pervye mesiatsy sushchestvovaniy moskovskogo narodnogo suda (The first months of the existence of the Moscow People’s Court), 44–5 Yezhenedelnik Sovetskoi Iustitsiy (Soviet Justice Weekly), 1–10

Pashukanis, Ye. (1923a) Obzor literatury po obshei teoriy prava (Review of the literature on the general theory of law), 5 Vestnik Sots. Akad (Bulletin of the Socialist Academy), 19–34

Pashukanis, Ye. (1923b) Kunov, kak interpretator marksovoi teoriy obshestva i gosudarstvo (Kunov as an interpreter of Marxian theory of society and state), 6 Vestnik Sots. Akad (Bulletin of the Socialist Academy), 6–21

Pashukanis, Ye. (1924) Rur i reparatsiy: Obzor diplomat, perepiski za yanv.–sent. 1923 (The Ruhr and reparation: survey of diplomatic records January to September 1923), 1 Mezdunarod. Letopis (International Chronicle), 1–8

Pashukanis, Ye. (1925a) Burzhuaznoye gosudarstvo i problema suvereniteta (The bourgeois state and the problem of sovereignty), 10 Bulletin (Vestnik) of the Communist Academy, 300–312

Pashukanis, Ye. (1925b) Obzor osnovnikh napravleniy vo fransuskoi literature gosudarstven-novo prava (Survey of the fundamental directions in the French literature of state law), 12 Bulletin (Vestnik) of the Communist Academy, 15–17

Pashukanis, Ye. (1925/80) Lenin and problems of law, in P. Beirne and R. Sharlet (eds), Pashukanis: selected writings on Marxism and Law (London and New York: Academic Press), at http://marxists.org/archive/pashukanis/1925/xx/lenin.htm (accessed 30 July 2012)

Pashukanis, Ye. (1927) Recognition, 5 Encyclopedia of State and Law, 503–504

Pashukanis, Ye. (1930) Polozheniye na teoreticheskom pravovom fronte (The situation on the theoretical legal front), 11–12 Sovetskoye gosudartsvo i revolutsiya prava (Soviet state and revolution of law), 16–49

Pashukanis, Ye. (1931) Vynuzhdenniy otvet (Necessitated reply), 5–6 Sovyetskoye Gosudarstvo i Revolyutsiya Prava (Soviet State and Revolution of Law), 98–102

Pashukanis, Ye. (1932) Pismo tov. Stalina i zadachi teoreticheskovo fronta gosudarstvo i pravo (The letter of comrade Stalin and the tasks of the theoretical front of state and law), 1 Sovetskoe Gosudarstvo (Soviet State), 4–48

Pashukanis, Ye. (1935) Ocherki po mezhdunarodnomu pravu (Essays in international law) (Moscow: Soviet Legislation)

Pashukanis, Ye. (1980) Izbranniye proizvedeniya po obshei teoriy prava i gosudarstvo (Selected works on the general theory of law and state) (Moscow: Nauka Publishers)

Pashukanis, Ye. (1983) Law and Marxism: a general theory. Towards a critique of the fundamental juridical concepts (London: Pluto Press)

Petrukhin, I. (1999) Pravo na zhzin i smertnaya kazn (The right to life and the death penalty), 5 Obshchestvenniye nauki i sovremennosti, at http://deathpenalty.narod.ru/nauka/pravon.htm (accessed 19 February 2013)

Petrukhin, I. (2000) Ogovorki i zayavleniya RF pri ratifikatsiy Yevropeiskipoi Konventsiy o Zashchite Prav Cheloveka i Osnovnikh Svobod (Reservations and declarations of the Russian Federation in Ratifying the ECHR), 10 Rossiskiy Byulleten po Pravam Cheloveka (Russian Bulletin of Human Rights), 65–69

Pimenov, S. (2005) Parad obyedineniy (The parade of mergers), 17 June, at http://www.polit-nn.ru/?pt=analytics&view=single&id=3 (accessed 29 October 2012)

Pimenova, E. (1906) Yedinstvo gosudarstvo i avtonomiya (The unity of the state and autonomy) (St Petersburg: Azbuka)

Popova, A. (2009) Femida v epokhu preobrazovaniy: sudebniye reformy 1864 i rubezha XX–XXI vv. v kontektste modernizatsiy (Femida in the age of transformation: the judicial reforms of 1864 and of the 20–21st centuries in the context of modernisation) (Moscow: Noviy Khronograf)

Pozdnov, M. (2002) O sudebnikh oshibkakh (On miscarriages of justice), at http://deathpenalty.narod.ru/nauka/errors.htm (accessed 19 February 2013)

Pristavkin, A. (1996) Kommentariy (Commentary on the President’s Decree of 16 May), 6 Rossiyskaya Iustitsiya, 13

Pristavkin, A. (1997) Kaznit? Milovat? (Execute? Pardon?), 4 Yuridicheskiy Vestnik, 5

Protopopov, E. (2007) Politiko-pravoviye vzglyady E. B. Pashukanisha (The political and legal views of Ye. B. Pashukanis). Moscow State Legal Academy, Dissertation for the award of Kandidat of Legal Science, at http://www.lib.ua-ru.net/diss/cont/217484.html (accessed 28 July 2012)

Prozorov, S. (2005) Russian conservatism in the Putin presidency: the dispersion of a hegemonic discourse, 10(2) Journal of Political Ideologies, 121–143

Putin, V. (2000) Rossiya vsegda oshchushala sebya yevroasiatskoi stranoi (Russia always conceived itself to be a Euro-Asian country), 13 November, at http://eurasia.com.ru/docs/putin1.html (accessed 14 October 2012)

Quaye, C. (1991) Liberation struggles in international law (Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press)

Quilin, W. (1977) The death penalty in the Soviet Union, 5 American Journal of Criminal Law, 225

Radelet, M. and Marian, B. (2000) The changing nature of death penalty debates, 26 Annual Review of Sociology, 43

Re, E. (1961) The Roman contribution to the common law, 29 Fordham Law Review, 447–493, at: http://ir.lawnet.fordham.edu/flr/vol29/iss3/2 (accessed 18 October 2012)

Reddaway, P. and Orttung, R. (eds), (2004) The dynamics of Russian politics: Putin’s reform of federal-regional relations, Vol. 1 (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield)

Remizov, M. (2008) Potomu chto my konservatory (Because we are conservatives), at http://www.apn.ru/blog/article21145.htm (accessed 5 December 2012)

Remizov, M. (2009) Shmitt forever: ‘revolutsiya sprava’ v predelakh tolko akademii (Schmitt forever: the ‘revolution from the right’ within the limits of the academy only), at http://www.russ.ru/Mirovaya-povestka/Shmitt-forever (accessed 5 December 2012)

Remizov, M. (2011) Nabor predrassudkov. Natsionalizmi pravyashchevo klassa (Collection of superstitions. The nationalism of the ruling class), at http://www.russ.ru/pole/Nabor-presdrassudkov (accessed 5 December 2012)

Rieber, A. (1971) Alexander II: a revisionist view, 43(1) Journal of Modern History 42–58

Ritter, K. (2000) The Russian death penalty dilemmas: square pegs and round holes, 32 Case Western Reserve Journal of International Law, 129

Rittersporn, G. (1993) Buying intellectual pre-fabs, 96 Telos, 53–60

Sakharov, A. (1975) My country and the world (New York: Random House)

Salikov, M. (2004) The Russian federal system: sub-national and local levels. Paper for the conference ‘Subnational Constitutions and Federalism: Design and Reform’, 22–7 March. Center for State Constitutional Studies at Rutgers-Camden, at http://camlaw.rutgers.edu/statecon/subpapers/salikov.pdf (accessed 29 October 2012)

Saunders, D. (2010) The political and social order, in W. Leatherbarrow and D. Offord (eds), A history of Russian thought (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press)

Savitskiy, V. (1993) Will there be a judicial power in the new Russia?, 19(6) Review of Central and East European Law, 639–660

Schamiloglu, U. (1990) The formation of a Tatar historical consciousness: Sihabäddin Märcani and the image of the Golden Horde, 9 (2) Central Asian Survey, 39–49

Schmitt, C. (1923/1985/2009) Dukhovno-istoricheskoye sostoyaniye sovremennovo parla-mentarizma. Predvaritelniye zamechaniya (Oprotivopolozhnosti parlamentarizma i demokratiy) (The spiritual and historical condition of contemporary parliamentarism. Provisional notes (On the contradictions of parliamentarism and democracy)) (trans. Aleksandr Filippov), 8(2) Sotsiologicheskoye Obozreniye, 6–16

Schöpflin, G. (1997) The functions of myth and a taxonomy of myths, in G. Hosking and G. Schöpflin (eds), Myths and nationhood (London: C. Hurst)

Schweisfurth, T. (1990) The acceptance by the Soviet Union of the compulsory jurisdiction of the ICJ for six human rights conventions, 2 European Journal of International Law, 110

Scobbie, I. (2010) Wicked heresies or legitimate perspectives? Theory and international law, in M. Evans (ed.), International law, 3rd edn (Oxford: Oxford University Press)

Shaimiev, M. (1996a) Conflict prevention and management: the significance of Tatarstan’s experience, in G.W. Lapidus (ed.) with S. Tsalik, Preventing deadly conflict: strategies and institution. Proceedings of a conference in Moscow (New York: Carnegie Corporation) [Report to the Carnegie Commission on preventing deadly conflict], at http://carnegie.org/fileadmin/Media/Publications/PDF/Preventing%20Deadly%20Conflict%20Strategies%20&%20Institutions.pdf (accessed 29 October 2012)

Shaimiev, M. (1996b) Opyt vzaimootnosheniy Tatarstana i Rossiy (Experience of the interrelations of Tatarstan and Russia), 6 Panorama-Forum, 44–49

Shaimiev, M. (2002) Krepit yedinstvo naroda, dvigatsya vperyod, ne otgorazhibayas ot ostal-novo mira (To strengthen the unity of the people, to move forward, not isolating ourselves from the rest of the world). Welcome of the president of Tatarstan to the Third World Congress of Tatars, 29 August

Shaimiev, M. (2006) My vsegda byli za federalism, no podlinniy, a ne na slovakh (We were always for federalism, but authentic, not in words only). Interview with Rosbalt, 28 March

Shanin, T. (1983) Late Marx and the Russian road: Marx and ‘the peripheries of capitalism’ (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul)

Sharlet, R. (2003) Resisting Putin’s federal reforms on the legal front, 11(3) Demkratizatsiya 335–342

Shestakov, L. (1990) Prava cheloveka: sbornik universalnikh i regionalnikh mezhdunarod-nikh dokumentov (Human rights: collection of universal and regional international documents) (Moscow: Moscow University Press)

Shlapentokh, D. (2007) Russia between East and West. Scholarly debates on Eurasianism (Leiden: Brill Academic Publishers)

Shulzhenko, Yu. (1998) Institut konstitutsionnovo nadzora v Rossiskoi Federatsii (The institution of constitutional review in the Russian Federation) (Moscow: Institute of State and Law)

Siegelbaum, L. (1992) Soviet state and Soviet society between revolutions: 1918–1929 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press)

Smirnov, A. (2007) Tatar treaty suggests dissent inside Kremlin on regional policy, 4 Eurasia Daily Monitor, 33, at http://www.jamestown.org/single/?no_cache=1&tx_ttnews%5Btt_news%5D=32494 (accessed 29 October 2012)

Smith, A. (1976) An inquiry into the nature and causes of the wealth of nations (ed. R.H. Campbell and A.S. Skinner) (Oxford: Oxford University Press)

Sokolova, Z., Novikova, N.I. and Sorin-Chaikov, N.V. (1995) Etnographi pishut zakon: kontekst i problemy (Ethnographers write a law: context and problems), 1 Etnographicheskoye Obozreniye, 74–88

Speed, R. (2005) Review of Christopher Andrew and Vasili Mitrokhin The world was going our way: the KGB and the battle for the third world (New York: Basic Books)

Spinoza, B. (1996) Ethics (trans. Edwin Curley) (London: Penguin)

Starr, S. (1972) Decentralization and self-government in Russia, 1830–1870 (Princeton: Princeton University Press)

Stuchka, P. (1927) Gosudarstvo i pravo v period sotsialisticheskovo stroitelstva (State and law in the period of socialist construction), 2 Revolution of Law, 3–26

Stuchka, P. (1931) Moi put i moi oshibki (My path and my mistakes), 5–6 Sovetskoye Gosudartsvo i Revolutsiya Prava (Soviet State and Revolution of Law), 67–97

Stuchka, P. (1988) Selected writings on Soviet law and Marxism (ed., annot., trans., intro. Robert Sharlet, Peter Maggs and Piers Beirne) (Armonk, NY: ME Sharpe)

Suny, R. (1997) The empire strikes out: imperial Russia, ‘national’ identity, and theories of empire, in A state of nations: empire and nation-making in the Soviet Union, 1917–1953 (New York: Mouton de Gruyter)

Surkov, V. (2008) Teksty 1997–2007 (Moscow: Yevropa)

Svetlichnaja, J. with James Heartfield (2010) Sovereign democracy: dictatorship over capitalism in contemporary Russia, 159 Radical Philosophy, 38–43

Taratuta, Y. and Zygar, M. (2009) Smertniye kozyn (Death machinations), Russian Newsweek 7–12 September, at http://www.runewsweek.ru/country/30122/

Teague, E. (2008) Regional mergers in the Russian Federation. Paper for the Association for the Study of Nationalities, 2007 World Convention, New York

Tishkov, V. (1996) O natsiy i natsionalisme (On the nation and nationalism), Svobodnaya Mysl (Free Thought), 3

Tishkov, V. (1997) Ethnicity, nmationalism and conflict in and after the Soviet Union. The mind aflame (London: Sage)

Tishkov, V. (1998) Zabyt o natsiy. Post-natsionalisticheskoye ponimaniye natsionalism (Forget about the nation. A post-nationalist understanding of nationalism), Voprosiy Philosophiy (Questions of Philosophy), 3–26

Triska, J. (1958) Treaties and other sources of order in international relations: the Soviet view, 52(4) American Journal of International Law, 699–726

Trochev, A. (2008) Judging Russia: Constitutional Court in Russian politics, 1990–2006 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press)

Trubetskoi, N. (1995) Istoriya. Kultura. Yazyk (History. Culture. Language) (Moscow: Publishing Group ‘Progress’ ‘Universe’)

Trunov, R. (2007) Chita region governor discusses merger in Russian Federation, Moscow News, 24 May

Tsymburskiy, V. (2007) Ostrov Rossiya. Geopoliticheskiye i khronopoliticheskiye raboty (The island of Russia. Geopolitical and chrono-political work) (Moscow: ROSSPEN)

Tsymburskiy, V. (2008) Igry suvereniteta: noviy vozrast Rossiy, mini-monograph, Rus Magazin, at http://www.intelros.ru/pdf/rus_magazin/02_2008/25.pdf (accessed 19 February 2013)

Tunkin, G. (1961) Remarks on the juridical nature of customary norms of international law, 49(3) California Law Review, 419–430

Tunkin, G. (1967) Borba dvukh kontseptsiy v mezhdunarodnom prave (The struggle of two conceptions in international law), 11 Sovetsoye Gosudarstvo i Pravo (Soviet State and Law), 140–149

Tunkin, G. (1970) Leninskiye printsipi ravnopraviya i samoopredeleniya narodov i sovremen-noye mezhdunarodoye pravo (Lenin’s principles of equal rights and the self-determination of peoples in contemporary international law), 2 Vestnik Moskovskovo Universiteta (Bulletin of Moscow University), 62–71

Tunkin, G. (1974) Theory of international law (trans. W.B. Butler) (London: George Allen & Unwin)

Tunkin, G. (1993) Is general international law customary only?, 4(4) European Journal of International Law, 534–541

Umland, A. (2009) A fascist establishment in bloom: Russia’s top political and cultural figures are subscribing to Alexander Dugin’s fascist ideology in greater numbers, at http://www.russiaprofile.org/page.php?pageid=Politics&articleid=a1242670774 (accessed 19 February 2013)

Umnova, I. (1998) Konstitutsionni osnovy sovremennovo rossiyskovo federalizma (The constitutional foundations of contemporary Russian federalism) (Moscow: Dyelo)

Vaksberg, A. (1990) The prosecutor and the prey: Vyshinsky and the 1930s’ Moscow show trials (London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson)

Varlamova, N. (2001) Sovremenniy Rossiysskiy federalizm: konstitutsionnaya model i politico-pravovaya dinamika (Contemporary Russian federalism: constitutional model and political-legal dynamic), in P. van Dijk and G. Van Hoof (eds.), Theory and practice of the European Convention on Human Rights, 3rd edn (The Hague: Kluwer Law International)

Vedernikov, V. (2012) Velikaya reforma ili revolutsionnaya situatsiya? (K otsenke dvizhush-chikh sil preobrazovanij v otechestvennoi istoriografiy 1871–1986) (Great reform or revolutionary situation? (Evaluating the moving forces of reform in the historiography of 1871–1986)) (St Petersburg: European University)

Vernadsky, G. (1947) Medieval Russian laws (New York: Columbia University Press)

Vetrov, P. and Tirmaste, M.-L. (2008) V Nenetskom okruge ne znayut, chevo zhdat ot Arkhangelskovo gubernatora (In the Nenets okrug they do not know what to expect from the Arkhangel governor), 45 Kommersant, 3862, at http://www.kommersant.ru/doc.aspx?DocsID=869006 (accessed 29 October 2012)

Vishnyakov, V. (1998) Konstitutsionnoye regulirovaniye federativnikh otnosheniy (The constitutional regulation of federal relations), 12 Gosudarstvo i Pravo (State and Law), 20–29

Vitsin, S. (1999) Vremya kaznit v Rossiy zakonchilos? (The time of the death penalty in Russia has come to an end?), 3 Rossiyskaya Iustitsiya, at http://deathpenalty.narod.ru/nauka/vicin.htm (accessed 19 February 2013)

Vyshinsky, A. (1948a) The law of the Soviet state (New York: Macmillan)

Vyshinsky, A. (1948b) Mezhdunarodnoye pravo i mezhdunarodnaya organisatsiya (International law and international organisation), 1 Sovetskoye Gosudarstvo i Pravo (Soviet State and Law), 22

Wada, H. (1981) Marx, Marxism and the agrarian question: II Marx and revolutionary Russia, 12(1) History Workshop Journal, 129–150

Wahnich, S. (2012) In defence of terror: liberty or death in the French Revolution (London: Verso)

Walicki, A. (1979) A history of Russian thought: from the Enlightenment to Marxism (Stanford: Stanford University Press)

Walicki, A. (1992) Legal philosophies of Russian liberalism (Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press)

Walicki, A. (2010) Milestones and Russian intellectual history, 62 Studies in Eastern European Thought, 101–107

Wheatcroft, S.G. (2002) The crisis of the late tsarist penal system, in S.G. Wheatcroft (ed.), Challenging traditional views of Russian history (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan)

Wilson, H. (1988) International law and the use of force by national liberation movements (Oxford: Clarendon Press)

Yanov, A. (1988) Russian nationalism as the ideology of counterrerform, Radio Liberty Research Bulletin, special issue, Russian Nationalism Today, 19 December

Yashuk, T. (1999) Yuridicheskiye zhurnaly 1920-x godov kak istochnik po istoriy sovetskovo pravovedeniya (Law journals of the 1920s as a source for the history of Soviet legal scholarship), 1 Vestnik Omskovo Universiteta (Bulletin of Omsk State University), 111–114, at http://www/omsu.omskreg.ru/vestnik/articles/y1999-il/a111/article.html (accessed 26 July 2012)

Yasmann, V. (2001) The rise of the Eurasians, at http://fb.rferl.org/content/arti-cle/1344707.html (accessed 12 July 2012)

Yasmann, V. (2006) Analysis: the future of Russia’s ‘ethnic republics’, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, 21 April 2006, at http://www.rferl.org/articleprintview/1067861.html (accessed 29 October 2012)

Yassour, A. (1987) The later Marx and the fate of the Russian obš ina, 23(1) Studies in East European Thought, 3–17

Zaslavsky, V. (1993) Russia and the problem of democratic transition, 96 Telos 26–52, 49–50

Zhiltsov, S.V. (2002) Ponyatiye smertnoi kazni (The concept of the death penalty), in Smertnaya kazn v istoriy Rossiy (The death penalty in the history of Russia) (Moscow: Nota Bene)

Zile, Z.L. (ed.) (1992) Ideas and forces in Soviet legal history: a reader on the Soviet state and law (Oxford: Oxford University Press)

Ziyatdinova, F. (1995) Historical memory of the Tatar ethnic group, International Affairs, January, at http://1997-2011.tatarstan.ru/?DNSID=722e2d0dbd77671b025769f6016ee1d3&node_id=1379&full=793 (accessed 29 October 2012)

Zorkin, V. (2004) Apologiya Westfalskoi sistemy (Apology for the Westphalian system), Rossiyskaya Gazeta, 13 July, at http://www.rg.ru/2004/07/13/zorkin.html (accessed 22 October 2012)

Zorkin, V. (2010) Predel ustupchivosti (The limits of compromise), Rossiysskaya Gazeta, 29 October 2010, at http://www.rg.ru/2010/10/29/zorkin.html (accessed 19 February 2013)

Zorkin, V. (2012) Verkhovenstvo prava i imperativ bezopastnosti (The supremacy of law and the imperative of security), Rossiyskaya Gazeta, 16 May, at http://www.rg.ru/2012/05/15/zorkin-poln.html (accessed 28 October 2012)

Zorkin, V. et al. (2008) Suverennoye gosudarstvo v usloviyakh globalizatsii: demokratiya i natsionalnaya identichnost (Sovereign state in conditions of globalisation: democracy and national identity), in V. Surkov, Tektsy 1997–2007 (Moscow: Yevropa)

Zverev, A. (2002) The patience of a nation is measured in centuries: national revival in Tatarstan historiography, in B. Coppieters and M. Huysseune (eds), Secession, history and the social sciences (Brussels: VUB University Press)





Index


Aleksandr II (Alexander II) abolition of serfdom 33–34

current relevance of legal reforms 33–47

debates and proposals for reform 35–36

introduction of jury trials 36–40

judicial system reforms 40–43

reforms overviewed 5–6, 33–35

significance of reforms 43–47





autonomy Constitution of 1918 135–136

Constitution of 1924 136–137

Lenin’s theories 133–135, 137

popularity of national–cultural autonomy (NCA) concept 120–122

protection of national minorities overviewed 7

Soviet nationalities policy 136–139

Tatar region in Soviet era 138–139

Tsarist Russia inorodtsy (non-Slavic peoples) 128–129

regional autonomy 122–129

religious autonomy 129–130

Russian Germans 124–125

scholars on territorial and personal autonomy 130–133





Baltic region autonomy in Tsarist era 124





Bar creation under Great Reforms of 1864 42





Bolshevik era, see Lenin, Vladimir

Bukhara region autonomy in tsarist era 127





capital punishment, see death penalty

Catherine the Great and roots of Russian federalism 96

and start of Russian Enlightenment 22, 30





CIS Convention on Human Rights and Russia’s application to join Council of Europe 154–155





Committee for Constitutional Supervision (CCS) human rights in Soviet era 143–148





Constitution of 1918 autonomy 135–136





Constitution of 1924 autonomy 136–137





Constitution of 1936 human rights 141–142





Constitution of 1993 Russian federalism 105–106





Council of Europe Russia’s accession, see human rights





death penalty abolition prospects 190–192

on accession to Council of Europe 187–189

executions world wide 176table

future 189–190

history overviewed 7

introduction 174–176

post-Soviet era 183–185

religious, political and philosophical issues 176

Russian Enlightenment and 177–180

Soviet era 180–183

Yeltsin era 185–187





decolonisation, see self-determination

Desnitskiy, Semyon and beginnings of law as academic discipline in Russia 4–5, 21–32

death and legacy 32

early life and career 24–25

and introduction of jury trials 36

lectures and writings on law 29–31





Duncan, Peter history of Messianism 16–18, 202





Engels, Friedrich theories on law overviewed 6





England’s links with Russia introduction of jury trials 36

Korovin’s international law writings 79

Marx’s theory of Russia 10

overview 206





Eurasianism emergence and modern influence 19–20

origins 48–49

overview 4

and Russian sovereignty 202





European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) and Russian sovereignty, see sovereignty

Russia’s ratification 162–164

Russia’s reservations 164–168





federalism, see Russian federalism

Finland autonomy in Tsarist era 123–124





General Theory of Law and Marxism, see Pashukanis, Yevgeniy

Georgia autonomy in Tsarist era 125–126





German law current influence in Russia 206–207

natural law and Russian Enlightenment 21, 24, 28–29





Germans in Russia autonomy in Tsarist era 124–125





Gramsci, Antonio hegemonic theory of Russia 4, 13–14





Great Reforms of 1864, see Aleksandr II (Alexander II)



hegemony Gramscian theory of Russia 4, 13–14

struggle between Westerners and Russophiles 13–16





human rights CIS Convention 155–156

Constitution of 1936 141–142

current views 140

European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) and Russian sovereignty, see sovereignty

Russia’s ratification 162–164

Russia’sreservations 164–168





level of rights overviewed 207

Putin’s policies 169–173

Russia’s accession to Council of Europe application for membership 148–151

CIS Convention as issue 154–155

compliance in first year 160–162

Council debate 151–152

Duma debate 152–154

obligations as to death penalty 187–189

obligations on accession 156–160

reasons for membership 154–155





Soviet era 140–145

USSR and Universal Declaration of Human Rights 142–143

Yeltsin era overviewed 7; see also death penalty





ideology historical threads 2–3

theories and movements overviewed 3–4





inorodtsy (non-Slavic peoples) autonomy in Tsarist era 128–129





intelligentsia support for Dmitry Medvedev 1–2





judicial system reforms under Aleksandr II 40–43





jury trials introduction under Aleksandr II 36–40





justices of the peace and Great Reforms of 1864 42





Khiva region autonomy in Tsarist era 127





Khodorkovsky, Mikhail trial and imprisonment 1, 169





Korovin, Yevgeniy international law writings 77–81





Landmarks (Vekhi) publication and significance 1, 6, 44





law importance in Russia 206





legal reforms of Aleksandr II, see Aleksandr II (Alexander II)

legal scholarship importance in Russia 206





Lenin, Vladimir on Aleksandr II’s reforms 43–45

on autonomy 133–135, 137

on death penalty 180–181

on hegemony 14

on jury trials 38–39

legal thought 62–65

New Economic Policy (NEP) 51–52

polemic against Vekhi 6, 44–45

on self-determination 84





Lester, Jeremy theory of Russia 13–15





Martin, Terry, The Affirmative Action Empire on Soviet nationalities policy 137–138





Marx, Karl on death penalty 180, 189

theory of Russia 3, 9–13





Marxist legal theory, see Pashukanis, Yevgeniy;; Soviet public international law;

‘Marxist’ theory of Russia overview 3





Medvedev, Dmitry intelligentsia’s open letter to 1–2

research on regional mergers policy 116–117





Messianism historical roots 16–17

and Slavophilia 17–19

and ‘young conservatives’ 202





minorities, see autonomy

Moscow University foundation 22–24





national identity symbols 2–3





nationalities, see autonomy

natural law, see German natural law

New Economic Policy (NEP) Yevgeniy Pashukanis and 51–52





non-Slavic peoples (inorodtsy) autonomy in Tsarist era 128–129





Orthodox Church, see religion



Pashukanis Yevgeniy debate with Stuchka 67–68

denunciation and death 55, 79

early writings 52–53

General Theory of Law and Marxism criticisms 60–61

overview 58–60

writing 50–51





and growth of legal journalism 55–58

ideological context 48–49

ideology and legal theory 68–71

international law writings 66–67

as leading Soviet legal theorist 53–55

on ‘Lenin and questions of law’ 62–65

life and career 49–55

list of writings 71–76

and New Economic Policy (NEP) 51–52

Revolution of Law articles 62–65, 67–68

on self-determination 79

theories on law overviewed 6





Peter the Great and beginnings of scientific revolution 21

and Marx’s theory of Russia 10–11

and roots of Russian federalism 96





Poland autonomy in Tsarist era 126–127





prokuratura and Great Reforms of 1864 42–43





public international law, see Soviet public international law

Putin, Vladimir Eurasianism 19–20

human rights 169–173

sovereignty and influence of Carl Schmitt 194–197





Radical Philosophy article on sovereign democracy 194–197





reforms of Aleksandr II, see Aleksandr II (Alexander II)

regions, see Russian federalism

religion and death penalty 176

and hegemonic struggle between Westerners and Russophiles 15–16





Revolution of Law articles by Yevgeniy Pashukanis 62–65, 67–68





Russia accession to Council of Europe, see human rights

autonomy; autonomy

Constitution of 1993 105–106

early history 16–17

England’s links with; England’s links with Russia

ethnic populations 118- 119table

federalism; Russian federalism

future global status 207

human rights; human rights

importance of law and legal scholarship 206

population 117–119

protection of national minorities; autonomy

Soviet era; Soviet

theories of Russia surveyed 9–20





Russian Empire autonomy, see autonomy

reform; Aleksandr II (Alexander II)





Russian Enlightenment Adam Smith’s influence in Russia 25–27, 28

Catherine the Great and start of Russian Enlightenment 22, 30

controversy with German natural law 21, 24, 28–29

death penalty 177–180

Moscow University founded 22–24

Peter the Great and start of scientific revolution 21

Scottish influence overviewed 4–5





Russian federalism as asymmetrical federation 107–109

bilateral treaties between Federation and regions 104–105

Constitution of 1993 105–106

contradictory legal basis 106–107, 108table

current size of Federation 96

declarations of state sovereignty 99table

first phase during Soviet collapse 98–102

historical overview 96–98

merging of regions 113–117, 115table

potential impact of Putin’s regional merger policies 117

Putin’s policies since 2000 109–113

regional types 107table

research on regional mergers policy 113–117

second phase to 1993 Constitution 102–103

third phase after 1993 103–104





Russian Germans autonomy in Tsarist era 124–125





Russophiles hegemonic struggle with Westerners 13–16





Schmitt, Carl influence on Russian sovereignty debate 194–201





scientific revolution Peter the Great and beginnings of 21; see also Russian Enlightenment





Scotland and Russian Enlightenment 21–32

self-determination contradictions in Soviet theory 81–83

sovereignty and 83–88

Soviet abandonment of 94–95

Soviet diplomatic successes during decolonisation era 88–94

and Soviet international law 77–95





serfdom abolition by Aleksandr II 33–34





Slavophiles hegemonic struggle with Westerners 15, 48

and Messianism 17–19





Smith, Adam and Russian Enlightenment 25–27, 28





sovereignty continuing conflict with ECHR 205

declarations by former Soviet republics and regions 99table

and European human rights, see sovereignty

Putin and influence of Carl Schmitt 194–197

Radical Philosophy article 194–197

Russian proclamations overviewed 6

‘sovereign democracy’ concept 194

and Soviet international law 83–88

Surkov’s theories overviewed 7

UK’s position as to European human rights compared 193

‘young conservatives’ views 201–203

Zorkin’s arguments 194–197, 203–204





Soviet historians and Aleksandr II’s reforms 5–6, 44, 46





Soviet legal theorists, see Pashukanis, Yevgeniy

Soviet public international law contradictions in theory 81–83

diplomatic successes during decolonisation era 88–94

ideological influences overviewed 6

self-determination abandoned 94–95

sovereignty and self-determination 83–88

theory and practice after Pashukanis 77–95

and United Nations (UN) 87, 88–94

writings by Yevgeniy Pashukanis 66–67





Soviet Union autonomy, see autonomy

Committee for Constitutional Supervision (CCS) 143–148

and roots of Russian federalism 96–98

Russian sovereignty after fall of; sovereignty





Stalin’s Constitution of 1936 human rights 141–142





Stuchka, Piotr debate with Pashukanis 67–68

list of writings 71–76





Surkov, Vladislav ‘sovereign democracy’ concept 194

sovereignty theories overviewed 7





Tabeev, Fikret Akhmedzhanovich life and career 138–139





Tatars autonomy in Tsarist era 127–128

Soviet nationalities policy 138–139





theories of Russia survey of 9–20





trial by jury introduction under Aleksandr II 36–40





Tsarist Russia, see Russian Empire



Ukraine autonomy in Tsarist era 125–126





United Kingdom England and Russia, see England’s links with Russia





Scotland and Russian Enlightenment 21–32 sovereignty and European human rights 193





United Nations (UN) Soviet diplomatic successes during decolonisation era 88–94





Universal Declaration of Human Rights USSR and 142–143





USSR, see Soviet

Uzbekistan Tsarist-era autonomy in Khiva and Bukhara 127





Vekhi (Landmarks) publication and significance 1, 6, 44





Westerners hegemonic struggle with Russophiles 13–16, 48





Yeltsin era, see human rights

‘young conservatives’ views on sovereignty 201–203





YUKOS, see Khodorkovsky, Mikhail



Zorkin, Valeriy on Russian sovereignty and European human rights 194–197, 203–204





