the oxford edition of blackstone


General Editor

Wilfrid Prest



Commentaries on

the Laws of engLand





The oxford edition of Blackstone


General Editor

Wilfrid Prest

Editorial Board

sir John Baker, Paul Brand, Joshua Getzler,

John langbein, and steven sheppard

Book i: Of the rights of Persons

Volume editor: david lemmings

Book ii: Of the rights of things

Volume editor: simon stern

Book iii: Of Private Wrongs

Volume editor: Thomas P. Gallanis

Book iV: Of Public Wrongs

Volume editor: ruth Paley



OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 11/07/16, SPi



Commentaries on



the Laws of engLand



BOOk ii: Of the riGhts Of thinGs



William BlackstOne



With an intrOdUctiOn, nOtes,

and teXtUal aPParatUs BY

simOn stern



1

OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 11/07/16, SPi



1

Great clarendon street, Oxford, OX2 6dP,

United kingdom

Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.

it furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship,

and education by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a registered trade mark of

Oxford University Press in the Uk and in certain other countries

© s. stern (editor’s introduction, notes, and textual apparatus) 2016

© W. Prest (note to the reader) 2016

The moral rights of the author have been asserted

first edition published in 2016

impression: 1

all rights reserved. no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the

prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted

by law, by licence or under terms agreed with the appropriate reprographics

rights organization. enquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the above should be sent to the rights department, Oxford University Press, at the

address above

You must not circulate this work in any other form

and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer

crown copyright material is reproduced under class licence

number c01P0000148 with the permission of OPsi

and the Queen’s Printer for scotland

Published in the United states of america by Oxford University Press

198 madison avenue, new York, nY 10016, United states of america

British library cataloguing in Publication data

data available

library of congress control number: 2015948893

isBn 978–0–19876898–2 (hardback)

isBn 978–0–19960100–4 (paperback)

isBn 978–0–19960103–5 (hardback set)

isBn 978–0–19960098–4 (paperback set)

Printed and bound by

cPi Group (Uk) ltd, croydon, cr0 4YY

links to third party websites are provided by Oxford in good faith and

for information only. Oxford disclaims any responsibility for the materials

contained in any third party website referenced in this work



OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 11/07/16, SPi





Contents




Editor’s Introduction to Book II vii

Acknowledgements xxvii

Note to the Reader xxix

Abbreviations xxxi

chapter 1: Of Property, in General 1

chapter 2: Of real Property; and, first, of corporeal hereditaments 10

chapter 3: Of incorporeal hereditaments 12

chapter 4: Of the feodal system 28

chapter 5: Of the antient english tenures 39

chapter 6: Of the modern english tenures 52

chapter 7: Of freehold estates, of inheritance 69

chapter 8: Of freeholds, not of inheritance 81

chapter 9: Of estates, less than freehold 95

chapter 10: Of estates upon condition 103

chapter 11: Of estates in Possession, remainder, and reversion 110

chapter 12: Of estates in severalty, Joint-tenancy, coparcenary, and common 120

chapter 13: Of the title to Things real, in General 131

chapter 14: Of title by descent 134

chapter 15: Of title by Purchase, and first by escheat 164

chapter 16: Of title by Occupancy 175

chapter 17: Of title by Prescription 179

chapter 18: Of title by forfeiture 182

chapter 19: Of title by alienation 196

chapter 20: Of alienation by deed 202

chapter 21: Of alienation by matter of record 234

chapter 22: Of alienation by special custom 248

chapter 23: Of alienation by devise 253

chapter 24: Of Things Personal 260

chapter 25: Of Property in Things Personal 263

chapter 26: Of title to Things Personal by Occupancy 271

chapter 27: Of title by Prerogative, and forfeiture 277

chapter 28: Of title by custom 286

chapter 29: Of title by succession, marriage, and Judgment 292

chapter 30: Of title by Gift, Grant, and contract 298

chapter 31: Of title by Bankruptcy 318

chapter 32: Of title by testament, and administration 330

appendix: sample forms and instruments 353

Varia 369

Table of Cases 405

Table of Statutes 417

Index of Persons and Places 423

Editor’s Introduction to Book II



at the beginning of the Commentaries, when enumerating the reasons why ‘gentle-men of independent estates and fortune’ should study law, Blackstone observes that ‘their landed property, with its long and voluminous train of descents and con-veyances, settlements, entails, and incumbrances … forms the most intricate and most extensive object of legal knowlege’. Perhaps realizing that this characterization would not necessarily serve as an enticement, Blackstone quickly adds that his audience need not master all these intricacies, but might still profit from acquiring an ‘understanding of a few leading principles, relating to estates and conveyancing, [which] may form some check and guard upon a gentleman’s inferior agents, and preserve him at least from very gross and notorious imposition’ (i. 11). When delivering a full account of these matters, in Book ii of the Commentaries, Blackstone takes even more care to emphasize the attractions of the subject. he prefaces the discussion with a tribute to the imaginative force of the property right, in an often-quoted passage that might have been inspired by the essays of Joseph addison or samuel Johnson: ‘There is nothing’, Blackstone asserts, ‘which so generally strikes the imagination, and engages the affections of mankind, as the right of property; or that sole and despotic dominion which one man claims and exercises over the external things of the world, in total exclusion of the right of any other individual in the universe’ (ii. 1). These remarks about the alluring conception of a property-owner’s dictatorial control were, apparently, composed in a self-conscious effort to draw readers into the text: in the surviving notes of Blackstone’s lectures, taken by his students at Oxford over the previous decade, no such prefatory flourish appears in his introductory lecture on property, which otherwise covered almost exactly the same ground as chapter 1, including the treatment of natural law and the origins of property rights.1 Blackstone evidently added these sweeping observations for rhetorical effect, never anticipating that they would be pressed into service as a durable framing device under the label of ‘Blackstonian property’.2

The volume occasionally adopts a similar tone when reflecting on the reasons for

various modes of ownership or tenancy, but for the most part Blackstone seeks to engage the reader by other means—namely, through the same kind of thorough, methodical, enumerative exposition that characterizes the Commentaries as a whole, and in a few instances, through the use of graphs and tables. although he evidently devoted a considerable amount of thought to the best means of leading the reader into the subject, Blackstone succeeded in maintaining his readers’ interest by striving

1 On his students’ notes, see W. Prest, William Blackstone: Law and Letters in the Eighteenth Century (Oxford, 2008), 115–18; for a conspectus, see i. x–xi, note 12. Books cited were published in london unless otherwise noted.

2 The function of this device is helpfully examined in d. B. schorr, ‘how Blackstone Became a Blackstonian’, Theoretical Inquiries in Law , 10 (2009), 103–26; see also r. W. Gordon, ‘Paradoxical Property’, in J. Brewer and s. staves (eds.), Early modern Conceptions of Property (new York, 1995), 95–110; h. dagan, Property: Values and Institutions (Oxford, 2011), 37–42.

viii book ii

to make order out of an abstruse and complicated area—by elucidating it in a clear and perspicuous fashion, to borrow the language of the book’s reviewers. These features help to explain not only why this book was greeted so enthusiastically on its first appearance but also why it has remained in print for so long, even though its historical orientation and its emphasis on real property (or land law) significantly reduced the book’s utility for nineteenth-century lawyers. if Jacob tonson—the augustan book-seller who published some of Blackstone’s favourite writers—‘made the classics english and the english classics’,3 Blackstone similarly sought to recast a recondite body of work in a vernacular form while exalting its distinctively english features.

indeed, one may doubt that Blackstone’s treatment of property would do much to

help a gentleman protect himself from his agent’s chicanery. close attention to the discussion of how an estate for life merges with a greater estate, or when the patron of an advowson is deemed to have waived the right of presentation, might keep the reader from an inadvertent mistake. But in avoiding the ‘minute distinctions’ that would interest only ‘a lawyer by profession’ (i. 11), Blackstone largely avoids the details that would allow the land-owner to guard against imposition. The quest for clarity also resulted in a cursory treatment of trusts (and hence of equitable property rights)—a subject that he touches on in chapter 20 only to abandon the topic as replete with ‘refinements and niceties’ (ii. 226), despite its practical importance to land-owners.

The volume’s real function is to elucidate the forms of ownership and the rights

that flow from it (and the limits on those rights), through a historical account that reconciles english liberty and independence with the potentially servile implications of the system of tenure that allocates title to land on the condition that the owner agrees to render military service to the monarch. Blackstone engineers that recon-ciliation by explaining that this system was ‘not … imposed by [William] the conqueror, but nationally and freely adopted by the general assembly of the whole realm’, making the english institution a rational and voluntary measure chosen according to the ‘principle of self-security’, rather than an unwanted imposition resulting from military conquest (ii. 32). (This account, ‘adopted from sir martin Wright without examination’, as a reviewer of the ninth edition explained, incorrectly treats ‘the introduction of the knight’s fee and knight’s service’ as if they marked ‘the introduction of the feudal law into england’—a system that was already ‘familiar to our anglo saxon ancestors’.4) from this point of origin, Blackstone proceeds to show how a form of tenure whose services ‘were unavoidably uncertain in respect to the time of their performance’ was replaced by a form whose services ‘were liquidated and reduced to an absolute certainty’—one of a series of developments illustrating the law’s preference for certainty (ii. 52).

3 d. f. mckenzie, ‘The london Book trade in 1644’, in J. horden (ed.), Bibliographia: Lectures 1975–1988 (Oxford, 1992), 137.

4 review of the ninth edition, English Review, 2 (1783), 161, 163. On Blackstone’s debt to Wright, see also J. W. cairns and G. mcleod, ‘Thomas craig, sir martin Wright, and sir William Blackstone: The english discovery of feudalism’, Journal of Legal History, 21 (2000), 54–66; m. lobban, A History of the Philosophy of Law in the Common Law World, 1600–1900 (dordrecht, 2007), 103–4; r. Willman, ‘Blackstone and the “theoretical Perfection” of english law in the reign of charles ii’, Historical Journal, 26 (1983), 46.

editor’s introduction to book ii ix

The explanation of the feudal tenure system and its development occupies the first

part of Blackstone’s treatment of real property. having initially set out the volume’s division into real and personal property (real estate and chattels), Blackstone devotes chapters 2 and 3 to the physical and abstract components of real property (corporeal and incorporeal hereditaments); he next covers tenures (the rights and duties of landholders in a feudal system) in chapters 4 to 6. chapters 7 to 12 deal with estates (the duration of a landholder’s rights in the property, and the contingencies affecting the termination of those rights). in the last part of this section—chapters 13 to 23, taking up nearly half of the space allotted to real property in the volume—Blackstone works through the means by which land may be transferred, acquired, and lost.

turning to personal property, in chapter 24 Blackstone offers a short outline of

the ensuing discussion, but without any attempt to rationalize or justify this aspect of the subject in theoretical terms (except insofar as the volume’s first chapter seeks to account for the grounds of both real and personal property). Though he occasionally offers brief theoretical justifications along the way, with respect to certain aspects of personal property, this section as a whole proceeds mainly in a pragmatic vein. Blackstone uses the same basic structure as before, but does without the overarching narrative that governs the first section. This topic affords no analogue for the treatment of the feudal relation, and so Blackstone first deals briefly with modes or degrees of ownership in chattels, with a few comments on duration, in chapter 25, and then devotes the remainder of this section to modes of acquisition and alienation (chapters 26 to 32). among the signs that this subject lacks the gravitas of real property is the rather abrupt ending, with some remarks on the distribution of assets when a person dies intestate or leaves property for which the will has not provided. finally, in the appendix, Blackstone gives a few samples of legal documents concerning the transfer of property and the enforcement of claims that may follow as a result. Those samples are, perhaps, the closest that Blackstone comes to equipping the reader with a way to ‘check and guard’ the laxity or deception of an ‘inferior agent’.



Publication and editions of Book ii

Blackstone’s treatment of property follows his discussion of personal rights in Book i, according to the four-part scheme taken from Justinian’s Institutes (and found in more recent institutional texts by sir matthew hale and Thomas Wood);5 when Book ii first appeared, Books iii and iV (covering civil and criminal wrongs) still remained to be published. (to maintain the contrast between ‘rights’ and ‘wrongs’, Blackstone chose the somewhat awkward title ‘The rights of Things’, also found in hale— whereas some have thought jura rerum is more aptly rendered as ‘the law of things’).6

5 J. W. cairns, ‘Blackstone, an english institutist: legal literature and the rise of the nation state’, Oxford Journal of Legal Studies, 4 (1984), 318–60; s. f. c. milsom, ‘The nature of Blackstone’s achievement’, Oxford Journal of Legal Studies, 1 (1981), 7–8; m. hale, An Analysis of the Law (1713); t. Wood, An Institute of the Laws of England (1720).

6 cairns, ‘Blackstone’, 344.

x book ii

On 25 January 1766, in a letter to solicitor General charles Yorke, Blackstone described his second volume as ‘now in the press’ and sought Yorke’s suggestions on some of the material in chapter 15.7 in early april, Blackstone wrote to his friend sir John eardley Wilmot (then a Justice of king’s Bench), enclosing proof sheets from the part of the book that covers real property and promising shortly to send the part on personal property. Blackstone asked Yorke to review the sheets for any ‘errors’, so that they could be ‘correct[ed] … before the Book is published’.8 evidently, by this time the press had already typeset about three-quarters of the volume (up to chapter 23, which concludes the discussion of real property). Blackstone continued to make additions through the summer, as we can tell because in chapter 26 he refers to Baskett v Cambridge by citing a volume of Burrow’s Reports that appeared around the middle of July.9

The second volume of the Commentaries was first advertised for sale (at the price

of 18 shillings) on 3 October 1766 in the London Gazetteer and New Daily Advertiser and on the following day in the Whitehall Evening Post.10 (The book may have been available earlier: a letter to the St James’s Chronicle, dated ‘Oct. 3, 1766’ and printed in that newspaper on 14 October, quotes extensively from the volume, in a discussion of bankruptcy.)11 Printed by the clarendon Press, the volume was sold in london, and in Oxford by daniel Prince, who would later acquire the copyright in partnership with two leading london booksellers, William strahan and Thomas cadell.12 The second edition was published in april 1767, about five months after the second edition of Book i.13 The third edition accompanied the release of Book iii, in may 1768, and the fourth edition (the first to form part of the entire four-volume set), appeared in 1770. Prince and his two colleagues bought the copyright in 1772 for £2,000, and they published four more editions (1773–8) in Blackstone’s lifetime; the ninth, which appeared in 1783, three years after his death, included his ‘last corrections’. along the way, the book saw numerous unauthorized reprints by booksellers in dublin, where the copyright law did not reach.14 The law did, however, extend to scotland, and an edition there in 1787 sparked a lawsuit that turned on the complexities



7 The Letters of Sir William Blackstone, 1744–1780, ed. W. Prest (2006), 111–12. he asked for Yorke’s advice about the discussion of forfeiture because of corruption of blood (see ii. 171–4).

8 Letters, ed. Prest, 113.

9 ii. 276. The preface to Burrow’s second volume is dated 28 June 1766, and the book was first advertised two weeks later. General Evening Post (10 July 1766), 5, col. 3; St James’s Chronicle (12 July 1766), 2, col 4. tariq Baloch suggests that Blackstone was particularly interested in the Baskett judgment because of his decision to publish the Commentaries with the clarendon Press rather than with William strahan, the london bookseller who held the printing patent for law books: t. a. Baloch, ‘law Booksellers and Printers as agents of Unchange’, Cambridge Law Journal, 66 (2007), 408.

10 London Gazetteer and New Daily Advertiser (3 October 1766), 1, col. 1; Whitehall Evening Post (4 October 1766), 2, col. 3. a similar ad appeared in the Public Advertiser (6 October 1766), 3, col. 2.

11 ‘a lawyer’, ‘To the Printer of The s. J. chronicle’, St. James’s Chronicle (14 October 1766), 4, cols. 1–2.

12 Prest, Blackstone, 219 n. 41; Baloch, ‘law Booksellers’, 402–8. Prince had worked with Blackstone on matters related to the Oxford University Press since the late 1750s; Prest, Blackstone, 135; i. G. Philip, William Blackstone and the Reform of the Oxford University Press in the Eighteenth Century (Oxford, 1957), 3–5.

13 London Evening Post (23 april 1767), 2, col. 2.

14 for the dublin editions, see c. s. eller, The William Blackstone Collection in the Yale Law Library: A Bibliographical Catalogue (new haven ct, 1938), pp. xii–xiv; a. J. laeuchli, A Bibliographical Catalog of William Blackstone (Buffalo nY, 2015), 4–24.

editor’s introduction to book ii xi

of the renewal provisions then in effect: the court concluded that the english partners owned the rights to Book i, and to Blackstone’s revisions to the later volumes, leaving the scots free to reprint the first edition of Books ii–iV.15 By this time, the Commentaries had also suffered the fate, in common with a few other contemporary best-sellers, of being abridged by rev. John trusler.16

as may be seen from the changes recorded in the ‘Varia’ at the end of this volume,

Blackstone made numerous revisions, both minor and major, to new editions of Book ii. The minor changes include grammatical adjustments, excision of redun-dancies and ambiguities, and syntactical improvements to make the prose flow more smoothly, as well as corrections of typographical errors and the addition of cross-references to other volumes in the Commentaries. Of course, even the revision of a few words may have a significant effect; thus, for example, when the fifth edition alters a line about the clergy’s exemption from tithing on their own land, the change from ‘not tithable’ to ‘not generally tithable’, with the addition of three cases in the newly created note, introduces an important qualification (see ii. 19 and 370 〈19〉). Usually, however, the significance of Blackstone’s revisions corresponds to their extent—in terms of either size or frequency of change in successive editions. The more notable alterations show that he was continuing to reread the original sources that he had mined when first composing the volume, while also consulting new ones, such as francis hargrave’s edition of Coke on Littleton (1775–8) and William robertson’s The History of the Reign of the Emperor Charles V (1762–71).

if we consider the changes that Blackstone made to each successive edition, it

becomes apparent that he initially focused on polishing the language and amplifying the historical sources, and did not incorporate much current legal authority until the eighth and ninth editions. This overall pattern reflects the book’s emphasis on real property, an area that did not undergo much change during the 1760s and 1770s. The third and fourth editions include only a few substantial revisions; largely restricted to the discussion of real property, some of these alterations provide new information from older sources (such as finch, Glanvill, and the Year Books) and other changes supplement the existing footnotes with further support from those sources. in the fourth edition Blackstone also added a final touch to his story about the consensual means by which the system of feudal tenure was adopted in england, writing that it was ‘gradually established by the norman barons’ where they had unilateral control, and then ‘universally’ approved by the english lords, with respect to their own lands (ii. 31; 371 〈6〉). This language further underscores the distinction developed in the



15 scottish record Office, cs228/s/7/27/1 (strahan and others v anderson and robertson); ‘causes respecting

literary Property’, Edinburgh magazine, 6 (1787), 442–4; ‘affairs in scotland’, Scots magazine, 49 (1787), 464–5; W. mcdougall, ‘smugglers, reprinters, and hot Pursuers: The irish-scottish Book trade and copyright Prosecutions in the late eighteenth century’, in r. myers and m. harris (eds.), The Stationers’ Company and the Book Trade 1550–1990 (Winchester, 1997), 156–7.

16 trusler was ‘an enthusiastic and fearless compiler of others’ works’: e. major, ‘trusler, John (1735–1820)’,

ODNB. his volume, disingenuously styled A Concise View of the Common Law and Statute Law of England, Carefully Collected from the Statutes and Best Common Law Writers (1780), was based entirely on the Commentaries. xii book ii

first edition, which explains that ‘[t]he only difference between [the] change of tenures in france, and that in england, was, that the former was effected gradually, by the consent of private persons; the latter was done at once, all over england, by the common consent of the nation’ (ii. 33). The substantial changes to the fifth edition, more numerous than to the previous two, again abound in references to cases from the Year Books and the elizabethan age.17 The sixth edition saw few changes of any sort, and Blackstone’s sparse revisions to the seventh edition relate mainly to recent developments—in copyright law, insurance policies, and mortgage interest.18 The lack of new material at this point is hardly surprising, considering that strahan and his partners were now bringing out new editions on an annual basis.19 This pace increased markedly following the transfer of copyright in 1772, and one may guess that if it had been up to Blackstone, the pace would have been slower, and the alterations from one edition to the next would accordingly have been more significant.

another three years passed before the eighth edition appeared, and it was at that

point that Blackstone began to make thoroughgoing changes, returning again to Bracton and Fleta for historical points (ii. 175–6), adding cases of comparatively recent vintage (ii. 232, 235), and—particularly—rewriting and updating various topics within the discussion of personal property, such as those involving annuities and bills of exchange (ii. 312, 315). his revisions to chapter 24—the short introduction to the second part of the book, on personal property—all occur in the eighth edition, and they show that he had reexamined some of the sources on norman law, including an enlarged edition of charles du fresne’s Glossarium (1733–6) and the second edition of Guillaume le rouillé’s commentary on the Grand Coustumier (1539) (ii. 261). Blackstone’s ninth edition reflects the same tendency, even more intensively. it features new cases, including a few older ones, but also a handful from the 1770s (ii. 19, 255, 348), including Pyke v Dowling, a 1779 case in which Blackstone agreed with Justices nares and de Grey that when a tithing obligation has been set in financial terms, the proper value (and the acceptable variation between the actual value and the tithe) should be treated as a question of fact. Pyke is the most recent case to be cited in the Commentaries, and along with various decisions involving copyright law, it is among the few to appear both in the Commentaries and Blackstone’s Reports. The ninth edition also includes new reflections on matters such as fishing rights (piscaries), the estimation of the value of a knight’s fee, the treatment of land as collateral for a debt, and the order of succession in inheritance (ii. 25, 41, 108, 159–60), as well as numerous new statutory references, particularly in the discussion of bankruptcy (chapter 31). in short, the ninth edition exhibits a comprehensive



17 see e.g. ii. 19, 20, 25, 41.

18 see, respectively, ii. 275–6, 311, 313.

19 They paid Blackstone for the copyright over four years (1772–5) but apparently did not provide for a royalty. as Baloch has shown, the partners’ investment was paying off impressively: in the three consecutive years when the fifth, sixth, and seventh editions appeared (1773–5), the Commentaries sold 3,590 sets, and another 3,069 sets in the following two years (before the eighth edition appeared, in 1778): Baloch, ‘law Booksellers’, 405 n. 85 (citing Bl add. ms 48807). On the resulting profits, see also r. d. harlan, ‘William strahan: eighteenth century london Printer and Publisher’ (Phd thesis, University of michigan, 1960), 188–9.

editor’s introduction to book ii xiii

effort to reexamine the subject as a whole, and while it does not reflect significant changes in Blackstone’s thought, it shows that in revising the text he gave some attention to current legal issues, even as he also refined the discussion of historical matters.



reception of Book ii

contemporaries immediately greeted the work as a classic, often commending Blackstone in the same register that marked their praise for similarly encyclopaedic works, such as samuel Johnson’s Dictionary of the English Language (1755) and, later, adam smith’s The Wealth of Nations (1776). The Critical Review devoted eighteen pages to Book ii, in two consecutive issues (October and november 1766).20 The reviewer reminded readers of the journal’s ‘encomiums … upon the first volume’ and called the second one an ‘instructive’ book that made the law ‘intelligible to common sense’.21 The monthly Review, not to be outdone, also printed its appraisal in two parts (in november 1766 and January 1767).22 The barrister Owen ruffhead, who often reviewed law books for the journal, commended Blackstone for explaining ‘the most … difficult part of the law … with an accuracy and perspicuity not to be met with in any other writer on this subject’ and for offering ‘new and interesting’ views ‘on a subject which has been exhausted by some of the ablest pens’.23 ruffhead also referred to his own earlier review of Blackstone’s A Treatise on … Descents in Fee-Simple, a review that had applauded the author’s ‘learning, judgment, and perspicuity’, while nevertheless questioning Blackstone’s account of the grounds that prohibit inheritances from ascending lineally.24 in the same spirit, ruffhead’s review of Book ii took issue with some of Blackstone’s arguments, including the proposition that the right of inheritance is a creation of positive law, not natural law.25 The London magazine praised the volume as ‘useful [and] ingenious’, in a column that reprinted Blackstone’s comments on copyright law.26 edmund Burke, in a review for the Annual Register, praised Blackstone for elucidating a subject generally abhorred as ‘dry, disgusting, [and] heavy’, first by ‘tak[ing] the pains to remove … the obscurity’ and



20 Critical Review, 22 (1766), 241–9, 321–30. On the reviews of this volume, see also Prest, Blackstone,

219–21.

21 Critical Review , 22 (1766), 241, 321.

22 monthly Review, 35 (1766), 356–63; 36 (1767), 29–36.

23 monthly Review, 35 (1766), 356; 36 (1767), 29.

24 monthly Review , 36 (1767), 32; 22 (1760), 35–8. Blackstone suggested that this policy reflected the ‘magnanimity’

of a parent who refuses to profit from the death of a child, and added that the rule reflected the pragmatic needs of a feudal society that tied landholding to military services—services that an elderly parent would be incapable of providing. for ruffhead, the first explanation was ‘more subtle than solid’, and the second showed that the ‘barbarous policy’ was outdated: 36.

25 Ibid., 35 (1766), 360–3.

26 London magazine, 35 (1766), 544–5. The reprinted material comes from the last three paragraphs of chapter 26.

The same issue also included Blackstone’s volume in the monthly list of new books (p. 552), but it was not reviewed there.

xiv book ii

‘clear[ing] the law of england from the rubbish in which it was buried’, and then by translating it into a ‘clear, concise, and intelligible form’.27

Just as the volume was a critical success, it was also successful in displacing its

leading competitor, Coke on Littleton, which had become a staple text for law students after its first publication in 1628. summarizing what seems to have been a widely shared reaction, lord mansfield said that coke was ‘an uncouth and crabbed author’, whose gloss of littleton’s Tenures had ‘disgusted and disheartened many a Tyro’, whereas Blackstone could not ‘fail to please’ because he had spruced up the subject ‘in a modern dress’.28 frequently reprinted throughout the seventeenth century, Coke on Littleton went through another thirteen printings in england (some in the form of abridgments) between 1700 and 1751. it was not printed again, however, until the mid-1770s. The intervening years saw the publication of several successful books in this area. sir John dalrymple’s An Essay towards a General History of Feudal Property in Great Britain went through four editions in two years—1757 to 1759—but then was allowed to go out of print. Geoffrey Gilbert’s A Treatise of Tenures, first published in 1730, reached its third edition in 1757, but the fourth edition did not appear until 1796. sir martin Wright’s An Introduction to the Law of Tenures, first published in 1729, also went through several new printings around the middle of the century (in 1750, 1768, and 1769), but saw no further printings until 1792.

from the lapse in reprintings of coke and the surge of newer texts, one may

surmise that lawyers were looking for modern accounts of property law. Blackstone’s volume, which remained in print throughout this period, seems to have answered this need even more effectively than the other texts.29 to sure, Book ii owed part of its success to its place in a comprehensive four-volume scheme that was widely admired, and also to its use of material from the other writings on property that had preceded it: the charge that Blackstone uncritically adopted Wright’s views (noted earlier)30 reminds us that Blackstone’s facility in absorbing his potential rivals helps to explain how he was able to displace them. Yet as the reviews testified, the means by which he synthesized the various sources of property law differentiated his efforts from those of his precursors. he sought to give a more coherent account than coke, and a more comprehensive account than dalrymple or Wright (as we may also see from the many cross-references that connect topics in Book ii to other parts of the Commentaries). The next edition of Coke on Littleton, produced by francis hargrave, started to appear (in instalments) in 1775.31 in yet a further testament to Blackstone’s

27 Annual Register … for 1767 (1768), 287. Burke devoted some twenty-two pages to the book (286–307), but most of the review (289–307) consists of an excerpt from Blackstone’s first chapter—an account that Burke found so ‘judicious and elegant’ that he offered ‘no apology for inserting it at length’: Ibid., 289.

28 J. holiday, The Life of William Late Earl of mansfield (1797), 90. a Victorian commentator, undertaking the same comparison, praised Blackstone’s ‘method’ while likening coke’s text to ‘an overgrown treatise on the subjunctive mood’; G. P. macdonell, ‘Blackstone’, macmillan’s magazine, 51 (1885), 350, 351.

29 Peter stein observes similarly of Wood’s Institute that the book sold well between its first edition (1720) and its tenth (1772), but then ‘was superseded by Blackstone’s Commentaries’: P. stein, ‘continental influences on english legal Thought, 1600–1900’, in The Character and Influence of the Roman Civil Law (1988), 216.

30 note 4 above.

31 f. hargrave (ed.), The First Part of the Institutes of the Law of England (1775–8). On the publication of this edition, see h. J. Jackson, Romantic Readers: The Evidence of marginalia (new haven ct, 2005), 107–8.

editor’s introduction to book ii xv

achievement, hargrave’s notes featured numerous references to Book ii. although coke’s volume continued to be reprinted into the first third of the nineteenth century, editors took pains to emphasize that they were offering a ‘systematic arrangement’ or even a ‘readable edition’,32 registering the demand for lucid and orderly accounts that Blackstone had helped to foster.



Blackstone’s treatment of Property

Blackstone did not purport to offer a comprehensive survey of the various aspects of property law, but chose to focus on real property—the topic that occupies the first three-quarters of the volume. having observed in Book i that the discussion of property would emphasize only ‘a few leading principles’, he repeats this point again in Book ii. When concluding the treatment of real property, at the close of chapter 23, Blackstone remarks apologetically that he has doubtless ‘afforded … less amusement and pleasure’ than might have been expected, on the basis of the preceding volume— and this despite his care to ‘select such parts of [the subject], as were of the most general use, where the principles were the most simple, … and the practice the least embarrassed’ (ii. 259). The focus on real property serves several purposes that harmonize with Blackstone’s overall scheme. The subject was vitally important for the readers whom he conceived as his primary audience: eligibility to vote and to hold various public offices was determined by property qualifications, and the symbolic meanings associated with the ownership of property played a fundamental role in defining social identity. although the privileges that flowed from ownership of land did not necessitate any training in the distinctions between corporeal and incorporeal hereditaments, and among the various kinds of tenures, nevertheless the significance of real property, to those who enjoyed its benefits, lent a fascination to the subject’s legal aspects.

The emphasis on real property also facilitates the kind of conceptual overview that

Blackstone seeks to provide throughout the Commentaries. Greater attention to emerging forms of property would have forced him to replace the broad lines of his ‘general map’ (i. 30) with a more fragmented and kaleidoscopic picture. indeed, when apologizing for the unavoidable tedium of the subject, Blackstone points out that he has attempted to save the reader from an even worse ordeal by marking out a series of guideposts through a field typified by ‘vast alterations’ in doctrine and by ‘infinite determinations … heaped one upon another … without any order or method’ (ii. 259). again, by crafting a narrative about the origins and development of the arrange-ments governing the feudal tenure system and the treatment of estates in fee simple, Blackstone was able to tell a story about national identity that would have been impossible if he had given equal attention to negotiable instruments and other forms of intangible property. in positing a moment of ‘common consent’ as the origin of

32 t. coventry (ed.), A Readable Edition of Coke upon Littleton (1830); J. h. Thomas (ed.), A Systematic

Arrangement of Lord Coke’s First Institute (Philadelphia, 1836). xvi book ii

feudal property in england (even if the story depends on ‘a mere fiction’) (ii. 33), Blackstone endows Book ii with a conceptual structure akin to the one governing his treatment of criminal law in Book iV. The latter volume begins by explaining that ‘the king … is supposed by the law to be the person injured by every infraction of the public rights belonging to [the] community’ (iV. 1), so that any given crime amounts to a breach of the king’s peace; similarly, the property-owners of Book ii can be placed in concentric rings emanating from the king as the notional source of all rights over land—a pattern that comes into visibility through Blackstone’s treatment of feudal tenure and of the ensuing ‘modern english tenures’ in chapter 6. to be sure, the volume also carries an implicit narrative, in which property becomes more fluid as the centuries pass, and the different modes by which it may be transferred slowly proliferate—but while that story might have accommodated a more wide-ranging treatment of the various forms of property, it could not be told with the simplicity that Blackstone sought. moreover, that narrative may be easier to perceive in hindsight—following maine’s delineation of the shift from status to contract—than it would have been to Blackstone, writing nearly one hundred years earlier.33

Besides imposing a coherent framework that allows Blackstone to explore com-

plexities without losing the reader in a maze, the focus on real property also supplies an emblem of stability, thereby creating an apt metaphor for the durable and grounded logic that Blackstone associates with the common law. When he finds the law’s architecture exemplified by ‘an old gothic castle’ that has been modified to make its conditions ‘convenien[t]’ for ‘modern inhabitant[s]’, one might speculate that Blackstone chooses a renovated castle for this image because he is thinking of the movement from the complications of military tenure to a system based on ‘one general species of tenure’—while also describing the modernizing aims of the Commentaries as a whole.34

even though Blackstone lavishes so much attention on real property, his treatment

of personal property, in the volume’s latter chapters, is also significant. as Blackstone himself observes in chapter 24, when prefacing the turn to personal property, chattels were formerly ‘not esteemed of so high a nature’ as land and its incidents, with the result that ‘little … is to be found in Glanvil, Bracton, and fleta’ on the subject (ii. 260). he might have included more recent commentators on the list: given the topic of littleton’s Tenures, it is hardly surprising that chattels appear only sporadically and interstitially in Coke on Littleton (1628), and indeed the frequency of reference to that text diminishes considerably in the last quarter of Book ii. even Thomas Wood’s An Institute of the Laws of England (1720), a much more recent work with the same structure as Blackstone’s Commentaries, treats personal property as a minor con-sideration, meriting some fifty pages at the tail-end of a discussion that devotes three hundred and fifty pages to real property.35 Blackstone, while continuing to maintain

33 h. s. maine, Ancient Law (1861), 168–70.

34 iii. 178; ii. 52. The passage about the ‘old gothic castle’ was itself refurbished as Blackstone modified the text in later editions; see iii. 178 and 341 〈17〉, 〈18〉.

35 Wood, Institute, i. 210–556 (real property); ii. 537–83 (personal property). On the relation between Wood’s text and Blackstone’s, see cairns, ‘Blackstone’; r. B. robinson, ‘The two Institutes of Thomas Wood: a study in eighteenth century legal scholarship’, American Journal of Legal History, 35 (1991), 432–58; m. lobban, ‘Blackstone and the science of law’, Historical Journal, 30 (1987), 320–2.

editor’s introduction to book ii xvii

this traditional emphasis, devotes about a quarter of the book to personal property (136 of the volume’s 520 pages) and mentions a number of topics that were becoming increasingly important, such as bailments, corporate ownership, copyrights, bonds, insurance, negotiable instruments, and bankruptcy. as noted above, Blackstone did not attempt to organize his treatment of these topics around a general theme, such as the growing need for liquidity in a commercial society. nevertheless, the greater proportion of space devoted to these issues in the Commentaries, by contrast with Wood’s Institute, testifies to this need—as does the appearance, over the following decades, of stand-alone treatises on each of these subjects.

Blackstone’s treatment of copyright law gives some indication of how complicated

his task would have been, if he had expanded the volume’s treatment of the newer forms of property. The four pages devoted to copyright make up the most intensively reworked section in the entire volume. This section is the only one that includes numerous citations to unreported cases—cases that Blackstone was aware of because of his litigation experience in this area. The law changed significantly as Blackstone was editing the Commentaries, and he was actively involved in this process, as a lawyer and then as a judge. in 1762, he represented the plaintiff bookseller (Jacob tonson iii) in Tonson v Collins, a case that many expected would finally resolve the question of whether copyright lasted only for the twenty-eight years provided by the statute of anne, or whether it originated at common law and lasted in perpetuity, as some in the bookselling industry had long insisted.36 indeed, Blackstone was brought in precisely because the parties recognized the importance of this dispute. The case had been argued the previous year, but lord mansfield found the arguments long on theory and short on precedent, and he ordered that the case ‘stand over for farther argument’.37 The plaintiffs, promoting the booksellers’ view, retained Blackstone for the re-argument, and he offered a well-researched, if not entirely persuasive, account of perpetual copyright based on natural law, roman law, guild convention, and chancery precedent.38 despite the vigorous efforts of counsel on both sides, mansfield postponed the decision again, ordering ‘further argument, before all the twelve Judges’.39 soon afterwards, however, the judges concluded that the action was collusive, with a ‘nominal defendant set up’ by the plaintiffs, in the hope of securing an unassailable authority for their position.40 Unwilling to risk the possibility, under

36 for a summary of the legal concerns motivating these two alternative positions, see s. stern, ‘from author’s

right to Property right’, University of Toronto Law Journal, 63 (2012), 39–47, 72.

37 tonson v collins (1761), 1 Black. W. 301, 311. Blackstone’s Reports are our only source for the arguments in

this case and its successor, later the same year—another indication of his interest in the subject.

38 tonson v collins (1761), 1 Black. W. 321, 321–33 (argument in chief), 340–4 (argument in reply); see also Letters,

ed. Prest, 82–3 (Blackstone to charles Yorke, solicitor-General, 21 June 1761, requesting ‘Precedents in chancery, particularly the most early ones, & those wherein perpetual injunctions have either been granted or denied’).

39 tonson v collins, 1 Black. W. 345.

40 millar v taylor (1769), 4 Burr. 2303 (Willes J.). lord mansfield explained that the judges ‘suspected collusion’

and ‘were afterwards clearly informed’ that they were correct: 4 Burr. 2400. many have wondered who informed the judges; their source remains unclear, but most industry members would have been familiar with the general tenor of the london booksellers’ plans. lord dreghorn (in a book published by the defendant in Millar v Taylor) traced the collusive lawsuit back to a scheme, hatched in 1758, to ‘procur[e] a judgement, that might be quoted as a Precedent by a collusive or mock-trial’; dreghorn added that because of collins’s relations with the london booksellers, ‘it was very much [in] his interest to lose the cause’. J. maclaurin, lord dreghorn, Considerations on xviii book ii

these circumstances, of a favourable result for the bookselling industry, the judges dismissed the action.

Thus the law still remained unsettled when Book ii first appeared. That situation

changed a few years later, after Blackstone again pressed the argument for perpetual copyright, when acting as the plaintiffs’ counsel in millar v Taylor.41 like Tonson, millar v Taylor was argued twice (in 1767 and 1768), and the plaintiffs retained Blackstone on the second try. This time, he won (over a dissent by Justice Joseph Yates, who had acted as the opposing counsel in Tonson v Collins). Blackstone’s revisions to the fourth, fifth, and sixth editions of the Commentaries (1770–74) duly reflected this new state of affairs, only to be followed by a further set of changes to the seventh edition (1775), which appeared after the house of lords, in Donaldson v Becket, overruled millar, opting for a limited term of protection. Blackstone, by that time a justice of king’s Bench, was ill on the day when the judgments in Donaldson were rendered. he sent in a short statement affirming that copyright originated at common law and lasted in perpetuity, but instead of elaborating his reasons, simply responded ‘in general terms’ by answering yes or no to each question.42 in a stroke worthy of Borges or escher, however, some of the contemporary reports opted instead to give his opinion by reproducing two paragraphs on the subject from the Commentaries.43

The changes that Blackstone records relate mainly to the question of copyright’s

duration. notably, while the pending litigation also provoked debates about the essence of literary property (its basis and extension to forms of copying beyond verbatim reprints), Blackstone’s treatment of that issue changed only slightly, when he added some comments in the seventh edition, striving to give a fair account of the arguments against a perpetual copyright and explaining how that position turned on a more limited view of the author’s rights in a printed text (as against a manuscript). although Blackstone had argued that copyright lasted in perpetuity, and is often associated with the view that copyright protection went far beyond the limits set out in the statute of anne, his explanation of its contours did not change as he revised the text, and he defines infringement entirely in terms of unauthorized reprinting. some have read his statement that no one may ‘vary the disposition’ of a work to mean that others may not engage in any form of partial copying (by abridgment, paraphrase, or imitation, for example), on the ground that these efforts would vary the author’s disposition of the words. as may be seen from the earlier part of the same paragraph, however, Blackstone is not concerned with alteration but with



the Nature and Origin of Literary Property (Berwick, 1768), 27. dreghorn was off by a year: in 1759 tonson and his colleagues began an aggressive legal campaign and also undertook various other measures to enforce their views about perpetual copyright: G. Walters, ‘The Booksellers in 1759 and 1774: The Battle for literary Property’, The Library (5th ser.), 29 (1974), 290–3, 298–302.

41 millar v taylor (1769). Burrow does not reproduce the arguments of counsel at bar, but instead gives a very brief summation (4 Burr. 2304).

42 middlesex Journal and Evening Advertiser (15 february 1774), 2, col. 3.

43 see e.g. The Cases of the Appellants and Respondents in the Cause of Literary Property (1774), 36–8.

editor’s introduction to book ii xix

disposing of the text in some other way—such as publishing it in a different format. he writes that without the author’s consent, no one else may ‘publish or make profit of the copies’, because the author of an ‘original’ work (that is, a work not copied entirely from another), has the right ‘to dispose of that identical work as he pleases’ (ii. 275). Perhaps Blackstone viewed the (temporary) judgment in favour of perpetual copyright, in 1769, as a justification for a broader conception of the object of copyright as well—a conception that went beyond the anti-piracy measures he described—but if so, he did not change the text to reflect that view. changes of that kind would probably have introduced new complexities into the discussion, undermining his aims for the volume as a whole. his revisions to this chapter illustrate the delicate balancing act involved in keeping the discussion current, and they show by implication how difficult it would have been to retain a coherent focus while devoting more attention to the various forms of intangible property.



Blackstone’s sources

One of the distinctive features of Blackstone’s treatment of property law involves the wide variety of sources he draws on. The discussion makes frequent reference to littleton’s Tenures (c. 1460; printed c. 1481) and coke’s Tristram Shandy-esque commentary on it, The First Part of the Institutes of the Laws of England (1628), and refers less often to Wright’s An Introduction to the Law of Tenures (1729) and dalrymple’s An Essay towards a General History of Feudal Property (1757)—although Book ii reflects the influence of both of these writers.44 Blackstone also refers to numerous case reports and, occasionally, to unreported cases, as well as such standard sources as hale’s The History of the Common Law (1713) and the abridgments by sir anthony fitzherbert (1514–17), sir robert Brooke (1573), henry rolle (1668), matthew Bacon (1736–66), and charles Viner (1742–53). in elaborating certain doctrinal points, Blackstone includes a range of specialized titles that he cites only once or twice, such as Thomas Wentworth’s The Office and Duty of Executors (1641), robert callis’s The … Reading … upon the Statute … of Sewers (1647), William somner’s A Treatise of Gavelkind (1659), nathaniel Pigott’s A Treatise of Common Recoveries (1739), and robert richardson’s The Law of Testaments and Last Wills (1744).

Blackstone also cites a number of earlier commentators on english law, reflecting

a historical orientation that pervades the Commentaries, and that is especially pro-nounced in Book ii. The range of legal texts includes andrew horn’s fourteenth-century mirror of Justices (printed in 1646), sir John fortescue’s fifteenth-century De Laudibus Legum Angliae (printed in 1543?), christopher st German’s Doctor and Student (1528–31), sir Thomas smith’s De Republica Anglorum (1583), and several of William lambarde’s books: A Perambulation of Kent (1576), Eirenarcha (1581), and Archeion (written c. 1579–96; printed 1635). in addition, Blackstone refers to customs,



44 cairns and mcleod, ‘english discovery of feudalism’, 58–9. xx book ii

early statutes, and legally significant events as cited or discussed in the works of english historians such as roger of howden, sir William temple, John strype, John selden, david Wilkins, and Thomas carte. Blackstone’s interest in english history also, apparently, led him to search through the all souls college archives: he refers to the court rolls of the manor of edgware as offering an english parallel to the scottish custom by which the lord of a manor hired a piper to entertain the labouring copy holders (although the specific court roll that Blackstone refers to has not been identified).45

for comparative purposes—and often apparently for the sheer pleasure of finding

analogies and contrasts—Blackstone refers to John skene on socage in scottish law, Benedict carpzov and antonius matthaeus on German game law, Jean domat and montesquieu on succession in french law, and Jean-Baptiste du halde on mongolian inheritance law (although, as noted below, this reference was apparently borrowed from montesquieu). Blackstone’s discussion of maritime law leads him to Gerard malynes’s The Ancient Law-merchant (1622), charles molloy’s De Jure maritimo et Navali (1676), francesco rocco’s De Navibus et Naulo (1655), and cornelius van Bynkershoek’s writings on public and private law (Quaestionum Juris Publici, 1737; Quaestionum Juris Privati, 1744). The numerous references to civil law are largely oriented around the texts of Justinian (the Code, Digest, and Novellae), with occasional mention of the commentators on these texts. There is a single reference to John taylor’s Elements of the Civil Law (1755), though some have suggested that Blackstone used it for many of his references to roman law.46 Blackstone only rarely refers to natural law because, as he notes at the outset, nearly all questions involving property fall within the positive law (or ‘municipal law’) of any given jurisdiction (see e.g. ii. 8). nevertheless, in the course of the discussion he cites a variety of natural-law theorists, including hugo Grotius, samuel von Pufendorf, and Jean Barbeyrac. The book also makes a few references to canon law, citing the Decretals (decretales epistolae) of Pope Gregory ix and commentaries and compilations by innocent iV and Gratian, as well as works related to canon law in england such as William lyndwood’s Provinciale (written in the early fifteenth century and published in 1496), and edmund Gibson’s Codex Juris Ecclesiastici Anglicani, or The Statutes, Constitutions, Canons, Rubricks, and Articles, of the Church of England (1713; 2nd edn Oxford, 1761).

in a few instances, Blackstone’s citations were evidently borrowed from a source

he does not acknowledge. for example, when discussing ‘the practice of the tartars’ concerning inheritance by the youngest son, Blackstone attributes the point to ‘father duhalde’ (without further specification), but the details cannot be found in du halde’s Description … de l’Empire de la Chine et de la Tartarie Chinoise (1735). Blackstone’s language, however, closely tracks a passage in the english translation of



45 ii. 64, note g. Blackstone became familiar with the college’s edgware manor in his role as ‘steward of the manors’ (or estates steward); see Prest, Blackstone, 82–3.

46 G. Jones, The Sovereignty of the Law: Selections from Blackstone’s Commentaries (1973), p. xxxvi; a. Watson, Roman Law and Comparative Law (athens Ga, 1991), 300 n. 23.

editor’s introduction to book ii xxi

montesquieu’s L’Esprit des Lois, which gives du halde as the source (ii. 55 and n.). (among montesquieu’s citations to du halde, this is the only one without a page reference.) similarly, in chapter 7, Blackstone erroneously gives Justinian’s Digest as the source of a latin tag that he seems to have found in Thomas Wood’s New Institute (the only source that includes the tag in the same form and also supplies the same Digest citation) (ii. 71, note q). again, in chapter 20, Blackstone refers to ingulf’s Chronicle but gives the text as it appears in a work by charles morton, which differs significantly from the available editions of ingulf (ii. 209, note f). These cases are unusual because, in each instance, we can identify the source that Blackstone must have relied on, and it differs from the source he cites. This pattern suggests that Blackstone may also have borrowed some of his other citations, leaving no trace of his immediate source because it furnished a reference that correctly matched the original.

as with the other volumes of the Commentaries, Book ii also draws on a wide

variety of non-legal sources. This technique (already developed in the lecture hall, as his students’ notes reveal) aligns the work with other enlightenment projects that achieved their authority by collecting material from a variety of different fields and organizing the details systematically to provide a comprehensive and orderly over-view. Blackstone mentions numerous works of geography and natural history. The modern Universal History, a vast compilation that reprinted travellers’ accounts from all over the globe, furnishes him with references concerning a politically charged inheritance dispute in Germany, copyhold-like services in the african kingdom of Whidah (or Whidaw, now Benin), Genghis khan’s prohibitions on game hunting, and the use of paper credit in the mongol empire. Blackstone also shows a marked interest in the scandinavian countries as providing analogies—and potentially sources—for aspects of english feudalism: to that end, he refers to robert molesworth’s An Account of Denmark (1694), erich Pontoppidan’s The Natural History of Norway (1755), and Johan stiernhöök’s treatment of swedish law, De Jure Sueonum et Gothorum Vetusto (1672). The range of classical reference includes aristotle, caesar, cicero, florus, Plutarch, and tacitus. again, as in the other volumes, Blackstone’s literary references are to poetry, and occasionally drama, but hardly ever fiction. he finds legal principles, and illustrations of legal doctrines, in homer, euripides, horace, Juvenal, martial, and terence—and in alexander Pope and John arbuthnot among the modern writers. extending the earlier observation about Blackstone’s efforts to elevate the dignity and accessibility of his subject, we may say that he sought to make english law classic by articulating it through the institutional structure that governs the Commentaries as a whole, and by connecting it with ancient sources throughout the discussion.



The influence of Book ii

The frequency of reference to Book ii, in contemporaneous debates, testifies to the volume’s significance. Various parts of the text were cited on either side of the debates xxii book ii

over slavery,47 the american colonists’ claims against taxation,48 and perpetual copy-right,49 to name only a few of the then-current controversies raising questions about property. These references do not suggest that any particular commentator was heavily influenced by Blackstone, but rather that the participants generally considered him such an important authority that they felt obliged to find some way of drawing on him for support. The contradictory interpretations were possible because Blackstone some-times contradicts himself, most notably in a passage from the first volume that con-temporaries often quoted selectively, as it suited their needs: soon after asserting that the law’s regard for private property is so great as to forbid ‘the least violation of it; no, not even for the general good of the whole community’, Blackstone acknowledges that the parliament ‘frequently does interpose, and compel the individual to acquiesce, … oblig[ing] the owner to alienate his possessions for a reasonable price’ (i. 94).

as noted earlier, one of the lasting effects of Blackstone’s discussion is related to

his paean to the imaginative effect and extent of the property right. although Blackstone may have aimed simply to describe a common perception about property rather than its actual nature,50 his comments were often reprinted verbatim, sometimes along with the entirety of the first chapter (leaving his opening remarks to be interpreted as the reader liked), and sometimes with the express purpose of supplying a definition of property. in a newspaper article published in 1792, for example, James madison quoted the line about exclusive dominion as a well-accepted definition of property, and did not bother to mention the source, perhaps assuming that it was too familiar to need attribution.51 Blackstone’s first chapter figured prominently in charles Barton’s Elements of Conveyancing (1802), John finlay’s A Treatise on the Law of Landlord and Tenant in Ireland (1825), and charles Waterman’s A Compendium of the Law … of Real Estate (1851), and was also quoted at length in John crisp’s The Conveyancer’s Guide (1832)—seemingly designed as a mnemonic aid for law students by reciting legal principles in poetic form—and John Phelps’s The Legal Classic (1835), a textbook for ‘young americans’.52 Blackstone’s opening passage

47 for the abolitionist view, see G. sharp, A Representation of the Injustice and Dangerous Tendency of Tolerating Slavery (1769), 132, 136–8, 144; for defences of colonial slavery, see s. estwick, Considerations on the Negroe Cause (1773), 65–7; [e. long], Candid Reflections upon the Judgement Lately Awarded by the Court of King’s Bench (1772), 45. On sharp, see also Prest, Blackstone, 253.

48 On the colonists’ side, see anon., An Argument in Defence of the Exclusive Right Claimed by the Colonies to Tax Themselves (1774), 23–5; against the colonists, see J. martin, Familiar Dialogues between Americus and Britannicus (1776), 67.

49 in favour of a perpetual right, see the arguments of edmund Burke, in ‘summary of friday’s Proceedings in the house of commons’, London Chronicle (24 march 1774), 4, col. 2; against a perpetual right, see [a. donaldson], A Letter from a Gentleman in Edinburgh, to His Friend in London, Concerning Literary Property (n.p., 1769), 13, 15; [anon.], ‘Thoughts on literary Property’, Public Advertiser (25 february 1774), 2, cols. 1–2.

50 schorr, ‘how Blackstone became a Blackstonian’; m. meehan, ‘authorship and imagination in Blackstone’s Commentaries on the Laws of England ’, Eighteenth-Century Life, 16 (1992), 116; s. stern, ‘Blackstone’s legal actors: The Passions of a rational Jurist’, in n. Johnson (ed.), Impassioned Jurisprudence: Law, Literature, and Emotion, 1760–1848 (lewisburg Pa, 2015), 1–19.

51 [J. madison], ‘Property’, National Gazette (29 march 1792), 174–5, reprinted in r. a. rutland et al. (eds.), The Papers of James madison (chicago, 1962–91), xiv. 266.

52 c. Barton, Elements of Conveyancing: To Which Are Prefixed an Essay on the Rise, Progress, and Present State of That Science (1802), i. pp. lxxi–ccxii; J. finlay, A Treatise on the Law of Landlord and Tenant in Ireland (dublin, 1825), 1–3; J. h. dart, A Compendium of the Law and Practice of Vendors and Purchasers of Real Estate, ed. and

editor’s introduction to book ii xxiii

quickly found its way into a range of non-legal texts, including an agricultural manual and the Encyclopedia Britannica.53 in 1772—less than a decade after the volume’s first appearance—seven pages from the opening chapter (starting with the paragraph on property and imagination) were culled for The Beauties of English Prose, an example of a new kind of anthology, in which selections of fine writing were presented under the name of ‘beauties’.54 a dozen years later, the essayist and critic Vicesimus knox, in his popular anthology, Elegant Extracts: Or Useful and Entertaining Passages in Prose, reproduced the same pages.55

By acting so quickly to repackage Blackstone’s words as an example of belles lettres,

these editors may have helped to give this passage the canonical status it has enjoyed for so long. more generally, the anthologists’ treatment of Blackstone as a literary writer is consistent with the many admiring observations that his prose has elicited. even Thomas Jefferson, who objected to Blackstone’s ‘honeyed mansfieldism’ and approvingly cited the epithet ‘Blackstone lawyer’ as a term of scorn, nevertheless described the Commentaries as ‘lucid in arrangement, … correct in it’s matter, [and] classical in style’—indeed, worthy to be ‘place[d] by the side of the Justinian institutes’.56 as we have seen, the first reviewers of Book ii included Blackstone’s style among the reasons for their praise, resorting over and over again to the same terms: ‘correct’, ‘elegant’, and above all ‘perspicuous’. The volume was praised for ‘perspicuity’ by a wide array of writers, both lay and professional.57 david Williams’s Lectures on

rev. by t. W. Waterman (new York, 1851), p. viii; J. crisp, The Conveyancer’s Guide, or, The Law Student’s Recreation: A Poem, 3rd edn. (1832), 83; J. Phelps, The Legal Classic, or, Young American’s First Book of Rights and Duties (amherst ma, 1835). The prefatory essay mentioned in the subtitle of Barton’s book is nearly 150 pages, and is simply an abridgment of Blackstone’s second volume, starting with the entirety of the first chapter. crisp’s book was first published in 1821; the third edition was the first to include the material from Blackstone. as this list shows, both english and american texts drew on Blackstone’s discussion.

53 J. macPhail, A Treatise on the Culture of the Cucumber … to Which Are Added, Hints and Observations on the

Improvement of Agriculture (1794), 400–10 (macPhail slightly revises Blackstone’s prose without attribution); Encyclopedia Britannica, 3rd edn. (edinburgh, 1797), xv. 590–4.

54 The Beauties of English Prose (1772), iii. 211–20 (the excerpt reproduces pp. 2–9 of the first edition of vol. 2).

On this genre, see B. Benedict, ‘The “Beauties” of literature, 1750–1820: tasteful Prose and fine rhyme for Private consumption’, 1650–1850: Ideas, Aesthetics, and Inquiries in the Early modern Era, 1 (1994), 317–46.

55 V. knox, Elegant Extracts: Or Useful and Entertaining Passages in Prose, new edn. (1785), 730–2. knox soon

added two selections, including eight pages on copyhold tenures, from chapter 8, and eight pages on the history of the feudal system, from chapter 4 (respectively pp. 90–8, and 45–52, in the 1st edn.; see Elegant Extracts (1790), 765–8, 770–3). knox also praised Blackstone in his treatise Liberal Education (1781), 166 n. That knox found the second volume of the Commentaries to be such a fruitful source of material may be explained, in part, by his aim of using ‘polite literature’ to improve the minds of the ‘mercantile classes’, as he explained in the preface to the companion volume, Elegant Extracts … of Poetry (1801), p. iv. On knox’s anthology, see l. Price, The Anthology and the Rise of the Novel (cambridge, 2003), 70–6.

56 letter to Judge John tyler, 17 June 1812, in J. Jefferson looney (ed.), The Papers of Thomas Jefferson: Retirement

Series (Princeton, 2004–), v. 136; letter to dr Thomas cooper, 16 January 1814, ibid., vii. 126.

57 r. Bradley, An Enquiry into the Nature of Property and Estates as Defined by the English Law. In Which Are

Considered, the Opinions of mr. Justice Blackstone (1779), 3; r. Wooddeson, A Systematical View of the Laws of England (1792–3), ii. 283; a. Browne, A Compendious View of the Civil Law (1798), i. 200; holiday, Life of … mansfield, 90; [anon.], The Spectre (1789), ii. 70. for more equivocal novelistic treatments, see t. holcroft, The Adventures of Hugh Trevor (1794–7), iv. 187–92; [anon.], Harriet: Or, the Innocent Adultress, new edn. (1779), 33–4. a notable exception to the chorus of praise for Blackstone’s style is the poet and abolitionist Percival stockdale, who considered lawyers’ prose generally unappealing: ‘[t]heir style is generally vitiated, and deformed with the ungraceful idiom with which they are most conversant; it has infected the diction even of the admired Blackstone’: memoirs of … Percival Stockdale (1809), i. 51. xxiv book ii

Education (1789) offers an especially striking example, recounting a dialogue between a schoolmaster and his pupils about the intricacies of different forms of tenure—all rendered ‘perfectly intelligible’ to the students because Blackstone’s account is ‘written with perspicuity’.58

This term, so frequently conjoined with Blackstone’s name, carried a significance

for his contemporaries that modern readers may not recognize. in a discussion of eighteenth-century prose, sylvia adamson writes that rhetoricians emphasized simplicity, ease, and clarity as the essential features of effective communication: ‘The coverall term for these goals—and we meet it everywhere in commentators of the time—is perspicuity.’59 she adds that ‘for neo-classical writers’, this term ‘permeates the whole aesthetics of literary style’; handbooks on good writing ‘repeatedly couple[d] the concept of perspicuity with ideas of universality and permanence’.60

The significance of both ideas for Blackstone’s overall project is readily apparent,

and they were especially important for Book ii, concerned with both the lasting nature of tenure in land and the parallels between english and foreign doctrines and customs involving real property. specifying the syntactic elements that accompanied the emphasis on perspicuity, adamson observes that ‘[t]here was a general preference for maintaining [a subject-verb-object] sequence and for placing adjective before noun, verb before adverb and main clause before subordinate adverbial clause.’61 a look at any page of the Commentaries would illustrate this preference, which Blackstone also displays at the broader level. he usually enumerates the rule and then gives the reason, and analogously, he describes the typical practice before setting out any exceptions—the reason and exception serving the same structural role, in the analysis, that the subordinate clause does in a sentence. doubtless, his book’s origin as a series of lectures helps to explain his stylistic habits, and indeed adamson points out that rhetoricians endorsed this kind of facility because they ‘recognize[d] that word order often performs the function of distributing the writer’s emphases’, ensuring that the text will track the rhythms of a spoken sentence.62 The qualities that appealed to Blackstone’s con temporaries were the ones that samuel Johnson commended when he wrote that addison’s prose, ‘familiar but not coarse, and elegant but not ostentatious’, furnished an ideal model for the aspiring writer to emulate.63 Blackstone had, evidently, followed that advice, cultivating a style that his readers would have encountered in the periodical essay, but not in the legal realm, where its use was a welcome innovation. his writing thus provides an english parallel to the ‘now-forgotten configuration of law and letters’ that robert ferguson has



58 d. Williams, Lectures on Education (1789), iii. 78, 82.

59 s. adamson, ‘literary language’, in r. lass (ed.), The Cambridge History of the English Language (cambridge, 1992), ii. 600. Thanks to carol Percy for bringing this chapter to my attention.

60 Ibid.

61 Ibid. 602.

62 Ibid. 604.

63 J. Boswell, The Life of Samuel Johnson, LL.D. (1791), ii. 86, quoted adamson, ‘literary language’, 615. addison was one of Blackstone’s favourite writers; see Prest, Blackstone, 288–9.

editor’s introduction to book ii xxv

examined as an aspect of american culture between the last quarter of the eighteenth century and the first half of the nineteenth century.64

The virtues of this mode of explanation may seem so obvious as to go without saying,

and so familiar as to make the method itself utterly banal. it would be an exaggeration to say that in using these techniques, Blackstone was attempting something altogether unprecedented in legal prose, but in pursuing this approach consistently over the breadth of the Commentaries, he created an influential model, when more transient efforts (in oral advocacy, for example) had failed. Before the appearance of the Commentaries, the salient features associated with legal writing and argumentation (and justifying either praise or condemnation) were intricacy and subtlety, not clarity or ease of comprehension. as a. W. B. simpson has observed, a host of new treatises began to appear in the decades after Blackstone’s Commentaries;65 simpson suggests that the broad scope of the Commentaries, and Blackstone’s avoidance of the doctrinal minutiae that a practising lawyer would need, pointed the way for these more particularized contributions, but another aspect of Blackstone’s influence may be discerned in the explanatory framework that prevails in these texts: the authors may not have adopted Blackstone’s writing style, but they tended to follow him in their arrangement of rules and supporting reasons, doctrines and exceptions, primary and secondary considerations. his ‘perspicuous’ mode of elab oration, even more than the ‘correct’ cadences of his prose, became so routine that the method is almost unnoticeable, barely even distinctive as a method—until one returns to the legal literature that preceded the Commentaries.

Blackstone’s use of visual aids, noted briefly above, serves the same purposes. Book

ii includes a table of consanguinity, a table of descents, and tables showing lineal and collateral degrees of relations—not a copious offering, but enough to provoke an enthusiastic response. When they first appeared, in Blackstone’s Descents in Fee Simple, the Universal Review affirmed that while it was ‘scarce possible to give greater clearness or conciseness to any subject than dr. Blackstone hath given to this’, he had gone even further to assist the reader’s ‘perfect comprehension’ by ‘adding tables, one of consanguinity and another of descent, whereby every thing relative thereto is become the object of sight, and scarce needs the least exertion of the intellect to be comprehended’. translating the tables’ visual qualities into a metaphor for the treatise as a whole (and anticipating Blackstone’s own conception of the Commentaries as a map) the reviewer added that the book resembled ‘a light-house’ that ‘not only tells you where you are but what to avoid’, yielding ‘a clear map of those rights which englishmen possess’. The general effect was a presentation that served—once again—‘to treat of the matter with perspicuity’.66



64 r. ferguson, Law and Letters in American Culture (cambridge, 1984), 5; see also his comments on Blackstone

(31, 92); Wilfrid Prest also points to this connection by giving his biography the subtitle Law and Letters in the Eighteenth Century.

65 a. W. B. simpson, ‘The rise and fall of the legal treatise’, University of Chicago Law Review, 48 (1981), 632;

see also milsom, ‘The nature of Blackstone’s achievement’, 9–10.

66 review of A Treatise on the Law of Descents in Fee-Simple, Universal Review, 1 (1760), 23–7 (pp. 25, 26, 23).

milsom, in assessing Blackstone’s contributions, similarly notes that ‘[b]y using visual aids, Blackstone managed to compress into a single chapter the mass of detailed rules which would in every possible case identify who a man’s heir was’: ‘The nature of Blackstone’s achievement’, 5.

xxvi book ii

These observations return us to Blackstone’s account of what Book ii offers: a

guide to the complexities of property law, pitched at a level that avoids the technical detail required by a practising lawyer, but sufficient to provide a thorough overview for readers who wish to understand the various dimensions of the subject, its history, and the logic governing its arrangements. Viewed in relation to this aim, Blackstone’s apology for the tedium of the subject also expresses a sense of pride. confronted with a morass of judgments ‘which have been heaped one upon another for a course of seven centuries, without any order or method’, producing a ‘perplexed and intricate’ field of law, Blackstone strives to render them ‘intelligible’ through a methodical and systematic explanation (ii. 259). his historical references, and his seeking out of analogies in far-flung jurisdictions, similarly convey an enthusiasm for the task of creating order and clarity. Given the pleasure he evidently took in exploring the intricacies of real property and discerning their proper mode of arrangement, it seems that he regarded this area of law as offering a paradigmatic illustration of the qualities that go into thinking like a lawyer—and that he hoped his discussion, by displaying those traits, would also encourage his readers to acquire them.

simon stern





Acknowledgements




Thanks to the many people who shared their knowledge, and offered suggestions, throughout this project. my co-editors, Wilf Prest, tom Gallanis, david lemmings, and ruth Paley, were wonderful resources on innumerable textual, historical, and logistical questions that arose in the course of research. John Baker, Will edwards, Joshua Getzler, richard helmholz, michael lobban, and ian Williams all offered valuable advice about various aspects of the text and the introduction. Gaius stern and Paul Brand gave expert advice about the translations, and saved me from many mistakes. dmitri nikulin offered invaluable help with complicated textual matters. my colleagues Jeannine delombard, daniel lee, fred Unwalla, and stephen Waddams have been tireless in offering help and encouragement; special thanks to markus dubber, who was a sounding board for many ideas relating to the notes and introduction. librarians sooin kim and sufei xu at the University of toronto and mary Person at harvard helped to identify and locate a wide array of primary sources. nancy Bueler and aleatha cox provided exceptional administrative assistance. Thanks also to my teachers, robert Gordon, John langbein, and david lieberman, and to my energetic research assistants: spencer Bass, maya Bielinski, Joseph Bricker, laura cardiff, Gabriel edelson, Joshua freedman, Julia Grandison, eric leinveer, Justin mclarty, William mcmillan, George Pakozdi, katya Popoff, and daanish samadmoten. finally, thanks to the editors at Oxford University Press who have overseen this project with grace and patience: alex flach, natasha flemming, caroline hawley, ela kotkowska, and malcolm todd.

simon stern



OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 11/07/16, SPi



Note to the Reader



This edition seeks to identify Blackstone’s changes to the text of the Commentaries between the first edition of 1765–9 and the ninth and first posthumous edition which appeared in 1783 under the editorship of dr richard Burn.1 all such authorial ‘varia’ are marked in each chapter by a preceding numeral enclosed in angled brackets. These cues are keyed to sequential lists, similarly numbered and grouped by chapter, at the end of each volume. here, every item is preceded by the number of the edition in which the authorial change first occurred, enclosed in square brackets. The listing commences with the relevant word, clause, sentence, or longer passage from the first edition, followed by a vertical divider | separating the original from the altered text. Omitted text or footnotes are annotated accordingly, or indicated by an omission on the right-hand side of the divider. textual changes to the same sentence or paragraph over more than one edition are represented by inserting the relevant information in square brackets, or listed sequentially following the first numbered entry.

to keep the varia lists within manageable proportions, the following are generally

ignored: (i) changes in punctuation and/or spelling; (ii) unambiguous typographical errors, including misspellings, omissions, and erroneous repetition of single words corrected in subsequent editions; (iii) incorporation of footnotes in text or vice versa; (iv) changes in cross-references due to different pagination in later editions; (v) alterations made in one edition reversed in the next or following editions; (vi) changes of form which do not change meaning, as where adjacent words are transposed, or paragraphs are recast.

no attempt has been made to modernize Blackstone’s language. While his spelling

often does not accord with current usage, most variants are simply phonetic equivalents of the modern form. except for removing the apostrophe from the possessive ‘it’s’, a similar policy applies to punctuation, italics, and the use of capital letters, although evident misspellings and typographical errors are silently corrected.

Blackstone’s footnotes present difficulties of a different kind. apart from the use of

lower-case letters of the alphabet rather than numerals, both for in-text cues and foot-of-page markers (usually, but not always, without the letters ‘j’ and ‘v’), the notes themselves include often cryptic and inconsistent bibliographical citations, to which no key was originally provided. While the following list of abbreviations identifies most such references, a few uncertainties remain. it should also be noted that Blackstone’s quotation marks often denote paraphrases rather than verbatim transcriptions.

editorial annotations and interventions are enclosed in square brackets, while

editorial footnotes are placed below those of Blackstone. Where his footnotes refer to published reports of identifiable law cases, the case name is added before the citation. an appended table of cases provides dates and, where possible, a reference to the



1 a fuller account of editorial methodology appears in the first volume (i. xliii–xlvi).

OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 11/07/16, SPi



xxx book ii

corresponding volume of the English Reports (although Blackstone sometimes cites differently paginated early editions of the nominate reports reproduced in that stand-ard series), the yearbooks, or other sources. The table of statutes, also found at the end of the volume, is a chronological list and page index of charters and parliamentary legislation mentioned both in the text and footnotes.

in the text, the original pagination is indicated by numbers placed in the margins.

in the footnotes, Blackstone’s own cross-references are retained, but supplemented with editorial cross-references keyed to the pagination of this edition.

The Commentaries use the old-style Julian calendar, in which each new year began

on 25 march rather than 1 January, for events and parliamentary statutes before 1752, when Great Britain adopted the Gregorian calendar. Thus the Bill of rights, presented to William and mary in february 1689 according to our modern calendar, is dated by Blackstone to the previous year.

Wilfrid Prest



OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 11/07/16, SPi



Abbreviations



Books listed were published in london, unless otherwise noted; the date given is that of first publication, together with the date of any later edition which appears to have been owned or used by Blackstone; for relevant book lists see Prest, Blackstone, 36–9. Books of the Bible (king James version) are not separately listed.

General Abbreviations

abr. abridgment

append. appendix

b. book

B.r. Bancum Regis [king’s Bench, court of] c., ch., cap. chapter

c.B. Commune Bancum [common Pleas, court of] can. canon

canc. chancery

circ. circa

d. penny; died

Dom. Proc. Domus Procerum [house of lords] fl. flourished

fol. folio, leaf

h., hil. hilary (term)

in loc. in the same place

l., l., l., lib. book or pound sterling

l., ll leges [laws]

m., mich. michaelmas (term)

p. part

P., Pasch. easter (term)

pl. plea(s)

pref., proem. preface

s. shilling

stat. statute

t., tit. title

tr. tract; translated

t., trin. trinity (term)

Westm. Westminster

YB, Yearb. yearbook



Bibliographical Abbreviations

Æl. lamprid. in vita Alex. Severi aelius lampridius, Alexander Severus, in Scriptores Historiae Augustae aleyn. J. aleyn, Select cases in B.R. 22, 23, & 24 Car. I. Regis (1681) Analect . see selden. Analect. and., anders. Les Reports du Treserudite Edmund Anderson, 2 vols (1664–5) aristotle. Polit. aristotle, Politics ass., assis. Liber Assisarum et Placitorum Coronae (c. 1514; 1580; 1676) atk. J. atkyns, Reports of Cases … in … Chancery, 3 vols (1765) Bac. abr. m. Bacon, A New Abridgement of the Law, 5 vols (1736–66) Bacon elem. f. Bacon, The Elements of the Common Lawes of England (1630) Bacon’s essays f. Bacon, Essays (1597) Bacon of uses, Bacon on uses f. Bacon, The Learned Reading … upon the Statute of Uses (1642) Bacon, use of the law f. Bacon [attrib.], The Use of the Law (1629) xxxii book ii

Barbeyr. J. Barbeyrac, Le Droit de la Nature et des Gens (amsterdam, 1706) Black W. W. Blackstone, Reports of Cases ... in the Several Courts of

Westminster-Hall, 2 vols (1781)

Blackstone, Great Charter W. Blackstone, ed., The Great Charter and Charter of the Forest, with

Other Authentic Instruments (Oxford, 1759)

Boeckelmann, Compendium Institutionum J. f. Boeckelmann, Compendium Institutionum Caesaris Justiniani:

Sive Elementa Juris Civilis (leiden, 1681)

Bract. h. de Bracton [attrib.], De Legibus et Consuetudinibus Angliæ (1569) Britton Summa de Legibus Anglie que vocatur Bretone (c. 1530; 1640) Bro., Bro. Abr. r. Brooke, La Graunde Abridgement (1573) Brownl. [r. Brownlow & J. Goldesborough], Reports of … Cases in Law (1651) Bulstr. Reports of Edward Bulstrode (1657–9) Burn., Burn. eccl. law r. Burn, Ecclesiastical Law, 2 vols (1763) Burr. J. Burrow, Reports of Cases … in the Court of King’s Bench … Part

the Fourth, 5 vols (1766–80)

Bynkersh. Observ. Jur. c. van Bynkershoek, Observationum Juris Romani, 2 vols (leiden, 1710) Bynkersh. quaest. jur. privat. c. van Bynkershoek, Quaestionum Juris Privati (leiden, 1744) Bynkersh. quaest. jur. publ. c. van Bynkershoek, Quaestionum Juris Publici (leiden, 1737) c., Cod. Codex Justinianus caesar de bell. Gall. caesar, Commentarii de Bello Gallico callis., callis of sewers. The Reading of that Famous and Learned … Robert Callis (1647) calthorpe c. calthrope, The Relation Betweene the Lord of a mannor and the

Coppy-Holder His Tenant (1635)

calv. lex. J. calvin, Lexicon Juridicum (frankfurt, 1600) carpzov. Practic. saxonic. B. carpzov, Practicae Novae Imperialis Saxonicae Rerum

Criminalium (Wittenberg, 1635)

cart., carth. t. carthew, Reports of Cases Adjudged … in the Court of King’s

Bench (1728)

cart. de forest. charter of the forest [1217] carte t. carte, A General History of England, 4 vols (1747–55) ch. case., chan. cas. [a. keck], Cases Argued and Decreed in the High Court of Chancery

(1697)

ch. Prec., chan. Prec. Precedents in Chancery (1733) ch. rep., chan. rep. Reports of Cases … in the Court of Chancery (1693) Chron. Sax. Chronicon Saxonorum, ed. e. Gibson (Oxford, 1692) cicero, de fin. cicero, De Finibus Bonorum et malorum co. cop., co. copyh., cop., copyh. e. coke, The Compleate Copy-Holder (1641) co. litt. e. coke, The First Part of the Institutes of the Laws of England; or,

A Commentary upon Littleton (1628); see also hargrave’s notes

coke, inst. e. coke, Institutes of the Lawes of England, 4 vols (1628–44) com. recov. see Pigott comb. r. comberbach, Reports of Several Cases … in the Court of King’s

Bench (1724)

commonw., commonwealth see smith comyns. J. comyns, Reports of Cases Argued and Adjudged (1744) corvi. jus feud., corvin. J. corvinus, Jus Feudale, per Aphorismos Strictim Explicatum

(leiden, 1655)

crag., craig. de jur. feud., de jure feo. [t. craig], Jus Feudale Tribus Libris Comprehensum … Authore …

Thoma Cragio (edinburgh, 1655; 1732; leipzig, 1716)

cro. car. The Reports of Sir George Croke Knight (1657) cro. eliz. The First Part … of the Reports of Sr George Croke Kt (1661) cro. Jac. The Second Part of the Reports of Sir George Croke Knight (1659) crompt. of courts r. crompton, L’Authoritie et Iurisdiction des Courts de la maiestie de

la Roygne (1594)

dalrymp. of feuds J. dalrymple, An Essay Towards a General History of Feudal

Property in Great Britain (1757)

d’argentre Antiq. Consuet. Brit. B. d’argentré, Commentarii in Patrias Britonum Leges (Paris, 1608) dav. [J. davies], Le Primer Report des Cases & matters en Ley … en les

Courts del Roy en Ireland (dublin, 1615) abbreviations xxxiii

de jure feo. see crag. Decretal. decretals, collected (various editions) domat J. domat, Les Loix Civiles dans leur Ordre Naturel (Paris, 1689) tr. as

The Civil Law in its Natural Order, 2 vols (1720)

dr. & st., dr. & stud. c. st German, Doctor and Student: Or, Dialogues between a Doctor

of Divinity and a Student in the Laws of England (1528–31; 1687)

dufresne c. du fresne du cange, Glossarium ad Scriptores ad mediae et

Infimae Latinitatis, 6 vols (Paris, 1678; 1733–6)

duhalde J.-B. du halde, Description … de l’Empire de la Chine et de la

Tartarie Chinoise (Paris, 1735)

duke’s charit. Uses. G. duke, The Law of Charitable Uses (1676) dyer [J. dyer], Cy Ensuont Ascuns Nouel Cases (1585) equ. cas. abr. A General Abridgment of Cases in Equity (1732) farr. t. farresley, modern Cases Argued and Adjudged in the Court of

King’s-Bench (1716)

Feud . Libri Feudorum Ff. Justinian’s Digest finch. l., finch. law h. finch, Law, or a Discourse Thereof (1627; 1678) finch. rep. Reports of Cases … in the High Court of Chancery during the Time

of Sir Heneage Finch (1725)

fitzg. J. fitz-Gibbons, The Reports of Several Cases Argued and Adjudged

in the Court of King’s Bench at Westminster (1732)

fitzh. Abr., fitzherbert, Abr. a. fitzherbert, La Graunde Abridgement, 3 vols (1514–17) fitzherbert, f. n. B., fitzherbert, n. B. a. fitzherbert, La Novelle Natura Brevium (1534) flet. Fleta, seu Commentarius Iuris Anglicani, ed. J. selden (1647) forr. a. forrester, Cases in Equity during the Time of the Late Lord

Chancellor Talbot (1741)

fortescue, de laud. LL. Angl. J. fortescue, De Laudibus Legum Angliae (1543?) freem. r. freeman, Reports of Cases … in the Courts of King’s Bench and

Common Pleas (1742)

Gavelk. J. somner, A Treatise of Gavelkind (1659) Gibs. cod. e. Gibson, Codex Juris Ecclesiastici Anglicani, 2 vols (1713;

Oxford, 1761)

Gilb. hist. of the exch. G. (or J.) Gilbert, A Treatise on the Court of Exchequer (1758) Gilb. rep. G. (or J.) Gilbert, Reports of Cases in Equity (1734) Gilb. ten. G. (or J.) Gilbert, A Treatise of Tenures (1730) Gilbert on devises G. (or J.) Gilbert, The Law of Devises, Revocations, and

Last Wills (1756)

Glanv., Glanvil ranulf de Glanvill [attrib.] Tractatus de Legibus et Consuetudinibus

Regni Angliae (c. 1554)

Gloss. see spelman, Glossarium God., Godolph., Godolph. Orph. leg. J. Godolphin, The Orphans Legacy, Or, a Testamentary Abridgment

in Three Parts (1674)

Godbolt Reports of Certain Cases … at Westminster (1652) Godefroy, Epitome Feudorum d. Godefroy, Epitome Feudorum, in idem, Opuscula Iuris varia

(Geneva, 1586)

Godouin J. Godouin, C. Julii Caesaris Quae Exstant (Paris, 1678) Gr. coustum., Gr. cust., Grand coustum. Le Grand Coustumier du … Normandie (rouen, c. 1483; 1539).

See also le rouillé

Gravin., Gravin. orig., Gravin. orig. jur. civ. G. Gravina, Originum Juris Civilis, 2 vols (naples, 1701) Grotius, de j. b & p., de jur. b. & p. h. Grotius, De Jure Belli ac Pacis (Paris, 1625; amersterdam, 1720) hal. anal. [m. hale], The Analysis of the Law (1713) hal. hist., hale hist. c.l., h.c.l. m. hale, The History of the Common Law of England (1713) hal. P.c. m. hale, Historia Placitorum Coronae: The History of the Pleas of

the Crown, ed. s. emlyn, 2 vols (1736)

hardr. t. hardres, Reports of Cases … in the Court of Exchequer (1693) hargrave’s notes on co. litt. e. coke, The First Part of the Institutes of the Laws of England, ed.

f. hargrave (1775–8)

xxxiv book ii

harris., harris in nov. G. harris, tr., D. Justiniani Institutionum Libri Quatuor:

The Four Books of Justinian’s Institutions, Translated into

English, with Notes (1756)

hawk. abr. W. hawkins, An Abridgment of the First Part of Ld. Coke’s

Institutes (1711)

hawk. P. c. W. hawkins, A Treatise of the Pleas of the Crown, 2 vols

(1716–21)

heinecc. antiqu. J. heineccius, Antiquitatum Romanarum Jurisprudentiam

Illustrantium Syntagma (halle, 1719)

hesiod, Θεογον hesiod, Theogony hetl. t. hetley, Reports and Cases … argued … at the Common

Pleas Barre (1657)

hickes Dissert. epistolar., hickes Dissertat. epistolar. G. hickes, Antiquae Literaturae Septentrionalis Libri Duo,

quorum Primus Linguarum Vett. Septentrionalium

Thesaurum, Dissertationem Epistolarem, 2 vols (Oxford, 1703–5)

hist. c. l. see hale hob. The Reports of That Learned Sir Henry Hobart (1641) hobbes, leviathan t. hobbes, Leviathan (1651) horace, ad Pisones horace, Epistula ad Pisones de Arte Poetica ingulph. Rerum Anglicarum Scriptores post Bedam … Ingulphi

Abbatis Croylandensis Historiarum lib. I, ed. h. savile (1596)

innocent. iii Opera innocent iii, Operum D. Innocentii Pontificis maximi eius

Nominis III, 2 vols (cologne, 1575)

innocent iV in Decretal. innocent iV, Commentaria super Libros Quinque

Decretalium (frankfurt, 1570)

inst. e. coke, Institutes of the Laws of England, 4 vols (1628–44) introd. hist. engl. W. temple, An Introduction to the History of England

(1695)

Jenk., Jenk. cent. d. Jenkins, Eight Centuries of Reports (1734)

Jon., Jones, 1 Jones W. Jones, Les Reports de Sir William Jones (1675)

t. Jones t. Jones, Les Reports de Divers Special Cases (1659);

tr. as Reports of Several Special Cases (1729)

Julius Pollux, Onomastic. J. Pollux, Onomasticon Justin. Justinus, Trogi Pompei Historiarum Philippicarum

Epitoma

Juv. Juvenal, Satires

keb. [J. keble], Reports in the Court of King’s Bench, 3 vols (1685)

keilw. Relationes quorundam Casuum Selectorum ex Libris

Roberti Keilwey (1602) and Reports d’Ascuns Cases (1688)

kitch. of courts J. kitchin, Le Court Leete, et Court Baron (1580); tr. as

Jurisdictions: Or, The Lawful Authority of Courts (1651)

L. Florus. lucius florus, Epitome rerum Romanorum lamb. archeion W. lambarde, Archeion, or A Discourse upon the High

Courts of Justice in England (1635)

lamb. eiren. W. lambarde, Eirenarcha; or, Of the Office of the Justices

of Peace (1581)

lamb. Peramb., lambard. Peramb. of kent. W. lambarde, A Perambulation of Kent (1576)

law of forfeit c. Yorke, Some Considerations on the Law of Forfeiture,

for High Treason (1745; 1746)

law of inheritances r. robinson, A Discourse Concerning the Law of

Inheritances in Fee (1736; 1738)

ld. raym., lord raym. robert, lord raymond, Reports of Cases … in the Courts

of King’s Bench and Common Pleas, 2 vols (1743)

le rouillé G. le rouillé, Le Grand Coustumier du Pays et Duché de

Normendie (rouen, 1534; 1539)

leibniz, Scriptores Rerum Brunsvicensium G. leibniz, Scriptores Rerum Brunsvicensium Illustrationi

Inservientes, 3 vols (hanover, 1707–11) abbreviations xxxv

leon. W. leonard, Reports and Cases of Law, 4 vols (1658–75) lev. Les Reports de Sr Creswell Levinz, 3 vols (1702) Lex. Saxonum see leibniz, Scriptores Rerum Brunsvicensium lib. ass. see ass. lindenbrog f. lindenbrog, Codex Legum Antiquarum (frankfurt, 1613) litt. t. littleton, Tenures (c. 1481) LL. Aelfred., Alfred., Canut, Eadg.,

Edgar., Ethel., Guil. Conqu., Hen. I see Wilkins LL. Alman. Leges Alemanni, see lindenbrog locke on Gov. J. locke, Two Treatises of Government (1689) lord clar. contin. e. hyde, earl of clarendon, The Life of Edward, Earl of Clarendon

… a Continuation (Oxford, 1759)

lutw. e. lutwyche, Un Livre des Entries, 2 vols (1704) lyndew., lyndewode W. lyndwood, Constitutiones Provinciales Ecclesiae Anglicanae

(Oxford, 1483; 1679)

m. Paris m. Paris, Chronica majora, ed. m. Parker (1571) mac doual. inst. a. mcdouall (lord Bankton), An Institute of the Laws of Scotland

in Civil Rights, 3 vols (edinburgh, 1751–3)

madox. formul. t. madox, Formulare Anglicanum (1702) madox. hist. exch. t. madox, The History and Antiquities of the Exchequer (1711) malone, Supplement e. malone, Supplement to the Edition of Shakespeare’s Plays

Published in 1778 by Samuel Johnson and George Steevens, 2 vols (1780)

malyne lex mercat. G. malynes, Consuetudo vel Lex mercatoria, or, The Ancient

Law-merchant (1622)

manutius de senatu Romano P. manutius, Antiquitatum Romanorum Paulli mannuccii Liber de

Senatu (Venice, 1581)

mar. J. march, Reports: or, New Cases (1648) martial, Epigr. martial, Epigrams mattheus de Crimin. a. matthaeus, De Criminibus: Ad Lib. XLVII et XLVIII Dig.

Commentarius (Utrecht, 1644)

mayn. edw. ii. maynard’s yearbook edw. ii J. maynard, Les Reports des Cases Argue & Adjudge in le Temps del’

Roy Edward le Second Et auxy memoranda del’ Exchequer en Temps le roy Edward le Primer (1678)

mirr., mirror, mirrour a. horn [attrib.], The Booke Called, The mirrour of Justices (1646) mo., moor. Cases Collect and Report per Sir Fra[ncis] moore (1663) mod. modern Reports, or Select Cases, 12 vols (1682–1741) mod. Un. hist., mod. Univ. hist. The modern Part of an Universal History, from the Earliest Account

of Time, 44 vols (1759–66)

molesworth r. molesworth, Viscount molesworth, An Account of Denmark, as

It Was in the Year 1692 (1694)

moll. de jur. mar. c. molloy, De Jure maritimo et Navali: Or, a Treatise of Affairs

maritime, and of Commerce (1676; 1744)

montesq. sp. l., montesqu. Esp. c. l. de secondat, Baron montesquieu, L’Esprit des Loix (Paris,

1748); tr. as The Spirit of Laws, 2 vols (1750)

morton, Whitelockes Notes Whitelockes Notes uppon the Kings Writt for Choosing members of

Parlement, ed. c. morton (1766)

n.B. see f. n. B. Nov. Justinian’s Novellae Constitutiones noy W. noy, Reports and Cases (1656) noy or noy, max. W. noy, A Treatise of the Principall Grounds and maximes of the

Lawes (1641)

ODNB Oxford Dictionary of National Biography of com. recov see Pigott of feuds see spelman of parliaments h. spelman, ‘Of Parliaments’, in The English Works of Sir Henry

Spelman (1723), ii. 57–65

Old nat. Brev. Old n.B. Natura Brevium (1496) Old. ten. The Old Tenures (1496) xxxvi book ii

P. c. see staunforde P. Wms. W. Peere Williams, Reports of Cases Argued and Determined in

the High Court of Chancery, 3 vols (1740–6)

Palm. Les Reports de Sir Gefrey Palmer (1678) Panormitan. Ad Decretal. n. de’ tedeschi, Abbatis Panormitani Commentaria … in …

Decretalium Librum, 4 vols (Venice, 1570–1)

Perk., Perkins A Profitable Booke of mr. John Perkins … Treating of the Lawes

of England (1528; 1586)

Petit. ll. Attic. s. Petit, Leges Atticæ (Paris, 1635) Philips’s life of Pole t. Phillips, The History of the Life of Reginald Pole, 2 vols (1764) Pig. of recov., Pigott n. Pigott, A Treatise of Common Recoveries (1739) Plowd. Les Comentaries, ou les Reports de Edmund Plowden, 2 vols

(1571–8)

Plutarch. in vita Solon Plutarch, Life of Solon Polit. see aristotle Pollexf. The Arguments and Reports of Sr. Hen. Pollexfen (1702) Pontoppidan e. Pontoppidan, The Natural History of Norway (1740–1) Poph. Reports and Cases Collected by the Learned Sir John Popham

(1656)

Pott. antiq. J. Potter, Archaeologiae Graecae; or, The Antiquities of Greece

(Oxford, 1697)

Prec. chan. Precedents in Chancery (1733) PROmE The Parliament Rolls of medieval England 1275–1504, ed.

c. Given-Wilson, 16 vols (2005)

Prov., Provinc., Provincial. see lyndwood Puff., Puff. l. n., l. of n. s. von Pufendorf, De Jure Naturae et Gentium (lund, 1672);

tr. as Of the Law of Nature and Nations (1703)

raym. t. raymond, The Reports of Divers Special Cases (1696) reg., reg. Brev., registr. W. rastell, Registrum Omnium Brevium (1531) Reg. mag. Regiam majestatem, tr. J. skene (edinburgh, 1609) Regist. honoris de Richm. r. Gale, Registrum Honoris de Richmond (1722) rep. Les Reports de Edward Coke, 13 vols (1600–59) richardson, law of testaments r. richardson, The Law of Testaments and Last Wills (1744) robertson. cha. V. W. robertson, The History of the Reign of the Emperor Charles

V, 3 vols (1769)

rocc. de. Assecur. not. f. roccus, De Navibus et Naulo, item de Assecurationibus

Notabilia (amsterdam, 1708)

roger de hoveden roger of howden, h. savile, Rerum Anglicarum Scriptores post

Bedam praecipui (1596)

roll. abr. h. rolle, Un Abridgment des Plusieurs Cases et Resolutions del

Common Ley, 2 vols (1668)

roll. rep. Les Reports de Henry Rolle, 2 vols (1675–6) Rot. maner. de Edgware Com. midd. codrington library, all souls college, Oxford, ctm 41 Rotuli Parliamentorum Rotuli Parliamentorum; Ut Et Petitiones, Et Placita in

Parliamento Tempore Edwardi R. I., 7 vols (1767–77)

st. Germain, st. Germyn see dr. & st salk. W. salkeld, Reports of Cases adjudg’d in the Court of King’s

Bench, 3 vols (1717–24)

saund. Les Reports du … Edmund Saunders (1686) savil. Les Reports de Sir John Savile (1675) schilter J. schilter, Dissertatio Solennis de Bonis Laudemialibus

(strasbourg, 1690)

scobell A Collection of Acts and Ordinances, ed. h. scobell, 2 vols

(1657–8)

seld., selden., seld. tith., selden. hist. of tithes J. selden, The Historie of Tithes (1618) seld. Jan., selden. Jan. angl. J. selden, Jani Anglorum Facies Altera (1610) seld. mar. claus. J. selden, mare Clausum (1635) seld. tit. hon. J. selden, Titles of Honor (1614) seld. Ux. Hebr. J. selden, Uxor Ebraica (1646; 1673) abbreviations xxxvii

selden. Analect., Analecton J. selden, Analecton Anglobritannicon (1615) selden. De succ. Ebr., Ebraeor. J. selden, De Successionibus in Bona Defuncti, Ad Leges

Ebraeorum (1631)

selden in Fletam. Fleta, seu, Commentarius Juris Anglicani, ed. J. selden (1647) sheppard’s touchstone W. sheppard, The Touchstone of Common Assurances (1648) show. The Reports of Sir Bartholomew Shower, 2 vols (1708–20) show. Parl. c., show. Parl. cas. B. shower, Cases in Parliament, Resolved and Adjudged (1698) sid. t. siderfin, Les Reports des Divers Special Cases … en le Court del

Bank le Roy, 2 vols (1683–4)

skene J. skene, De Verborum Significatione (edinburgh, 1597). skinn. r. skinner, Reports of Cases … in the Court of King’s Bench (1728) smith, commonwealth t. smith, De Republica Anglorum (1583) somner. Gavelk. J. somner, A Treatise of Gavelkind (1660) sp. l., sp. of laws see montesquieu spelm. cod. Vet. leg. h. spelman, Codex Legum Veterum Statutorum Regni Angliae,

see Wilkins

spelm. Gl., spelm. Gloss. h. spelman, Glossarium Archaiologicum (1664; 1687) spelman, Reliquiae Spelmannianae, h. spelman, Reliquiae Spelmannianae, ed. e. Gibson (Oxford, 1698)

spelman of feuds, of parliaments

staundf. Prerog. W. staunford, An Exposicion of the Kinges Prerogative (1567) staunforde P. c. W. staunford, Les Plees del Coron (1557) stiernhook, de jure Sueonum J. stiernhöök, De Jure Sueonum et Gothorum Vetusto (stockholm,

1672)

stockmans de jure devolutionis P. stockmans, Tractatus de Iure Devolutionis (Brussels, 1666) str., stra. J. strange, Reports of Adjudged Cases, 2 vols (1755) strype’s annals of eliz. J. strype, Annals of the Reformation and Establishment of Religion

(1709; 1725)

styl. W. style, Narrationes modernae, or modern Reports (1658) tacit. annal. tacitus, Annales tac. de mor. Germ. tacitus, Germania taylor’s elem. civ. law. J. taylor, Elements of the Civil Law (cambridge, 1755) temple, History of England W. temple, An Introduction to the History of England (1695) terence, Prol. In Eunuch terence, The Eunuch Text. Roffens. [ernulf], Textus Roffensis, ed. t. hearne (Oxford, 1720) titius, Observationes G. titius, Observationes in … Pufendorf De Officio Hominis et

Civis (lepizig, 1703)

toth. W. tothill, The Transactions of the High Court of Chancery (1649) Uses see Bacon Van leeuwen in 2 Feud s. Van leeuwen (ed.), Corpus Iuris Civilis (amsterdam, 1663) Vaugh. The Reports and Arguments of … Sir John Vaughan (1677) Ventr. The Reports of Sir Peyton Ventris, 2 vols (1696) Vern. Cases Argued … in the High Court of Chancery, 2 vols (1726) Viner abr. c. Viner, A General Abridgment of Law and Equity, 23 vols

(aldershot, 1742–53)

Vinnius, Vinn. in Inst. a. Vinnius, Institutionum Imperialium Commentarius

Academicus et Forensis, 4 vols (amsterdam, 1642)

Walsingh. Upodigm. Neustr. t. Walsingham, Ypodigma Neustriæ (1574) Warburton’s alliance W. Warburton, The Alliance Between Church and State (1736; 1766) Warburton’s notes on Pope a. Pope, Works, ed. W. Warburton, 9 vols (1752) Went. Off. ex., Wentw. t. Wentworth, The Office and Duty of Executors (1641; 1728) West. symb. W. West, Symbolaeographia (1590) Wilk., Wilkins d. Wilkins, Leges Anglo-Saxonicae Ecclesiasticae et Civiles …

subjungitur Henr. Spelmanni Codex Legum Veterum Statutorum

Regni Angliae (1721)

Wood, New Institute t. Wood, A New Institute of the Imperial or Civil Law (1704; 1712) Wotton. LL. Wall. W. Wotton (ed.), Cyfreithjeu Hywel Dda ac eraill, seu Leges

Wallicae (1730)

Wright., Wright of tenures m. Wright, An Introduction to the Law of Tenures (1729) Yelv. Les Reports de Sr Henry Yelverton … de Divers Speciall Cases (1661)





Commentaries


on the



Laws

of



engLand.



BOOk the secOnd.



BY

William BlackstOne, esq.

solicitor general to her majesty.



OxfOrd,

printed at the clarendon press.

m. dcc. lxvi.





chapter the first.




of property, in general.

the former book of these commentaries having treated at large of the jura personarum, or such rights and duties as are annexed to the persons of men, the objects of our enquiry in this second book will be the jura rerum, or, those rights which a man may acquire in and to such external things as are unconnected with his person. These are what the writers on natural law stile the rights of dominion, or property, concerning the nature and original of which I shall first premise a few observations, before I proceed to distribute and consider its several objects.

there is nothing which so generally strikes the imagination, and engages the 2

affections of mankind, as the right of property; or that sole and despotic dominion which one man claims and exercises over the external things of the world, in total exclusion of the right of any other individual in the universe.1 And yet there are very few, that will give themselves the trouble to consider the original and foundation of this right. Pleased as we are with the possession, we seem afraid to look back to the means by which it was acquired, as if fearful of some defect in our title; or at best we rest satisfied with the decision of the laws in our favour, without examining the reason or authority upon which those laws have been built. We think it enough that our title is derived by the grant of the former proprietor, by descent from our ancestors, or by the last will and testament of the dying owner; not caring to reflect that (accurately and strictly speaking) there is no foundation in nature or in natural law, why a set of words upon parchment should convey the dominion of land; why the son should have a right to exclude his fellow creatures from a determinate spot of ground, because his father had done so before him; or why the occupier of a particular field or of a jewel, when lying on his death-bed and no longer able to maintain possession, should be entitled to tell the rest of the world which of them should enjoy it after him. These enquiries, it must be owned, would be useless and even troublesome in common life. It is well if the mass of mankind will obey the laws when made, without scrutinizing too nicely into the reasons of making them. But, when law is to be considered not only as matter of practice, but also as a rational science, it cannot be improper or useless to examine more deeply the rudiments and grounds of these positive constitutions of society.

In the beginning of the world, we are informed by holy writ, the all-bountiful

creator gave to man “dominion over all the earth; and over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moveth upon the eartha.” This 3

a Gen. 1. 28. [As with many other aspects of Blackstone’s remarks on the origins and development of property rights, this resort to a biblical source closely tracks the account in Grotius’s De Jure Belli ac Pacis, bk. 2, ch. 2.]

1 Cf. Blackstone’s comment in I. 93–4 that property rights consist in ‘free use, enjoyment, and disposal, of all … acquisitions, without any control or diminution, save only by the laws of the land’.

2 of the rights of things

is the only true and solid foundation of man’s dominion over external things, whatever airy metaphysical notions may have been started by fanciful writers upon this subject. The earth therefore, and all things therein, are the general property of all mankind, exclusive of other beings, from the immediate gift of the creator. And, while the earth continued bare of inhabitants, it is reasonable to suppose, that all was in common among them, and that every one took from the public stock to his own use such things as his immediate necessities required.

these general notions of property were then sufficient to answer all the purposes

of human life; and might perhaps still have answered them, had it been possible for mankind to have remained in a state of primaeval simplicity: as may be collected from the manners of many American nations when first discovered by the Europeans; and from the antient method of living among the first Europeans themselves, if we may credit either the memorials of them preserved in the golden age of the poets, or the uniform accounts given by historians of those times, wherein “erant omnia communia et indivisa omnibus, veluti unum cunctis patrimonium essetb [all things were common to all and undivided, as if there were one general patrimony for them all].”2 Not that this communion of goods seems ever to have been applicable, even in the earliest ages, to ought but the substance of the thing; nor 〈1〉 could be extended to the use of it. For, by the law of nature and reason, he who first began to use it, acquired therein a kind of transient property, that lasted so long as he was using it, and no longerc: or, to speak with greater precision, the right of possession continued for the same time only that the act of possession lasted. Thus the ground was in common, and no part of it was the permanent property of any man in particular: yet whoever was in the occupation of any determinate spot of it, for rest, for shade, or the like, acquired for the time a sort of ownership, from which it would have been unjust, and contrary to the law of nature, to have driven him by force; but the instant that he

4 quitted the use or occupation of it, another might seise it without injustice. Thus also

a vine or other tree might be said to be in common, as all men were equally entitled to its produce; and yet any private individual might gain the sole property of the fruit, which he had gathered for his own repast. A doctrine well illustrated by Cicero, who compares the world to a great theatre, which is common to the public, and yet the place which any man has taken is for the time his ownd.

But when mankind increased in number, craft, and ambition, it became necessary

to entertain conceptions of more permanent dominion; and to appropriate to individuals not the immediate use only, but the very substance of the thing to be used. Otherwise innumerable tumults must have arisen, and the good order of the world been continually broken and disturbed, while a variety of persons were striving who



b Justin. l. 43. c. 1.

c Barbeyr. Puff. 1. 4. c. 4.

d Quemadmodum theatrum, cum commune sit, recte tamen dici potest, ejus esse eum locum quem quisque occuparit. De Fin. l. 3. c. 20. [translated in the text; a line often quoted in discussions of property by theorists of natural law.]

2 Justinus is discussing the absence of private property among the first inhabitants of Italy.





chapter 1 3


should get the first occupation of the same thing, or disputing which of them had actually gained it. As human life also grew more and more refined, abundance of conveniences were devised to render it more easy, commodious, and agreeable; as, habitations for shelter and safety, and raiment for warmth and decency. But no man would be at the trouble to provide either, so long as he had only an usufructuary property in them, which was to cease the instant that he quitted possession;—if, as soon as he walked out of his tent, or pulled off his garment, the next stranger who came by would have a right to inhabit the one, and to wear the other. In the case of habitations in particular, it was natural to observe, that even the brute creation, to whom every thing else was in common, maintained a kind of permanent property in their dwellings, especially for the protection of their young; that the birds of the air had nests, and the beasts of the field had caverns, the invasion of which they esteemed a very flagrant injustice, and would sacrifice their lives to preserve them. Hence a property was soon established in every man’s house and home-stall; which seem to have been originally mere temporary huts or moveable cabins, suited to the design of 5

providence for more speedily peopling the earth, and suited to the wandering life of their owners, before any extensive property in the soil or ground was established. And there can be no doubt, but that moveables of every kind became sooner appropriated than the permanent substantial soil: partly because they were more susceptible of a long occupancy, which might be continued for months together without any sensible interruption, and at length by usage ripen into an established right; but principally because few of them could be fit for use, till improved and meliorated by the bodily labour of the occupant; which bodily labour, bestowed upon any subject which before lay in common to all men, is universally allowed to give the fairest and most reasonable title to an exclusive property therein.

the article of food was a more immediate call, and therefore a more early consideration.

Such, as were not contented with the spontaneous product of the earth, sought for a more solid refreshment in the flesh of beasts, which they obtained by hunting. But the frequent disappointments, incident to that method of provision, induced them to gather together such animals as were of a more tame and sequacious nature; and to establish a permanent property in their flocks and herds, in order to sustain themselves in a less precarious manner, partly by the milk of the dams, and partly by the flesh of the young. The support of these their cattle made the article of water also a very important point. And therefore the book of Genesis (the most venerable monument of antiquity, considered merely with a view to history) will furnish us with frequent instances of violent contentions concerning wells; the exclusive property of which appears to have been established in the first digger or occupant, even in such places where the ground and herbage remained yet in common. Thus we find Abraham, who was but a sojourner, asserting his right to a well in the country of Abimelech, and exacting an oath for his security, “because he had digged that welle.” And Isaac, about ninety years afterwards, re-claimed this his father’s property; and, 6

after much contention with the Philistines, was suffered to enjoy it in peace f.

e Gen. 21. 30.

f Gen. 26. 15, 18, &c.

4 of the rights of things

All this while the soil and pasture of the earth remained still in common as before,

and open to every occupant: except perhaps in the neighbourhood of towns, where the necessity of a sole and exclusive property in lands (for the sake of agriculture) was earlier felt, and therefore more readily complied with. Otherwise, when the multitude of men and cattle had consumed every convenience on one spot of ground, it was deemed a natural right to seise upon and occupy such other lands as would more easily supply their necessities. This practice is still retained among the wild and uncultivated nations that have never been formed into civil states, like the tartars and others in the east; where the climate itself, and the boundless extent of their territory, conspire to retain them still in the same savage state of vagrant liberty, which was universal in the earliest ages; and which tacitus informs us continued among the Germans till the decline of the Roman empireg. We have also a striking example of the same kind in the history of Abraham and his nephew Loth. When their joint substance became so great, that pasture and other conveniences grew scarce, the natural consequence was that a strife arose between their servants; so that it was no longer practicable to dwell together. This contention Abraham thus endeavoured to compose: “let there be no strife, I pray thee, between thee and me. Is not the whole land before thee? Separate thyself, I pray thee, from me. If thou wilt take the left hand, then I will go to the right; or if thou depart to the right hand, then I will go to the left.” This plainly implies an acknowleged right, in either, to occupy whatever ground he pleased, that was not pre-occupied by other tribes. “And Lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld all the plain of Jordan, that it was well watered every where, even as the garden of the Lord. Then Lot chose him all the plain of Jordan, and journeyed east; and Abraham dwelt in the land of Canaan.”

7 upon the same principle was founded the right of migration, or sending colonies

to find out new habitations, when the mother-country was overcharged with inhabitants; which was practised as well by the Phaenicians and Greeks, as the Germans, Scythians, and other northern people. And, so long as it was confined to the stocking and cultivation of desart uninhabited countries, it kept strictly within the limits of the law of nature. But how far the seising on countries already peopled, and driving out or massacring the innocent and defenceless natives, merely because they differed from their invaders in language, in religion, in customs, in government, or in colour; how far such a conduct was consonant to nature, to reason, or to christianity, deserved well to be considered by those, who have rendered their names immortal by thus civilizing mankind.

As the world by degrees grew more populous, it daily became more difficult to find

out new spots to inhabit, without encroaching upon former occupants; and, by constantly occupying the same individual spot, the fruits of the earth were consumed, and its spontaneous produce destroyed, without any provision for a future supply or succession. It therefore became necessary to pursue some regular method of

g Colunt discreti et diversi; ut fons, ut campus, ut nemus placuit [They dwell scattered in various places, wherever a fountain, plain, or grove entices them]. De mor. Germ. 16.

h Gen. c. 13.





chapter 1 5


providing a constant subsistence; and this necessity produced, or at least promoted and encouraged, the art of agriculture. And the art of agriculture, by a regular connexion and consequence, introduced and established the idea of a more perma-nent property in the soil, than had hitherto been received and adopted. It was clear that the earth would not produce her fruits in sufficient quantities, without the assistance of tillage: but who would be at the pains of tilling it, if another might watch an opportunity to seise upon and enjoy the product of his industry, art, and labour? Had not therefore a separate property in lands, as well as moveables, been vested in some individuals, the world must have continued a forest, and men have been mere animals of prey; which, according to some philosophers, is the genuine state of nature.3 Whereas now (so graciously has providence interwoven our duty and our 8 happiness together) the result of this very necessity has been the enobling of the human species, by giving it opportunities of improving its rational faculties, as well as of exerting its natural. Necessity begat property; and, in order to insure that property, recourse was had to civil society, which brought along with it a long train of inseparable concomitants; states, government, laws, punishments, and the public exercise of religious duties. Thus connected together, it was found that a part only of society was sufficient to provide, by their manual labour, for the necessary subsistence of all; and leisure was given to others to cultivate the human mind, to invent useful arts, and to lay the foundations of science.

the only question remaining is, how this property became actually vested; or what

it is that gave a man an exclusive right to retain in a permanent manner that specific land, which before belonged generally to every body, but particularly to nobody. And, as we before observed that occupancy gave the right to the temporary use of the soil, so it is agreed upon all hands that occupancy gave also the original right to the permanent property in the substance of the earth itself; which excludes every one else but the owner from the use of it. There is indeed some difference among the writers on natural law, concerning the reason why occupancy should convey this right, and invest one with this absolute property: Grotius and Puffendorf insisting, that this right of occupancy is founded 〈2〉 upon a tacit and implied assent of all mankind, that the first occupant should become the owner; and Barbeyrac, titius, Mr Locke, and others, holding, that there is no such implied assent, neither is it necessary that there should be; for that the very act of occupancy, alone, being a degree of bodily labour, is from a principle of natural justice, without any consent or compact, sufficient of itself to gain a title. A dispute that savours too much of nice and scholastic refinement! However, both sides agree in this, that occupancy is the thing by which the title was in fact originally gained; every man seising to his own continued use such spots of ground as he found most agreeable to his own convenience, provided he found them 9

unoccupied by any one else.

Property, both in lands and moveables, being thus originally acquired by the first

taker, which taking amounts to a declaration that he intends to appropriate the thing

3 Blackstone may be referring to Thomas Hobbes, who famously characterized life in a state of nature as ‘solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short’ (Leviathan 1.12).

6 of the rights of things

to his own use, it remains in him, by the principles of universal law, till such time as he does some other act which shews an intention to abandon it: for then it becomes, naturally speaking, publici juris [of public right] once more, and is liable to be again appropriated by the next occupant. So if one is possessed of a jewel, and casts it into the sea or a public highway, this is such an express dereliction, that a property will be vested in the first fortunate finder that will seise it to his own use. But if he hides it privately in the earth, or other secret place, and it is discovered, the finder acquires no property therein; for the owner hath not by this act declared any intention to abandon it, but rather the contrary: and if he loses or drops it by accident, it cannot be collected from thence, that he designed to quit the possession; and therefore in 〈3〉 such case the property still remains in the loser, who may claim it again of the finder. And this, we may remember, is the doctrine of the law of England, with relation to treasure trovei.

But this method, of one man’s abandoning his property, and 〈4〉 another’s seising

the vacant possession, however well founded in theory, could not long subsist in fact. It was calculated merely for the rudiments of civil society, and necessarily ceased among the complicated interests and artificial refinements of polite and established governments. In these it was found, that what became inconvenient or useless to one man was highly convenient and useful to another; who was ready to give in exchange for it some equivalent, that was equally desirable to the former proprietor. 〈5〉 This mutual convenience introduced commercial traffic, and the reciprocal transfer of

10 property by sale, grant, or conveyance: which may be considered either as a continuance

of the original possession which the first occupant had; or as an abandoning of the thing by the present owner, and an immediate successive occupancy of the same by the new proprietor. The voluntary dereliction of the owner, and delivering the possession to another individual, amount to a transfer of the property; the proprietor declaring his intention no longer to occupy the thing himself, but that his own right of occupancy shall be vested in the new acquirer. Or, taken in the other light, if I agree to part with an acre of my land to titius,4 the deed of conveyance is an evidence of 〈6〉 my having abandoned the property, and titius, being the only or first man acquainted with such my intention, immediately steps in and seises the vacant possession: thus the consent expressed by the conveyance gives titius a good right against me; and possession, or occupancy, confirms that right against all the world besides.

the most universal and effectual way, of abandoning property, is by the death of

the occupant; when, both the actual possession and intention of keeping possession ceasing, the property, which is founded upon such possession and intention, ought also to cease of course. For, naturally speaking, the instant a man ceases to be, he ceases to have any dominion: else, if he had a right to dispose of his acquisitions one



i See Book I. pag. 285 [I. 190].

4 A name often used generically to designate legal parties, in texts on feudal law and in Justinian’s Digest.





chapter 1 7


moment beyond his life, he would also have a right to direct their disposal for a million of ages after him; which would be highly absurd and inconvenient. All property must therefore cease upon death, considering men as absolute individuals, and unconnected with civil society: for then, by the principles before established, the next immediate occupant would acquire a right in all that the deceased possessed. But as, under civilized governments which are calculated for the peace of mankind, such a constitution would be productive of endless disturbances, the universal law of almost every nation (which is a kind of secondary law of nature) has either given the dying person a power of continuing his property, by disposing of his possessions by will; or, in case he neglects to dispose of it, or is not permitted to make any disposition at all, the municipal law of the country then steps in, and declares who shall be the 11

successor, representative, or heir of the deceased; that is, who alone shall have a right to enter upon this vacant possession, in order to avoid that confusion, which its becoming again common would occasionj. And farther, in case no testament be permitted by the law, or none be made, and no heir can be found so qualified as the law requires, still, to prevent the robust title of occupancy from again taking place, the doctrine of escheats is adopted in almost every country; whereby the sovereign of the state, and those who claim under his authority, are the ultimate heirs, and succeed to those inheritances, to which no other title can be formed.

the right of inheritance, or descent to the children and relations of the deceased,

seems to have been allowed much earlier than the right of devising by testament. We are apt to conceive at first view that it has nature on its side; yet we often mistake for nature what we find established by long and inveterate custom. It is certainly a wise and effectual, but clearly a political, establishment; since the permanent right of property, vested in the ancestor himself, was no natural, but merely a civil, right. It is true, that the transmission of one’s possessions to posterity has an evident tendency to make a man a good citizen and a useful member of society: it sets the passions on the side of duty, and prompts a man to deserve well of the public, when he is sure that the reward of his services will not die with himself, but be transmitted to those with whom he is connected by the dearest and most tender affections. Yet, reasonable as this foundation of the right of inheritance may seem, it is probable that its immediate original arose not from speculations altogether so delicate and refined; and, if not from fortuitous circumstances, at least from a plainer and more simple principle. A man’s children or nearest relations are usually about him on his death-bed, and are the earliest witnesses of his decease. They became therefore generally the next immediate 12

occupants, till at length in process of time this frequent usage ripened into general law. And therefore also in the earliest ages, on failure of children, a man’s servants born under his roof were allowed to be his heirs; being immediately on the spot when he died. For we find the old patriarch Abraham expressly declaring, that “since God had given him no seed, his steward Eliezer, one born in his house, was his heir k.”

j It is principally to prevent any vacancy of possession, that the civil law considers father and son as one person; so that upon the death of either the inheritance does not so properly descend, as continue in the hands of the survivor. Ff. 28. 2. 11.

k Gen. 15. 3.

8 of the rights of things

While property continued only for life, testaments were useless and unknown;

and, when it became inheritable, the inheritance was long indefeasible, and the children or heirs at law were incapable of exclusion by will. till at length it was found, that so strict a rule of inheritance made heirs disobedient and headstrong, defrauded creditors of their just debts, and prevented many provident fathers from dividing or charging their estates as the exigence of their families required. This introduced pretty generally the right of disposing of one’s property, or a part of it, by testament; that is, by written or oral instructions properly witnessed and authenticated, according to the pleasure of the deceased; which we therefore emphatically stile his will. This was established in some countries much later than in others. With us in England, till modern times, a man could only dispose of one third of his moveables from his wife and children: and, in general, no will was permitted of lands till the reign of Henry the eighth; and then only 〈7〉 of a certain portion: for it was not till after the restoration that the power of devising real property became so universal as at present.

Wills therefore and testaments, rights of inheritance and successions, are all of

them creatures of the civil or municipal laws, and accordingly are in all respects regulated by them; every distinct country having different ceremonies and requisites to make a testament completely valid: neither does any thing vary more than the

13 right of inheritance under different national establishments. In England particularly,

this diversity is carried to such a length, as if it had been meant to point out the power of the laws in regulating the succession to property, and how futile every claim must be that has not its foundation in the positive rules of the state. In personal estates the father may succeed to his children; in landed property he never can be their immediate heir, by any the remotest possibility: in general only the eldest son, in some places only the youngest, in others all the sons together, have a right to succeed to the inheritance: in real estates males are preferred to females, and the eldest male will usually exclude the rest; in the division of personal estates, the females of equal degree are admitted together with the males, and no right of primogeniture is allowed.

this one consideration may help to remove the scruples of many well-meaning

persons, who set up a mistaken conscience in opposition to the rules of law. If a man disinherits his son, by a will duly executed, and leaves his estate to a stranger, there are many who consider this proceeding as contrary to natural justice: while others so scrupulously adhere to the supposed intention of the dead, that if a will of lands be attested by only two witnesses instead of three, which the law requires, they are apt to imagine that the heir is bound in conscience to relinquish his title to the devisee. But both of them certainly proceed upon very erroneous principles: as if, on the one hand, the son had by nature a right to succeed to his father’s lands; or as if, on the other hand, the owner was by nature intitled to direct the succession of his property after his own decease. Whereas the law of nature suggests, that on the death of the possessor the estate should again become common, and be open to the next occupant, unless otherwise ordered for the sake of civil peace by the positive law of society. The positive law of society, which is with us the municipal law of England, directs it to vest in such person as the last proprietor shall by will, attended with certain requisites, appoint; and, in defect of such appointment, to go to some particular person, who,





chapter 1 9


from the result of certain local constitutions, appears to be the heir at law. Hence it 14

follows, that, where the appointment is regularly made, there cannot be a shadow of right in any one but the person appointed: and, where the necessary requisites are omitted, the right of the heir is equally strong and built upon as solid a foundation, as the right of the devisee would have been, supposing such requisites were observed.

But, after all, there are some few things, which notwithstanding the general intro-

duction and continuance of property, must still unavoidably remain in common; being such wherein nothing but an usufructuary property is capable of being had; and therefore they still belong to the first occupant, during the time he holds possession of them, and no longer. Such (among others) are the elements of light, air, and water; which a man may occupy by means of his windows, his gardens, his mills, and other conveniences: such also are the generality of those animals which are said to be ferae naturae, or of a wild and untameable disposition; which any man may seise upon and keep for his own use or pleasure. All these things, so long as they remain in possession, every man has a right to enjoy without disturbance; but if once they escape from his custody, or he voluntarily abandons the use of them, they return to the common stock, and any man else has an equal right to seise and enjoy them afterwards.

Again; there are other things, in which a permanent property may subsist, not only

as to the temporary use, but also the solid substance; and which yet would be frequently found without a proprietor, had not the wisdom of the law provided a remedy to obviate this inconvenience. Such are forests and other waste grounds, which were omitted to be appropriated in the general distribution of lands: such also are wrecks, estrays, and that species of wild animals, which the arbitrary constitutions of positive law have distinguished from the rest by the well-known appellation of game. With regard to these and some others, as disturbances and quarrels would frequently arise 15

among individuals, contending about the acquisition of this species of property by first occupancy, the law has therefore wisely cut up the root of dissension, by vesting the things themselves in the sovereign of the state; or else in his representatives, appointed and authorized by him, being usually the lords of manors. And thus the legislature of England has universally promoted the grand ends of civil society, the peace and security of individuals, by steadily pursuing that wise and orderly maxim, of assigning to every thing capable of ownership a legal and determinate owner.



16 chapter the second.



of real property; and,

first, of corporeal

hereditaments.

The objects of dominion or property are things, as contradistinguished from persons: and things are by the law of England distributed into two kinds; things real, and things personal. Things real are such as are permanent, fixed, and immoveable, which cannot be carried out of their place; as lands and tenements: things personal are goods, money, and all other moveables; which may attend the owner’s person wherever he thinks proper to go.

In treating of things real, let us consider, first, their several sorts or kinds; secondly,

the tenures by which they may be holden; thirdly, the estates which may be had in them; and, fourthly, the title to them, and the manner of acquiring and losing it.

First, with regard to their several sorts or kinds, things real are usually said to

consist in lands, tenements, or hereditaments. Land comprehends all things of a permanent, substantial nature; being a word of a very extensive signification, as will presently appear more at large. Tenement is a word of still greater extent; and though

17 in its vulgar acceptation 〈1〉 it is only applied to houses and other buildings, yet in its

original, proper, and legal sense it signifies every thing that may be holden, provided it be of a permanent nature; whether it be of a substantial and sensible, or of an unsubstantial ideal kind. Thus liberum tenementum, franktenement, or freehold, is applicable not only to lands and other solid objects, but also to offices, rents, commons, and the likea: and as lands and houses are tenements, so is an advowson a tenement; and a franchise, an office, a right of common, a peerage, or other property of the like unsubstantial kind, are, all of them, legally speaking, tenementsb. But an hereditament, says sir Edward Cokec, is by much the largest and most comprehensive expression; for it includes not only lands and tenements, but whatsoever may be inherited, be it corporeal, or incorporeal, real, personal, or mixed. Thus an heir loom, or implement of furniture which by custom descends to the heir together with an house, is neither land, nor tenement, but a mere moveable; yet, being inheritable, is comprized under the general word, hereditament: and so a condition, the benefit of which may descend to a man from his ancestor, is also an hereditamentd.

Hereditaments then, to use the largest expression, are of two kinds, corporeal,

and incorporeal. Corporeal consist of such as affect the senses; such as may be seen

a Co. Litt. 6.

b Co. Litt. 19, 20.

c 1 Inst. 6.

d [Winchester’s case] 3 Rep. 2.





chapter 2 11


and handled by the body: incorporeal are not the object of sensation, can neither be seen nor handled, are creatures of the mind, and exist only in contemplation.

Corporeal hereditaments consist wholly of substantial and permanent objects;

all which may be comprehended under the general denomination of land only. For land, says sir Edward Cokee, comprehendeth in its legal signification any ground, soil, or earth whatsoever; as arable, meadows, pastures, woods, moors, waters, marshes, furzes, and heath. It legally includeth also all castles, houses, and other 18 buildings: for they consist, saith he, of two things; land, which is the foundation; and structure thereupon: so that, if I convey the land or ground, the structure or building passeth therewith. It is observable that water is here mentioned as a species of land, which may seem a kind of solecism; but such is the language of the law: and 〈2〉 I cannot bring an action to recover possession of a pool or other piece of water, by the name of water only; either by calculating its capacity, as, for so many cubical yards; or, by superficial measure, for twenty acres of water; or by general description, as for a pond, a watercourse, or a rivulet: but I must bring my action for the land that lies at the bottom, and must call it twenty acres of land covered with water f. For water is a moveable, wandering thing, and must of necessity continue common by the law of nature; so that I can only have a temporary, transient, usufructuary property therein: wherefore if a body of water runs out of my pond into another man’s, I have no right to reclaim it. But the land, which that water covers, is permanent, fixed, and immoveable: and therefore in this I may have a certain, substantial property; of which the law will take notice, and not of the other.

Land hath also, in its legal signification, an indefinite extent, upwards as well as

downwards. Cujus est solum, ejus est usque ad coelum [whoever owns the land also owns everything up to the sky], is the maxim of the law;1 upwards, therefore no man may erect any building, or the like, to overhang another’s land: and, downwards, whatever is in a direct line between the surface of any land, and the center of the earth, belongs to the owner of the surface; as is every day’s experience in the mining countries. So that the word “land” includes not only the face of the earth, but every thing under it, or over it. And therefore if a man grants all his lands, he grants thereby all his mines of metal and other fossils, his woods, his waters, and his houses, as well as his fields and meadows. Not but the particular names of the things are equally sufficient to pass them, except in the instance of water; by a grant of which, nothing 19 passes but a right of fishingg: but the capital distinction is this; that by the name of a castle, messuage, toft, croft, or the like, nothing else will pass, except what falls with the utmost propriety under the term made use of; but by the name of land, which is nomen generalissimum [the most general name], every thing terrestrial will passh.



e 1 Inst. 4.

f [Challenor v Thomas] Brownl. 142.

g Co. Litt. 4

h Ibid. 4, 5, 6.

1 See e.g. Bury v Pope, Cro. Eliz. 118 (footnote); Co. Litt. 4a.

20 chapter the third.





of incorporeal

hereditaments.

An incorporeal hereditament is a right issuing out of a thing corporeal (whether real or personal) or concerning, or annexed to, or exercisible within, the samea. It is not the thing corporeal itself, which may consist in lands, houses, jewels, or the like; but something collateral thereto, as a rent issuing out of those lands or houses, or an office relating to those jewels. In short, as the logicians speak, corporeal heredita­ ments are the substance, which may be always seen, always handled: incorporeal hereditaments are but a sort of accidents, which inhere in and are supported by that substance; and may belong, or not belong to it, without any visible alteration therein. Their existence is merely in idea and abstracted contemplation; though their effects and profits may be frequently objects of our bodily senses. And indeed, if we would fix a clear notion of an incorporeal hereditament, we must be careful not to confound together the profits produced, and the thing, or hereditament, which produces them. An annuity, for instance, is an incorporeal hereditament: for though the money, which is the fruit or product of this annuity, is doubtless of a corporeal nature, yet the annuity itself, which produces that money, is a thing invisible, has only a mental

21 existence, and cannot be delivered over from hand to hand. So tithes, if we consider

the produce of them, as the tenth sheaf or tenth lamb, seem to be completely corporeal; yet they are indeed incorporeal hereditaments: for they, being merely a 〈1〉 contingent right, collateral to or issuing out of lands, can never be the object of sense: 〈 2〉 they are neither capable of being shewn to the eye, nor of being delivered into bodily possession.

Incorporeal hereditaments are principally of ten sorts; advowsons, tithes,

commons, ways, offices, dignities, franchises, corodies or pensions, annuities, and rents.

I. Advowson is the right of presentation to a church, or ecclesiastical benefice.

Advowson, advocatio, signifies in clientelam recipere, the taking into protection; and therefore is synonymous with patronage, patronatus: and he who has the right of advowson is called the patron of the church. For, when lords of manors first built churches on their own demesnes, and appointed the tithes of those manors to be paid to the officiating ministers, which before were given to the clergy in common (from whence, as was formerly mentionedb, arose the division of parishes) the lord, who thus built a church, and endowed it with glebe or land, had of common right a power annexed of nominating such minister as he pleased (provided he were

a Co. Litt. 19, 20.

b Vol. I. pag. 109 [I. 78].





chapter 3 13


canonically qualified) to officiate in that church of which he was the founder, endower, maintainer, or, in one word, the patronc.

This instance of an advowson will completely illustrate the nature of an incorporeal

hereditament. It is not itself the bodily possession of the church and its appendages; but it is a right to give some other man a title to such bodily possession. The advowson is the object of neither the sight, nor the touch; and yet it perpetually exists in the mind’s eye, and in contemplation of law. It cannot be delivered from man to man by any visible bodily transfer, nor can corporal possession be had of it. If the patron 22 takes corporal possession of the church, the church­yard, the glebe or the like, he intrudes on another man’s property; for to these the parson has an exclusive right. The patronage can therefore be only conveyed by operation of law, by verbal grant, either oral or written, which is a kind of invisible, mental transfer: and being so vested, it lies dormant and unnoticed, till occasion calls it forth; when it produces a visible, corporeal fruit, by intitling some clerk, whom the patron shall please to nominate, to enter and receive bodily possession of the lands and tenements of the church.

Advowsons are either advowsons appendant, or advowsons in gross. Lords of

manors being originally the only founders, and of course the only patrons, of churchesd, the right of patronage or presentation, so long as it continues annexed to the possession of the manor, as some have done from the foundation of the church to this day, is called an advowson appendant e: and it will pass, or be conveyed, together with the manor, as incident and appendant thereto, by a grant of the manor only, without adding any other wordsf. But where the property of the advowson has been once separated from the property of the manor, by legal conveyance, it is called an advowson in gross, or at large, and never can be appendant any more; but is for the future annexed to the person of its owner, and not to his manor or lands g.

Advowsons are also either presentative, collative, or donative h. An advowson

presentative is where the patron hath a right of presentation to the bishop or ordinary,1 and moreover to demand of him to institute his clerk, if he find him canonically qualified: and this is the most usual advowson. An advowson collative is where the bishop and patron are one and the same person: in which case the bishop cannot present to himself; but he does, by the one act of collation, or conferring the benefice, 23

the whole that is done in common cases, by both presentation and institution. An advowson donative is when the king, or any subject by his licence, doth found a church or chapel, and ordains that it shall be merely in the gift or disposal of the



c This original of the jus patronatus [right of patronage], by building and endowing the church, appears also to have been allowed in 〈3〉 the empire. Nov. 56. t. 12. c. 2. Nov. 118. c. 23. [The citations to Justinian’s Novellae here are slightly confusing: Blackstone refers to Nov. 56, ch. 1; Nov. 57 (title 12), ch. 2; and Nov. 123, ch. 23. Together, these relate to the appointment of ministers and the collection of fees for ecclesiastical establishments.]

d Co. Litt. 119.

e Ibid. 121.

f Ibid. 307.

g Ibid. 120.

h Ibid.

1 i.e. any clergyman exercising jurisdiction by virtue of his office.

14 of the rights of things

patron; subject to his visitation only, and not to that of the ordinary; and vested absolutely in the clerk by the patron’s deed of donation, without presentation, institution, or inductioni. This is said to have been antiently the only way of conferring ecclesiastical benefices in England; the method of institution by the bishop not being established more early than the time of arch­bishop Becket in the reign of Henry II k. And therefore though pope Alexander III l , in a letter to Becket, severely inveighs against the prava consuetudo [evil custom], as he calls it, of investiture conferred by the patron only, this however shews what was then the common usage. Others contend, that the claim of the bishops to institution is as old as the first planting of christianity in this island; and in proof of it they allege a letter from the English nobility, to the pope in the reign of Henry the third, recorded by Matthew Parism, which speaks of presentation to the bishop as a thing immemorial. The truth seems to be, that, where the benefice was to be conferred on a mere layman, he was first presented to the bishop, in order to receive ordination, who was at liberty to examine and refuse him: but where the clerk was already in orders, the living was usually vested in him by the sole donation of the patron; till about the middle of the twelfth century, when the pope and his bishops endeavoured to introduce a kind of feodal dominion over ecclesiastical benefices, and, in consequence of that, began to claim and exercise the right of institution universally, as a species of spiritual investiture.

However this may be, if, as the law now stands, the true patron once waives this

privilege of donation, and presents to the bishop, and his clerk is admitted and

24 instituted, the advowson is now become for ever presentative, and shall never be

donative any 〈4〉 more. For these exceptions to general rules, and common right, are ever looked upon by the law in an unfavourable view, and construed as strictly as possible. If therefore the patron, in whom such peculiar right resides, does once give up that right, the law, which loves uniformity, will interpret it to be done with an intention of giving it up for ever; and will 〈5〉 thereupon reduce it to the standard of other ecclesiastical livings.

II. A second species of incorporeal hereditaments is that of tithes; which are

defined to be the tenth part of the increase, yearly arising and renewing from the profits of lands, the stock upon lands, and the personal industry of the inhabitants: the first species being usually called predial, as of corn,2 grass, hops, and woodn; the second mixed, as of wool, milk, pigs, &co, consisting of natural products, but nurtured and preserved in part by the care of man; and of these the tenth must be paid in gross: the third personal, as of manual occupations, trades, fisheries, and the like; and of these only the tenth part of the clear gains and profits is due p.

i Co. Litt. 344.

k Seld. tith. c. 12. §. 2.

l Decretal. l. 3. t. 7. c. 3.

m a.d. 1239.

n 1 Roll. Abr. 635. 2 Inst. 649.

o Ibid.

p [Goslin v Harden] 1 Roll. Abr. 656.

2 i.e. any kind of grain, such as wheat, barley, or rye.





chapter 3 15


It is not to be expected from the nature of these general commentaries, that I

should particularly specify, what things are tithable, and what not, the time when, or the manner and proportion in which, tithes are usually due. For this I must refer to such authors as have treated the matter in detail: and shall only observe, that, in general, tithes are to be paid for every thing that yields an annual increase, as corn, hay, fruit, cattle, poultry, and the like; but not for any thing that is of the substance of the earth, or is not of annual increase, as stone, lime, chalk, and the like; nor for creatures that are of a wild nature, or ferae naturae, as deer, hawks, &c, whose increase, so as to profit the owner, is not annual, but casualq. It will rather be our business to consider, 1. The original of the right of tithes. 2. In whom that right at present subsists. 3. Who 25

may be discharged, either totally or in part, from paying them.

1. As to their original. I will not put the title of the clergy to tithes upon any divine

right; though such a right certainly commenced, and I believe as certainly ceased, with the Jewish theocracy. Yet an honourable and competent maintenance for the min­ is ters of the gospel is, undoubtedly, jure divino [by divine right]; whatever the par­ ticular mode of that maintenance may be. For, besides the positive precepts of the new testament, natural reason will tell us, that an order of men, who are separated from the world, and excluded from other lucrative professions, for the sake of the rest of mankind, have a right to be furnished with the necessaries, conveniences, and moderate enjoyments of life, at their expense, for whose benefit they forego the usual means of providing them. Accordingly all municipal laws have provided a liberal and decent maintenance for their national priests or clergy: ours in particular have established this of tithes, probably in imitation of the Jewish law: and perhaps, considering the degenerate state of the world in general, it may be more beneficial to the English clergy to found their title on the law of the land, than upon any divine right whatsoever, unacknowleged and unsupported by temporal sanctions.

We cannot precisely ascertain the time when tithes were first introduced into this

country. Possibly they were contemporary with the planting of christianity among the Saxons, by Augustin the monk, about the end of the sixth century. But the first mention of them, which I have met with in any written English law, is in a constitutional decree, made in a synod held a.d. 786 r, wherein the payment of tithes in general is strongly enjoined. This canon, or decree, which at first bound not the laity, was effectually confirmed by two kingdoms of the heptarchy,3 in their parliamentary conventions of estates, respectively consisting of the kings of Mercia and Northumberland, the bishops, 26

dukes, senators, and people. Which was a few years later than the time that Charlemagne established the payment of them in Frances, and made that famous division of them into four parts; one to maintain the edifice of the church, the second to support the poor, the third the bishop, and the fourth the parochial clergy t.

q 2 Inst. 651.

r Selden, [Tithes] c. 8. §. 2.

s a.d. 778. [See e.g. Selden, Tithes, ch. 7, § 7.]

t Book I. ch. 11. Seld. [Tithes] c. 6. §. 7. Sp. of laws, b. 31. c. 12.

3 The heptarchy refers to a confederation, between about 500 and 850 ad, of seven Anglo­Saxon kingdoms: Northumbria, Mercia, East Anglia, Essex, Kent, Sussex, and Wessex.

16 of the rights of things

The next authentic mention of them is in the foedus Edwardi et Guthruni; or the

laws agreed upon between king Guthrun the Dane, and Alfred and his son Edward the elder, successive kings of England, about the year 900. This was a kind of treaty between those monarchs, which may be found at large in the Anglo­Saxon lawsu; wherein it was necessary, as Guthrun was a pagan, to provide for the subsistence of the christian clergy under his dominion; and, accordingly, we findw the payment of tithes not only enjoined, but a penalty added upon non­observance: which law is seconded by 〈6〉 those of Athelstanx, about the year 930. And this is as much as can certainly be traced out, with regard to their legal original.

2. We are next to consider the persons to whom they are due. And upon their first

introduction (as hath formerly been observedy) though every man was obliged to pay tithes in general, yet he might give them to what priests he pleasedz; which were called arbitrary consecrations of tithes: or he might pay them into the hands of the bishop, who distributed among his diocesan clergy the revenues of the church, which were then in commona. But, when dioceses were divided into parishes, the tithes of each parish were allotted to its own particular minister; first by common consent, or the appointments of lords of manors, and afterwards by the written law of the landb.

27 However, arbitrary consecrations of tithes took place again afterwards, and

became in general use till the time of king Johnc. Which was probably owing to the intrigues of the regular clergy, or monks of the Benedictine and other rules, under arch­bishop Dunstan and his successors; who endeavoured to wean the people from paying their dues to the secular or parochial clergy, (a much more valuable set of men than themselves) and were then in hopes to have drawn, by sanctimonious pretences to extraordinary purity of life, all ecclesiastical profits to the coffers of their own societies.4 And this will naturally enough account for the number and riches of the monasteries and religious houses, which were founded in those days, and which were frequently endowed with tithes. For a layman, who was obliged to pay his tithes somewhere, might think it good policy to erect an abbey, and there pay them to his own monks; or grant them to some abbey already erected; since for this dotation,5 which really cost the patron little or nothing, he might, according to the superstition of the times, have masses for ever sung for his soul. But, in process of years, the income of the poor laborious parish priests being scandalously reduced by these arbitrary consecrations of tithes, it was remedied by pope Innocent the thirdd about

u Wilkins, pag. 51.

w cap. 6. [Wilkins, 52. The treaty does not specify the penalty, but only provides for ‘a penalty among the Danes, a fine among the Angles’.]

x cap. 1. [Wilkins, 55.]

y Book I. Introd. §. 4 [I. 77].

z 2 Inst. 646. [Slade v Drake] Hob. 296.

a Seld. [Tithes] c. 9. §. 4.

b LL. Edgar. c. 1 & 2. Canut. c. 11 [Wilkins, 76, 130].

c Selden. [Tithes] c. 11

d Opera Innocent. III. tom. 2. pag. 452. [The citation corresponds to the 1575 edition of the works of Innocent III.]

4 Dunstan was archbishop of Canterbury, 960–78.

5 i.e. endowment.





chapter 3 17


the year 1200 in a decretal epistle, sent to the arch­bishop of Canterbury, and dated from the palace of Lateran: which has occasioned sir Henry Hobart6 and others to mistake it for a decree of the council of Lateran held a.d. 1179, which only prohibited what was called the infeodation of tithes, or their being granted to mere laymene; whereas this letter of pope Innocent to the arch­bishop enjoined the payment of tithes to the parsons of the respective parishes where every man inhabited, agreeable to what was afterwards directed by the same pope in other countriesf. This epistle, says sir Edward Cokeg, bound not the lay subjects of this realm; but, being reasonable and just (and, he might have added, being correspondent to the antient law) it was 28 allowed of, and so became lex terrae [the law of the land]. This put an effectual stop to all the arbitrary consecrations of tithes; except some footsteps which still continue in those portions of tithes, which the parson of one parish hath, though rarely, a right to claim in another: for it is now universally heldh, that tithes are due, of common right, to the parson of the parish, unless there be a special exemption. This parson of the parish, we have formerly seeni, may be either the actual incumbent, or else the appropriator of the benefice: appropriations being a method of endowing monasteries, which seems to have been devised by the regular clergy, by way of substitution to arbitrary consecrations of tithes k.

3. We observed that tithes are due to the parson of common right, unless by special

exemption: let us therefore see, thirdly, who may be exempted from the payment of tithes, and how. Lands, and their occupiers, may be exempted or discharged from the payment of tithes, either in part or totally, first, by a real composition; or, secondly, by custom or prescription.

First, a real composition is when an agreement is made between the owner of the

lands, and the parson or vicar, with the consent of the ordinary and the patron, that such lands shall for the future be discharged from payment of tithes, by reason of some land or other real recompence given to the parson, in lieu and satisfaction thereof l. This was permitted by law, because it was supposed that the clergy would be no losers by such composition; since the consent of the ordinary, whose duty it is to take care of the church in general, and of the patron, whose interest it is to protect that particular church, were both made necessary to render the composition effectual: and hence have arisen all such compositions as exist at this day by force of the common law. But, experience shewing that even this caution was ineffectual, and the possessions 29

of the church being, by this and other means, every day diminished, the disabling statute 13 Eliz. c. 10. was made; which prevents, among other spiritual persons, all

e Decretal. l. 3. t. 30. c. 19.

f Ibid. c. 26.

g 2 Inst. 641.

h Regist. 46. [Slade v Drake] Hob. 296.

i Book I. pag. 372 [I. 247].

k In extraparochial places the king, by his royal prerogative, has a right to all the tithes. See book I. 〈7〉 pag. 110 [I. 78–9].

l 2 Inst. 490. Regist. 38. [Case de Modo Decimandi] 13 Rep. 40.

6 See Slade v Drake, Hob. 295. On the date of this epistle, see W. Easterby, History of the Law of Tithes (Cambridge, 1888), 21–4.

18 of the rights of things

parsons and vicars from making any conveyances of the estates of their churches, other than for three lives or twenty one years. So that now, by virtue of this statute, no real composition made since the 13 Eliz. is good for any longer term than three lives or twenty one years, though made by consent of the patron and ordinary: which has indeed effectually demolished this kind of traffick; such compositions being now rarely heard of, unless by authority of parliament.

Secondly, a discharge by custom or prescription, is where time out of mind such

persons or such lands have been, either partially or totally, discharged from the payment of tithes. And this immemorial usage is binding upon all parties, as it is in its nature an evidence of universal consent and acquiescence; and with reason supposes a real composition to have been formerly made. This custom or prescription is either de modo decimandi [of a particular manner of tithing], or de non decimando [of an exemption from tithes].

A modus decimandi, commonly called by the simple name of a modus only, is

where there is by custom a particular manner of tithing allowed, different from the general law of taking tithes in kind, which are the actual tenth part of the annual increase. This is sometimes a pecuniary compensation, as twopence an acre for the tithe of land: sometimes it is a compensation in work and labour, as that the parson shall have only the twelfth cock of hay, and not the tenth, in consideration of the owner’s making it for him: sometimes, in lieu of a large quantity of crude or imperfect tithe, the parson shall have a less quantity, when arrived to greater maturity, as a couple of fowls in lieu of tithe eggs; and the like. Any means, in short, whereby the general law of tithing is altered, and a new method of taking them is introduced, is called a modus decimandi, or special manner of tithing.

30 To make a good and sufficient modus, the following rules must be observed. 1. It

must be certain and invariable m, for payment of different sums will prove it to be no modus, that is, no original real composition; because that must have been one and the same, from its first original to the present time. 2. The thing given, in lieu of tithes, must be beneficial to the parson, and not for the emolument of third persons only n: thus a modus, to repair the church in lieu of tithes, is not good, because that is an advantage to the parish only; but to repair the chancel is a good modus, for that is an advantage to the parson.7 3. It must be something different from the thing compounded for o: one load of hay, in lieu of all tithe hay, is no good modus: for no parson would, bona fide, make a composition to receive less than his due in the same species of tithe; and therefore the law will not suppose it possible for such composition to have existed. 4. One cannot be discharged from payment of one species of tithe, by paying a modus for another p. Thus a modus of 1d. for every milch cow will discharge the tithe of milch kine, but not of barren cattle: for tithe is, of common right, due for

m [Baudink v Bushel] 1 Keb. 602.

n [Longley v Meredine] 1 Roll. Abr. 649.

o [Sheppard v Penrose] 1 Lev. 179.

p [Grysman v Lewes] Cro. Eliz. 446. [Archbishop of York v Duke of Newcastle] Salk. 657.

7 The chancel, near the altar, was reserved for the clergy and choir; the rector was usually responsible for the repair of the chancel, the parishioners for the rest.





chapter 3 19


both; and therefore a modus for one shall never be a discharge for the other. 5. The recompence must be in its nature as durable as the tithes discharged by it; that is, an inheritance certainq: and therefore a modus that every inhabitant of a house shall pay 4d. a year, in lieu of the owner’s tithes, is no good modus; for possibly the house may not be inhabited, and then the recompence will be lost. 6. The modus must not be too large, 〈8〉 which in law is called a rank modus: as if the real value of the tithes be 60l. per annum, and a modus is suggested of 40l. this modus will not 〈9〉 be good; though one of 40s. might have been validr. 〈10〉 For, in these cases of prescriptive or customary modus’s, 〈11〉 the law supposes an original real composition to have been regularly made; which being lost by length of time, the immemorial usage is admitted as 31 evidence to shew that it once did exist, and that from thence such usage was derived. Now time of memory hath been long ago ascertained by the law to commence from 〈12〉 the reign of Richard the first s; and any custom may be destroyed by evidence of its non­existence in any part of the long period 〈15〉 from his days to the present: wherefore, as this real composition is supposed to have been an equitable contract, or the full value of the tithes, at the time of making it, if the modus set up is so rank and large, as that it beyond dispute exceeds the value of the tithes in the time of Richard the first, this modus 〈16〉 is felo de se [a suicide] and destroys itself. For, as it would be destroyed by any direct evidence to prove its non­existence at any time since that aera, so also it is destroyed by carrying in itself this internal evidence of a much later original.

A prescription de non decimando is a claim to be entirely discharged of tithes,

and to pay no compensation in lieu of them. Thus the king by his prerogative is discharged from all tithest. So a vicar shall pay no tithes to the rector, nor the rector to the vicar, for ecclesia decimas non solvit ecclesiae u [a church does not pay tithes to a church]. But these 〈18〉 privileges are personal to both the king and the clergy; for their tenant or lessee shall pay tithes of the same land, though in their own occupation 〈19〉 it is not tithable. And, generally speaking, it is an established rule, that in lay hands, modus de non decimando non valet w [an exemption from tithing is of no force]. But spiritual persons or corporations, as monasteries, abbots, bishops, and the like, were always capable of having their lands totally discharged of tithes, by various ways x: as, 1. By real composition: 2. By the pope’s bull of exemption: 3. By unity of possession; as when the rectory of a parish, and lands in the same parish, both belonged to a religious house, those lands were discharged of tithes by this unity of 32

possession: 4. By prescription; having never been liable to tithes, by being always in spiritual hands: 5. By virtue of their order; as the knights templars, cistercians, and

q ms [Carleton v Brightwell] 2 P. W. 462.

r [Startup v Doderidge] 11 Mod. 60.

s 〈13〉 This rule was adopted when by the statute of Westm. 1. (3 Edw. I. c. 39.) the reign of Richard I was made the time of limitation in a writ of right. But, since by the statute 32 Hen. VIII. c. 2. this period (in a writ of right) hath been very rationally reduced to sixty years, it seems unaccountable, that the date of legal prescription or memory should still continue to be reckoned from an aera so very antiquated. 〈14〉 See 2 Roll. Abr. 269. pl. 16.

t [Wright v Wright] Cro. Eliz. 511.

u 〈17〉 [Blinco v Marston] Ibid. 479.

w [Wright v Wright] Ibid. 511.

x [Wright v Gerrard] Hob. 309. [Clison v Proctor] Cro. Jac. 308.

20 of the rights of things

others, whose lands were privileged by the pope with a discharge of tithes y.8 Though, upon the dissolution of abbeys by Henry VIII, most of these exemptions from tithes would have fallen with them, and the lands become tithable again; had they not been supported and upheld by the statute 31 Hen. VIII. c. 13. which enacts, that all persons who should come to the possession of the lands of any abbey then dissolved, should hold them free and discharged of tithes, in as large and ample a manner as the abbeys themselves formerly held them. And from this original have sprung all the lands, which, being in lay hands, do at present claim to be tithe­free: for, if a man can shew his lands to have been such abbey lands, and also immemorially discharged of tithes by any of the means before­mentioned, this is now a good prescription de non decimando. But he must shew both these requisites: for abbey lands, without a special ground of discharge, are not discharged of course; neither will any prescription de non decimando avail in total discharge of tithes, unless it relates to such abbey lands.

III. Common, or right of common, appears from its very definition to be an

incorporeal hereditament: being a profit which a man hath in the land of another; as to feed his beasts, to catch fish, to dig turf, to cut wood, or the like z. And hence common is chiefly of four sorts; common of pasture, of piscary, of turbary, and of estovers.

1. Common of pasture is a right of feeding one’s beasts on another’s land; for in

those waste grounds, which are usually called commons, the property of the soil is generally in the lord of the manor; as in common fields it is in the particular tenants. This kind of common is either appendant, appurtenant, because of vicinage, or in grossa.

33 Common appendant is a right, belonging to the owners or occupiers of arable

land, to put commonable beasts upon the lord’s waste, and upon the land of other persons within the same manor. Commonable beasts are either beasts of the plough, or such as manure the ground. This is a matter of most universal right; and it was originally permittedb, not only for the encouragement of agriculture, but for the necessity of the thing. For, when lords of manors granted out parcels of land to tenants, for services either done or to be done, these tenants could not plough or manure the land without beasts; these beasts could not be sustained without pasture; and pasture could not be had but in the lord’s wastes, and on the uninclosed fallow grounds of themselves and the other tenants. The law therefore annexed this right of common, as inseparably incident, to the grant of the lands; and this was the original of common appendant: which obtains in Sweden, and the other northern kingdoms, much in the same manner as in Englandc. Common 〈20〉 appurtenant is where the owner of land has a right to put in other beasts, besides such as are generally commonable;

y [Wright v Wright] 2 Rep. 44. Seld. tith. c. 13. §. 2.

z Finch, law. 157.

a Co. Litt. 122.

b 2 Inst. 86.

c Stiernh. de jure Sueonum. l. 2. c. 6.

8 The Knights Templar were relieved from tithes by Pope Innocent II in 1139, seven years after he gave a similar exemption to the Cistercian order.





chapter 3 21


as hogs, 〈21〉 goats, and the like, which neither plough nor manure the ground. This, not arising 〈22〉 from the necessity of the thing, like common appendant, is therefore not 〈23〉 of common right; but can only be claimed by immemorial usage and prescrip­ tiond, which the law esteems sufficient proof of a special grant or agreement for this purpose. Common because of vicinage, or neighbourhood, is where the inhabitants of two townships, which lie contiguous to each other, have usually intercommoned with one another; the beasts of the one straying mutually into the other’s fields, without any molestation from either. This is indeed only a permissive right, intended to excuse what in strictness is a trespass in both, and to prevent a multiplicity of suits: and therefore either township may enclose and bar out the other, though they have intercommoned time out of mind. Neither hath any person of one town a right to put his beasts originally into the other’s common; but if they escape, and stray thither of 34

themselves, the law winks at the trespasse. Common in gross, or at large, is such as is neither appendant nor appurtenant to land, but is annexed to a man’s person; being granted to him and his heirs by deed: or it may be claimed by prescriptive right, as 〈25〉 by parson of a church, or the like corporation sole. This is a separate inheritance, entirely distinct from any landed property, and may be vested in one who has not a foot of ground in the manor.

All these species, of pasturable common, may be and usually are limited as to

number and time; but there are also commons without stint, and which last all the year. By the statute of Merton however, and other subsequent statutes f, the lord of a manor may enclose so much of the waste as he pleases, for tillage or woodground, provided he leaves common sufficient for such as are entitled thereto. This enclosure, when justifiable, is called in law “approving;” an antient expression signifying the same as “improving g.” The lord hath the sole interest in the soil; but the interest of the lord and commoner, in the common, are looked upon in law as mutual. They may both bring actions for damage done, either against strangers, or each other; the lord for the public injury, and each commoner for his private damage h.

2, 3. Common of piscary is a liberty of fishing in another man’s 〈26〉 waters; as

common of turbary is a liberty of digging turf upon another’s ground i. There is also a common of digging for coals, minerals, stones, and the like. All these bear a resemblance to common of pasture in many respects; though in one point they go much farther: common of pasture being only a right of feeding on the herbage and vesture of the soil, which renews annually; but common of turbary, and 〈27〉 the rest, are a right of carrying away the very soil itself.

4. Common of 〈28〉 estovers (from estoffer, to furnish) is a liberty of taking 35

necessary wood, for the use or furniture of a house or farm, from off another’s estate. The Saxon word, bote, is 〈29〉 of the same signification with the French estovers; and

d 〈24〉 Co. Litt. 122.

e Co. Litt. 122.

f 20 Hen. III. c. 4. 29. Geo. II. c. 36. and 31 Geo. II. c. 41.

g 2 Inst. 474.

h [Robert Marys’s case] 9 Rep. 113.

i Co. Litt. 122.

22 of the rights of things

therefore house­bote is a sufficient allowance of wood, to repair, or to burn in, the house; which latter is sometimes called fire­bote: plough­bote and cart­bote are wood to be employed in making and repairing all instruments of husbandry: and hay­bote or hedge­bote is wood for repairing of hays, hedges, or fences. These botes or estovers must be reasonable ones; and such any tenant or lessee may take off the land let or demised to him, without waiting for any leave, assignment, or appointment of the lessor, unless he be restrained by special covenant to the contrary k.

These several species of commons do all originally result from the same necessity

as common of pasture; viz. for the maintenance and carrying on of husbandry: common of piscary being given for the sustenance of the tenant’s family; common of turbary and fire­bote for his fuel; and house­bote, plough­bote, cart­bote, and hedge­ bote, for repairing his house, his instruments of tillage, and the necessary fences of his grounds.

IV. A fourth species of incorporeal hereditaments is that of ways; or the right of

going over another man’s ground. I speak not here of the king’s highways, which lead from town to town; nor yet of common ways, leading from a village into the fields; but of private ways, in which a particular man may have an interest and a right, though another be owner of the soil. This may be grounded on a special permission; as when the owner of the land grants to another a liberty of passing over his grounds, to go to church, to market, or the like: in which case the gift or grant is particular, and confined to the grantee alone; it dies with the person; and, if the grantee leaves the

36 country, he cannot assign over his right to any other; nor can he justify taking another

person in his company l. A way may be also by prescription; as if 〈30〉 all the owners and occupiers of such a farm have immemorially used to 〈31〉 cross another’s ground: for this immemorial usage supposes an original grant, whereby a right of way thus appurtenant to 〈32〉 land may clearly be created. A right of way may also arise by act and operation of law: for, if a man grants me a piece of ground in the middle of his field, he at the same time tacitly and impliedly gives me a way to come at it; and I may cross his land for that purpose without trespass m. For when the law doth give any thing to one, it giveth impliedly whatsoever is necessary for enjoying the same n. By the law of the twelve tables at Rome, where a man had the right of way over another’s land, and the road was out of repair, he who had the right of way might go over any part of the land he pleased: which was the established rule in public as well as private ways.9 And the law of England, in both cases, seems to correspond with the Romano.



k Co. Litt. 41.

l Finch. law. 31.

m Ibid. 63.

n Co. Litt. 56.

o [Young v —] Lord Raym. 725. [Horn v Widlake] 1 Brownl. 212. [Absor v French] 2 Show. 28. [Henn’s case] 1 Jon. 297.

9 The Law of the Twelve Tables, drawn up around 451–449 bc, established a set of basic procedural and private rights in the Roman republic. Table VII.7 provided that owners of real property were required to ‘build and repair the road’, and that unless they kept it ‘clear of stones’, others could ‘drive [their] beast or carriage’ where they liked.





chapter 3 23


V. Offices, which are a right to exercise a public or private employment, 〈33〉 and

the fees and emoluments thereunto belonging, are also incorporeal hereditaments: whether public, as those of magistrates; or private, as of bailiffs, receivers, and the like. For a man may have an estate in them, either to him and his heirs, or for life, or for a term of years, or during pleasure only: save only that offices of public trust cannot be granted for a term of years, especially if they concern the administration of justice, for then they might perhaps vest in executors or administrators p. Neither can any judicial office be granted in reversion; because, though the grantee may be able to perform it at the time of the grant, yet before the office falls he may become unable and insufficient: but ministerial offices may be so granted q; for those may be executed by deputy. Also, by statute 5 and 6 Edw. VI. c. 16. no public 〈34〉 office shall be sold, under pain of disability to dispose of or hold it. For the law presumes that he, who buys an office, will by bribery, extortion, or other unlawful means, make his 37 purchase good, to the manifest detriment of the public.

VI. Dignities bear a near relation to offices. Of the nature of these we treated at

large in the former book r: it will therefore be here sufficient to mention them as a species of incorporeal hereditaments, wherein a man may have a property or estate.

VII. Franchises are a seventh species. Franchise and liberty are used as synonymous

terms: and their definition is s, a royal privilege, or branch of the king’s prerogative, subsisting in the hands of a subject. Being therefore derived from the crown, they must arise from the king’s grant; or, in some cases, may be held by prescription, which, as has been frequently said, presupposes a grant. The kinds of them are various, and almost infinite: I will here briefly touch upon some of the principal; premising only, that they may be vested in either natural persons or bodies politic; in one man, or in many: but the same identical franchise, that has before been granted to one, cannot be bestowed on another; for that would prejudice the former grant t.

To be a county palatine is a franchise, vested in a number of persons. It is likewise

a franchise for a number of persons to be incorporated, and subsist as a body politic, with a power to maintain perpetual succession and do other corporate acts: and each individual member of such corporation is also said to have a franchise or freedom. Other franchises are, to hold a court leet: to have a manor or lordship; or, at least, to have a lordship paramount: to have waifs, wrecks, estrays, treasure­trove, royal fish, forfeitures, and deodands:10 to have a court of one’s own, or liberty of holding pleas, and trying causes: to have the cognizance of pleas; which is a still greater liberty, being an exclusive right, so that no other court shall try causes arising within that jurisdiction: to have a bailiwick, or liberty exempt from the sheriff of the county, wherein the grantee only, and his officers, are to execute all process: to have a fair or 38

market; with the right of taking toll, either there or at any other public places, as at

p [Sir George Reynel’s case] 9 Rep. 97.

q [Auditor Curle’s case] 11 Rep. 4.

r See Book I. ch. 12.

s Finch. L. 164.

t 2 Roll. Abr. 191. [Anon. (1517)] Keilw. 196.

10 See also I, ch. 8, where Blackstone defines all these terms in more detail.

24 of the rights of things

bridges, wharfs, 〈35〉 and the like; which tolls must have a reasonable cause of com­ mencement, (as in consideration of repairs, or the like) else the franchise is illegal and voidu: or, lastly, to have a forest, chase, park, warren, or fishery, endowed with privileges of royalty; which species of franchise may require a more minute discussion.

As to a forest: this, in the hands of a subject, is properly the same thing with a

chase; being subject to the common law, and not to the forest lawsv. But a chase differs from a park, in that it is not enclosed, and also in that a man may have a chase in another man’s ground as well as his own; being indeed the liberty of keeping beasts of chase or royal game therein, protected even from the owner of the land, with a power of hunting them thereon. A park is an enclosed chase, extending only over a man’s own grounds. The word park indeed properly signifies 〈36〉 any enclosure; but yet it is not every field or common, which a gentleman pleases to surround with a wall or paling, and to stock with a herd of deer, that is thereby constituted a legal park: for the king’s grant, or at least immemorial prescription, is necessary to make it sow. Though now the difference between a real park, and such enclosed grounds, is in many respects not very material: only that it is unlawful at common law for any person to kill any beasts of park or chasex, except such as possess these franchises of forest, chase, or park. Free-warren is a similar franchise, erected for preservation or custody (which the word signifies) of beasts and fowls of warren y; which, being ferae

39 naturae, every one had a natural right to kill as he could: but upon the introduction

of the forest laws at the Norman conquest, as will be shewn hereafter, these animals being looked upon as royal game and the sole property of our savage monarchs, this franchise of free­warren was invented to protect them; by giving the grantee a sole and exclusive power of killing such game, so far as his warren extended, on condition of his preventing other persons. A man therefore that has the franchise of warren, is in reality no more than a royal game­keeper: but no man, not even a lord of a manor, could by common law justify sporting on another’s soil, or even on his own, unless he had the liberty of free­warrenz. This franchise is almost fallen into disregard, since the new statutes for preserving the game; the name being now chiefly preserved in grounds that are set apart for breeding hares and rabbets. There are many instances of keen sportsmen in antient times, who have sold their estates, and reserved the free­warren, or right of killing game, to themselves; by which means it comes to pass that a man and his heirs have sometimes free­warren over another’s grounda. A free fishery, or exclusive right of fishing in a public river, is also a royal franchise; and is considered as such in all countries where the feodal polity has prevailedb: though the

u 2 Inst. 220.

v 4 Inst. 314.

w Co. Litt. 233. 2 Inst. 199. [Case of Monopolies] 11 Rep. 86.

x These are properly buck, doe, fox, martin, and roe; but in a common and legal sense extend likewise to all the beasts of the forest: which, besides the other, are reckoned to be hart, hind, hare, boar, and wolf, and in a word, all wild beasts of venary or hunting (Co. Litt. 233.)

y The beasts are hares, conies, and roes: the fowls are either campestres [field birds], as partridges, rails, and quails; or sylvestres [wood birds], as woodcocks and pheasants; or aquatiles [water­fowls], as mallards and herons. (Ibid.)

z [Smith v Kemp] Salk. 637.

a Bro. Abr. tit. Warren. 3.

b Seld. Mar. claus. I. 24. Dufresne. V. 503. Crag. de Jur feod. II. 8. 15.





chapter 3 25


making such grants, and by that means appropriating what seems to be unnatural to restrain, the use of running water, was prohibited for the future by king John’s great charter, and the rivers that were fenced in his time were directed to be laid open, as well as the forests to be disafforestedc. This opening was extended, by the secondd and thirde charters of Henry III, to those also that were fenced under Richard I; so that a franchise of free fishery ought now to be at least as old as the reign of Henry II. This differs from a several fishery; because he that has a several fishery must 〈37〉 also be the owner of the 〈38〉 soil, which in a free fishery is not requisite. It differs also from a common of piscary before­mentioned, in that the free fishery is an exclusive right, 40

the common of piscary is not so: and therefore, in a free fishery, a man has a property in the fish before they are caught; in a common of piscary, not till afterwardsf. Some indeed have considered a free fishery not as a royal franchise, but merely as a private grant of a liberty to fish in the several fishery of the grantor g. But 〈39〉 the considering such right as originally a flower of the prerogative, till restrained by magna carta, and derived by royal grant (previous to the reign of Richard I.) to such as now claim it by prescription, 〈40〉 may remove some difficulties in respect to this matter, with which our books are 〈41〉 embarassed.

VIII. Corodies are a right of sustenance, or to receive certain allotments of victual

and provision for one’s maintenanceh. In lieu of which (especially when due from ecclesiastical persons) a pension or sum of money is sometimes substituted i . And these may be reckoned another species of incorporeal hereditaments; though not chargeable on, or issuing from, any corporeal inheritance, but only charged on the person of the owner in respect of such his inheritance. To these may be added,

IX. Annuities, which are much of the same nature; only that these arise from

temporal, as the former from spiritual, persons. An annuity is a thing very distinct from a rent­charge, with which it is frequently confounded: a rent­charge being a burthen imposed upon and issuing out of lands, whereas an annuity is a yearly sum chargeable only upon the person of the grantor j. Therefore, if a man by deed grant to another the sum of 20l. per annum, without expressing out of what lands it shall issue, no land at all shall be charged with it; but it is a mere personal annuity: which is of so little account in the law, that, if granted to an eleemosynary11 corporation, it is not within the statutes of mortmaink; and yet a man may have a real estate in it, though his security is merely personal.

X. Rents are the last species of incorporeal hereditaments. The word, rent, or 41

render, reditus, signifies a compensation, or return; it being in the nature of an

c cap. 47. edit. Oxon.

d cap. 20.

e 9 Hen. III. c. 16.

f F. N. B. 88. [Smith v Kemp] Salk. 637.

g [Alderman de Londres v Hasting] 2 Sid. 8.

h Finch. L. 162.

i See Book I. ch. 8.

j Co. Litt. 144.

k Ibid. 2.

11 charitable.

26 of the rights of things

acknowlegement given for the possession of some corporeal inheritancel. It is defined to be a certain profit issuing yearly out of lands and tenements corporeal. It must be a profit; yet there is no occasion for it to be, as it usually is, a sum of money: for spurs, capons, horses, corn, and other matters may be rendered, and frequently are rendered, by way of rentm. It may also consist in services or manual operations; as, to plough so many acres of ground, to attend the king or the lord to the wars, and the like; which services in the eye of the law are profits. This profit must also be certain; or that which may be reduced to a certainty by either party. It must also issue yearly; though there is no occasion for it to issue every successive year; but it may be reserved every second, third, or fourth year n: yet, as it is to be produced out of the profits of lands and tenements, as a recompense for being permitted to hold 〈42〉 and enjoy them, it ought to be reserved yearly, because those profits do annually arise and are annually renewed. It must issue out of the thing granted, and not be part of the land or thing itself; wherein it differs from an exception in the grant, which is always of part of the thing grantedo. It must, lastly, issue out of lands and tenements corporeal; that is, from some inheritance whereunto the owner or grantee of the rent may have recourse to distrein. Therefore a rent cannot be reserved out of an advowson, a common, an office, a franchise, or the like p. But a grant of such annuity or sum may operate as a personal contract, and oblige the grantor to pay the money reserved, or subject him to an action of debtq; though it doth not affect the inheritance, and is no legal rent in contemplation of law.

There are at common law r three manner of rents; rent­service, rent­charge,

42 and rent­seck. Rent-service is so called because it hath some corporal service

incident to it, as at the least fealty, or the feodal oath of fidelity s. For, if a tenant holds his land by fealty, and ten shillings rent; or by the service of ploughing the lord’s land, and five shillings rent; these pecuniary rents, being connected with personal services, are therefore called rent­service. And for these, in case they be behind, or arrere, at the day appointed, the lord may distrein of common right, without reserving any special power of distress; provided he hath in himself the reversion, or future estate of the lands and tenements, after the lease or particular estate of the lessee or grantee is expired t. A rent-charge, is where the owner of the rent hath no future interest, or reversion expectant in the land; as where a man by deed maketh over to others his whole estate in fee simple, with a certain rent payable thereout, and adds to the deed a covenant or clause of distress, that if the rent be arrere, or behind, it shall be lawful to distrein for the same. In this case the

l Co. Litt. 144.

m Ibid. 142.

n Ibid. 47.

o [Reniger v Fogossa] [1] Plowd. 13. [Whitlock’s case] 8 Rep. 71.

p Co. Litt. 144.

q Ibid. 47.

r Litt. §. 213.

s Co. Litt. 142.

t Litt. §. 215 [recte 213].





chapter 3 27


land is liable to the distress, not of common right, but by virtue of the clause in the deed: and therefore it is called a rent­charge, because in this manner the land is charged with a distress for the payment of it u. Rent-seck, reditus siccus, or barren rent, is in effect nothing more than a rent reserved by deed, but without any clause of distress.

There are also other species of rents, which are reducible to these three. Rents of

assise are the certain established rents of the freeholders and antient copyholders of a manorw, which cannot be departed from or varied. Those of the freeholders are frequently called chief rents, reditus capitales; and both sorts are indifferently denomin­ ated quit rents, quieti reditus; because thereby the tenant goes quit and free of all other services. When these payments were reserved in silver or white money, they were antiently called white­rents, or blanch-farms, reditus albix; in contradistinction to rents reserved in work, grain, 〈44〉 &c. which were called reditus nigri, or black- 43

maile y. Rack­rent is only a rent of the full value of the tenement, or near it. A feefarm­ rent is a rent­charge issuing out of an estate in fee; of at least one fourth of the value of the lands, at the time of its reservationz: for a grant of lands, reserving so considerable a rent, is indeed only letting lands to farm in fee simple instead of the usual methods for life or years.

These are the general divisions of rent; but the difference between them (in respect

to the remedy for recovering them) is now totally abolished; and all persons may have the like remedy by distress for rents­seck, rents of assise, and chief­rents, as in case of rents reserved upon leasea.

Rent is regularly due and payable upon the land from whence it issues, if no

particular place is mentioned in the reservationb: but, in case of the king, the payment must be either to his officers at the exchequer, or to his receiver in the country c. And, strictly, the rent is demandable and payable before the time of sunset of the day whereon it is reservedd; though 〈46〉 some have thought it not absolutely due till midnight e.

With regard to the original of rents, something will be said in the next chapter:

and, as to distresses and other remedies for their recovery, the doctrine relating thereto, and the several proceedings thereon, these belong properly to the third part of our commentaries, which will treat of civil injuries, and the means whereby they are redressed.



u Co. Litt. 143.

w 2 Inst. 19.

x In Scotland this kind of small payment is called 〈43〉 blench-holding, or reditus albae firmae [rents of white­ farm].

y 2 Inst. 19.

z Co. Litt. 143.

a Stat. 4 Geo. II. c. 28.

b Co. Litt. 201.

c [Boroughe’s case] 4 Rep. 73.

d 〈45〉 [Dennis v Bosden] Anders. 253.

e [Duppa v Mayo] 1 Saund. 287. 〈47〉 [Earl of Strafford v Lady Wentworth] 1 Chan. Prec. 555.

44 chapter the fourth.





of the feodal system.

It is impossible to understand, with any degree of accuracy, either the civil constitution of this kingdom, or the laws which regulate its landed property, without some general acquaintance with the nature and doctrine of feuds, or the feodal law: a system so universally received throughout Europe, upwards of twelve centuries ago, that sir Henry Spelmana does not scruple to call it the law of nations in our western world. This chapter will be therefore dedicated to this inquiry. And though, in the course of our observations in this and many other parts of the present book, we may have occasion to search pretty highly into the antiquities of our English jurisprudence, yet surely no industrious student will imagine his time mis-employed, when he is led to consider that the obsolete doctrines of our laws are frequently the foundation, upon which what remains is erected; and that it is impracticable to comprehend many rules of the modern law, in a scholarlike scientifical manner, without having recourse to the antient. Nor will these researches be altogether void of rational entertainment as well as use: as in viewing the majestic ruins of Rome or Athens, of Balbec or Palmyra, it administers both pleasure and instruction to compare them with the draughts of the same edifices, in their pristine proportion and splendor.1

45 The constitution of feudsb had its original from the military policy of the northern

or Celtic nations, the Goths, the Hunns, the Franks, the Vandals, and the Lombards, who all migrating from the same officina gentium [workshop of nations], as Craig very justly entitles it c, poured themselves in vast quantities into all the regions of Europe, at the declension of the Roman empire. It was brought by them from their own countries, and continued in their respective colonies as the most likely means to secure their new acquisitions: and, to that end, large districts or parcels of land were allotted by the conquering general to the superior officers of the army, and by them dealt out again in smaller parcels or allotments to the inferior officers and most deserving soldiersd. These allotments were called feoda, feuds, fiefs, or fees; which last appellation in the northern languagese signifies a conditional stipend or



a of parliaments. 57.

b See Spelman of feuds, and Wright of tenures, per tot. [passim]

c De jure feod. 19, 20.

d Wright. 7.

e Spelm. Gl. 216.

1 Balbec (or Baalbek), in eastern Lebanon, is famous for its monolithic temples, built between the first century bc and the first century ad. Palmyra, in a desert oasis in central Syria, is also famous for its temples, built around the same time. Blackstone’s use of these examples is probably indebted to two lavishly illustrated books by Robert Wood, The Ruins of Palmyra (1753) and The Ruins of Balbec (1757).





chapter 4 29


rewardf. Rewards or stipends they evidently were; and the condition annexed to them was, that the possessor should do service faithfully, both at home and in the wars, to him by whom they were given; for which purpose he took the juramentum fidelitatis, or oath of fealty g: and in case of the breach of this condition and oath, by not performing the stipulated service, or by deserting the lord in battle, the lands were again to revert to him who granted themh.

Allotments thus acquired, naturally engaged such as accepted them to defend

them: and, as they all sprang from the same right of conquest, no part could subsist 46

independent of the whole; wherefore all givers as well as receivers were mutually bound to defend each others possessions. But, as that could not effectually be done in a tumultuous irregular way, government, and to that purpose subordination, was necessary. Every receiver of lands, or feudatory, was therefore bound, when called upon by his benefactor, or immediate lord of his feud or fee, to do all in his power to defend him. Such benefactor or lord was likewise subordinate to and under the command of his immediate benefactor or superior; and so upwards to the prince or general himself. And the several lords were also reciprocally bound, in their respective gradations, to protect the possessions they had given. Thus the feodal connection was established, a proper military subjection was naturally introduced, and an army of feudatories 〈2〉 were always ready enlisted, and mutually prepared to muster, not only in defence of each man’s own several property, but also in defence of the whole, and of every part of this their newly acquired country i : the prudence of which constitution was soon sufficiently visible in the strength and spirit, with which they maintained their conquests.

The universality and early use of this feodal plan, among all those nations which in

complaisance to the Romans we still call barbarous, may appear from what is recordedk of the Cimbri and Teutones, nations of the same northern original as those whom we have been describing, at their first irruption into Italy about a century before the christian aera.2 They demanded of the Romans, “ut martius populus aliquid sibi terrae daret, quasi stipendium: caeterum, ut vellet, manibus atque armis suis uteretur.”3 The sense of which may be thus rendered; they desired stipendiary lands (that is, feuds) to be allowed them, to be held by military and other personal services, whenever their lords should call upon

f Pontoppidan in his history of Norway (page 290) observes, that in the northern languages odn signifies proprietas [property] and all totum [the whole]. Hence he derives the odhal right in those countries; and 〈1〉 hence too perhaps is derived the udal right in Finland, &c. (See Mac Doual. Inst. part. 2 [i. 2.3.3].) Now the transposition of these northern syllables, allodh, will give us the true etymology of the allodium, or absolute property of the feudists; as, by a similar combination of the latter syllable with the word fee (which signifies, we have seen, a conditional reward or stipend) feeodh or feodum will denote stipendiary property.

g See this Oath explained at large in Feud. l. 2. t. 7.

h Feud. l. 2. t. 24.

i Wright. 8.

k L. Florus. l. 3. c. 3.

2 The Cimbri and Teutones were tribes from Northern Europe who, moving southward through what is now France, had a series of successful battles with Roman forces and their allies between 113 bc and 103 bc, but were decisively defeated by the Romans at the Battle of Vercellae, in northern Italy, in 101 bc.

3 ‘That so warlike a people would give them some land as pay, but might use their hands and their armour, as they wished’. Blackstone gives the source in note k.

30 of the rights of things

them. This was evidently the same constitution, that displayed itself more fully about seven hundred years afterwards; when the Salii, Burgundians, and Franks broke in upon

47 Gaul, the Visigoths on Spain, and the Lombards upon Italy, and introduced with

themselves this northern plan of polity, serving at once to distribute, and to protect, the territories they had newly gained. And from 〈3〉 hence it is probable that the emperor Alexander Severusl took the hint, of dividing lands conquered from the enemy among his generals and victorious soldiery, 〈4〉 on condition of receiving military service from them and their heirs for ever.

Scarce had these northern conquerors established themselves in their new

dominions, when the wisdom of their constitutions, as well as their personal valour, alarmed all the princes of Europe; that is, of those countries which had formerly been Roman provinces, but had revolted, or were deserted by their old masters, in the general wreck of the empire. Wherefore most, if not all, of them thought it necessary to enter into the same or a similar plan of policy. For whereas, before, the possessions of their subjects were perfectly allodial; (that is, wholly independent, and held of no superior at all) now they parcelled out their royal territories, or persuaded their subjects to surrender up and retake their own landed property, under the like feodal 〈 5〉 obligation of military fealty m. And thus, in the compass of a very few years, the feodal constitution, or the doctrine of tenure, extended itself over all the western world. Which alteration of landed property, in so very material a point, necessarily drew after it an alteration of laws and customs: so that the feodal laws soon drove out the Roman, which had hitherto universally obtained, but now became for many centuries lost and forgotten; and Italy itself (as some of the civilians, with more spleen than judgment, have expressed it) belluinas, atque ferinas, immanesque Longobardorum leges accepitn [received the wild, fierce, and barbarous laws of the Lombards].

48 But this feodal polity, which was thus by degrees established over all the

continent of Europe, seems not to have been received in this part of our island, at least not universally and as a part of the national constitution, till the reign of William the Normano. Not but that it is reasonable to believe, from abundant traces in our history and laws, that even in the times of the Saxons, who were a swarm from what sir William Temple calls the same northern hive,4 something



l “Sola, quae de hostibus capta sunt, limitaneis ducibus et militibus donavit; ita ut eorum ita essent, si haeredes illorum militarent, nec unquam ad privatos pertinerent: dicens attentius illos militaturos, si etiam sua rura defenderent. Addidit sane his et animalia et servos, ut possent colere quod acceperant; ne per inopiam hominum vel per senectutem desererentur rura vicina barbariae, quod turpissimum ille ducebat [The lands which were taken from the enemy on the borders he gave to his generals and soldiers; on condition that their heirs should be soldiers, and never belong to private stations: saying that they would fight more resolutely, if they defended their own lands at the same time. He also gave animals and slaves with them, that they might cultivate what they had acquired; lest, through want of men, or by reason of old age, the neighbouring lands should be abandoned to the barbarians, something he considered most disgraceful].” (Æl. Lamprid. in vita Alex. Severi.)

m Wright. 10.

n Gravin. Orig. l. 1. §. 139.

o Spelm. Gloss. 218. Bract. l. 2. c. 16. §. 7.

4 Temple’s History of England describes the Saxons as members of a ‘Northern Hive’ that ‘swarmed’ repeatedly into England (e.g. 44, 62).





chapter 4 31


similar to this was in use: yet not so extensively, nor attended with all the rigour that was afterwards imported by the Normans. For the Saxons were firmly settled in this island, at least as early as the year 600: and it was not till two centuries after, that feuds arrived to their full vigour and maturity, even on the continent of Europep.

This introduction however of the feodal tenures into England, by king William,

does not seem to have been effected immediately after the conquest, nor by the mere arbitrary will and power of the conqueror; but to have been 〈6〉 consented to by the great council of the nation long after his title was established. Indeed from the prodigious slaughter of the English nobility at the battle of Hastings, and the fruitless insurrections of those who survived, such numerous forfeitures had accrued, that he was able to reward his Norman followers with very large and extensive possessions: which gave a handle to the monkish historians, and such as have implicitly followed them, to represent him as having by right of the sword seised on all the lands of England, and dealt them out again to his own favourites. A supposition, grounded upon a mistaken sense of the word conquest; which, in its feodal acceptation, signifies no more than acquisition: and this has led many hasty writers into a strange historical mistake, and one which upon the slightest examination will be found to be most untrue. However, certain it is, that the Normans now began to gain very large possessions in England: and their regard for the feodal law, under which they had long lived, together with the king’s recommendation of this policy to the English, as 49

the best way to put themselves on a military footing, and thereby to prevent any future attempts from the continent, were probably the reasons that prevailed to effect its establishment 〈7〉 here. And 〈8〉 perhaps we may be able to ascertain the time of this great revolution in our landed property 〈9〉 with a tolerable degree of exactness. For we learn from the Saxon Chronicle q, that in the nineteenth year of king William’s reign an invasion was apprehended from Denmark; and the military constitution of the Saxons being then laid aside, and no other introduced in its stead, the king-dom was wholly defenceless: which occasioned the king to bring over a large army of Normans and Bretons, who were quartered upon every landholder, and great ly oppressed the people. This apparent weakness, together with the grievances occa-sioned by a foreign force, might co-operate with the king’s remonstrances, and the better encline the nobility to listen to his proposals for putting them in a posture of defence. For, as soon as the danger was over, the king held a great council to inquire into the state of the nationr; the immediate consequence of which was the compiling of the great survey called domesday-book, which was finished in the next year: and in the latter end of that very year the king was attended by all his nobility at Sarum [Salisbury]; where all the principal landholders submitted their lands to the yoke of military



p Crag. l. 1. t. 4.

q [Chron. Sax.] a.d. 1085.

r Rex tenuit magnum concilium, et graves sermones habuit cum suis proceribus de hac terra, quo modo incoleretur, et a quibus hominibus [The king held a great council, and had important debates with his nobles concerning this land, how it should be inhabited and by what men]. Chron. Sax. ibid.

32 of the rights of things

tenure, became the king’s vasals, and did homage and fealty to his persons. This 〈10〉 seems to have been the aera of formally introducing the feodal tenures by law; and 〈11〉 probably the very law, thus made at the council of Sarum, is that which is still extant t, and couched in these remarkable words: “statuimus, ut omnes liberi homines foedere et sacramento affirment, quod intra et extra universum regnum Angliae Wilhelmo regi domino suo fideles esse volunt; terras et honores illius omni fidelitate

50 ubique servare cum eo, et contra inimicos et alienigenas defendere.”5 The terms of this

law (as sir Martin Wright has observed u) are plainly feodal: for, first, it requires the oath of fealty, which made in the sense of the feudists every man that took it a tenant or vasal; and, secondly, the tenants obliged themselves to defend their lord’s territories and titles against all enemies foreign and domestic. But what 〈12〉 puts the matter out of dispute is another law of the same collectionw, which exacts the performance of the military feodal services, as ordained by the general council. “Omnes comites, et barones, et milites, et servientes, et universi liberi homines totius regni nostri praedicti, habeant et teneant se semper bene in armis et in equis, ut decet et oportet: et sint semper prompti et bene parati ad servitium suum integrum nobis explendum et peragendum cum opus fuerit; secundum quod nobis debent de feodis et tenementis suis de jure facere; et sicut illis statuimus per commune concilium totius regni nostri praedicti.”6

This new polity therefore seems not to have been imposed by the conqueror, but

nationally and freely adopted by the general assembly of the whole realm, in the same manner as other nations of Europe had before adopted it, upon the same principle of self-security. And, in particular, they had the recent example of the French nation before their eyes; which had gradually surrendered up all its allodial or free lands into the king’s hands, who restored them to the owners as a beneficium or feud, to be held to them and such of their heirs as they previously nominated to the king: and thus by degrees all the allodial estates 〈13〉 of France were converted into feuds, and the freemen became the vasals of the crownx. The only difference between this change of tenures in France, and that in England, was, that the former was effected gradually,



s Omnes praedia tenentes, quotquot essent notae melioris per totam Angliam, ejus homines facti sunt, et omnes se illi subdidere, ejusque facti sunt vasalli, ac ei fidelitatis juramenta praestiterunt, se contra alios quoscunque illi fidos futuros [All holding such estates that were of a better condition throughout England became his men, subjected themselves to him, were made his vassals, and took the oath of fealty, that they would be faithful to him against all, whoever they might be]. Chron. Sax. a.d. 1086.

t cap. 52. Wilk. 228.

u Tenures. 66.

w cap. 58. Wilk. 228.

x Montesq. Sp. L. b. 31. c. 8.

5 ‘We decree that all freemen bind themselves by agreement and oath, that within and without the whole kingdom of England, they will be faithful to King William their lord, and everywhere preserve his lands and honours with all fidelity, and defend him against enemies and foreigners.’

6 ‘That all earls, barons, knights, serjeants, and freemen of our whole kingdom aforesaid, keep and hold themselves always well furnished with arms and horses, as is suitable and necessary: and be always ready and well prepared for fulfilling and performing their entire service to us when needed; according to what they are by law bound to do for us by reason of their fees and tenements, and as we have ordained by the common council of our whole kingdom aforesaid.’





chapter 4 33


by the consent of private persons; the latter was done at once, all over England, by the common consent of the nationy.

In consequence of this change, it became a fundamental maxim and necessary 51

principle (though in reality a mere fiction) of our English tenures, “that the king is the universal lord and original proprietor of all the lands in his 〈14〉 kingdom; and that no man doth or can possess any part of it, but what has mediately or immediately been derived as a gift from him, to be held upon feodal services.”7 For, this being the real case in pure, original, proper feuds, other nations who adopted this system were obliged to act upon the same supposition, as a substruction and foundation of their new polity, though the fact was indeed far otherwise. And indeed by thus consenting to the introduction of feodal tenures, our English ancestors probably meant no more than to put the kingdom in a state of defence by establishing a military system; and to oblige themselves (in respect of their lands) to maintain the king’s title and territories, with equal vigour and fealty, as if they had received their lands from his bounty upon these express conditions, as pure, proper, beneficiary feudatories. But, whatever their meaning was, the Norman interpreters, skilled in all the niceties of the feodal constitutions, and well understanding the import and extent of the feodal terms, gave a very different construction to this proceeding; and thereupon took a handle to introduce not only the rigorous doctrines which prevailed in the duchy of Normandy, but also such fruits and dependencies, such hardships and services, as were never known to other nationsz; as if the English had in fact, as well as theory, owed every thing they had to the bounty of their sovereign lord.

Our ancestors therefore, who were by no means beneficiaries, but had barely

consented to this fiction of tenure from the crown, as the basis of a military discipline, with reason looked upon these deductions as grievous impositions, and arbitrary conclusions from principles that, as to them, had no foundation in trutha. However, this king, and his son William Rufus, kept up with a high hand all the rigours of the 52

feodal doctrines: but their successor, Henry I, found it expedient, when he set up his pretensions to the crown, to promise a restitution of the laws of king Edward the confessor, or antient Saxon system; and accordingly, in the first year of his reign, granted a charter b, whereby he gave up the greater grievances, but still reserved the fiction of feodal tenure, for the same military purposes which engaged his father to introduce it. But this charter was gradually 〈15〉 broke through, and the former grievances were revived and aggravated, by himself and succeeding princes; till in the reign of king John they became so intolerable, that they occasioned his barons, or principal feudatories, to rise up in arms against him: which at length produced the

y Pharoah thus acquired the dominion of all the lands in Egypt, and granted them out to the Egyptians, reserving an annual render of the fifth part of their value. (Gen. c. 47.)

z Spelm. of feuds, c. 28.

a Wright. 81.

b LL. Hen. I. c. 1.

7 Wright, Tenures, 58–9, using nearly the same language, calls this a ‘fundamental necessary Maxim, Principle, or Fiction of our English Law of Tenures’, citing the Latin form of the maxim from the 1655 edition of Craig’s Jus Feudale, 223.

34 of the rights of things

famous great charter at Runing-mead, which, with some alterations, was confirmed by his son Henry III. And, though its immunities (especially as altered on its last edition by his sonc) are very greatly short of those granted by Henry I, it was justly esteemed at the time a vast acquisition to English liberty. Indeed, by the farther alteration of tenures that has since happened, many of these immunities may now appear, to a common observer, of much less consequence than they really were when granted: but this, properly considered, will shew, not that the acquisitions under John were small, but that those under Charles were greater.8 And from hence also arises another inference; that the liberties of Englishmen are not (as some arbitrary writers would represent them) mere infringements of the king’s prerogative, extorted from our princes by taking advantage of their weakness; but a restoration of that antient constitution, of which our ancestors had been defrauded by the art and finesse of the Norman lawyers, rather than deprived by the force of the Norman arms.

Having given this short history of their rise and progress, we will next consider

the nature, doctrine, and principal laws of feuds; wherein we shall evidently trace the

53 groundwork of many parts of our public polity, and also the original of such of our

own tenures, as were either abolished in the last century, or still remain in force.

The grand and fundamental maxim of all feodal tenure is this; that all lands were

originally granted out by the sovereign, and are therefore holden, either mediately or immediately, of the crown. The grantor was called the proprietor, or lord; being he who retained the dominion or ultimate property of the feud or fee: and the grantee, who had only the use and possession, according to the terms of the grant, was stiled the feudatory or vasal, which was only another name for the tenant or holder of the lands; though, on account of the prejudices we have justly conceived against the doctrines that were afterwards grafted on this system, we now use the word vasal opprobriously, as synonymous to slave or bondman. The manner of the grant was by words of gratuitous and pure donation, dedi et concessi [I have given and granted]; which are still the operative words in our modern infeodations or deeds of feoffment. This was perfected by the ceremony of corporal investiture, or open and notorious delivery of possession in the presence of the other vasals, which perpetuated among them the aera of the new acquisition, at a time when the art of writing was very little known: and therefore the evidence of property was reposed in the memory of the neighbourhood; who, in case of a disputed title, were afterwards called upon to decide the difference, not only according to external proofs, adduced by the parties litigant, but also by the internal testimony of their own private knowlege.

Besides an oath of fealty, or profession of faith to the lord, which was the parent

of our oath of allegiance, the vasal or tenant upon investiture did usually homage to his lord; openly and humbly kneeling, being ungirt, uncovered, and holding up his hands both together between those of the lord, who sate before him; and there professing that “he did become his man, from that day forth, of life and limb and

c 9 Hen. III.

8 Blackstone refers to the abolition of feudal tenures in 1661: see II. 51.





chapter 4 35


earthly honour:” and then he received a kiss from his lordd. Which ceremony was 54 denominated homagium, or manhood, by the feudists, from the stated form of words, devenio vester homoe [I become your man].9

When the tenant had thus professed himself to be the man of his superior or

lord, the next consideration was concerning the service, which, as such, he was bound to render, in recompense for the land he held. This, in pure, proper, and original feuds, was only twofold: to follow, or do suit to, the lord in his courts in time of peace; and in his armies or warlike retinue, when necessity called him to the field. The lord was, in early times, the legislator and judge over all his feudatories: and therefore the vasals of the inferior lords were bound by their fealty to attend their domestic courts baronf, (which were instituted in every manor or barony, for doing speedy and effectual justice to all the tenants) in order as well to answer such complaints as might be alleged against themselves, as to form a jury or homage for the trial of their fellow-tenants; and upon this account, in all the feodal institutions both here and on the continent, they are distinguished by the appellation of the peers of the court; pares curtis or pares curiae. In like manner the barons themselves, or lords of inferior districts, were denominated peers of the king’s court, and were bound to attend him upon summons, to hear causes of greater consequence in the king’s presence and under the direction of his grand justiciary; till in many countries the power of that officer was broken and distributed into other courts of judicature, the peers of the king’s court still reserving to themselves (in almost every feodal government) the right of appeal from those subordinate courts in the last resort. The military branch of service consisted in attending the lord to the wars, if called upon, with such a retinue, and for such a number of days, as were stipulated at the first 55 donation, in proportion to the quantity of the land.

At the first introduction of feuds, as they were gratuitous, so also they were

precarious and held at the will of the lord g, who was 〈18〉 the sole judge whether his vasal performed his services faithfully. Then they became certain, for one or more years. Among the antient Germans they continued only from year to year; an annual

d Litt. §. 85.

e It was an observation of Dr Arbuthnot, that tradition was no where preserved so pure and incorrupt as among children, whose games and plays are delivered down invariably from one generation to another. (Warburton’s notes on Pope. vi. 134. 8º.) 〈16〉 Perhaps it may be thought puerile to observe (in confirmation of this remark) that in one of our antient pastimes (〈17〉 the basilinda of Julius Pollux, Onomastic. l. 9. c. 7.) the ceremonies and language of feodal homage are preserved with great exactness. [Arbuthnot’s observation appears in an annotation to ch. 5 (‘A Dissertation upon Play-things’) of The Memoirs of Martin Scriblerus, in Alexander Pope’s Works (ed. Warburton). Julius Pollux, a second-century Greek rhetorician, describes basilinda (‘the king’s command’) as a game in which one player is chosen to be king and the others must obey his orders (Onomasticon, 9.110).]

f Feud. l. 2. t. 55.

g Feud. l. 1. t. 1.

9 Littleton, Tenures, bk. 2, ch. 1, s. 85, quotes this formula when discussing the homage of a franktenant to his lord. Blackstone also refers to this section of the Tenures in his notes on Macbeth, published posthumously in Edmund Malone’s Supplement to … Shakespeare’s Plays, i. 149, where he glosses the line ‘safe toward your love and honour’ as ‘an allusion to the forms of doing homage in the feudal times’, involving ‘a saving of the allegiance (the love and honour) due to the sovereign’.

36 of the rights of things

distribution of lands being made by their leaders in their general councils or assemblies h. This was professedly done, lest their thoughts should be diverted from war to agriculture; lest the strong should incroach upon the possessions of the weak; and lest luxury and avarice should be encouraged by the erection of permanent houses, and too curious an attention to convenience and the elegant superfluities of life. But, when the general migration was pretty well over, and a peaceable possession of 〈19〉 their new-acquired settlements had introduced new customs and manners; when the fertility of the soil had encouraged the study of husbandry, and an affection for the spots they had cultivated began naturally to arise in the tillers; a more permanent degree of property was introduced, and feuds began now to be granted for the life of the feudatory i. But still feuds were not yet hereditary; though frequently granted, by the favour of the lord, to the children of the former possessor; till in process of time it became unusual, and was therefore thought hard, to reject the heir, if he were capable to perform the servicesk: and therefore infants, women, and professed monks, who were incapable of bearing arms, were also incapable of succeeding to a genuine feud. But the heir, when admitted to the feud which his

56 ancestor possessed, used generally to pay a fine or acknowlegement to the lord, in

horses, arms, money, and the like, for such renewal of the feud: which was called a relief, because it 〈20〉 re-established the inheritance, or, in the words of the feodal writers, “incertam et caducam hereditatem relevabat [it raised up the uncertain and fallen inheritance].”10 This relief was afterwards, when feuds became absolutely hereditary, continued on the death of the tenant, though the original foundation of it had ceased.

For in process of time feuds came by degrees to be universally extended, beyond

the life of the first vasal, to his sons, or perhaps to such one of them, as the lord should name; and in this case the form of the donation was strictly observed: for if a feud was given to a man and his sons, all his sons succeeded him in equal portions; and as they died off, their shares reverted to the lord, and did not descend to their children, or even to their surviving brothers, as not being specified in the donationl. But when such a feud was given to a man, and his heirs, in general terms, then a more extended rule of succession took place; and when 〈21〉 a feudatory died, his male descendants in infinitum [forever] were admitted to the succession. When any such descendant,



h Thus Tacitus: (de mor. Germ. c. 26.) “agri ab universis per vices occupantur: arva per annos mutant [they all occupy the lands by turns: the arable lands they change annually].” And Caesar yet more fully; (de bell. Gall. l. 6. c. 21.) “Neque quisquam agri modum certum, aut fines proprios habet; sed magistratus et principes, in annos singulos, gentibus et cognationibus hominum qui una coierunt, quantum eis et quo loco visum est, attribuunt agri, atque anno post alio transire cogunt [Nor has anyone a certain proportion, or fixed boundaries to his land; but the magistrates and princes every year assign to the people, and the kin of those men who have assembled, as much land, and in whatever place, as seems to them fit, and require them the next year to move from it to another portion].”

i Feud. l. 1. t. 1.

k Wright. 14.

l Wright. 17.

10 E.g. Schilter, Dissertatio … de Bonis Laudemialibus, § 52. Blackstone’s immediate source was probably Wright, Tenures, 15, note g.





chapter 4 37


who thus had succeeded, died, his male descendants were also admitted in the first place; and, in defect of them, such of his male collateral kindred as were of the blood or lineage of the first feudatory, but no others. For this was an unalterable maxim in feodal succession, that “none was capable of inheriting a feud, but such as was of the blood of, that is, lineally descended from, the first feudatory m.” And the descent, being thus confined to males, originally extended to all the males alike; all the sons, without any distinction of primogeniture, succeeding to equal portions of the father’s feud. But this being found upon many accounts inconvenient, (particularly, by dividing the services, and thereby weakening the strength of the feodal union) and honorary feuds (or titles of nobility) being now introduced, which were not of a divisible nature, but could only be inherited by the eldest sonn; in imitation of these, military feuds (or those we are now describing) began also in most countries to descend according to the same rule of primogeniture, to the eldest son, in exclusion 57

of all the rest o.

Other qualities of feuds were; that the feudatory could not aliene or dispose of his

feud; neither could he exchange, nor yet mortgage, nor even devise it by will, without the consent of the lord p. For, the reason of conferring the feud being the personal abilities of the feudatory to serve in war, it was not fit he should be at liberty to transfer this gift, either from himself, or 〈22〉 his posterity who were presumed to inherit his valour, to others who might prove less able. And, as the feodal obligation was looked upon as reciprocal, the feudatory being entitled to the lord’s protection, in return for his own fealty and service; therefore the lord could no more transfer his seignory or protection without consent of his vasal, than the vasal could his feud without consent of his lord q: it being equally unreasonable, that the lord should extend his protection to a person to whom he had exceptions, and that the vasal should owe subjection to a superior not of his own choosing.

These were the principal, and very simple, qualities of the genuine or original

feuds; 〈23〉 being then all of a military nature, and in the hands of military persons: though the feudatories, being under frequent incapacities of cultivating and manuring their own lands, soon found it necessary to commit part of them to inferior tenants; obliging them to such returns in service, corn, cattle, or money, as might enable the chief feudatories to attend their military duties without distraction: which returns, or reditus, were the original of rents. And by 〈24〉 this means the feodal polity was greatly extended; these inferior feudatories (who held what are called in the Scots law “rere-fiefs”) being under similar obligations of fealty, to do suit of court, to answer the stipulated renders or rent-service, and to promote the welfare of their immediate superiors or lordsr. But this at the same time demolished the antient 58 simplicity of feuds; and an inroad being once made upon their constitution, it

m Ibid. 183.

n Feud. 2. t. 55.

o Wright. 32.

p Ibid. 29.

q Ibid. 30.

r Wright. 20.

38 of the rights of things

subjected them, in a course of time, to great varieties and innovations. Feuds 〈25〉 came to be bought and sold, and deviations were made from the old fundamental rules of tenure and succession; which were held no longer sacred, when the feuds themselves no longer continued to be purely military. Hence these tenures began now to be divided into feoda propria et impropria, proper and improper feuds; under the former of which divisions were comprehended such, and such only, of which we have before spoken; and under that of improper or derivative feuds were comprized all such as do not fall within the other description: such, for instance, as were originally bartered and sold to the feudatory for a price; such as were held upon base or less honourable services, or upon a rent, in lieu of military service; such as were in themselves alienable, without mutual licence; and such as might descend indifferently either to males or females. But, where a difference was not expressed in the creation, such new-created feuds did in 〈26〉 all other respects follow the nature of an original, genuine, and proper feuds.

But as soon as the feodal system came to be considered in the light of a civil

establishment, rather than as a military plan, the ingenuity of the same ages, which perplexed all theology with the subtilty of scholastic disquisitions, and bewildered philosophy in the mazes of metaphysical jargon, began also to exert its influence on this copious and fruitful subject: in pursuance of which, the most refined and oppressive consequences were drawn from what originally was a plan of simplicity and liberty, equally beneficial to both lord and tenant, and prudently calculated for their mutual protection and defence. From this one foundation, in different countries of Europe, very different superstructures have been raised: what effect it has produced on the landed property of England will appear in the following chapters.



s Feud. 2. t. 7.





chapter the fifth. 59




of the antient english

tenures.

In this chapter we shall take a short view of the antient tenures of our English estates, or the manner in which lands, tenements, and hereditaments might have been holden; as the same stood in force, till the middle of the last century. In which we shall easily perceive, that all the particularities, all the seeming and real hardships, that attended those tenures, were to be accounted for upon feodal principles and no other; being fruits of, and deduced from, the feodal policy.

Almost all the real property of this kingdom is by the policy of our laws supposed

to be granted by, dependent upon, and holden of some 〈1〉 superior or lord, by and in consideration of certain services to be rendered to the lord by the tenant or possessor of this property. The thing holden is therefore stiled a tenement, the possessors thereof tenants, and the manner of their possession a tenure. Thus all the land in the kingdom is supposed to be holden, mediately or immediately, of the king; who is stiled the lord paramount, or above all. Such tenants as held under the king imme­ diately, when they granted out portions of their lands to inferior persons, became also lords with respect to those inferior persons, as they were still tenants with respect to the king; and, thus partaking of a middle nature, were called mesne, or middle, lords. So that if the king granted a manor to A, and he granted a portion of the land to B, now B was said to hold of A, and A of the king; or, in other words, B held his 60

lands immediately of A, but mediately of the king. The king therefore was stiled lord paramount; A was both tenant and lord, or was a mesne lord; and B was called tenant paravail, or the lowest tenant; being he 〈2〉 who is supposed to make avail, or profit, of the landa. In this manner are all the lands of the kingdom holden, which are in the hands of subjects: for, according to sir Edward Cokeb, in the law of England we have not properly allodium; which, we have seenc, is the name by which the feudists abroad distinguish such estates of the subject, as are not holden of any superior. So that at the first glance we may observe, that our lands are either plainly feuds, or partake very strongly of the feodal nature.

All tenures being thus derived, or supposed to be derived, from the king, those

that held immediately under him, in right of his crown and dignity, were called his tenants in capite, or in chief; which was the most honourable species of tenure, but at the same time subjected the tenants to greater and more burthensome services, than



a 2 Inst. 296.

b 1 Inst. 1.

c pag. 47 [II. 30].

40 of the rights of things

inferior tenures didd. This distinction ran through all the different sorts of tenure; of which I now proceed to give an account.

I. There seem to have subsisted among our ancestors four principal species of lay

tenures, to which all others may be reduced: the grand criteria of which were the natures of the several services or renders, that were due to the lords from their tenants. The services, in respect of their quality, were either free or base services; in respect of their quantity and the time of exacting them, were either certain or uncertain. Free services

61 〈3〉 such as were not unbecoming the character of a soldier, or a freeman, to perform; as

to serve under his lord in the wars, to pay a sum of money, and the like. Base services were such as were fit only for peasants, or persons of a servile rank; as to plough the lord’s land, to make his hedges, to carry out his dung, or other mean employments. The certain services, whether free or base, were such as were stinted in quantity, and could not be exceeded on any pretence; as, to pay a stated annual rent, or to plough such a field for three days. The uncertain depended upon unknown contingencies; as to do military service in person, or pay an assessment in lieu of it, when called upon; or to wind a horn whenever the Scots invaded the realm; which are free services: or to do whatever the lord should command; which is a base or villein service.

From the various combinations of these services have arisen the four kinds of lay

tenure which subsisted in England, till the middle of the last century; and three of which subsist to this day. Of these Bracton (who wrote under Henry the third) seems to give the clearest and most compendious account, of any author antient or moderne; of which the following is the outline or abstract f. “Tenements are of two kinds, frank-tenement, and villenage. And, of frank­tenements, some are held freely in consideration of homage and knight-service; others in free-socage with the service of fealty only.” And againg, “of villenages some are pure, and others privileged. He that holds in pure villenage shall do whatsoever is commanded him, and always be bound to an uncertain service. The other kind of villenage is called villein-socage; and these villein­socmen do villein services, but such as are certain and determined.” Of which the sense seems to be as follows: first, where the service was free, but uncertain, as military service

62 with homage, that tenure was called the tenure in chivalry, per servitium militare, or

by knight­service. Secondly, where the service was not only free, but also certain, as by fealty only, by rent and fealty, &c, that tenure was called liberum socagium, or free socage. These were the only free holdings or tenements; the others were villenous or servile: as, thirdly, where the service was base in its nature, and uncertain as to time and quantity, the tenure was purum villenagium, absolute or pure villenage. Lastly,

d In the Germanic constitution, the electors, the bishops, the secular princes, the imperial cities, &c, which hold directly from the emperor, are called the immediate states of the empire; all other landholders being denominated mediate ones. Mod. Un. Hist xlii. 61.

e l. 4. tr. 1. c. 28.

f Tenementorum aliud liberum, aliud villenagium. Item, liberorum aliud tenetur libere pro homagio et servitio

militari; aliud in libero socagio cum fidelitate tantum. [Bracton, bk. 4, tr. 1, ch. 28,] §. 1.

g Villenagiorum aliud purum, aliud privilegiatum. Qui tenet in puro villenagio faciet quicquid ei praeceptum fuerit, et semper tenebitur ad incerta. Aliud genus villenagii dicitur villanum socagium; et hujusmodi villani socmanni—villana faciunt servitia, sed certa et determinata. [Bracton, bk. 4, tr. 1, ch. 28,] §. 5. [Blackstone quotes this passage again at II. 62 note p.]





chapter 5 41


where the service was base in its nature, but reduced to a certainty, this was still villenage, but distinguished from the other by the name of privileged villenage, villenagium privilegiatum; or it might be still called socage (from the certainty of its services) but degraded by their baseness into the inferior title of villanum socagium, villein­socage.

I. The first, most universal, and esteemed the most honourable species of tenure,

was that by knight­service, called in Latin servitium militare, and in law French chivalry, or service de chivaler, answering to the fief d’ haubert of the Normansh, which name is expressly given it by the mirrour i. This differed in very few points, as we shall presently see, from a pure and proper feud, being entirely military, and the genuine effect of the feodal establishment in England. To make a tenure by knight­ service, a determinate quantity of land was necessary, which was called a knight’s fee, feodum militare; 〈4〉 the value of which, not only in the reign of Edward II k, but also of Henry II l, and therefore probably at its original in the reign of the conqueror, was stated at 20 l. per annum; and a certain number of these knight’s fees were requisite to make up a barony. And he who held this proportion of land (or a whole fee) by knight­service, was bound to attend his lord to the wars for forty days in every year, if called 〈5〉 upon: which attendance was his reditus or return, his rent or service, for the land he claimed to hold. If he held only half a knight’s fee, he was only bound to attend twenty days, and so in proportionm. And there is reason to apprehend, that this 63

service was the whole that our ancestors meant to subject themselves to; the other fruits and consequences of this tenure being fraudulently superinduced, as the regular (though unforeseen) appendages of the feodal system.

This tenure of knight­service had all the marks of a strict and regular feud: it was

granted by words of pure donation, dedi et concessi n [I give and grant]; was transferred by investiture or delivering corporal possession of the land, usually called livery of seisin; and was perfected by homage and fealty. It also drew after it these seven fruits and consequences, as inseparably incident to the tenure in chivalry; viz. aids, relief, primer seisin, wardship, marriage, fines for alienation, and escheat: all which I shall endeavour to explain, and shew to be of feodal original.

1. Aids were originally mere benevolences granted by the tenant to his lord, in

times of difficulty and distresso; but in process of time they grew to be considered as a matter of right, and not of discretion. These aids were principally three: first, to ransom the lord’s person, if taken prisoner; a necessary consequence of the feodal attachment and fidelity; insomuch that the neglect of doing it, whenever it was in the vasal’s power, was, by the strict rigour of the feodal law, an absolute forfeiture of his

h Spelm. Gloss. 219.

i [The Mirror of Justices] c. 2. §. 27.

k Stat. de milit. 1 Edw. II. Co. Litt. 69.

l Glanvil. l. 9. c. 4.

m Litt. §. 95.

n Co. Litt. 9.

o Auxilia fiunt de gratia et non de jure,—cum dependeant ex gratia tenentium et non ad voluntatem dominorum [Aids arise from favour, and not from right—because they depend on the good will of the tenants, and not on the will of the lords]. Bracton. l. 2. tr. 1. c. 16. §. 8.

42 of the rights of things

estatep. Secondly, to make the lord’s eldest son a knight; a matter that was formerly attended with great ceremony, pomp, and expense. This aid could not be demanded till the heir was fifteen years old, or capable of bearing armsq: the intention of it being to breed up the eldest son, and heir apparent of the seignory, to deeds of arms and chivalry, for the better defence of the nation. Thirdly, to marry the lord’s eldest daughter, by giving her a suitable portion: for daughters’ portions were in those days

64 extremely slender; few lords being able to save much out of their income for this

purpose; nor could they acquire money by other means, being wholly conversant in matters of arms; nor, by the nature of their tenure, could they charge their lands with this, or any other incumbrances. From bearing their proportion to these aids no rank or profession was exempted: and therefore even the monasteries, till the time of their dissolution, contributed to the knighting of their founder’s male heir (of whom their lands were holden) and the marriage of his female descendants r. And one cannot but observe, in this particular, the great resemblance which the lord and vasal of the feodal law bore to the patron and client of the Roman republic; between whom also there subsisted a mutual fealty, or engagement of defence and protection. 〈6〉 With regard to the matter of aids, there were three which were usually raised by the client; viz. to marry the patron’s daughter; to pay his debts; and to redeem his person from captivity s.

But besides these antient feodal aids, the tyranny of lords by degrees exacted more

and more; as, aids to pay the lord’s debts, (probably in imitation of the Romans) and aids to enable him to pay aids or reliefs to his superior lord; from which last indeed the king’s tenants in capite were, from the nature of their tenure, excused, as they held immediately of the king who had no superior. To prevent this abuse, king John’s magna cartat ordained, that no aids be taken by the king without consent of parliament, nor in any wise by inferior lords, save only the three antient ones above­mentioned. But this provision was omitted in Henry III’s charter, and the same oppressions were continued till the 25 Edw. I; when the statute called confirmatio chartarum was enacted; which in this respect revived king John’s charter, by ordaining that none but the antient aids should be taken. But though the species of aids was thus

65 restrained, yet the quantity of each aid remained arbitrary and uncertain. King John’s

charter indeed ordered, that all aids taken by inferior lords should be reasonableu; and that the aids taken by the king of his tenants in capite should be settled by parliamentw. But they were never completely ascertained and adjusted till the statute

p Feud. l. 2. t. 24.

q 2 Inst. 233.

r Philips’s life of Pole. I. 223. [Blackstone was returning a favour; near the beginning of this biography, Phillips praises Blackstone for reviving the ‘liberal and judicious method’, inaugurated in the sixteenth century by Andrea Alciato, of ‘unit[ing] the study of polite Learning and Antiquity with that of the Law’ (i. 17).]

s Erat autem haec inter utrosque officiorum vicissitudo,—ut clientes ad collocandas senatorum filias de suo conferrent ; in aeris alieni dissolutionem gratuitam pecuniam erogarent; et ab hostibus in bello captos redimerent [But there was this reciprocity of service between them—that the clients should give a sum of money for marrying the daughters of their lords, pay their debts, and ransom them when taken captive in war]. Paul. Manutius de senatu Romano. c. 1.

t cap. 12. 15.

u cap. 15.

w Ibid. 14.





chapter 5 43


Westm. 1. 3 Edw. I. c. 36. which fixed the aids of inferior lords at twenty shillings, or the supposed twentieth part of 〈7〉 every knight’s fee, for making the eldest son a knight, or marrying the eldest daughter; and the same was done with regard to the king’s tenants in capite by statute 25 Edw. III. c. 11. The other aid, for ransom of the lord’s person, being not in its nature capable of any certainty, was therefore never ascertained.

2. Relief, relevium, was before mentioned as incident to every feodal tenure, by

way of fine or composition with the lord for taking up the estate, which was lapsed or fallen in by the death of the last tenant. But, though reliefs had their original while feuds were only life­estates, yet they continued after feuds became hereditary; and were therefore looked upon, very justly, as one of the greatest grievances of tenure: especially when, at the first, they were merely arbitrary and at the will of the lord; so that, if he pleased to demand an exorbitant relief, it was in effect to disinherit the heir x. The English ill brooked this consequence of their new adopted policy; and therefore William the conqueror by his laws y ascertained the relief, by directing (in imitation of the Danish heriots) that a certain quantity of arms and habiliments of war should be paid by the earls, barons, and vavasours1 respectively; and, if the latter had no arms, they should pay 100s. William Rufus broke through this composition, and again demanded arbitrary uncertain reliefs, as due by the feodal laws; thereby in effect obliging every heir to new­purchase or redeem his landz: but his brother Henry I by the charter before­mentioned restored his father’s law; and ordained, that the relief to be paid should be according to the law so established, 66 and not an arbitrary redemptiona. But afterwards, when, by an ordinance in 27 Hen. II. called the assise of arms, it was provided that every man’s armour should descend to his heir, for defence of the realm; and it thereby became impracticable to pay these acknowlegements in arms, according to the laws of the conqueror, the composition was universally accepted of 100s. for every knight’s fee; as we find it ever after establishedb. But it must be remembered, that this relief was only then payable, if the heir at the death of his ancestor had attained his full age of one and twenty years.

3. Primer seisin was a feodal burthen, only incident to the king’s tenants in capite,

and not to those who held of inferior or mesne lords. It was a right which the king had, when any of his tenants in capite died seised of a knight’s fee, to receive of the heir (provided he were of full age) one whole year’s profits of the lands, if they were in immediate possession; and half a year’s profits, if the lands were in reversion



x Wright. 99.

y c. 22, 23, 24 [Wilkins, 223].

z 2 Roll. Abr. 514.

a “Haeres non redimet terram suam, sicut faciebat tempore fratris mei, sed legitima et justa relevatione relevabit eam [An heir shall not redeem his land as he used to do in the time of my brother, but he will pay relief for it with a lawful and just relief].” (Text. Roffens. cap. 34.)

b Glanv. l. 9. c. 4. Litt. §. 112.

1 i.e. vassals (in the sense already indicated).

44 of the rights of things

expectant on an estate for lifec. This seems to be little more than an additional relief: but grounded upon this feodal reason; that, by the antient law of feuds, immediately upon a death of a vasal the superior was intitled to enter and take seisin or possession of the land, by way of protection against intruders, till the heir appeared to claim it, and receive investiture: 〈8〉 and, for the time the lord so held it, he was entitled to take the profits; and, unless the heir claimed within a year and day, it was by the strict law a forfeitured. This practice however seems not to have long obtained in England, if ever, with regard to 〈9〉 tenures under inferior lords; but, as to the king’s tenures in capite, 〈10〉 this prima seisina [first seisin] was expressly declared, under Henry III and Edward II, to belong to the king by prerogative, in contradistinction to other lordse. 〈11〉 And the king was intitled to enter and receive the whole profits of the

67 land, till livery was sued; which suit being commonly 〈12〉 within a year and day next

after the death of the tenant, 〈13〉 therefore the king used to take at an average the first fruits, that is to say, one year’s profits of the land f. And this afterwards gave a handle to the popes, who claimed to be feodal lords of the church, to claim in like manner from every clergyman in England the first year’s profits of his benefice, by way of primitiae, or first fruits.

4. These payments were only due if the heir was of full age; but if he was under the

age of twenty one, being a male, or fourteen, being a female g, the lord was intitled to the wardship of the heir, and was called the guardian in chivalry. This wardship consisted in having the custody of the body and lands of such heir, without any account of the profits, till the age of twenty one in males, and sixteen in females. For the law supposed the heir­male unable to perform knight­service till twenty one; but as for the female, she was supposed capable at fourteen to marry, and then her husband might perform the service. The lord therefore had no wardship, if at the death of the ancestor the heir­male was of the full age of twenty one, or the heir­ female of fourteen: yet, if she was then under fourteen, and the lord once had her in ward, he might keep her so till sixteen, by virtue of the statute of Westm. 1. 3 Edw. I. c. 22. the two additional years being given by the legislature for no other reason but merely to benefit the lordh.

This wardship, so far as it related to land, though it was not nor could be part of

the law of feuds, so long as they were arbitrary, temporary, or for life only; yet, when they became hereditary, and did consequently often descend upon infants, who by reason of their age could neither perform nor stipulate for the services of the feud, does not seem upon feodal principles to have been unreasonable. For the wardship of the land, or custody of the feud, was retained by the lord, that he might out of the

68 profits thereof provide a fit person to supply the infant’s services, till he should be of

age to perform them himself. And, if we 〈14〉 consider a feud in its original import, as

c Co. Litt. 77.

d Feud. l. 2. t. 24.

e Stat. Marlbr. [52 Hen. III] c. 16. 17 Edw. II. c. 3.

f Staundf. Prerog. 12.

g Litt. §. 103.

h Ibid.





chapter 5 45


a stipend, fee, or reward for actual service, it could not be thought hard that the lord should withhold the stipend, so long as the service was suspended. Though undoubtedly to our English ancestors, where such 〈15〉 stipendiary donation was a mere supposition or figment, it carried abundance of hardship; and accordingly it was relieved by the charter of Henry I before­mentioned, which took this custody from the lord, and ordained that the custody, both of the land and the children, should belong to the widow or next of kin. But this noble immunity did not continue many years.

The wardship of the body was a consequence of the wardship of the land; for he

who enjoyed the infant’s estate was the properest person to educate and maintain him in his infancy: and also, in a political view, the lord was most concerned to give his tenant a suitable education, in order to qualify him the better to perform those services which in his maturity he was bound to render.

When the male heir arrived to the age of twenty one, or the heir­female to that of

sixteen, they might sue out their livery or ousterlemain i; that is, the delivery of their lands out of their guardian’s hands. For this they were obliged to pay a fine, namely, half a year’s profits of the land; though this seems expressly contrary to magna carta k. However, in consideration of their lands having been so long in ward, they were excused all reliefs, and the king’s tenants also all primer seisins l. In order to ascertain the profits that arose to the crown by these fruits of tenure, and to grant the heir his livery, the itinerant justices, or justices in eyre, had it formerly in charge to make inquisition concerning them by a jury of the county m, commonly called an inquisitio post mortem [enquiry after death]; which was instituted to enquire (at the death of any man of fortune) the value of his estate, the tenure by which it was holden, and 69

who, and of what age, his heir was; thereby to ascertain the relief and value of the primer seisin, or the wardship and livery accruing to the king thereupon. A manner of proceeding that came in process of time to be greatly abused, and at length an intolerable grievance; it being one of the principal accusations against Empson and Dudley,2 the wicked engines of Henry VII, that by colour of false inquisitions they compelled many persons to sue out livery from the crown, who by no means were tenants thereunton. And, afterwards, a court of wards and liveries was erectedo, for conducting the same enquiries in a more solemn and legal manner.

When the heir thus came of full age, provided he held a knight’s 〈16〉 fee, he was to

receive the order of knighthood, and was compellable to take it upon him, or else pay a fine to the king. For, in those heroical times, no person was qualified for deeds of arms and chivalry who had not received this order, which was conferred with much

i Co. Litt. 77.

k 9 Hen. III. c. 3.

l Co. Litt. 77.

m Hoveden. sub Ric. I.

n 4 Inst. 198.

o Stat. 32 Hen. VIII. c. 46. [See further III. 172.]

2 Richard Empson and Edmund Dudley, financial officers of Henry VII, were charged with constructive treason when Henry VIII took the throne, and executed in 1510; cf. IV, ch. 23.

46 of the rights of things

preparation and solemnity. We may plainly discover the footsteps of a similar custom in what Tacitus relates of the Germans, who in order to qualify their young men to bear arms, presented them in a full assembly with a shield and lance; which ceremony, as was formerly hinted p, is supposed to have been the original of the feodal knighthoodq. This prerogative, of compelling 〈17〉 the vasals to be knighted, or to pay a fine, was expressly recognized in parliament, by the statute de militibus, 1 Edw. II; was exerted as an expedient 〈18〉 of raising money by many of our best princes, particularly by Edward VI and queen Elizabeth; but yet was the occasion of heavy murmurs when exerted by Charles I: among whose many misfortunes it was, that neither himself nor his people seemed able to distinguish between the arbitrary

70 stretch, and the legal exertion, of prerogative. However, among the other concessions

made by that unhappy prince, before the fatal recourse to arms, he agreed to divest himself of this undoubted flower of 〈19〉 his crown, and it was accordingly abolished by statute 16 Car. I. c. 20.

5. But, before they came of age, there was still another piece of authority, which the

guardian was at liberty to exercise over his infant wards; I mean the right of marriage, (maritagium [the right to give in marriage], as contradistinguished from matrimonium [marriage]) which in its feodal sense signifies the power, which the lord or guardian in chivalry had of disposing of his infant ward in matrimony. For, while the infant was in ward, the guardian had the power of tendering him or her a suitable match, without disparagement, or inequality: which if the infants refused, they forfeited the value of the marriage, valorem maritagii, to their guardianr; that is, so much as a jury would assess, or any one would bona fide give to the guardian for such an alliance s: and, if the infants married themselves without the guardian’s consent, they forfeited double the value, duplicem valorem maritagii t. This seems to have been one of the greatest hardships of our antient tenures. There are indeed substantial reasons why the lord should have the restraint and controll of the ward’s marriage, especially of his female ward; because of their tender years, and the danger of such female ward’s intermarrying with the lord’s enemy u. But no tolerable pretence could be assigned why the lord should have the sale, or value, of the marriage. Nor indeed is this claim of strictly feodal original; the most probable account of it seeming to be this: that by the custom of Normandy the lord’s consent was necessary to the marriage of his female­wardsw; which was introduced into England, together with the rest of the Norman doctrine of feuds: and it is likely that the lords usually took money for such

p Vol. I. pag. 392 [I. 260].

q “In ipso concilio vel principum aliquis, vel pater, vel propinquus; scuto frameaque juvenem ornant. Haec apud illos toga, hic primus juventae honos: ante hoc domus pars videntur; mox reipublicae [In that council either one of the princes, or the father, or a relation, adorns the youth with a spear and buckler: this is the toga among them, the first honour of youth: before this ceremony, he was merely a member of his family; now, he becomes a member of the republic].” de mor. Germ. cap. 13.

r Litt. §. 110.

s Stat. Mert. [20 Hen. III] c. 6. Co. Litt. 82.

t Litt. §. 110.

u Bract. l. 2. c. 37. §. 6.

w [Le Rouillé] Gr. Cust. 55.





chapter 5 47


their consent, since in the often­cited charter of Henry the first, he engages for the future to take nothing for his consent; which also he promises in general to give, provided such female ward were not married to his enemy.3 But this, among other 71 beneficial parts of that charter, being disregarded, and guardians still continuing to dispose of their wards in a very arbitrary unequal manner, it was provided by king John’s great charter, that heirs should be married without disparagement, the next of kin having previous notice of the contract x; or, as it was expressed in the first draught of that charter, ita maritentur ne disparagentur, et per consilium propinquorum de consanguinitate sua y [they are to be so married that they are not disparaged, and by the consent of their blood relations.]. But 〈20〉 these clauses in behalf of the relations were omitted in the charter of Henry III; whereinz the clause stands merely thus, “haeredes maritentur absque disparagatione [heirs should be married without dispar­ agement];” meaning certainly, by haeredes, heirs female, as there are no traces before this to be found of the lord’s claiming the 〈21〉 marriage of heirs male; and as Glanvila expressly confines it to heirs female. But the king and his great lords thenceforward took a handle from the ambiguity of this expression to claim them both, sive sit masculus sive foemina [whether they are male or female], as Bracton more than once expresses it b; and also, as nothing but disparagement was restrained by magna carta, they thought themselves at liberty to make all other advantages that they couldc. And afterwards this right, of selling the ward in marriage or else receiving the price or value of it, was expressly declared by the statute of Mertond; which is the first direct mention of it that I have met with, in our own 〈22〉 or in any other law.

6. Another attendant or consequence of tenure by knight­service was that of fines

due to the lord for every alienation, whenever the tenant had occasion to make over his land to another. This depended on the nature of the feodal connexion; it not being reasonable nor allowed, as we have before seen, that a feudatory should transfer his lord’s gift to another, and substitute a new tenant to do the service in his own stead, without the consent of the lord: and, as the feodal obligation was considered as 72 reciprocal, the lord also could not alienate his seignory without the consent of his tenant, which consent of his was called an attornment. This restraint upon the lords soon wore away; that upon the tenants continued longer. For, when every thing came in process of time to be bought and sold, the lords would not grant a licence to their 〈23〉 tenants to aliene, without a fine being paid; apprehending that, if it was reasonable for the heir to pay a fine or relief on the renovation of his paternal estate, it was much more reasonable that a stranger should make the same acknowlegement on his admission to a newly purchased feud. With us in England, these fines seem only to

x [Blackstone, Great Charter] cap. 6. edit. Oxon.

y cap. 3. ibid.

z cap. 6.

a l. 9. c. 9. & 12. & l. 9. c. 4.

b l. 2. c. 38. §. 1.

c Wright. 97.

d 20 Hen. III. c. 6.

3 Henry I, Charter of Liberties, s. 3.

48 of the rights of things

have been exacted from the king’s tenants in capite, who were never able to aliene without a licence: but, as to common persons, they were at liberty, by magna carta e, and the statute of quia emptores f, (if not earlier) to aliene the whole of their estate, to be holden of the same lord, as they themselves held it of before. But the king’s tenants in capite, not being included under the general words of these statutes, could not aliene without a licence: for if they did, it was in antient strictness an absolute forfeiture of the 〈24〉 lands g; though some have imagined otherwise. But this severity was mitigated by the statute 1 Edw. III. c. 12. which ordained, that in such case the lands should not be forfeited, but a reasonable fine be paid to the king. Upon which statute it was settled, that one third of the yearly value should be paid for a licence of alienation; but, if the tenant presumed to aliene without a licence, a full year’s value should be paidh.

7. The last consequence of tenure in chivalry was escheat; which is the determi­

nation of the tenure, or dissolution of the mutual bond between the lord and tenant, from the extinction of the blood of the latter by either natural or civil means: if he died without heirs of his blood, or if his blood was corrupted and stained by commission of treason or felony; whereby every inheritable quality was intirely blotted out and

73 abolished. In such cases the land escheated, or fell back, to the lord of the fee i; that is,

the tenure was determined by breach of the original condition, expressed or implied in the feodal donation. In the one case, there were no heirs subsisting of the blood of the first feudatory or purchaser, to which heirs alone the grant of the feud extended: in the other, the tenant, by perpetrating an atrocious crime, shewed that he was no longer to be trusted as a vasal, having forgotten his duty as a subject; and therefore forfeited his feud, which he held under the implied condition that he should not be a traitor or a felon. The consequence of which in both cases was, that the gift, being determined, resulted back to the lord who gave it k.

These were the principal qualities, fruits, and consequences of the tenure by

knight­service: a tenure, by which the greatest part of the lands in this kingdom were holden, and that principally of the king in capite, till the middle of the last century; and which was created, as sir Edward Coke expressly testifies l, for a military purpose; viz. for defence of the realm by the king’s own principal subjects, which was judged to be much better than to trust to hirelings or foreigners. The description here given is that of knight­service proper; which was to attend the king in his wars. There were also some other species of knight­service; so called, though improperly, because the service or render was of a free and honourable nature, and equally uncertain as to the time of rendering as that of knight­service proper, and because they were attended with similar fruits and consequences. Such was the tenure by grand serjeanty, per magnum servitium, whereby the tenant was bound, instead of serving the king

e cap. 32.

f 18 Edw. I. c. 1.

g 2 Inst. 66.

h Ibid. 67.

i Co. Litt. 13.

k Feud. l. 2. t. 86.

l 4 Inst. 192.





chapter 5 49


generally in his wars, to do some special honorary service to the king in person; as to carry his banner, his sword, or the like; or to be his butler, champion, or other officer at his coronationm. It was in most other respects like knight­servicen; only he was not 74

bound to pay aido, or escuage p; and, when tenant by knight­service paid five pounds for a relief on every knight’s fee, tenant by grand serjeanty paid one year’s value of his land, were it much or littleq. Tenure by cornage, which was, to wind a horn when the Scots or other enemies entered the land, in order to warn the king’s subjects, was (like other services of the same nature) a species of grand serjeanty r.

These services, both of chivalry and grand serjeanty, were all personal, and

uncertain as to their quantity or duration. But, the personal attendance in knight­ service growing troublesome and inconvenient in many respects, the tenants found means of compounding for it; by first sending others in their stead, and in process of time making a pecuniary satisfaction to the lords in lieu of it. This pecuniary satisfaction at last came to be levied by assessments, at so much for every knight’s fee; and therefore this kind of tenure was called scutagium [scutage] in Latin, or servitium scuti [service of the shield or ecu]; scutum being then a well­known denomination 〈25〉 of money: and, in like manner it was called, in our Norman French, escuage; being indeed a pecuniary, instead of a military, service. The first time this appears to have been taken was in the 5 Hen. II. on account of his expedition to Toulouse; but it soon came to be so universal, that personal attendance fell quite into disuse. Hence we find in our antient histories that, from this period, when our kings went to war, they levied scutages on their tenants, that is, on all the landholders of the kingdom, to defray their expenses, and to hire troops: and these assessments, in the time of Henry II, seem to have been made arbitrarily and at the king’s pleasure. Which prerogative being greatly abused by his successors, it became matter of national clamour, and king John was obliged to consent, by his magna carta, that no scutage should be imposed without consent of parliament s. But this clause was omitted in his son Henry III’s charter; where we only find t, that scutages or escuage should be taken 75 as they were used to be taken in the time of Henry II; that is, in a reasonable and moderate manner. Yet afterwards by statute 25 Edw. I. c. 5 & 6. and many subsequent statutesu it was enacted, that the king should take no aids or tasks but by the common assent of the 〈26〉 realm. Hence it is held in our old books, that escuage or scutage could not be levied but by consent of parliamentw; such scutages being indeed the groundwork of all succeeding subsidies, and the land­tax of later times.

m Litt. §. 153.

n Ibid. §. 158.

o 2 Inst. 233.

p Litt. §. 158.

q Litt. §. 154.

r Ibid. §. 156.

s Nullum scutagium ponatur in regno nostro, nisi per commune consilium regni nostri [No scutage is to be imposed in our kingdom, unless by the common council of our kingdom]. cap. 12.

t cap. 37.

u See Vol. I. pag. 136 [I. 94–5].

w Old Ten. tit. Escuage.

50 of the rights of things

Since therefore escuage differed from knight­service in nothing, but as a com­

pensation differs from actual service, knight­service is frequently confounded with it. And thus Littletonx must be understood, when he tells us, that tenant by homage, fealty, and escuage was tenant by knight­service: that is, that this tenure (being sub­ servient to the military policy of the nation) was respectedy as a tenure in chivalry z. But as the actual service was uncertain, and depended upon emergences, so it was necessary that this pecuniary compensation should be equally uncertain, and depend on the assessments of the legislature suited to those emergences. For had the escuage been a settled invariable sum, payable at certain times, it had been neither more nor less than a mere pecuniary rent; and the tenure, instead of knight­service, would have then been of another kind, called socagea, of which we shall speak in the next chapter.

For the present, I have only to observe, that by the degenerating of knight­service,

or personal military duty, into escuage, or pecuniary assessments, all the advantages (either promised or real) of the feodal constitution were destroyed, and nothing but the hardships remained. Instead of forming a national militia composed of barons, knights, and gentlemen, bound by their interest, their honour, and their oaths, to

76 defend their king and country, the whole of this system of tenures now tended to

nothing else, but a wretched means of raising money to pay an army of occasional mercenaries. In the mean time the families of all our nobility and gentry groaned under the intolerable burthens, which (in consequence of the fiction adopted after the conquest) were introduced and laid upon them by the subtlety and finesse of the Norman lawyers. For, besides the scutages they were liable to in defect of personal attendance, which however were assessed by themselves in parliament, they might be called upon by the king or lord paramount for aids, whenever his eldest son was to be knighted, or his eldest daughter married; not to forget the ransom of his own person. The heir, on the death of his ancestor, if of full age, was plundered of the first emoluments arising from his inheritance, by way of relief and primer seisin; and, if under age, of the whole of his estate during infancy. And then, as sir Thomas Smithb very feelingly complains, “when he came to his own, after he was out of wardship, his woods decayed, houses fallen down, stock wasted and gone, lands let forth and ploughed to be barren,” 〈27〉 to make amends he was yet to pay half a year’s profits as a fine for suing out his livery; and also the price or value of his marriage, if he refused such wife as his lord and guardian had bartered for, and imposed upon him; or twice that value, if he married another woman. Add to this, the untimely and expensive honour of knighthood, to make his poverty more completely splendid. And when by these deductions his fortune was so shattered and ruined, that perhaps he was obliged to sell his patrimony, he had not even that poor privilege allowed him, without paying an exorbitant fine for a licence of alienation.

x §. 103.

y Wright. 122.

z Pro feodo militari reputatur [It is reckoned as knight­service]. Flet. l. 2 [recte 3] c. 14. §. 7.

a Litt. §. 97. 120.

b Commonw. 1. 3. c. 5.





chapter 5 51


A slavery so complicated, and so extensive as this, called aloud for a remedy in a

nation that boasted 〈28〉 of her freedom. Palliatives were from time to time applied by successive acts of parliament, which asswaged some temporary grievances. Till at length the humanity of king James I consentedc 〈29〉 for a proper equivalent to 77 abolish them all; though the plan then proceeded not to effect: in like manner as he had formed a scheme, and began to put it in execution, for removing the feodal grievance of heretable jurisdictions in Scotlandd, which has since been pursued and effected 4 by the statute 20 Geo. II. c. 43e. King James’s plan for exchanging our military tenures seems to have been nearly the same as that which has been since pursued; only with this difference, that, by way of compensation for the loss which the crown and other lords would sustain, an annual feefarm 〈30〉 rent should be settled and inseparably annexed to the crown, and assured to the inferior lords, payable out of every knight’s fee within their respective signories. An expedient, seemingly much better than the hereditary excise, which was afterwards made the principal equivalent for these concessions. For at length the military tenures, with all their heavy 〈31〉 appendages, were destroyed at one blow by the statute 12 Car. II. c. 24. which enacts, “that the court of wards and liveries, and all wardships, liveries, primer seisins, and ousterlemains, values and forfeitures of marriages, by reason of any tenure of the king or others, be totally taken away. And that all fines for alienations, tenures by homage, knights­service, and escuage, and also aids for marrying the daughter or knighting the son, and all tenures of the king in capite, be likewise taken away. And that all sorts of tenures, held of the king or others, be turned into free and common socage; save only tenures in frankalmoign, copyholds, and the honorary services (with­ out the slavish part) of grand serjeanty.” A statute, which was a greater acquisition to the civil property of this kingdom than even magna carta itself: since that only pruned the luxuriances that had grown out of the military tenures, and thereby preserved them in vigour; but the statute of king Charles extirpated the whole, and demolished both root and branches.

c 4 Inst. 202.

d Dalrymp. of feuds. 292.

e By another statute of the same year (20 Geo. II. c. 50) the tenure of wardholding (equivalent to the knight­ service of England) is for ever abolished in Scotland.

4 20 Geo. II c. 43, passed after the Jacobite rebellion of 1745, provided £152,000 to defray the cost of abolishing the Scottish lords’ power over heritable jurisdictions and assigning it to the crown, so as to secure the allegiance of the landholders.



78 chapter the sixth.



of the modern english

tenures.

Although, by the means that were mentioned in the preceding chapter, the oppressive or military part of the feodal constitution was happily done away, yet we are not to imagine that the constitution itself was utterly laid aside, and a new one introduced in its room; since by the statute 12 Car. II. the tenures of socage and frankalmoign, the honorary services of grand serjeanty, and the tenure by copy of court roll were reserved; nay all tenures in general, except frankalmoign, grand serjeanty, and copyhold, were reduced to one general species of tenure, then well known and subsisting, called free and common socage. And this, being sprung from the same feodal original as the rest, demonstrates the necessity of fully contemplating that antient system; since it is that alone, to which we can recur to explain any seeming, or real, difficulties, that may arise in our present mode of tenure.

The military tenure, or that by knight-service, consisted of what were reputed the

most free and honourable services; but which in their nature were unavoidably uncertain in respect to the time of their performance. The second species of tenure, or free-socage, consisted also of free and honourable services; but such as were liquidated and reduced to an absolute certainty. And this tenure not only subsists to this day, but has in a manner absorbed and swallowed up (since the statute of Charles

79 the second) almost every other species of tenure. And to this we are next to proceed.

II. Socage, in its most general and extensive signification, seems to denote a tenure

by any certain and determinate service. And in this sense it is by our antient writers constantly put in opposition to chivalry, or knight-service, where the render was precarious and uncertain. Thus Bractona; if a man holds by a rent in money, without any escuage or serjeanty, “id tenementum dici potest socagium [that tenement may be called socage]:” but if you add thereto any royal service, or escuage to any, the smallest, amount, “illud dici poterit feodum militare [that can be called a knight’s fee].” So too the author of Fletab; “ex donationibus servitia militaria vel magnae serjantiae non continentibus, oritur nobis quoddam nomen generale, quod est socagium.”1 Littleton alsoc defines it to be, where the tenant holds his tenement of the lord by any certain service, in lieu of all other services; so that they be not services of chivalry, or knight-service. And therefore afterwardsd he tells us, that whatsoever is not tenure in



a l. 2. c. 16. §. 9.

b l. 3. c. 14. §. 9.

c §. 117.

d §. 118.

1 ‘From grants not containing knight service or grand serjeantcies arises a general name, which is “socage”. ’





chapter 6 53


chivalry is tenure in socage: in like manner as it is defined by Finche, a tenure to be done out of war. The service must therefore be certain, in order to denominate it socage; as to hold by fealty and 20s. rent; or, by homage, fealty, and 20s. rent; or, by homage and fealty without rent; or, by fealty and certain corporal service, as ploughing the lord’s land for three days; or, by fealty only without any other service: for all these are tenures in socage f.

But socage, as was hinted in the last chapter, is of two sorts: free-socage, where the

services are not only certain, but honourable; and villein-socage, where the services, though certain, are of a baser nature. Such as hold by the former tenure are called in Glanvil g, and other subsequent authors, by the name of liberi sokemanni, or tenants in free-socage. Of this tenure we are first to speak; and this, both in the nature of its 80

service, and the fruits and consequences appertaining thereto, was always by much the most free and independent species of any. And therefore I cannot but assent to Mr Somner’s etymology of the wordh; who derives it from the Saxon appellation, soc, which signifies liberty or privilege, and, being joined to a usual termination, is called socage, in Latin socagium; signifying thereby a free or privileged tenure i . This etymology seems to be much more just than that of our common lawyers in general, who derive it from soca, an old Latin word denoting (as they tell us) a plough: for that in antient time this socage tenure consisted in nothing else but services of husbandry, which the tenant was bound to do to his lord, as to plough, sow, or reap for him; but that, in process of time, this service was changed into an annual rent by consent of all parties, and that, in memory of its original, it still retains the name of socage or plough-service k. But this by no means agrees with what Littleton himself tells us l, that to hold by fealty only, without paying any rent, is tenure in socage; for here is plainly no commutation for plough-service. Besides, even services, confessedly of a military nature and original, (as 〈1〉 escuage itself, which while it remained uncertain was equivalent to knight-service) the instant they were reduced to a certainty changed both their name and nature, and were called socagem. It was the certainty therefore that denominated it a socage tenure; and nothing sure could be a greater liberty or privilege, than to have the service ascertained, and not left to the arbitrary calls of the lord, as in the tenures of chivalry. Wherefore also Britton, who 〈2〉 describes socage tenure under the name of fraunke fermen, tells us, that they are “lands and tenements, whereof the nature of the fee is changed by feoffment out of chivalry for certain yearly services, and in respect whereof neither homage, ward, marriage, nor relief can be demanded.” Which leads us also to another observation, that, if socage tenures were 81

e L. 147.

f Litt. §. 117, 118, 119.

g l. 3. c. 7.

h Gavelk. 138.

i In like manner Skene in his exposition of the Scots’ law [De Verborum Significatione], title socage, tells us that it is “anè kind of holding of lands, quhen ony man is infeft [enfeoffed] freely,” &c.

k Litt. §. 119.

l §. 118.

m Litt. §. 98. 120.

n c. 65. [recte ch. 66 (‘De gardes’), fol. 164b, in the 1640 edition that Blackstone used.]

54 of the rights of things

of such base and servile original, it is hard to account for the very great immunities which the tenants of them always enjoyed; so highly superior to those of the tenants by chivalry, that it was thought, in the reigns of both Edward I and Charles II, a point of the utmost importance and value to the tenants, to reduce the tenure by knight-service to fraunk ferme or tenure by socage. We may therefore, I think, fairly conclude in favour of Somner’s etymology, and the liberal extraction of the tenure in free socage, against the authority even of Littleton himself.

Taking this then to be the meaning of the word, it seems probable that the socage

tenures were the relicks of Saxon liberty, retained by such persons, as had neither forfeited them to the king, nor been obliged to exchange their tenure for the more honourable, as it was called, but at the same time more burthensome, tenure of knight-service. This is peculiarly remarkable in the tenure which prevails in Kent, called gavelkind, which is generally acknowleged to be a species of socage tenureo; the preservation whereof inviolate from the innovations of the Norman conqueror is a fact universally known. And those who thus preserved their liberties were said to hold in free and common socage.

As therefore the grand criterion and distinguishing mark of this species of tenure

are the having its renders or services ascertained, it will include under it all other methods of holding free lands by certain and invariable rents and duties: and, in particular, petit serjeanty, tenure in burgage, and gavelkind.

We may remember, that by the statute 12 Car. II. grand serjeanty is not itself totally

abolished, but only the slavish appendages belonging to it; for the honorary services (such as carrying the king’s sword or banner, officiating as his butler, carver, &c, at the coronation) are still reserved. Now petit serjeanty bears a great resemblance to grand

82 serjeanty; for as the one is a personal service, so the other is a rent or render, both

tending to some purpose relative to the king’s person. Petit serjeanty, as defined by Littletonp, consists in holding lands of the king by the service of rendering to him annually some small implement of war, as a bow, a sword, a lance, an arrow, or the like. This, he saysq, is but socage in effect; for it is no personal service, but a certain rent: and, we may add, it is clearly no predial service, or service of the plough, but in all respects liberum et commune socagium [free and common socage]; only, being held of the king, it is by way of eminence dignified with the title of parvum servitium regis, or petit serjeanty. And magna carta 〈3〉 respects it in this light, when it enactsr, that no wardship of the lands or body shall be claimed by the king in virtue of a tenure by petit serjeanty.

Tenure in burgage is described by Glanvils, and is expressly said by Littletont, to

be but tenure in socage; and it is where the king or other person is lord of an antient borough, in which the tenements are held by a rent certainu. It is indeed only a kind

o Wright. 211.

p §. 159.

q §. 160.

r cap. 27.

s lib. 7. cap. 3.

t §. 162.

u Litt. §. 162, 163.





chapter 6 55


of town socage; as common socage, by which other lands are holden, is usually of a rural nature. A borough, as we have formerly seen, 〈4〉 is distinguished from other towns by the right of sending members to parliament; and, where the right of election is by burgage tenure, that alone is a proof of the antiquity of the borough. Tenure in burgage therefore, or burgage tenure, is where houses, or lands which were formerly the scite of houses, in an antient borough, are held of some lord in common socage, by a certain established rent. And these seem to have withstood the shock of the Norman encroachments principally on account of their insignificancy, which made it not worth while to compel them to an alteration of tenure; as an hundred of them put together would scarce have amounted to a knight’s fee. Besides, the owners of them, being chiefly artificers and persons engaged in trade, could not with any tolerable propriety be put on such a military establishment, as the tenure in chivalry 83 was. And here also we have again an instance, where a tenure is confessedly in socage, and 〈5〉 yet is impossible ever to have been held by plough-service; since the tenants must have been citizens or burghers, the situation frequently a walled town, the tenement a single house; so that none of the owners was probably master of a plough, or was able to use one, if he had it. The free socage therefore, in which these tenements are held, seems to be plainly a remnant of Saxon liberty; which may also account for the great variety of customs, affecting 〈6〉 these tenements so held in antient burgage: the principal and most remarkable of which is that called Borough-English, so named in contradistinction as it were to the Norman customs, and which is taken notice of by Glanvil w, and by Littletonx; viz. that the youngest son, and not the eldest, succeeds to the burgage tenement on the death of his father. For which Littletony gives this reason; because 〈7〉 the youngest son, by reason of his tender age, is not so capable as the rest of his brethren to help himself. Other authors z have indeed given a much stranger reason for this custom, as if the lord of the fee had antiently a 〈8〉 right to break the seventh commandment with his tenant’s wife on her wedding-night; and that therefore the tenement descended not to the eldest, but the youngest, son; who was more certainly the offspring of the tenant. But I cannot learn that ever this custom prevailed in England, though it certainly did in Scotland, (under the name of mercheta or marcheta) till abolished by Malcolm III a. And perhaps a more rational account than either may be fetched (though at a sufficient distance) from the practice of the Tartars; among whom, according to father Duhalde, this custom of descent to the youngest son also prevails.2 That nation is composed totally of shepherds and

w ubi supra [see above, i.e. II. 53].

x §. 165.

y §. 211.

z 3 Mod. Pref. [As explained in the (unpaginated) preface to the Modern Reports, vol. 3 (1700), the custom was adopted by tenants who sought to ensure that ‘their eldest Sons (who might be their Lord’s Bastards) should be incapable to inherit their Estates’.]

a Seld. tit. of hon. 2. 1. 47. Reg. Mag. l. 4. c. 31.

2 This summary of the Mongol tradition of ultimogeniture, by which the otgon or ot-chigin (‘hearth-child’) inherits his father’s possessions, is essentially correct, but no such account appears in du Halde. Blackstone evidently drew on Montesquieu’s Spirit of the Laws (bk. 18, ch. 21)—or on Thomas Nugent’s translation (1750)— which mentions du Halde, but gives no specific citation.

56 of the rights of things

herdsmen; and the elder sons, as soon as they are capable of leading a pastoral life, migrate from their father with a certain allotment of cattle; and go to seek a new

84 habitation. The youngest son therefore, who continues latest with the father, is

naturally the heir of his house, the rest being already provided for. And thus we find that, among many other northern nations, it was the custom for all the sons but one to migrate from the father, which one became his heir b. So that possibly this custom, wherever it prevails, may be the remnant of that pastoral state of our British and German ancestors, which Caesar and Tacitus describe. Other special customs there are 〈9〉 in burgage tenures; as that the wife shall be endowed of all her husband’s tenementsc, and not of the third part only, as at the common law: and 〈10〉 that a man might dispose of his tenements by will d, which, in general, was not permitted after the conquest till the reign of Henry the eighth; though in the Saxon times it was allowable e. A pregnant proof that these liberties of socage tenure were fragments of Saxon liberty.

The nature of the tenure in gavelkind affords us a still stronger argument. It is

universally known what struggles the Kentishmen made to preserve their antient liberties; and with how much success those struggles were attended. And as it is principally here that we meet with the custom of gavelkind, (though it was and is to be found in some other parts of the kingdomf) we may fairly conclude that this was a part of those liberties; agreeably to Mr Selden’s opinion, that gavelkind before the Norman conquest was the general custom of the realmg. The distinguishing properties of this tenure are various: some of the principal are these; 1. The tenant is of age sufficient to aliene his estate by feoffment at the age of fifteenh. 2. The estate does not escheat in case of an attainder and execution for felony; their maxim being, “the

85 father to the bough, the son to the ploughi.” 3. In most places he had a power of

devising lands by will, before the statute for that purpose was madek. 4. The lands descend, not to the eldest, youngest, or any one son only, but to all the sons together l; which was indeed antiently the most usual course of descent all over Englandm, though in particular places particular customs prevailed. These, among other prop-erties, distinguished this tenure in a most remarkable manner: and yet it is 〈11〉

b Pater cunctos filios adultos a se pellebat, praeter unum quem heredem sui juris relinquebat [The father used to send away all his sons once they were adults, except the one who became heir to his right]. (Walsingh. Upodigm. Neustr. c. 1.)

c Litt. §. 166.

d §. 167.

e Wright. 172.

f Stat. 32 Hen. VIII. c. 29. Kitch. of courts, 200.

g In toto regno, ante ducis adventum, frequens et usitata fuit: postea caeteris adempta, sed privatis quorundam locorum consuetudinibus alibi postea regerminans: Cantianis solum integra et inviolata remansit. [This custom was frequent and usual, throughout the whole kingdom, before the arrival of the Duke (i.e. William the Conqueror); afterwards this tenure was abolished, but in some other places it was revived as a private custom; it only remained whole and inviolate for the men of Kent.] (Analect. l. 2. c. 7.)

h Lamb. Peramb. 614.

i Lamb. 634.

k F. N. B. 198. [Launder v Brooks] Cro. Car. 561.

l Litt. §. 210.

m Glanv. l. 7. c. 3.





chapter 6 57


held to be only a species of a socage tenure, modified by the custom of the country; being holden by suit of court and fealty, which is a service in its nature certainn. Wherefore, by a charter of king Johno, Hubert arch-bishop of Canterbury was authorized to exchange the gavelkind tenures holden of the see of Canterbury into tenures by knight-service; and by statute 31 Hen. VIII. c. 3. for disgavelling the lands of divers lords and gentlemen in the county of Kent, they are directed to be descendible for the future like other lands, which were never holden by service of socage. Now the immunities which the tenants in gavelkind enjoyed were such, as we cannot conceive should be conferred upon mere 〈12〉 ploughmen, or peasants: from all which I think it sufficiently clear, that tenures in free socage are in general of a nobler original than is assigned by Littleton, and after him by the bulk of our common lawyers.

Having thus distributed and distinguished the several species of tenure in free

socage, I proceed next to shew that this also partakes very strongly of the feodal nature. Which may probably arise from its antient Saxon original; since (as was before observed p) feuds were not unknown among the Saxons, though they did not form a part of their military policy, nor were drawn out into such arbitrary consequences as among the Normans. It seems therefore reasonable to imagine, that socage tenure existed in much the same state before the conquest as after; that in Kent it was preserved with a high hand, as our histories inform us it was: and that the 86

rest of the socage tenures dispersed through England escaped the general fate of other property, partly out of favour and affection to their particular owners, and partly from their own insignificancy; since I do not apprehend the number of socage tenures soon after the conquest to have been very considerable, nor their value by any means large; till by successive charters of enfranchisement granted to the tenants, which are particularly mentioned by Brittonq, their number and value began to swell so far, as to make a distinct, and justly envied, part of our English system of tenures.

However this may be, the tokens of their feodal original will evidently appear

from a short comparison of the incidents and consequences of socage tenure with those of tenure in chivalry; remarking their agreement or difference as we go along.

1. In the first place, then, both were held of superior lords; 〈13〉 of the king as lord

paramount, and sometimes of a subject or mesne lord between the king and the tenant.

2. Both were subject to the feodal return, render, rent, or service, of some sort or

other, which arose from a supposition of an original grant from the lord to the tenant. In the military tenure, or more proper feud, this was from its nature uncertain; in socage, which was a feud of the improper kind, it was certain, fixed, and determinate, (though perhaps nothing more than bare fealty) and so continues to this day.

3. Both were, from their constitution, universally subject (over and above all other

renders) to the oath of fealty, or mutual bond of obligation between the lord and



n Wright. 211.

o Spelm. cod. vet. leg. 355.

p pag. 48 [II. 30–1].

q c. 66.

58 of the rights of things

tenant r. Which oath of fealty usually draws after it suit to the lord’s court. And this oath every lord, of whom tenements are holden at this day, may and ought to call upon his tenants to take in his court baron;3 if it be only for the reason given by

87 Littletons, that if it be neglected, it will by long continuance of time grow out of

memory (as doubtless it frequently 〈14〉 has) whether the land be holden of the lord or not; and so he may lose his seignory, and the profit which may accrue to him by escheats and other contingenciest.

4. The tenure in socage was subject, of common right, to aids for knighting the

son and marrying the eldest daughter u: which were fixed by the statute Westm. 1. c. 36. at 20s. for every 20l. per annum so held; as in knight-service. These aids, as in tenure by chivalry, were originally mere benevolences, though afterwards claimed as matter of right; but were all abolished by the statute 12 Car. II.

5. Relief is due upon socage tenure, as well as upon tenure in chivalry: but the

manner of taking it is very different. The relief on a knight’s fee was 5l. or one quarter of the supposed value of the land; but a socage relief is one year’s rent or render, payable by the tenant to the lord, be the same either great or smallw: and therefore Bractonx will not allow this to be properly a relief, but quaedam praestatio loco relevii in recognitionem domini [a sum of money paid instead of relief as an acknowledgement of the lord]. So too the statute 28 Edw. I. c. 1. declares, that a free sokeman shall give no relief, but shall double his rent after the death of his ancestor, according to that which he hath used to pay his lord, and shall not be grieved above measure. Reliefs in knight-service were only payable, if the heir at the death of his ancestor was of full age: but in socage they were due, even though the heir was under age, because the lord has no wardship over him y. The statute of Charles II reserves the reliefs incident to socage tenures; and therefore, wherever lands in fee simple are holden by a rent, relief is still due of common right upon the death of the tenant z.

88 6. Primer seisin was incident to the king’s socage tenants in capite [in chief], as

well as to those by knight-servicea. But tenancy in capite as well as primer seisins, 〈15〉 are also, among the other feodal burthens, intirely abolished by the statute.

7. Wardship is also incident to tenure in socage; but of a nature very different from

that incident to knight-service. For if the inheritance descend to an infant under fourteen, the wardship of 〈16〉 him shall not belong to the lord of the fee; because, in this tenure no military or other personal service being required, there 〈17〉 is no

r Litt. §. 117. 131.

s §. 130.

t Eo maxime praestandum est, ne dubium reddatur jus domini et vetustate temporis obscuretur [It is chiefly to be taken, lest the right of the lord should be rendered doubtful and obscured by length of time]. (Corvin. jus feud.

l. 2. t. 7.)

u Co. Litt. 91.

w Litt. §. 126.

x l. 2. c. 37 [recte 36]. §. 8.

y Litt. §. 127.

z [Freeman v Booth] 3 Lev. 145.

a Co. Litt. 77.

3 See further II. 60–1.





chapter 6 59


occasion for the lord to take the profits, in order to provide a proper substitute for his infant tenant: but his nearest relation (to whom the inheritance cannot descend) shall be his guardian in socage, and have the custody of his land and body till he arrives at the age of fourteen. The guardian must be such a one, to whom the inheritance by no possibility can descend; as was fully explained, together with the reasons for it, in the former book of these commentariesb. At fourteen this wardship in socage ceases, and the heir may oust the guardian, and call him to account for the rents and profitsc: for at this age the law supposes him capable of chusing a guardian for himself. It was in this particular, of wardship, as also in that of marriage, and in the certainty of the render or service, that the socage tenures had so much the advantage of the military ones. But as the wardship ceased at fourteen, there was this disadvantage attending it; that young heirs, being left at so tender an age to chuse their own guardians till twenty one, 〈18〉 they might make an improvident choice. Therefore, when almost all the 〈19〉 lands of the kingdom were turned into socage tenures, the same statute 12 Car. II. c. 24. enacted, that it should be in the power of any father by will to appoint a guardian, till his child should attain the age of twenty one. And, if no such appointment be made, the court of chancery will frequently 〈20〉 interpose, to prevent an infant heir from improvidently exposing himself to ruin.

8. Marriage, or the valor maritagii [value of the marriage], was not in socage tenure 89

any perquisite or advantage to the guardian, but rather the reverse. For, if the guardian married his ward under the age of fourteen, he was bound to account to the ward for the value of the marriage, even though he took nothing for it, unless he married him to advantage d. For the law, in favour of infants,4 is always jealous of guardians, and therefore in this case it made them account, not only for what they did, but also for what they might, receive on the infant’s behalf; lest by some collusion the guardian should have received the value, and not brought it to account: but, the statute having destroyed all values of marriages, this doctrine of 〈21〉 course is ceased with them. At fourteen years of age the ward might have disposed of himself in marriage, without any consent of his guardian, till the late act for preventing clandestine marriages. These doctrines of wardship and marriage in socage tenure were so diametrically opposite to those in knight-service, and so entirely agree with those parts of king Edward’s laws, that were restored by Henry the first’s charter, as might alone convince us that socage was of a higher original than the Norman conquest.

9. Fines for alienations were, I apprehend, due for lands holden of the king in

capite by socage tenure, as well as in case of tenure by knight-service: for the statutes that relate to this point, and sir Edward Coke’s comment on theme, speak generally of all tenants in capite, without making any distinction; 〈22〉 though now all fines for alienation are demolished by the statute of Charles the second.

b pag. 449 [I. 298].

c Litt. § 123. Co. Litt. 89.

d Litt. §. 123.

e 1 Inst. 43. 2 Inst. 65, 66, 67.

4 i.e. Lord Hardwicke’s Marriage Act, 26 Geo. II c. 33 (1753), which Blackstone also refers to in the following sentence.

60 of the rights of things

10. Escheats are equally incident to tenure in socage, as they were to tenure by

knight-service; except only in gavelkind lands, which are (as is before-mentioned) subject to no escheats for felony, though they are to escheats for want of heirsf.

90 Thus much for the two grand species of tenure, under which almost all the free

lands of the kingdom were holden till the restoration in 1660, when the former was abolished and sunk into the latter: so that lands of both sorts are now holden by the one universal tenure of free and common socage.

The other grand division of tenure, mentioned by Bracton as cited in the preceding

chapter, is that of villenage, as contradistinguished from liberum tenementum, or frank tenure. And this (we may remember) he subdivides into two classes, pure, and privileged, villenage: from whence have arisen two other species of our modern tenures.

III. From the tenure of pure villenage have sprung our present copyhold tenures,

or tenure by copy of court roll at the will of the lord; in order to obtain a clear idea of which, it will be previously necessary to take a short view of the original and nature of manors.

Manors are in substance as antient as the Saxon constitution, though perhaps

differing a little, in some immaterial circumstances, from those that exist at this day g: just as we observed of feuds, that they were partly known to our ancestors, even before the Norman conquest. A manor, manerium, a manendo,5 because the usual residence of the owner, seems to have been a district of ground, held by lords or great personages; who kept in their own hands so much land as was necessary for the use of their families, which were called terrae dominicales, or demesne lands; being occupied by the lord, or dominus manerii [lord of the manor], and his servants. The 〈23〉 other tenemental lands they distributed among their tenants; which from the different modes of tenure 〈24〉 were called and distinguished by two different names. First, book-land, or charter-land, which was held by deed under certain rents and

91 free services, and in effect differed nothing from free socage landsh: and from hence

have 〈25〉 arisen all the freehold tenants which hold of particular manors, and owe suit and service to the same. The other species was called folk-land, which was held by no assurance in writing, but distributed among the common folk or people at the pleasure of the lord, and resumed at his discretion; being indeed land held in villenage, which we shall presently describe more at large. The residue of the manor, being uncultivated, was termed the lord’s waste, and served for public roads, and for common of pasture to the lord and his tenants. Manors were formerly called baronies, as they still are lordships: and each lord or baron was empowered to hold a domestic court, called the court-baron, for redressing misdemesnors and nusances within the manor, and for settling disputes of property among the tenants. This court is an



f Wright. 210.

g Co. Cop. §. 2, & 10.

h Co. Cop. §. 3.

5 Blackstone supplies the Latin to show that manerium (‘manor’) is derived from manendum (‘dwelling’).





chapter 6 61


inseparable ingredient of every manor; and if the number of suitors should so fail, as not to leave sufficient to make a jury or homage, that is, two tenants at the least, the manor itself is lost.

〈 26〉 Before the statute of quia emptores, 18 Edw. I. the king’s greater barons, who

had a large extent of territory held under the crown, granted out frequently smaller manors to inferior persons to be 〈27〉 held of themselves; which do therefore now continue to be held under a superior lord, who is called in such cases the lord paramount over all these manors: and his seignory is frequently termed an honour, not a manor, especially if it hath belonged to an antient feodal baron, or hath been at any time in the hands of the crown. In imitation whereof, these inferior lords began to carve out and grant to others still more minute estates, to be held as of themselves, and were so proceeding downwards in infinitum; till the superior lords observed, that by this method of subinfeudation they lost all their feodal profits, of wardships, marriages, and escheats, which fell into the hands of these mesne or middle lords, who were the immediate superiors of the terre-tenant, or him who occupied the 〈28〉 land. This occasioned the statute of Westm. 3. or quia emptores, 18 Edw. I. to be made; which directs, that, upon all sales or feoffments of land, the feoffee shall hold the 92 same, not of his immediate feoffor, but of the chief lord of the fee, of whom such feoffor himself held it. 〈29〉 And from hence it is held, that all manors existing at this day, must have existed by immemorial prescription; or at least ever since the 18 Edw. I. when the statute of quia emptores was made. For no new manor can have been created since that statute: because it is essential to a manor, that there be tenants who hold of the lord, and that statute enacts, that for the future no subject shall create any new tenants to hold of himself.

Now with regard to the folk-land, or estates held in villenage, this was a species of

tenure neither strictly feodal, Norman, or Saxon; but mixed and compounded of them alli: and which also, on account of the heriots that usually attend it, may seem to have somewhat Danish in its composition. Under the Saxon government there were, as sir William Temple speaksk, a sort of people in a condition of downright servitude, used and employed in the most servile works, and belonging, both they, their children, and effects, to the lord of the soil, like the rest of the cattle or stock upon it. These seem to have been those who held what was called the folk-land, from which they were removeable at the lord’s pleasure. On the arrival of the Normans here, it seems not improbable, that they, who were strangers to any other than a feodal state, might give some sparks of enfranchisement to such wretched persons as fell to their share, by admitting them, as well as others, to the oath of fealty; which conferred a right of protection, and raised the tenant to a kind of estate superior to downright slavery, but inferior to every other conditionl. This they called villenage, and the tenants villeins, either from the word vilis [vile] or else, as sir Edward Coke tells usm, a villa [from ‘village’]; because they lived chiefly in villages, and were employed in

i Wright. 215.

k Introd. Hist. Engl. 59.

l Wright. 217.

m 1 Inst. 116.

62 of the rights of things

rustic works of the most sordid kind: 〈30〉 like the Spartan helotes,6 to whom alone the culture of the lands was consigned; their rugged masters, like our northern ancestors, esteeming war the only honourable employment of mankind.

93 These villeins, belonging principally to lords of manors, were either villeins

regardant, that is, annexed to the manor or land; or else they were in gross, or at large, that is, annexed to the person of the lord, and transferrable by deed from one owner to another n. They could not leave their lord without his permission; but, if they ran away, or were purloined from him, might be claimed and recovered by action, like beasts or other chattels. They held indeed small portions of land by way of sustaining themselves and families; but it was at the mere will of the lord, who might dispossess them whenever he pleased; and it was upon villein services, that is, to carry out dung, to hedge and ditch the lord’s demesnes, and any other the meanest officeso: and 〈31〉 these services were not only base, but uncertain both as to their time and quantity p. A villein, in short, was in much the same state with us, as lord Molesworthq describes to be that of the boors in Denmark, and Stiernhookr attributes also to the traals or slaves in Sweden; which confirms the probability of their being in some degree monuments of the Danish tyranny. A villein could acquire no property either in lands or goods; but, if he purchased either, the lord might enter upon them, oust the villein, and seise them to his own use, unless he contrived to dispose of them again before the lord had seised them; for the lord had then lost his opportunity s.

In many places also a fine was payable to the lord, if the villein presumed to marry

his daughter to any one without leave from the lord t: and, by the common law, the lord might also bring an action against the husband for damages in thus purloining his property u. For the children of villeins were also in the same state of bondage with

94 their parents; whence they were called in Latin, nativi,7 which gave rise to the female

appellation of a villein, who was called a neifew. In case of a marriage between a freeman and a neife, or a villein and a freewoman, the issue followed the condition of the father, being free if he was free, and villein if he was villein; contrary to the maxim of the civil law, that partus sequitur ventrem [the issue follows the belly].8 But no bastard could be born a villein, because by another maxim of our law he is nullius

n Litt. §. 181.

o Ibid. §. 172.

p Ille qui tenet in villenagio faciet quicquid ei praeceptum fuerit, nec scire debet sero quid facere debet in crastino, et semper tenebitur ad incerta [He who holds in villenage shall do whatever he is commanded, nor ought he to know on the evening of one day what he must do on the next, but shall always be held to an uncertain service]. (Bracton. l. 4. tr. 1. c. 28.)

q c. 8 [pp. 86–90 in the first edition of Molesworth’s Account of Denmark (1694)].

r de jure Sueonum. l. 2. c. 4.

s Litt. §. 177.

t Co. Litt. 40.

u Litt. §. 202.

w Litt. §. 187.

6 A class of serfs in ancient Sparta, whose status was above that of slaves and below that of free citizens.

7 Also called, in medieval England, nativi de sanguine (‘neifs or villeins by blood’).

8 Roman law did not adopt this principle as a general rule, but did provide that illegitimate children followed the mother’s status: see Code 3.32.7 and Digest 1.5.24.





chapter 6 63


filius [the son of nobody]; and as he can gain nothing by inheritance, it were hard that he should lose his natural freedom by it x. The law however protected the persons of villeins, as the king’s subjects, against atrocious injuries of the lord: for he might not kill, or maim his villein y; though he might beat him with impunity, since the villein had no action or remedy at law against his lord, but in case of the murder of his ancestor or the maim of his own person. Niefes indeed had also an appeal of rape, in case the lord violated them by force z.

Villeins might be enfranchised by manumission, which is either express or

implied: express; as where a man granted to the villein a deed of manumissiona: implied; as where a man bound himself in a bond to his villein for a sum of money, granted him an annuity by deed, or gave him an estate in fee, for life, or yearsb: for this was dealing with his villein on the footing of a freeman; it was in some of the instances giving him an action against his lord, and in others vesting an ownership in him entirely inconsistent with his former state of bondage. So also if the lord brought an action against his villein, this enfranchised himc; for, as the lord might have a short remedy against his villein, by seising his goods, (which was more than equivalent to any damages he could recover) the law, which is always ready to catch at any thing in favour of liberty, presumed that by bringing this action he meant to set his villein on the same footing with himself, and therefore held it an implied manumission. But, in 95

case the lord indicted him for felony, it was otherwise; for the lord could not inflict a capital punishment on his villein, without calling in the assistance of the law.

Villeins, 〈32〉 by this and many other means, in process of time gained considerable

ground on their lords; and in particular strengthened the tenure of their estates to that degree, that they came to have in them an interest in many places full as good, in others better than their lords. For the goodnature and benevolence of many lords of manors having, time out of mind, permitted their villeins and their children to enjoy their possessions without interruption, in a regular course of descent, the common law, of which custom is the life, now gave them title to prescribe against their lords; and, on performance of the same services, to hold their lands, in spight of any determination of the lord’s will. For, though in general they are still said to hold their estates at the will of the lord, yet it is such a will as is agreeable to the custom of the manor; which customs are preserved and evidenced by the rolls of the several courts baron in which they are entered, or kept on foot by the constant immemorial usage of the several manors in which the lands lie. And, as such tenants had nothing to shew for their estates but these customs, and admissions in pursuance of them, entered on those rolls, or the copies of such entries witnessed by the steward, they now began to be called tenants by copy of court roll, and their tenure itself a copyholdd.

x Ibid. §. 187, 188.

y Ibid. §. 189. 194.

z Ibid. §. 190.

a Ibid. §. 204.

b [Ibid.] §. 204, 5, 6.

c [Ibid.] §. 208.

d F. N. B. 12.

64 of the rights of things

Thus copyhold tenures, as sir Edward Coke observese, although very meanly

descended, yet come of an antient house; for, from what has been premised it appears, that copyholders are in truth no other but villeins, who, by a long series of immemorial encroachments on the lord, have at last established a customary right to those estates, which before were held absolutely at the lord’s will. Which affords a very substantial

96 reason for the great variety of customs that prevail in different manors, with regard

both to the descent of the estates, and the privileges belonging to the tenants. And these encroachments grew to be so universal, that when tenure in villenage was virtually abolished, (though copyholds were reserved) by the statute of Charles II, there was hardly a pure villein left in the nation. For sir Thomas Smithf testifies, that in all his time (and he was secretary to Edward VI) he never knew any villein in gross throughout the realm; and the few villeins regardant that were then remaining were such only as had belonged to bishops, monasteries, or other ecclesiastical corporations, in the preceding times of popery. For he tells us, that “the holy fathers, monks, and friars, had in their confessions, and specially in their extreme and deadly sickness, convinced the laity how dangerous a practice it was, for one christian man to hold another in bondage: so that temporal men, by little and little, by reason of that terror in their consciences, were glad to manumit all their villeins. But the said holy fathers, with the abbots and priors, did not in like sort by theirs; for they also had a scruple in conscience to empoverish and despoil the church so much, as to manumit such as were bond to their churches, or to the manors which the church had gotten; and so kept their villeins still.” By these several means the generality of villeins in the king-dom have long ago sprouted up into copyholders: their persons being enfranchised by manumission or long acquiescence; but their estates, in strictness, remaining subject to the same servile conditions and forfeitures as before; though, in general, the villein services are usually commuted for a small pecuniary quit-rent g.

97 As a farther consequence of what has been premised, we may collect these two

main principles, which are held h to be the supporters 〈34〉 of a copyhold tenure, and without which it cannot exist; 1. That the lands be parcel of, and situate within, that manor, under which it is held. 2. That they have been demised, or demisable, by copy of court roll immemorially. For immemorial custom is the life of all tenures by copy; so that no new copyhold can, strictly speaking, be granted at this day.

e Cop. §. 32.

f Commonwealth. b. 3. c. 10. [recte bk. 2, ch. 10, in Smith’s text. Blackstone’s quotation varies slightly from the original, but preserves its sense.]

g In some manors the copyholders were bound to perform the most servile offices, as to hedge and ditch the lord’s grounds, to lop his trees, 〈33〉 to reap his corn, and the like; the lord usually finding them meat and drink, and sometimes (as is still the use in the highlands of Scotland) a minstrell or piper for their diversion. (Rot. Maner. de Edgware Com. Midd.) As in the kingdom of Whidah, on the slave coast of Africa, the people are bound to cut and carry in the king’s corn from off his demesne lands, and are attended by music during all the time of their labour. (Mod. Un. Hist. xvi. 429.) [Blackstone refers to the court rolls (rotuli) of the manor of Edgware in the county of Middlesex. He was familiar with them from his term as estates steward of All Souls College, which owned the manor. The custom of entertaining agricultural workers with a piper, while not well documented, was once thought to be the source of the name ‘Piper’s Green’ in Edgware: cf. D. Lysons, Environs of London (1792–6), ii. 244; however, it may well derive from the surname of a local family. Whidah is located in what is now Benin, West Africa.]

h Co. Litt. 58.





chapter 6 65


In some manors, where the custom hath been to permit the heir to succeed the

ancestor in his tenure, the estates are stiled copyholds of inheritance; in others, where the lords have been more vigilant to maintain their rights, they remain copyholds for life only: for the custom of the manor has in both cases so far superseded the will of the lord, that, provided the services be performed or stipulated for by fealty, he cannot, in the first instance, refuse to admit the heir of his tenant upon his death; nor, in the second, can he remove his present tenant so long as he lives, though he holds nominally by the precarious tenure of his lord’s will.

The fruits and appendages of a copyhold tenure, that it hath in common with free

tenures, are fealty, services (as well in rents as otherwise) reliefs, and escheats. The two latter belong only to copyholds of inheritance; the former to those for life also. But, besides these, copyholds have also heriots, wardship, and fines. Heriots, which I think are agreed to be a Danish custom, and of which we shall say more 〈35〉 hereafter, are a render of the best beast or other good (as the custom may be) to the lord on the death of the tenant. This is plainly a relic of villein tenure; there being originally less hardship in it, when all the goods and chattels belonged to the lord, and he might have seised them even in the villein’s lifetime. These are incident to both species of copyhold; but wardship and fines to those of inheritance only. 98 Wardship, in copyhold estates, partakes both of that in chivalry and that in socage. Like that in chivalry, the lord is the legal guardian, who usually assigns some relation of the infant tenant to act in his stead: and he, like guardian in socage, is accountable to his ward for the profits. Of fines, some are in the nature of primer seisins, due on the death of each tenant, others are mere fines for alienation of the lands; in some manors only one of these sorts can be demanded, in some both, and in others neither. They are sometimes arbitrary and at the will of the lord, sometimes fixed by custom: but, even when arbitrary, the courts of law, in favour of the liberty of copyholders, have tied them down to be reasonable in their extent; otherwise they might amount to a disherison of the estate. No fine therefore is allowed to be taken upon descents and alienations, (unless in particular circumstances) of more than two years improved value of the estate i . From this instance we may judge of the favourable disposition, that the law of England (which is a law of liberty) hath always shewn to this species of tenants; by removing, as far as possible, every real badge of slavery from them, however some nominal ones may continue. It suffered custom very early to get the better of the express terms upon which they held their lands; by declaring, that the will of the lord was to be interpreted by the custom of the manor: and, where no custom has been suffered to grow up to the prejudice of the lord, as in this case of arbitrary fines, the law itself 〈36〉 interposes in an equitable method, and will not suffer the lord to extend his power so far, as to disinherit the tenant.

Thus much for the antient tenure of pure villenage, and the modern one of

copyhold at the will of the lord, which is lineally descended from it.



i [Morgan v Scudamore] 2 Ch. Rep. 134.

66 of the rights of things

IV. There is yet a fourth species of tenure, described by Bracton under the name

sometimes of privileged villenage, and sometimes of villein-socage. This, he tells us k,

99 is such as has been held of the kings of England from the conquest downwards; that

the tenants herein “villana faciunt servitia, sed certa et determinata [they perform villein services, but certain and fixed];” that they cannot aliene or transfer their tenements by grant or feoffment, any more than pure villeins can; but must surrender them to the lord or his steward, to be again granted out and held in villenage. And from these circumstances we may collect, that what he here describes is no other than an exalted species of copyhold, subsisting at this day, viz. the tenure in antient demesne: to which, as partaking of the baseness of villenage in the nature of its services, and the freedom of socage in their certainty, he has therefore given a name compounded out of both, and calls it villanum socagium [villein socage].

Antient demesne consists of those lands or manors, which, though now perhaps

granted out to private subjects, were actually in the hands of the crown in the time of Edward the confessor, or William the conqueror; and so appear to have been by the great survey in the exchequer called domesday book l . The tenants of these lands, under the crown, were not all of the same order or degree. Some of them, as Britton testifiesm, continued for a long time pure and absolute villeins, dependent on the will of the lord: and those who have succeeded them in their tenures now differ from common copyholders in only a few pointsn. Others were in great measure enfranchised by the royal favour: being only bound in respect of their lands to perform some of the better sort of villein services, but those determinate and certain; as, to plough the king’s 〈37〉 land, to supply his court with provisions, and the like; all of which are now changed into pecuniary rents: and in consideration hereof they had many immunities and privileges granted to themo; as, to try the right of their property in a peculiar court of their own, called a court of antient demesne, by a peculiar process denominated a writ of right closep; not to pay toll or taxes; not to contribute to the expenses of knights of the shire; not to be put on juries, and the like q.

100 These tenants therefore, though their tenure be absolutely copyhold, yet have an

interest equivalent to a freehold: 〈38〉 for, though their services were of a base and villenous originalr, yet the tenants were esteemed in all other respects to be highly privileged villeins; and 〈39〉 especially in this, that their services were fixed and determinate, and that they could not be compelled (like pure villeins) to relinquish these tenements at the lord’s will, or to hold them against their own: “et ideo, says Bracton, dicuntur liberi [and therefore they are called free].”9 Britton also, from such

k l. 4. tr. 1. c. 28 [§ 5].

l F. N. B. 14. 16.

m c. 66.

n F. N. B. 228.

o 4 Inst. 269.

p F. N. B. 11.

q Ibid. 14.

r Gilb. hist. of the exch. 16. & 30.

9 Bracton, bk. 4, ch. 28, § 5.





chapter 6 67


their freedom, calls them absolutely sokemans, and their tenure sokemanries; which he describess to be “lands and tenements, which are not held by knight-service, nor by grand serjeanty, nor by petit, but by simple services, being as it were lands enfranchised by the king or his predecessors from their antient demesne.” And the same name is also given them in Fletat. Hence Fitzherbert observesu, that no lands are antient demesne, but lands holden in socage: that is, not in free and common socage, but in this amphibious, subordinate class, of villein-socage. And it is possible, that as this species of socage tenure is plainly founded upon predial services, or services of the plough, it may have given cause to imagine that all socage tenures arose from the same original; for want of distinguishing, with Bracton, between free-socage or socage of frank-tenure, and villein-socage or socage of antient demesne.

Lands 〈40〉 held by this tenure are therefore a species of copyhold, and as such

preserved and exempted from the operation of the statute of Charles II. Yet they differ from common copyholds, principally in the privileges before-mentioned: as also they differ from freeholders by one especial mark and tincture of villenage, noted by Bracton and remaining to this day; viz. that they cannot be conveyed from man to man by the general common law conveyances of feoffment, and the rest; but must pass by surrender to the lord or his steward, in the manner of common 101 copyholds: yet with 〈41〉 this differencew, that, 〈42〉 in these surrenders of lands in antient demesne of frank tenure, it is not used to say “to hold at the will of the lord” in their copies, but only “to hold according to the custom of the manor.”

Thus have we taken a compendious view of the principal and fundamental points

of the doctrine of tenures, both antient and modern, in which we cannot but remark the mutual connexion and dependence that all of them have upon each other. And upon the whole it appears, that, whatever changes and alterations these tenures have in process of time undergone, from the Saxon aera to the 12 Car. II, all lay tenures are now in effect reduced to two species; free tenure in common socage; and base tenure by copy of court roll.

I mentioned lay tenures only; because there is still behind one other species of

tenure, reserved by the statute of Charles II, which is of a spiritual nature, and called the tenure in frankalmoign.

V. Tenure in frankalmoign, in libera eleemosyna, or free alms, is that, whereby a

religious corporation, aggregate or sole, holdeth lands of the donor to them and their successors for ever x. The service, which they were bound to render for these lands was not certainly defined; but only in general to pray for the souls of the donor and his heirs, dead or alive; and therefore they did no fealty, (which is incident to all other services but this y) because this divine service was of a higher and more exalted nature z.

s c. 66.

t l. 1. c. 8.

u F. N. B. 13.

w Kitchin on courts. 194.

x Litt. §. 133.

y Ibid. 131.

z Ibid. 135.

68 of the rights of things

This is the tenure, by which almost all the antient monasteries and religious houses held their lands; and by which the parochial clergy, and very many ecclesiastical and eleemosynary foundations, hold them at this day a; the nature of the service being

102 upon the reformation altered, and made conformable to the purer doctrines of the

church of England. It was an old Saxon tenure; and continued under the Norman revolution, through the great respect that was shewn to religion and religious men in antient times. Which is also the reason that tenants in frankalmoign were discharged of all other services, except the trinoda necessitas [threefold necessity], of repairing the highways, building castles, and repelling invasionsb: just as the druids, among the antient Britons, had omnium rerum immunitatemc [exemption from all things]. And, even at present, this is a tenure of a nature very distinct from all others; being not in the least feodal, but merely spiritual. For if the service be neglected, the law gives no remedy by distress or otherwise to the lord of whom the lands are holden; but merely a complaint to the ordinary or visitor to correct it d. Wherein it 〈43〉 materially differed from what was called tenure by divine service: in which the tenants were obliged to do some special divine services in certain; as to sing so many masses, to distribute such a sum in alms, and the like; which, being expressly defined and prescribed, could with no kind of propriety be called free alms; especially as for this, if unperformed, the lord might distrein, without any complaint to the visitor e. All such donations are indeed now out of use: for, since the statute of quia emptores, 18 Edw. I, none but the king can give lands to be holden by this tenure f. So that I only mention them, because frankalmoign is excepted by name in the statute of Charles II, and therefore subsists in many instances at this day. Which is all that shall be remarked concerning it; herewith concluding our observations on the nature of tenures.



a Bracton. l. 4. tr. 1. c. 28. §. 1.

b Seld. Jan. 1. 42.

c Caesar de bell. Gall. l. 6. c. 13.

d Litt. §. 136.

e Ibid. 137.

f Ibid. 140.





chapter the seventh. 103




of freehold estates, of

inheritance.

The next objects of our disquisitions are the nature and properties of estates. An estate in lands, tenements, and hereditaments, signifies such interest as the tenant hath therein: so that if a man grants all his 〈1〉 estate to another and his heirs, every thing that he can possibly grant shall pass thereby a. It is called in Latin, status; it signifying the condition, or circumstance, in which the owner stands, with regard to his property. And, to ascertain this with proper precision and accuracy, estates may be considered in a threefold view: first, with regard to the quantity of interest which the tenant has in the tenement: secondly, with regard to the time at which that quantity of interest is to be enjoyed: and, thirdly, with regard to the number and connexions of the tenants.

First, with regard to the quantity of interest which the tenant has in the tenement,

this is measured by its duration and extent. Thus, either his right of possession is to subsist for an uncertain period, during his own life, or the life of another man; to determine at his own decease, or to remain to his descendants after him: or it is circumscribed within a certain number of years, months, or days: or, lastly, it is infinite and unlimited, being vested in him and his representatives for ever. And this 104

occasions the primary division of estates, into such as are freehold, and such as are less than freehold.

An estate of freehold, liberum tenementum, or franktenement, is defined by

Brittonb to be “the possession of the soil by a freeman.” And St. Germync tells us, that “the possession of the land is called in the law of England the franktenement or freehold.” Such estate therefore, and no other, as requires actual possession of the land, is legally speaking freehold: which actual possession can, by the course of the common law, be only given by the ceremony called livery of seisin, which is the same as the feodal investiture. And from these principles we may extract this description of a freehold; that it is such an estate in lands as is conveyed by livery of seisin; or, in tenements of an incorporeal nature, by what is equivalent thereto. And accordingly it is laid down by Littletond, that where a freehold shall pass, it behoveth to have livery of seisin. As therefore estates of inheritance and estates for life could not by common law be conveyed without livery of seisin, these are properly estates of freehold; and, as no other estates were conveyed with the same solemnity, therefore no others are properly freehold estates.

a Co. Litt. 345.

b c. 32.

c Dr & Stud. b. 2. d. 22.

d §. 59.

70 of the rights of things

Estates of 〈2〉 freehold then are divisible into estates of inheritance, and estates not

of inheritance. The former are again divided into inheritances absolute or fee-simple; and inheritances limited, one species of which we usually call fee-tail.

I. Tenant in fee-simple (or, as he is frequently stiled, tenant in fee) is he that hath

lands, tenements, or hereditaments, to hold to him and his heirs for ever e; generally, absolutely, and simply; without mentioning what heirs, but referring that to his own pleasure, or to the disposition of the law. The true meaning of the word fee (feodum) is the same with that of feud or fief, and in its original sense it is taken in

105 contradistinction to allodiumf; which latter the writers on this subject define to be

every man’s own land, which he possesseth merely in his own right, without owing any rent or service to any superior. This is property in its highest degree; and the owner thereof hath absolutum et directum dominium [absolute and direct ownership], and 〈3〉 therefore it is said to be seised thereof absolutely in dominico suo, in his own demesne. But feodum, or fee, is that which is held of some superior, on condition of rendering him service; in which superior the ultimate property of the land resides. And therefore sir Henry Spelmang defines a feud or fee to be the right which the vasal or tenant hath in lands, to use the same, and take the profits thereof to him and his heirs, rendering to the lord his due services; the mere allodial propriety of the soil always remaining in the lord. This allodial property no subject in England hash; it being a received, and now undeniable, principle in the law, that all the lands in England are holden mediately or immediately of the king. The king therefore only hath absolutum et directum dominiumi; but all subjects’ lands are in the nature of feodum or fee; whether derived to them by descent from their ancestors, or purchased for a valuable consideration; for they cannot come to any man by either of those ways, unless accompanied with those feodal clogs, which were laid upon the first feudatory when it was originally granted. A subject therefore hath only the usufruct, and not the absolute property of the soil; or, as sir Edward Coke expresses it k, he hath dominium utile [ownership for the purpose of use], but not dominium directum [direct ownership]. And hence it is that, in the most solemn acts of law, we express the strongest and highest estate, that any subject can have, by these words; “he is seised thereof in his demesne, as of fee.” It is a man’s demesne, dominicum, or property, since it belongs to him and his heirs for ever: yet this dominicum, property, or demesne, is strictly not absolute or allodial, but qualified or feodal: it is his demesne, as of fee; that is, it is not purely and simply his own, since it is held of a superior lord, in whom the ultimate property resides.

106 This is the primary sense and acceptation of the word fee. But (as sir Martin

Wright very justly observes l) the doctrine, “that all lands are holden,” having been for

e Litt. §. 1.

f See pag. 45, 47 [II. 28–9, 30].

g of feuds, c. 1.

h Co. Litt. 1.

i Praedium domini regis est directum dominium, cujus nullus est author nisi Deus [The estate of the king is direct ownership, of which God alone is the author]. Ibid.

k Ibid.

l pag. 148 [II. 100].





chapter 7 71


so many ages a fixed and undeniable axiom, our English lawyers do very rarely (of late years especially) use the word fee in this its primary original sense, in contra-distinction to allodium or absolute property, with which they have no concern; but generally use it to express the continuance or quantity of estate. A fee therefore, in general, signifies an estate of inheritance; being the highest and most extensive interest that a man can have in a feud: and, when the term is used simply, without any other adjunct, or has the adjunct of simple annexed to it, (as, a fee, or, a fee-simple) it is used in contradistinction to a fee conditional at the common law, or a fee-tail by the statute; importing an absolute inheritance, clear of any condition, limitation, or restrictions to particular heirs, but descendible to the heirs general, whether male or female, lineal or collateral. And in no other sense than this is the king said to be seised in fee, he being the feudatory of no manm.

Taking therefore fee for the future, unless where otherwise explained, in this its

secondary sense, as a state of inheritance, it is applicable to, and may be had in, any kind of hereditaments either corporeal or incorporealn. But there is this distinction between the two species of hereditaments; that, of a corporeal inheritance a man shall be said to be seised in his demesne, as of fee; of an incorporeal one he shall only be said to be seised as of fee, and not in his demesneo. For, as incorporeal hereditaments are in their nature collateral to, and issue out of, lands and houses p, their owner hath no property, dominicum, or demesne, in the thing itself, but hath only something derived out of it; resembling the servitutes, or services, of the civil law q. The dominicum or property is frequently in one man, while the appendage or service is in another. 107 Thus Gaius may be seised as of fee, of a 〈4〉 way going over the land, of which Titius is seised in his demesne as of fee.

The fee-simple or inheritance of lands and tenements is generally vested and

resides in some person or other; though divers inferior estates may be carved out of it. As if one grants a lease for twenty one years, or for one or two lives, the fee-simple remains vested in him and his heirs; and after the determination of those years or lives, the land reverts to the grantor or his heirs, who shall hold it again in fee-simple. Yet sometimes the fee may be in abeyance, that is (as the word signifies) in expectation, remembrance, and 〈5〉 contemplation of law; there being no person in esse [in being], in whom it can vest and abide; though the law considers it as always potentially existing, and ready to vest whenever a proper owner appears. Thus, in a grant to John for life, and afterwards to the heirs of Richard, the inheritance is plainly neither granted to John nor Richard, nor can it vest in the heirs of Richard till his death, nam nemo est haeres viventis [for no one is the heir of the living]: it remains therefore in

m Co. Litt. 1.

n Feodum est quod quis tenet sibi et heredibus suis, sive sit tenementum, sive reditus, &c [A fee is an estate which a man holds to himself and his heirs, whether it is a tenement, or a rent, etc.]. Flet. l. 5. c. 5. §. 7.

o Litt. §. 10.

p See pag. 20 [II. 12].

q Servitus est jus, quo res mea alterius rei vel personae servit. [A servitude is a right by which my property serves the property or person of another.] Ff. 8. 1. 1. [This phrase does not appear in Justinian’s Digest, but nearly the same language may be found in Boeckelmann, Compendium Institutionum, 82, III.2. Blackstone’s source appears to have been Thomas Wood’s New Institute; this phrase first appeared in the second edition (1712), 90, note b.] 72 of the rights of things

waiting, or abeyance, during the life of Richardr. This is likewise always the case of a parson of a church, who hath only an estate therein for the term of his life: and the inheritance remains in abeyance s. And not only the fee, but the freehold also, may be in abeyance; as, when a parson dies, the freehold of his glebe is in abeyance, until a successor be named, and then it vests in the successor t.

The word, heirs, is necessary in the grant or donation in order to make a fee, or

inheritance. For if land be given to a man for ever, or to him and his assigns for ever, this vests in him but an estate for life u. This very great nicety about the insertion of the word “heirs” in all feoffments and grants, in order to vest a fee, is plainly a relic of the feodal strictness: by which we may rememberw it was required, that the form

108 of the donation should be punctually pursued; or that, as Crag x expresses it, in the

words of Baldus, “donationes sint stricti juris, ne quis plus donasse praesumatur quam in donatione expresserit.”1 And therefore, as the personal abilities of the donee were originally supposed to be the only inducements to the gift, the donee’s estate in the land extended only to his own person, and subsisted no longer than his life; unless the donor, by an express provision in the grant, gave it a longer continuance, and extended it also to his heirs. But this rule is now softened by many exceptions y.

For, 1. It does not extend to devises by will; in which, as they were introduced at

the time when the feodal rigor was apace wearing out, a more liberal construction is allowed: and therefore by a devise to a man for ever, or to one and his assigns for ever, or to one in fee-simple, the devisee hath an estate of inheritance; for the intention of the devisor is sufficiently plain from the words of perpetuity annexed, though he hath omitted the legal words of inheritance. But if the devise be to a man and his assigns, without annexing words of perpetuity, there the devisee shall take only an estate for life; for it does not appear that the devisor intended any more. 2. Neither does this rule extend to fines or recoveries, considered as a species of conveyance; for thereby an estate in fee passes by act and operation of law without the word “heirs:” as it does also, for particular reasons, by certain other methods of conveyance, which have relation to a former grant or estate, wherein the word “heirs” was expressedz. 3. In creations of nobility by writ, the peer so created hath an inheritance in his title, without expressing the word, “heirs;” 〈6〉 for they are implied in the creation, unless it be otherwise specially provided: but in creations by patent, which are stricti juris [according to strict law], the word “heirs” must be inserted, otherwise there is no inheritance. 4. In grants of lands to sole corporations and their successors, the word



r Co. Litt. 342.

s Litt. §. 646.

t Litt. §. 647.

u Litt. §. 1.

w See pag. 56 [II. 36].

x [Craig, Jus Feudale, 1716 ed.] l. 1. t. 9. §. 17.

y Co. Litt. 9, 10.

z Ibid. 9.

1 ‘Grants are to be construed strictly, so that no one is to be presumed to have granted more than he expressed in the grant.’





chapter 7 73


“successors” supplies the place of “heirs;” for as heirs take from the ancestor, so doth the successor from the predecessor. Nay, in a grant to a bishop, or other sole spiritual 109

corporation, in frankalmoign, the word “frankalmoign” supplies the place 〈7〉 of both “heirs” and “successors,” ex vi termini [from the strict sense of the word]; and in all these cases a fee-simple vests in such sole corporation. But, in a grant of lands to a corporation aggregate, the word “successors” is not necessary, though usually inserted: for, albeit such simple grant be strictly only an estate for life, yet, as that corporation never dies, such estate for life is perpetual, or equivalent to a fee-simple, and therefore the law allows it to be one a. 〈8〉 Lastly, in the case of the king, a fee-simple will vest in him, without the 〈9〉 words “heirs” or “successors” in the grant; partly from prerogative royal, and partly from a reason similar to the last, because the king in judgment of law never diesb. But the general rule is, that the word “heirs” is necessary to create an estate of inheritance.

II. We are next to consider limited fees, or such estates of inheritance as are

clogged and confined with conditions, or qualifications, of any sort. And these we may divide into two sorts: 1. Qualified, or base fees; and 2. Fees conditional, so called at the common law; and afterwards fees-tail, in consequence of the statute de donis.

1. A base, or qualified, fee is such a one as has a qualification subjoined thereto,

and which must be determined whenever the qualification annexed to it is at an end. As, in the case of a grant to A and his heirs, tenants of the manor of Dale; in this instance, whenever the heirs of A cease to be tenants of that manor, the grant is intirely defeated. So, when Henry VI granted to John Talbot, lord of the manor of Kingston-Lisle in Berks, that he and his heirs, lords of the said manor, should be peers of the realm, by the title of barons of Lisle; here John Talbot had a base or qualified fee in that dignity c; and the instant he or his heirs quitted the seignory of this manor, the dignity was at an end. This estate is a fee, because by possibility it may 110

endure for ever in a man and his heirs; yet as that duration depends upon the concurrence of collateral circumstances, which qualify and debase the purity of the donation, it is therefore a qualified or base fee.

2. A conditional fee, at the common law, was a fee restrained to some particular

heirs, exclusive of others: “donatio stricta et coarctatad; sicut certis haeredibus, quibusdam a successione exclusis:”2 as, to the heirs of a man’s body, by which only his lineal descendants were admitted, in exclusion of collateral heirs; or, to the heirs male of his body, in exclusion both of collaterals, and lineal females also. It was called a conditional fee, by reason of the condition expressed or implied in the donation of it, that if the donee died without such particular heirs, the land should revert to the donor. For this was a condition annexed by law to all grants whatsoever; that on failure of the heirs specified in the grant, the grant should be at an end, and the land

a See Vol. I. pag. 472 [I. 314].

b Ibid. 242 [I. 161].

c Co. Litt. 27.

d Flet. l. 3. c. 3. §. 5.

2 ‘A strict and limited donation; as to certain heirs, others being excluded from the succession.’

74 of the rights of things

return to its antient proprietor e. Such conditional fees were strictly agreeable to the nature of feuds, when they first ceased to be mere estates for life, and were not yet arrived to be absolute estates in fee-simple. And we find strong traces of these limited, conditional fees, which could not be alienated from the lineage of the first purchasor, in our earliest Saxon laws f.

Now, with regard to the condition annexed to these fees by the common law, our

ancestors held, that such a gift (to a man and the heirs of his body) was a gift upon condition, that it should revert to the donor, if the donee had no heirs of his body; but, if he had, it should then remain to the donee. They therefore called it a fee-simple, on condition that he had issue. Now we must observe, that, when any condition is performed, it is thenceforth intirely gone; and the thing, to which it was

111 before annexed, becomes absolute, and wholly unconditional. So that, as soon as the

grantee had any issue born, his estate was supposed to become absolute, by the per-formance of the condition; at least, for these three purposes: 1. To enable the tenant to aliene the land, and thereby to bar not only his own issue, but also the donor of his interest in the reversion g. 2. To subject him to forfeit it for treason: which he could not do, till issue born, longer than for his own life; lest thereby the inheritance of the issue, and reversion of the donor, might have been defeated h. 3. To empower him to charge the land with rents, commons, and certain other incumbrances, so as to bind his issue i. And this was thought the more reasonable, because, by the birth of issue, the possibility of the donor’s reversion was rendered more distant and precarious: and his interest seems to have been the only one which the law, as it then stood, was solicitous to protect; without much regard to the right of succession intended to be vested in the issue. However, if the tenant did not in fact aliene the land, the course of descent was not altered by this performance of the condition: for if the issue had afterwards died, and then the tenant, or original grantee, had died, without making any alienation; the land, by the terms of the donation, could descend to none but the heirs of his body, and therefore, in default of them, must have reverted to the donor. For which reason, in order to subject the lands to the ordinary course of descent, the donees of these conditional fee-simples took care to aliene as soon as they had performed the condition by having issue; and afterwards re-purchased the lands, which gave them a fee-simple absolute, that would descend to the heirs general, according to the course of the common law. And thus stood the old law with regard to conditional fees: which things, says sir Edward Cokek, though they seem antient, are yet necessary to be known; as well for the declaring how the common law stood in such cases, as for the sake of annuities, and such like inheritances, as are not within the statutes of entail, and therefore remain as at the common law.

e [Willion v Berkeley] [1] Plowd. 241.

f Si quis terram haereditariam habeat, eam non vendat a cognatis haeredibus suis, si illi viro prohibitum sit, qui

eam ab initio acquisivit, ut ita facere nequeat [He who has a hereditary estate may not, by sale, deprive his kindred heirs of it, if he is prohibited from so doing by him who first acquired the land.]. LL. Aelfred. c. 37 [Wilkins, 43].

g Co. Litt. 19. 2 Inst. 233.

h Co. Litt. Ibid. 2 Inst. 234.

i Co. Litt. 19.

k 1 Inst. 19.





chapter 7 75


The inconvenience, which attended these limited and fettered inheritances, were 112

probably what induced the judges to give way to this subtle 〈10〉 finesse, (for such it undoubtedly was) in order to shorten the duration of these conditional estates. But, on the other hand, the nobility, who were willing to perpetuate their possessions in their own families, to put a stop to this practice, procured the statute of Westminster the second l (commonly called the statute de donis conditionalibus [of conditional gifts]) to be made; which 〈11〉 pays a greater regard to the private will and intentions of the donor, than to the propriety of such intentions, or any public considerations whatsoever. This statute 〈12〉 revives in some sort the antient feodal restraints which were originally laid on alienations, by enacting, that from thenceforth the will of the donor be observed; and that the tenements so given (to a man and the heirs of his body) should at all events go to the issue, if there were any; or, if none, should revert to the donor.

Upon the construction of this act of parliament, the judges determined that the

donee had no longer a conditional fee-simple, which became absolute and at his own disposal, the instant any issue was born; but they divided the estate into two parts, leaving in the donee a new kind of particular estate, which they denominated a fee-tailm; and vesting in the donor the ultimate fee-simple of the land, expectant on the failure of issue; which expectant estate is what we now call a reversionn. And hence it is that Littleton tells uso, that tenant in fee-tail is by virtue of the statute of Westminster the second.

Having thus shewn the original of estates-tail, I now proceed to consider, what

things may, or may not, be entailed under the statute de donis. Tenements is the only 113

word used in the statute: and this sir Edward Coke p expounds to comprehend all corporeal hereditaments whatsoever; and also all incorporeal hereditaments which savour of the realty, that is, which issue out of corporeal ones, or which concern, or are annexed to, or may be exercised within the same; as, rents, estovers, commons, and the like. Also offices and dignities, which concern lands, or have relation to fixed and certain places, may be entailedq. But mere personal chattels, which savour not at all of the realty, cannot be entailed. Neither can an office, which merely relates to such personal chattels; nor an annuity, which charges only the person, and not the lands, of the grantor. But 〈13〉 in them, if granted to a man and the heirs of his body, the grantee hath still a fee conditional at common law, as before the statute; and by his 〈14〉 alienation may bar the heir or reversioner r. An estate to a man and his heirs for another’s life cannot be entailed s; for this is strictly no estate of inheritance (as will

l 13 Edw. I. c. 1.

m The expression fee-tail, or feodum talliatum, was borrowed from the feudists; (See Crag. l. 1. t. 10. §. 24, 25.) among whom it signified any mutilated or truncated inheritance, from which the heirs general were cut off; being derived from the barbarous verb taliare, to cut; from which the French tailler and the Italian tagliare are formed. (Spelm. Gloss. 531.)

n 2 Inst. 335.

o §. 13.

p 1 Inst. 19, 20.

q [Nevil’s case] 7 Rep. 33.

r Co. Litt. 19, 20.

s [Baker v Bayley] 2 Vern. 225.

76 of the rights of things

appear hereafter) and therefore not within the statute de donis. Neither can a copyhold estate be entailed by virtue of the statute; for that would tend to encroach upon and restrain the will of the lord: but, by the special custom of the manor, a copyhold may be limited to the heirs of the body t; for here the custom ascertains and interprets the lord’s will.

Next, as to the several species of estates-tail, and how they are respectively created.

Estates-tail are either general, or special. Tail-general is where lands and tenements are given to one, and the heirs of his body begotten: which is called tail-general, because, how often soever such donee in tail be married, his issue in general by all and every such marriage is, in successive order, capable of inheriting the estate-tail, per formam doniu [by the form of the gift]. Tenant in tail-special is where the gift is restrained to certain heirs of the donee’s body, and does not go to all of them in

114 general. And this may happen several waysw. I shall instance in only one: as where

lands and tenements are given to a man and the heirs of his body, on Mary his now wife to be begotten; here no issue can inherit, but such special issue as is engendered between them two; not such as the husband may have by another wife: and therefore it is called special tail. And here we may observe, that the words of inheritance (to him and his heirs) give him an estate in fee; but they being heirs to be by him begotten, this makes it a fee-tail; and the person being also limited, on whom such heirs shall be begotten, (viz. Mary his present wife) this makes it a fee-tail special.

Estates, in general and special tail, are farther diversified by the distinction of

sexes in such entails; for both of them may either be in tail male or tail female. As if lands be given to a man, and his heirs male of his body begotten, this is an estate in tail male general; but if to a man and the heirs female of his body on his present wife begotten, this is an estate in tail female special. And, in case of an entail male, the heirs female shall never inherit, nor any derived from them; nor, e converso [on the other hand], the heirs male, in case of a gift in tail femalex. Thus, if the donee in tail male hath a daughter, who dies leaving a son, such grandson in this case cannot inherit the estate-tail; for he cannot deduce his descent wholly by heirs male y. And as the heir male must convey his descent wholly by males, so must the heir female wholly by females. And therefore if a man hath two estates-tail, the one in tail male, the other in tail female; and he hath issue a daughter, which daughter hath issue a son; this grandson can succeed to neither of the estates: for he cannot convey his descent wholly either in the male or female line z.

As the word heirs is necessary to create a fee, so, in farther imitation of the strictness

of the feodal donation, the word body, or some other words of procreation, are

115 necessary to make it a fee-tail, and ascertain to what heirs in particular the fee is

limited. If therefore either the words of inheritance or words of procreation be

t [Heydon’s case] 3 Rep. 8.

u Litt. §. 14, 15.

w Litt. §. 16, 26, 27, 28, 29.

x Ibid. §. 21, 22.

y Ibid. §. 24.

z Co. Litt. 25.





chapter 7 77


omitted, albeit the others are inserted in the grant, this will not make an estate-tail. As, if the grant be to a man and his issue of his body, to a man and his seed, to a man and his children, or offspring; all these are only estates for life, there wanting the words of inheritance, his heirsa. So, on the other hand, a gift to a man, and his heirs male, or female, is an estate in fee-simple, and not in fee-tail; for there are no words to ascertain the body out of which they shall issueb. Indeed, in last wills and testaments, wherein greater indulgence is allowed, an estate-tail may be created by a devise to a man and his seed, or to a man and his heirs male; or by other irregular modes of expressionc.

There is still another species of entailed estates, now indeed grown out of use, yet

still capable of subsisting in law; which are estates in libero maritagio, or frankmarriage. These are definedd to be, where tenements are given by one man to another, together with a wife, who is the daughter or cousin of the donor, to hold in frankmarriage. Now by such gift, though nothing but the word frankmarriage is expressed, the donees shall have the tenements to them, and the heirs of their two bodies begotten; that is, they are tenants in special tail. For this one word, frankmarriage, does ex vi termini not only create an inheritance, like the word frankalmoign, but likewise limits that inheritance; supplying not only words of descent, but of procreation also. Such donees in frankmarriage are liable to no service but fealty; for a rent reserved thereon is void, until the fourth degree of consanguinity be past between the issues of the donor and doneee.

The incidents to a tenancy in tail, under the statute Westm. 2. are chiefly these f .

1. That a tenant in tail may commit waste on the estate-tail, by felling timber, pulling down houses, or the like, without being impeached, or called to account, for the same. 116

2. That the wife of the tenant in tail shall have her dower, or thirds, of the estate-tail. 3. That the husband of a female tenant in tail may be tenant by the curtesy of the estate-tail. 4. That an estate-tail may be barred, or destroyed, by a fine, by a common recovery, or by lineal warranty descending with assets to the heir. All which will hereafter be explained at large.

Thus much for the nature of estates-tail: the establishment of which family law (as

it is properly stiled by Pigott g) occasioned infinite difficulties and disputes h. Children grew disobedient when they knew they could not be set aside: farmers were ousted of their leases made by tenants in tail; for, if such leases had been valid, then under colour of long leases the issue might have been virtually disinherited: creditors were defrauded of their debts; for, if tenant in tail could have charged his estate with their payment, he might also have defeated his issue, by mortgaging it for as much as it was worth: innumerable latent entails were produced to deprive purchasers of the lands

a Co. Litt. 20.

b Litt. §. 31. Co. Litt. 27.

c Co. Litt. 9. 27.

d Litt. §. 17.

e Ibid. §. 19, 20.

f Co. Litt. 224.

g Com. Recov. 5.

h [Chudleigh’s case] 1 Rep. 131.

78 of the rights of things

they had fairly bought; of suits in consequence of which our antient books are full: and treasons were encouraged; as estates-tail were not liable to forfeiture, longer than for the tenant’s life. So that they were justly branded, as the source of new contentions, and mischiefs unknown to the common law; and almost universally considered as the common grievance of the realmi. But, as the nobility were always fond of this statute, because it preserved their family estates from forfeiture, there was little hope of procuring a repeal by the legislature; and therefore, by the connivance of an active and politic prince, a method was devised to evade it.

About two hundred years intervened between the making of the statute de donis,

and the application of common recoveries to this intent, in the twelfth year of Edward

117 IV: which were then openly declared by the judges to be a sufficient bar of an estate-

tailk. For though the courts had, so long before as the reign of Edward III, very frequently hinted their opinion that a bar might be effected upon these principles l , yet it never was carried into execution; till Edward IV observing m (in the disputes between the houses of York and Lancaster) how little effect attainders for treason had on families, whose estates were protected by the sanctuary of entails, gave his countenance to this proceeding, and suffered Taltarum’s case to be brought before the court n: wherein, in consequence of the principles then laid down, it was in effect determined, that a common recovery suffered by tenant in tail should be an effec-tual destruction thereof. What common recoveries are, both in their nature and consequences, and why they are allowed to be a bar to the estate-tail, must be reserved to a subsequent enquiry. At present I shall only say, that they are fictitious proceedings, introduced by a kind of pia fraus [pious fraud], to elude the statute de donis, which was found so intolerably mischievous, and which yet one branch of the legislature would not then consent to repeal: and, that these recoveries, however 〈15〉 clandes-tinely begun, are now become by long use and acquiescence a most common assurance of lands; and are looked upon as the legal mode of conveyance, by which tenant in tail may dispose of his lands and tenements: so that no court will suffer them to be shaken or reflected on, and even acts of parliament o have by a sidewind countenanced and established them.

This expedient having greatly abridged estates-tail with regard to their duration,

others were soon invented to strip them of other privileges. The next that was attacked was their freedom from forfeitures for treason. For, notwithstanding the large advances made by recoveries, in the compass of about threescore years, towards unfettering these inheritances, and thereby subjecting the lands to forfeiture, the

118 rapacious prince then reigning, finding them frequently re-settled in a similar



i Co. Litt. 19. [Hunt v Gately] Moor. 156. [Mary Portington’s case] 10 Rep. 38.

k [Chudleigh’s case] 1. Rep. 131. [Sir Anthony Mildmay’s case] 6 Rep. 40.

l [Mary Portington’s case] 10 Rep. 37, 38.

m Pigott. 8.

n Year Book. 12 Edw. IV. 14. [Taltarum’s case, YB 12 Edw. IV] 19. Fitzh. Abr. tit. faux recov. 20. Bro. Abr. ibid. 30.

tit. recov. in value. 19. tit. taile. 36.

o 11 Hen. VII. c. 20. 7 Hen. VIII. c. 4. 34 & 35 Hen. VIII. c. 20. 14 Eliz. c. 8. 4 & 5 Ann. c. 16. 14. Geo. II. c. 20.





chapter 7 79


manner to suit the convenience of families, had address enough to procure a statute p, whereby all estates of inheritance (under which general words estates-tail were covertly included) are declared to be forfeited to the king upon any conviction of high treason.

The next attack which they suffered, in order of time, was by the statute 32 Hen.

VIII. c. 28. whereby certain leases made by tenants in tail, which do not tend to the prejudice of the issue, were allowed to be good in law, and to bind the issue in tail. But they received a more violent blow, in the same session of parliament, by the construction put upon the statute of finesq, by the statute 32 Hen. VIII. c. 36. which declares a fine duly levied by tenant in tail to be a complete bar to him and his heirs, and all other persons, claiming under such entail. This was evidently agreeable to the intention of Henry VII, whose policy it was (before common recoveries had obtained their full strength and authority) to lay the road as open as possible to the alienation of landed property, in order to weaken the overgrown power of his nobles. But as they, from the opposite reasons, were not easily brought to consent to such a provision, it was therefore couched, in his act, under covert and obscure expressions. And the judges, though willing to construe that statute as favourably as possible for the de feating of entailed estates, yet hesitated at giving fines so extensive a power by mere implication, when the statute de donis had expressly declared, that they should not be a bar to estates-tail. But the statute of Henry VIII, when the doctrine of alienation was better received, and the will of the prince more implicitly obeyed than before, avowed and established that intention. Yet, in order to preserve the property of the crown from any danger of infringement, all estates-tail created by the crown, and of which the crown has the reversion, are excepted out of this statute. And the same was done with regard to common recoveries, by the statute 34 & 35 Hen. VIII. c. 20. which enacts, that no feigned recovery had against tenants in tail, where the estate 119

was created by the crownr, and the remainder or reversion continues still in the crown, shall be of any 〈16〉 force or effect. Which is allowing, indirectly and collaterally, their full force and effect with respect to ordinary estates-tail, where the royal prerogative is not concerned.

Lastly, by a statute of the succeeding year s, all estates-tail are rendered liable to be

charged for payment of debts due to the king by record or special contract; as, since, by the bankrupt lawst, they are also subjected to be sold for the debts contracted by a bankrupt. And, by the construction put on the statute 43 Eliz. c. 4. an appointment u by tenant in tail of the lands entailed, to a charitable use, is good without fine or recovery.

Estates-tail, being thus by degrees unfettered, are now reduced again to almost

the same state, even before issue born, as conditional fees were in at common law,

p 26 Hen. VIII. c. 13.

q 4 Hen. VII. c. 24.

r Co. Litt. 372.

s 33 Hen. VIII. c. 39. §. 75.

t Stat. 21 Jac. I. c. 19.

u [Attorney General ex rel. Pettifer v Rye] 2 Vern. 453. [Tay v Slaughter] Chan. Prec. 16.

80 of the rights of things

after the condition was performed, by the birth of issue. For, first, the tenant in tail is now enabled to aliene his lands and tenements by fine, by recovery, or by certain other means; and thereby to defeat the interest as well of his own issue, though unborn, as also of the reversioner, except in the case of the crown: secondly, he is now liable to forfeit them for high treason: and, lastly, he may charge them with reasonable leases, and also with such of his debts as are due to the crown on specialties, or have been contracted with his fellow-subjects in a course of extensive commerce.





chapter the eighth. 120




of freeholds, not of

inheritance.

We are next to discourse of such estates of freehold, as are not of inheritance, but for life only. And, of these estates for life, some are conventional, or expressly created by 〈1〉 the act of the parties; others merely legal, or created by construction and operation of law a. We will consider them both in their order.

I. Estates for life, expressly created by deed or grant, (which alone are properly

conventional) are where a lease is made of lands or tenements to a man, to hold for the term of his own life, or for that of any other person, or for more lives than one: in any of which cases he is stiled tenant for life; only, when he holds the estate by the life of another, he is usually called tenant pur auter vie b [for the life of another]. These estates for life are, like inheritances, of a feodal nature; and were, for some time, the highest estate that any man could have in a feud, which (as we have before seenc) was not in its original hereditary. They are given or conferred by the same 〈2〉 feodal rites and solemnities, the same investiture or livery of seisin, as fees themselves are; and they are held by fealty, if demanded, and such conventional rents and services as the lord or lessor, and his tenant or lessee, have agreed on.

Estates for life may be created, not only by the express words before-mentioned, 121

but also by a general grant, without defining or limiting any specific estate. As, if one grants to A. B. the manor of Dale, this makes him tenant for lifed. For though, as there are no words of inheritance, or heirs, mentioned in the grant, it cannot be construed to be a fee, it shall however be construed to be as large an estate as the words of the donation will bear, and therefore an estate for life. Also such a grant at large, or a grant for term of life generally, shall be construed to be an estate for the life of the grantee e; in case the grantor hath authority to make such a grant: for an estate for a man’s own life is more beneficial and of a higher nature than for any other life; and the rule of law is, that all grants are to be taken most strongly against the grantor f, unless in the case of the king.

Such estates for life will, generally speaking, endure as long as the life for which

they are granted: but there are some estates for life, which may determine upon future contingencies, before the life, for which they are created, expires. As, if an estate be granted to a woman during her widowhood, or to a man until he be promoted to a benefice; in these, and similar cases, whenever the contingency

a Wright. 190.

b Litt. §. 56.

c pag. 55 [II. 35–6].

d Co. Litt. 42.

e Ibid.

f Ibid. 36. [However, the reference is seemingly to Co. Litt. 42.]

82 of the rights of things

happens, when the widow marries, or when the grantee obtains a benefice, the respective estates are absolutely determined and gone g. Yet, while they subsist, they are reckoned estates for life; because, the time for which they will endure being uncertain, they may by possibility last for life, if the contingencies upon which they are to determine do not sooner happen. And, moreover, in case an estate be granted to a man for his life, generally, it may also determine by his civil death; as if he enters into a monastery, whereby he is dead in law h: for which reason in conveyances the grant is usually made “for the term of a man’s natural life;” which can only determine

122 by his natural death i.

The incidents to an estate for life, are principally the following; which are applicable

not only to that species of tenants for life, which are expressly created by deed; but also to those, which are created by act and operation of law.

1. Every tenant for life, unless restrained by covenant or agreement, may of

common right take upon the land demised to him reasonable estovers k or botes l. For he hath a right to the full enjoyment and use of the land, and all its profits, during his estate therein. But he is not permitted to cut down timber or do other waste upon the premisesm: for the destruction of such things, as are not the temporary profits of the tenement, is not necessary for the tenant’s complete enjoyment of his estate; but tends to the permanent and lasting loss of the person entitled to the inheritance.

2. Tenant for life, or his representatives, shall not be prejudiced by any sudden

determination of his estate, because 〈3〉 such determination is contingent and uncertainn. Therefore if a tenant for his own life sows the lands, and dies before harvest, his executors shall have the emblements, or profits of the crop: for the estate was determined by the act of God; and it is a maxim in the law, that actus Dei nemini facit injuriam [the act of God does wrong to no one]. The representatives therefore of the tenant for life shall have the emblements, to compensate for the labour and expense of tilling, manuring, and sowing, the lands; and also for the encouragement of husbandry, which being a public benefit, tending to the increase and plenty of provisions, ought to have the utmost security and privilege that the law can give it. Wherefore, by the feodal law, if a tenant for life died between the beginning of September and the end of February, the lord, who was entitled to the reversion, was also entitled to the profits of the whole year; but, if he died between the beginning of

123 March and the end of August, the heirs of the tenant received the wholeo. From hence

our law of emblements seems to have been derived, but with very considerable improvements. So it is also, if a man be tenant for the life of another, and cestuy que vie, or he on whose life the land is held, dies after the corn sown, the tenant pur auter



g Co. Litt. 42. [Hynde v Ambrye] 3 Rep. 20.

h [Archbishop of Canterbury’s case] 2 Rep. 48.

i See Vol. I. pag. 129 [I. 90].

k See pag. 35 [II. 21–2].

l Co. Litt. 41.

m Ibid. 53.

n Ibid. 55.

o Feud. l. 2. t. 28.





chapter 8 83


vie [for another’s life] shall have the emblements. The same is also the rule, if a life-estate be determined by the act of law. Therefore, if a lease be made to husband and wife during coverture, (which gives them a determinable estate for life) and the husband sows the land, and afterwards they are divorced a vinculo matrimonii [from the bond of matrimony], the husband shall have the emblements in this case; for the sentence of divorce is the act of law p. But if an estate for life be determined by the tenant’s own act, (as, by forfeiture for waste committed; or, if a tenant during widowhood thinks proper to marry) in these, and similar cases, the tenants, having thus determined the estate by their own acts, shall not be entitled to take the emblementsq. The doctrine of emblements extends not only to corn sown, but to roots planted, or other annual artificial profit: but it is otherwise of fruit-trees, grass, and the like; which are not planted annually at the expense and labour of the tenant, but are either the permanent, or natural, profit of the earthr. 〈4〉 For even when a man plants a tree, he cannot be presumed to plant it in contemplation of any present profit; but merely with a prospect of its being 〈5〉 useful to future successions of tenants. The advantages also of emblements are particularly extended to the parochial clergy by the statute 28 Hen. VIII. c. 11. For all persons, who are presented to any ecclesiastical benefice, or to any civil office, are considered as tenants for their own lives, unless the contrary be expressed in the form of donation.

3. A third incident to estates for life relates to the under-tenants or lessees. For

they have the same, nay greater indulgences, than their lessors, the original tenants for life. The same; for the law of estovers and emblements, with regard to the tenant for life, is also law with regard to his under-tenant, who represents him and stands in 124

his place s: and greater; for in those cases where tenant for life shall not have the emblements, because the estate determines by his own act, the exception shall not reach his lessee who is a third person. As in the case of a woman who holds durante viduitate [during widowhood]; her taking husband is her own act, and therefore deprives her of the emblements: but if she leases her estate to an under-tenant, who sows the land, and she then marries, this her act shall not deprive the tenant of his emblements, who is a stranger and could not prevent her t. The lessees of tenants for life had also at the common law another most unreasonable advantage; for, at the death of their lessors the tenants for life, these under-tenants might if they pleased quit the premises, and pay no rent to any body for the occupation of the land since the last quarter day, or other day assigned for payment of rent u. To remedy which it is now enacted v, that the executors or administrators of tenant for life, on whose death any lease determined, shall recover of the lessee a ratable proportion of rent, from the last day of payment to the death of such lessor.

p [Oland’s case] 5 Rep. 116.

q Co. Litt. 55.

r Co. Litt. 55, 56. 1 Roll. Abr. 728.

s Co. Litt. 55.

t [Haddon v Arrowsmith] Cro. Eliz. 461. [Oland v Burdwick] 1 Roll. Abr. 727.

u [William Clun’s case] 10 Rep. 127.

v Stat. 11 Geo. II. c. 19. §. 15.

84 of the rights of things

II. The next estate for life is of the legal kind, as contradistinguished from

conventional; viz. that of tenant in tail after possibility of issue extinct. This happens, where one is tenant in special tail, and a person, from whose body the issue was to spring, dies without issue; or, having left issue, that issue becomes extinct; in either of these cases the surviving tenant in special tail becomes tenant in tail after possibility of issue extinct. As, where one has an estate to him and his heirs on the body of his present wife to be begotten, and the wife dies without issuew; in this case the man has an estate-tail, which cannot possibly descend to any one; and therefore the law makes use of this long periphrasis, as absolutely necessary to give an adequate idea of his

125 estate. For if it had called him barely tenant in fee-tail special, that would not have

distinguished him from others; and besides he has no longer an estate of inheritance, or fee x, for he can have no heirs, capable of taking per formam doni [by the form of the gift]. Had it called him tenant in tail without issue, this had only related to the present fact, and would not have excluded the possibility of future issue. Had he been stiled tenant in tail without possibility of issue, this would exclude time past as well as present, and he might under this description never have had any possibility of issue. No definition therefore could so exactly mark him out, as this of tenant in tail after possibility of issue extinct, which (with a precision peculiar to our own law) not only takes in the possibility of issue in tail which he once had, but also states that this possibility is now extinguished and gone.

This estate must be created by the act of God, that is, by the death of that person

out of whose body the issue was to spring; for no limitation, conveyance, or other human act can make it. For, if land be given to a man and his wife, and the heirs of their two bodies begotten, and they are divorced a vinculo matrimonii, they shall neither of them have this estate, but be barely tenants for life, notwithstanding the inheritance once vested in them y. A possibility of issue is always supposed to exist, in law, unless extinguished by the death of the parties; even though the donees be each of them an hundred years oldz.

This estate is of an amphibious nature, partaking partly of an estate-tail, and partly

of an estate for life. The tenant is, in truth, only tenant for life, but with many of the privileges of a tenant in tail; as, not to be punishable for waste, &c a: or, he is tenant in tail, with many of the restrictions of a tenant for life; as, to forfeit his estate if he alienes it in fee-simple b: whereas such alienation by tenant in tail, though voidable by the issue, is no forfeiture of the estate to the reversioner; who is not concerned in

126 interest, till all possibility of issue be extinct. But, in general, the law looks upon this

estate as equivalent to an estate for life only; and, as such, will permit this tenant to exchange his estate with a tenant for life; which exchange can only be made, as we shall see hereafter, of estates that are equal in their nature.

w Litt. §. 32.

x [Bowles v Berrie] 1 Roll. Rep. 184. [Priddle and Napper’s case] 11 Rep. 80.

y Co. Litt. 28.

z Litt. §. 34. Co. Litt. 28.

a Co. Litt. 27.

b Ibid. 28.





chapter 8 85


III. Tenant by the curtesy of England, is where a man marries a woman 〈6〉 seised of

lands or tenements in fee-simple or fee-tail; that is, of any estate of inheritance; and has by her issue, born alive, which was capable of inheriting her estate. In this case, he shall, on the death of his wife, hold the lands for his life, as tenant by the curtesy of Englandc.

This estate, according to Littleton, has its denomination, because it is used within

the realm of England only; and it is said in the mirrour d to have been introduced by king Henry the first: but it appears also to have been the established law of Scotland, wherein it was called curialitas e: so that probably our word curtesy was understood to signify rather an attendance upon the lord’s court or curtis, (that is, being his vasal or tenant) than to denote any peculiar favour belonging to this island. And therefore it is laid downf that, by having issue, the husband shall be intitled to do homage to the lord, for the wife’s lands, 〈7〉 alone. It is likewise used in Ireland, by virtue of an ordinance of king Henry III g. It also appears h to have obtained in Normandy; and was likewise used among the antient Almains or Germansi. And yet it is not generally apprehended to have been a consequence of feodal tenure k, though I think some substantial feodal reasons may be given for its introduction. For, if a woman seised of lands hath issue by her husband, and dies, the husband is the natural guardian of the child, and as such is in reason entitled to the profits of the lands in order to maintain it: 〈8〉 and therefore the heir apparent of a tenant by the curtesy could not be in ward 127

to the lord of the fee, during the life of such tenantl. As soon therefore as any child was born, the father began to have a permanent interest in the lands, he became one of the pares curtis [peers of the court], 〈9〉 and was called tenant by the curtesy initiate; and this estate being once vested in him by the birth of the child, was not liable 〈10〉 to be determined by the subsequent death or coming of age of the infant.

There are four requisites necessary to make a tenancy by the curtesy; marriage,

seisin of the wife, issue, and death of the wifem. 1. The marriage must be canonical, and legal. 2. The seisin of the wife must be an actual seisin, or possession of the lands; not a bare right to possess, which is a seisin in law, but an actual possession, which is a seisin in deed. And therefore a man shall not be tenant by the curtesy of a remainder or reversion. But of some incorporeal hereditaments a man may be tenant by the curtesy, though there have been no actual seisin of the wife; as in case of an advowson, where the church has not become void in the life time of the wife, which a man may hold by the curtesy, because it is impossible 〈11〉 to have had actual seisin of it; and impotentia excusat legemn [inability is a valid excuse]. If the wife be an idiot, the

c Litt. §. 35, 52.

d c. 1. §. 3.

e Crag. l. 2. t. 19. §. 4.

f Litt. §. 90. Co. Litt. 30. 67.

g Pat. 11 H. III. m. 30. in 2 [recte 1] Bac. Abr. 659. [Patent Rolls of Henry III, 1227, membrane 30.]

h Grand Coustum. c. 119.

i Lindenbrog. LL. Alman. t. 92.

k Wright. 294 [recte 194].

l F. N. B. 143.

m Co. Litt. 30.

n Ibid. 29.

86 of the rights of things

husband shall not be tenant by the curtesy of her lands; for the king by prerogative is entitled to them, the instant she herself has any title: and since she could never be rightfully seised of 〈12〉 these lands, and the husband’s title depends entirely upon her seisin, the husband can have no title as tenant by the curtesy o. 3. The issue must be born alive. Some have had a notion that it must be heard to cry; but that is a mistake. Crying indeed is the strongest evidence of its being born alive; but it is not the only evidence p. The issue also must be born during the life of the mother; for, if the mother dies in labour, and the Caesarean operation is performed, the husband in

128 this case shall not be tenant by the curtesy: because, at the instant of the mother’s

death, he was clearly not entitled, as having had no issue born, but the land descended to the child, while he was yet in his mother’s womb; and the estate, being once so vested, shall not afterwards be taken from himq. In gavelkind lands, a husband may be tenant by the curtesy without having any issuer. But in general there must be issue born: and such 〈13〉 issue must also be capable of inheriting the mother’s estates. Therefore if a woman be tenant in tail male, and hath only a daughter born, the husband is not thereby entitled to be tenant by the curtesy; because such issue female can never inherit the estate in tail malet. And this seems to be 〈14〉 the true reason, why the husband cannot be tenant by the curtesy of any lands of which the wife was not actually seised: because, in order to intitle himself to such estate, he must have begotten issue that may be heir to the wife; but no one, by the standing rule of law, can be heir to the ancestor of any land, whereof the ancestor was not actually seised; and therefore, as the husband hath never begotten any issue that can be heir to those lands, he shall not be tenant of them by the curtesy u. And hence we may observe, with how much nicety and consideration the old rules of law were framed; and how closely they are connected and interwoven together, supporting, illustrating, and demonstrating one another. The time when the issue was born is immaterial, provided it were during the coverture: for, whether it were born before or after the wife’s seisin of the lands, whether it be living or dead at the time of the seisin, or at the time of the wife’s decease, the husband shall be tenant by the curtesy w. The husband by the birth of the child becomes (as was before observed) tenant by the curtesy initiate x, and may do many acts to charge the lands; but his estate is not consummate till the death of the wife; which is the fourth and last requisite to make a complete tenant by the curtesy y.

129 IV. Tenant in dower is where the husband of a woman is seised of an estate of

inheritance, and dies; in this case, the wife shall have the third part of all the lands

o Co. Litt. 30. [Hales v Petit] [1] Plowd. 263.

p [Brikhead v Wilson] Dyer. 25. [Paine’s case] 8 Rep. 34.

q Co. Litt. 29.

r Ibid. 30.

s Litt. §. 56 [recte 52].

t Co. Litt. 29.

u Ibid. 40.

w Ibid. 29.

x Ibid. 30.

y Ibid.





chapter 8 87


and tenements whereof he was seised during the coverture, to hold to herself for the term of her natural life z.

Dower is called in Latin by the foreign jurists doarium, but by Bracton and our

English writers dos; which among the Romans signified the marriage portion, which the wife brought to her husband; but with us is applied to signify this kind of estate, to which the civil law, in its original state, had nothing that bore a resemblance: nor indeed is there any thing in general more different, than the regulation of landed property according to the English, and Roman laws. Dower out of lands seems also to have been unknown in the early part of our Saxon constitution; for, in the laws of king Edmonda, the wife is directed to be supported wholly out of the personal estate. Afterwards, as may be seen in gavelkind tenure, the widow became entitled to a conditional estate in one half of the lands, with a proviso that she remained chaste and unmarriedb; as is usual also in copyhold dowers, or free bench. Yet somec have ascribed the introduction of dower to the Normans, as a branch of their local tenures; though we cannot expect any feodal reason for its invention, since it was not a part of the pure, primitive, simple law of feuds, but was first of all introduced into that system (wherein it was called triens, tertia d, [the third] and dotalitium [the dower]) by the emperor Frederick the second e; who was contemporary with our king Henry III. It is possible therefore that it might be with us the relic of a Danish Custom: since, according to the historians of that country, dower was introduced into Denmark by Swein, the father of our Canute the great, out of gratitude to the Danish ladies, who sold all their jewels to ransom him when taken prisoner by the Vandals f. However 130 this be, the reason, which our law gives for adopting it, is a very plain and a sensible one; for the sustenance of the wife, and the nurture and education of the younger childreng.

In treating of this estate, let us, first, consider, who may be endowed; secondly, of

what she may be endowed; thirdly, the manner how she shall be endowed; and, fourthly, how dower may be barred or prevented.

1. Who may be endowed. She must be the actual wife of the party at the time of

his decease. If she be divorced a vinculo matrimonii, she shall not be endowed; for ubi nullum matrimonium, ibi nulla dos h [where there is no marriage, there is no dower]. But a divorce a mensa et thoro [from bed and board] only doth not destroy the dower i; no, not even for adultery itself, by the common law k. Yet now by the statute



z Litt. §. 36.

a Wilk. 75.

b Somner. Gavelk. 51. Co. Litt. 33. Bro. Dower. 70.

c Wright. 192.

d Crag. l. 2. t. 22. §. 9.

e Ibid.

f Mod. Un. Hist. xxxii. 91.

g Bract. l. 2. c. 39. Co. Litt. 30.

h Bract. l. 2. c. 39. §. 4.

i Co. Litt. 32.

k Yet, among the antient Goths, an adulteress was punished by the loss of her dotalitii et trientis ex bonis mobilibus viri [dower and thirds, from her husband’s movable goods]: (Stiernh. l. 3. c. 2.)

88 of the rights of things

Westm. 2.l if a 〈15〉 woman elopes from her husband, and lives with an adulterer, she shall lose her dower, unless her husband be voluntarily reconciled to her. It was formerly held, that the wife of an idiot might be endowed, though the husband of an idiot could not be tenant by the curtesy m: but as it seems to be at present agreed, upon principles of sound sense and reason, that an idiot cannot marry, being incapable of consenting to any contract, this doctrine cannot now take place. By the antient law the wife of a person attainted of treason or felony could not be endowed; to the intent, says Staunforden, that, if the love of a man’s own life cannot restrain him from such atrocious acts, the love of his wife and children may: though Brittono gives it another turn; viz. that it is presumed the wife was privy to her husband’s crime.

131 However, the statute 1 Edw. VI. c. 12. abated the rigor of the common law in this

particular, and allowed the wife her dower. But a subsequent statute p revived this severity against the widows of traitors, who are now barred of their 〈16〉 dower, but not the widows of felons. An alien also cannot be endowed, unless she be queen consort; for no alien is capable of holding lands q. The wife must be above nine years old at her husband’s death, otherwise she shall not be endowedr: though in Bracton’s time the age was indefinite, and dower was then only due, “si uxor possit dotem promereri, et virum sustinere s [if the wife is able to merit dower and support a husband].”

2. We are next to enquire, of what a wife may be endowed. And she is now by law

entitled to be endowed of all lands and tenements, of which her husband was seised in fee-simple or fee-tail at any time during the coverture; and of which any issue, which she might have had, might by possibility have been heir t. Therefore if a man, seised in fee-simple, hath a son by his first wife, and after marries a second wife, she shall be endowed of his lands; for her issue might by possibility have been heir, on the death of the son by the former wife. But, if there be a donee in special tail, who holds lands to him and the heirs of his body begotten on Jane his wife; though Jane may be endowed of these lands, yet if Jane dies, and he marries a second wife, that second wife shall never be endowed of the lands entailed; for no issue, that she could have, could by any possibility inherit themu. A seisin in law of the husband will be as effectual as a seisin in deed, in order to render the wife dowable; for it is not in the wife’s power to bring the husband’s title to an actual seisin, as it is in the husband’s power to do with regard to the wife’s lands: which is one reason why he shall not be tenant by the curtesy, but of such lands whereof the wife, or he himself in her right, was actually seised in deed w. The seisin of the husband, for a transitory instant only,

132 when the same act which gives him the estate conveys it also out of him again, (as

l 13 Edw. I. c. 34.

m Co. Litt. 31.

n P. C. b. 3. c. 3.

o c. 110.

p 5 & 6 Edw. VI. c. 11.

q Co. Litt. 31.

r Litt. §. 36.

s 〈17〉 l. 2. c. 9. §. 3.

t Litt. §. 36. 53.

u Ibid. §. 53.

w Co. Litt. 31.





chapter 8 89


where by a fine land is granted to a man, and he immediately renders it back by the same fine) such a seisin will not intitle the wife to dower x: for the land was merely in transitu [passing through his hands], and never rested in the 〈18〉 husband. But, if the land abides in him 〈19〉 for a single moment, it seems that the wife shall be endowed thereof y. And, in short, a widow may be endowed of all her husband’s lands, tenements, and hereditaments, corporeal or incorporeal, under the restrictions before-mentioned; unless there be some special reason to the contrary. Thus, a woman shall not be endowed of a castle, built for defence of the realmz: nor of a common without stint; for, as the heir would then have one portion of this common, and the widow another, and both without stint, the common would be doubly stockeda. Copyhold estates also are not liable to dower, being only estates at the lord’s will; unless by the special custom of the manor, in which case it is usually called the widow’s free-benchb. But, where dower is allowable, it matters not, though the husband aliene the lands during the coverture; for he alienes them liable to dower c.

3. Next, as to the manner in which a woman is to be endowed. There are now

subsisting four species of dower; the fifth, mentioned by Littletond, de la plus belle [of the best part], having been abolished together with the military tenures, of which it was a consequence. 1. Dower by the common law; or that which is before described. 2. Dower by particular custom e; as that the 〈21〉 wife shall have half the husband’s lands, or in some places the whole, and in some only a quarter. 3. Dower ad ostium ecclesiae f [at the church door]: which is where tenant in fee-simple of full age, openly 133

at the church door, where all marriages were formerly celebrated, after affiance made and (sir Edward Coke in his 〈22〉 translation adds) troth plighted between them, doth endow his wife with the whole, or such quantity as he shall please, of his lands; at the same time specifying and ascertaining the same: on which the wife, after her husband’s death, may enter without farther ceremony. 4. Dower ex assensu patris g [by assent of the father]; which is only a species of dower ad ostium ecclesiae, made when the husband’s father is alive, and the son by his consent, expressly given, endows his wife with parcel of his father’s lands. In either of these cases, they must (to prevent frauds) be made h in facie ecclesiae et ad ostium ecclesiae; non enim valent facta in lecto mortali, nec in camera, aut alibi ubi clandestina fuere conjugia.1

x [Amcotts v Catherich] Cro. Jac. 615. [Tooker’s case] 2 Rep. 67. Co. Litt. 31.

y This doctrine was extended very far by a jury in Wales, where the father and son were both hanged in one cart, but the son was supposed to have survived the father, by appearing to struggle longest; whereby he became seised of an 〈20〉 estate by survivorship, in consequence of which seisin his widow had a verdict for her dower. ([Broughton v Randall] Cro. Eliz. 503.)

z Co. Litt. 31. [Gerard v Gerard] 3 Lev. 401.

a Co. Litt. 32. [Symmes v Smith] 1 Jon. 315.

b [Rivet’s case] 4 Rep. 22.

c Co. Litt. 32.

d §. 48, 49.

e Litt. §. 37.

f Ibid. §. 39.

g Ibid. §. 40.

h Bracton. l. 2. c. 39. §. 4.

1 ‘in the face of the church, and at the church door; for those made on a death-bed, or in a chamber or elsewhere, where the nuptials have been private, are not valid’.

90 of the rights of things

It is curious to observe the several revolutions which the doctrine of dower has

undergone, since its introduction into England. It seems first to have been of the nature of the dower in gavelkind, before-mentioned; viz. a moiety of the husband’s lands, but forfeitable by incontinency or a second marriage. By the famous charter of Henry I, this condition, of widowhood and chastity, was only required in case the husband left any issue i: and afterwards we hear no more of it. Under Henry the second, according to Glanvilk, the dower ad ostium ecclesiae was the most usual species of dower; and here, as well as in Normandy l, it was binding upon the wife, if by her consented to at the time of marriage. Neither, in those days of feodal rigour, was the husband allowed to endow her ad ostium ecclesiae with more than the third part of the lands whereof he then was seised, though he might endow her with less; lest by such liberal endowments the lord should be defrauded of his wardships and

134 other feodal profitsm. But if no specific dotation was made at the church porch, then

she was endowed by the common law of the third part (which was called her dos rationabilis [reasonable dower]) of such lands and tenements, as the husband was seised of at the time of the espousals, and no other; unless he specially engaged before the priest to endow her of his future acquisitions n: and, if the husband had no lands, an endowment in goods, chattels, or money, at the time of espousals, was a bar of any dower o in lands which he afterwards acquired p. In king John’s magna carta, and the first charter of Henry III q, no mention is made of any alteration of the common law, in respect of the lands subject to dower: but in those of 1217, and 1224, it is particularly provided, that a widow shall be intitled for her dower to the third part of all such



i Si mortuo viro uxor ejus remanserit, et sine liberis fuerit, dotem suam habebit;—si vero uxor cum liberis remanserit, dotem quidem habebit, dum corpus suum legitime servaverit [If the wife survives her husband and there are no children, she shall have her dower—but if there are children she shall have her dower only as long as she lives chastely]. (Cart. Hen. I. a.d. 1101. Introd. to great charter [Blackstone], edit. Oxon. pag. iv.)

k l. 6. c. 1. & 2.

l Gr. Coustum. c. 101.

m Bract. l. 2. c. 39. §. 6.

n De questu suo [Of his own acquiring]. (Glanv. ibid.) de terris acquisitis et acquirendis [of the lands he has acquired, and those he may acquire in the future]. (Bract. ibid.)

o Glanv. c. 2.

p When special endowments were made ad ostium ecclesiae, the husband, after affiance made, and troth plighted, used to declare with what specific lands he meant to endow his wife, (quod dotat eam de tali manerio cum pertinentiis, &c. [that he endows her of such a manor with its appurtenances, etc.] Bract. ibid) and therefore in the old York ritual (Seld. Ux. Hebr. l. 2. c. 27) there is, at this part of the matrimonial service, the following rubric; “sacerdos interroget dotem mulieris; et, si terra ei in dotem detur, tunc dicatur psalmus iste, &c.” [‘the priest shall ask what is the woman’s dower; and if land is given to her for her dower, then let that psalm be read, etc.’ (This language first appeared in Selden’s second edition (1673); see Ux. Hebr. 198.)] When the wife was endowed generally (ubi quis uxorem suam dotaverit in generali, de omnibus terris et tenementis [where anyone shall have endowed his wife generally, with all his lands and tenements]; Bract. ibid.) the husband seems to have said, “with all my lands and tenements I thee endow;” and then they all became liable to her dower. When he endowed her with personalty only, he used to say, “with all my worldly goods (or, as the Salisbury ritual has it, with all my worldly chatel) I thee endow;” which intitled the wife to her thirds, or pars rationabilis [reasonable part], of his personal estate, which is provided for by magna carta, cap. 26. and will be farther treated of in the concluding chapter of this book: though the retaining this last expression in our modern liturgy, if of any meaning at all, can now refer only to the right of maintenance, which she acquires during coverture, out of her husband’s personalty.

q a.d. 1216. c. 7. edit. Oxon.





chapter 8 91


lands as the husband had held in his life timer: yet, in case of a specific endowment of less ad ostium ecclesiae, the widow had still no power to waive it after her husband’s death. And this continued to be law, during the reigns of Henry III and Edward I s. In Henry IV’s time it was denied to be law, that a woman can be endowed of her husband’s goods and chattelst: and, under Edward IV, Littleton lays it down expressly, 135

that a woman may be endowed ad ostium ecclesiae with more than a third part u; and shall have her election, after her husband’s death, to accept such dower, or refuse it and betake herself to her dower at common law w. Which state of uncertainty was probably the reason, that these specific dowers, ad ostium ecclesiae and ex assensu patris, have since fallen into total disuse.

I proceed therefore to consider the method of endowment, or assigning dower,

by the common law, which is now the only usual species. By the old law, grounded on the feodal exactions, a woman could not be endowed without a fine paid to the lord: neither could she marry again without his licence; lest she should contract herself, and so convey part of the feud, to the lord’s enemy x. This licence the lords took care to be well paid for; and, as it seems, would sometimes force the dowager to a second marriage, in order to gain the fine. But, to remedy these oppressions, it was provided, first by the charter of Henry I y, and afterwards by magna carta z, that the widow shall pay nothing for her marriage, nor shall be distreined to marry afresh, if she chooses to live without a husband; but shall not however marry against the consent of the lord: and farther, that nothing shall be taken for assignment of the widow’s dower, but that she shall remain in her husband’s capital mansion-house for forty days after his death, during which time her dower shall be assigned. These forty days are called the widow’s quarentine; a term made use of in law to signify the number of forty days, whether applied to this occasion, or any other a. The particular lands to be held in dower, must be assigned b by the heir of the husband, or his guardian; not only for the sake of notoriety, but also to entitle the lord of the fee to demand his services of the heir, in respect of the lands so 〈23〉 held. For the heir by this entry becomes tenant thereof to the lord, and the widow is immediate tenant to 136

the heir, by a kind of subinfeudation or under-tenancy, completed by this investiture or assignment: which tenure may still be created, notwithstanding the statute of quia



r Assignetur autem ei pro dote sua tertia pars totius terrae mariti sui quae sua fuit in vita sua, nisi de minori dotata fuerit ad ostium ecclesiae [One third of the lands which her husband owned during his lifetime shall be assigned to her for her dower, unless she has been endowed with less at the church door]. c. 7. (Ibid.)

s Bract. ubi supr. Britton. c. 101, 102. Flet. l. 5. c. 23. §. 11, 12.

t [YB] P. 7 Hen. IV. 13, 14.

u §. 39. F. N. B. 150.

w §. 41.

x Mirr. c. 1. §. 3.

y ubi supra [II. 90].

z cap. 7.

a It signifies, in particular, the forty days, which persons coming from infected countries are obliged to wait, before they are permitted to land in England.

b Co. Litt. 34, 35.

92 of the rights of things

emptores, because the heir parts not with the fee-simple, but only with an estate for life. If the heir or his guardian do not assign her dower within the term of quarentine, or do assign it unfairly, she has her remedy at law, and the sheriff is appointed to assign it c. 〈24〉 If the thing of which she is endowed be divisible, her dower must be set out by metes and bounds; but, if it be indivisible, she must be endowed specially; as, of the third presentation to a church, the third toll-dish of a mill, the third part of the profits of an office, the third sheaf of tithe, and the like d.

Upon preconcerted marriages, and in estates of considerable consequence,

tenancy in dower happens very seldom: for, the claim of the wife to her dower at the common law diffusing itself so extensively, it became a great clog to alienations, and was otherwise inconvenient to families. Wherefore, since the alteration of the antient law respecting dower ad ostium ecclesiae, which hath occasioned the intire disuse of that species of dower, jointures have been introduced in their stead, as a bar to the claim at common law. Which leads me to enquire, lastly,

4. How dower may be barred or prevented. A widow may be barred of her dower

not only by elopement, divorce, being an alien, the treason of her husband, and other disabilities before-mentioned, but also by detaining the title deeds, or evidences of the estate from the heir; until she restores theme: and, by the statute of Glocester f, if a dowager alienes the land assigned her for dower, she forfeits it ipso facto, and the heir may recover it by action. A woman also may be barred of her

137 dower, by levying a fine or suffering a recovery of the lands, during her coverture g.

But the most usual method of barring dowers is by jointures, as regulated by the statute 27 Hen. VIII. c. 10.

A jointure, which strictly speaking signifies a joint estate, limited to both husband

and wife, but in common acceptation extends also to a sole estate, limited to the wife only, is thus defined by sir Edward Coke h; “a competent livelyhood of freehold for the wife, of lands and tenements; to take effect, in profit or possession, presently after the death of the husband; for the life of the wife at least.” This description is framed from the purview of the statute 27 Hen. VIII. c. 10. before-mentioned; commonly called the statute of uses, of which we shall speak fully hereafter. At present I have only to observe, that, before the making of that statute, the greatest part of the land of England was conveyed to uses; the property or possession of the soil being vested in one man, and the use, or profits thereof, in another; whose directions, with regard to the disposition thereof, the former was in conscience obliged to follow, and might be compelled by a court of equity to observe. Now, though a husband had the use of lands in absolute fee-simple, yet the wife was not entitled to any dower therein; he not being seised thereof: wherefore it became usual, on marriage, to settle by express deed



c Co. Litt. 34. 35.

d Ibid. 32.

e Ibid. 39.

f 6 Edw. I. c. 7.

g Pig. of recov. 66.

h 1 Inst. 36.





chapter 8 93


some special estate to the use of the husband and his wife, for their lives, in joint-tenancy or jointure; which settlement would be a provision for the wife in case she survived her husband. At length the statute of uses ordained, that such as had the use of lands, should, to all intents and purposes, be reputed and taken to be absolutely seised and possessed of the soil itself. In consequence of which legal seisin, all wives would have become dowable of such lands as were held to the use of their husbands, and also entitled at the same time to any special lands that might be settled in jointure; had not the same statute provided, that upon making such an estate in jointure to the wife before marriage, she shall be for ever precluded from her dower i. But then these 138

four requisites must be punctually observed. 1. The jointure must take effect immediately on the death of the husband. 2. It must be for her own life at least, and not pur auter vie, or for any term of years, or other smaller estate. 3. It must be made to herself, and no other in trust for her. 4. It must be made, and so in the deed particularly expressed to be, in satisfaction of her whole dower, and not of any particular part of it. If the jointure be made to her after marriage, she has her election after her husband’s death, as in dower ad ostium ecclesiae, and may either accept it, or refuse it and betake herself to her dower at common law; for she was not capable of consenting to it during coverture. And if, by any fraud or accident, a jointure made before marriage proves to be on a bad title, and the jointress is evicted, or turned out of possession, she shall then (by the provisions of the same statute) have her dower pro tanto [to that amount] at the common law k.

There are some advantages attending tenants in dower that do not extend to

jointresses; and so, vice versa, jointresses are in some respects more privileged than tenants in dower. Tenant in dower by the old common law is subject to no tolls or taxes; and here is almost the only estate on which, when derived from the king’s debtor, the king cannot distrain for his debt; if contracted during the coverture l. But, on the other hand, a widow may enter at once, without any formal process, on her jointure land; as she also might have done on dower ad ostium ecclesiae, which a 139 jointure in many points resembles; and the resemblance was still greater, while that species of dower continued in its primitive state: whereas no small trouble, and a very



i [Vernon’s case] 4 Rep. 1, 2.

k These settlements, previous to marriage, seem to have been in use among the antient Germans, and their kindred nation the Gauls. Of the former Tacitus gives us this account. “Dotem non uxor marito, sed uxori maritus affert: intersunt parentes et propinqui, et munera probant [The wife does not bring the dower to the husband, but the husband to the wife: the parents and relations are present and approve the gifts].” (de mor. Germ. c. 18.) And Caesar, (de bello Gallico, l. 6. c. 18.) has given us the terms of a marriage settlement among the Gauls, as nicely calculated as any modern jointure. “Viri, quantas pecunias ab uxoribus dotis nomine acceperunt, tantas ex suis bonis, aestimatione facta, cum dotibus communicant. Hujus omnis pecuniae conjunctim ratio habetur, fructusque servantur. Uter eorum vita superarit, ad eum pars utriusque cum fructibus superiorum temporum pervenit [Whatever portion a wife has brought to her husband, an estimate being made, he adds as much from his own goods. An account is taken of all this money jointly, and the produce put aside. The share of both, with all the profits that have accrued, falls to the survivor].” The dauphin’s commentator on Caesar [see Godouin, 128] supposes that this Gaulish custom was the ground of the new regulations made by Justinian (Nov. 97.) with regard to the provision for widows among the Romans: but surely there is as much reason to suppose, that it gave the hint for our statutable jointures.

l Co. Litt. 31. a. F. N. B. 150.

94 of the rights of things

tedious method of proceeding, is necessary to compel a legal assignment of dower m. And, what is more, though dower be forfeited by the treason of the husband, yet lands settled in jointure remain unimpeached to the widow n. Wherefore sir Edward Coke very justly gives it the preference, as being more sure and safe to the widow, than even dower ad ostium ecclesiae, the most eligible species of any.

m Co. Litt. 36.

n Ibid. 37.





chapter the ninth. 140




of estates, less than

freehold.

Of estates, that are less than freehold, there are three sorts; 1. Estates for years: 2. Estates at will: 3. Estates by sufferance.

I. An estate for years is a contract for the possession of lands or tenements, for

some determinate period: and 〈1〉 it happens where a man letteth them to another for the term of a certain number of years, agreed upon between the lessor and the lessee a, and the lessee enters thereonb. If the lease be but for half a year, or a quarter, or any less time, this lessee is respected as a tenant for years, and is stiled so in some legal proceedings; a year being the shortest term which the law in this case takes notice of c. And this may, not improperly, lead us into a 〈2〉 short explanation of the division and calculation of time by the English law.

The space of a year is a determinate and well-known period, consisting commonly

of 365 days: for, though in bissextile or leap-years it consists properly of 366, yet by 141 the statute 21 Hen. III. the increasing day in the leap-year, together with the preceding day, shall be accounted for one day only. That of a month is more ambiguous: there being, in common use, two ways of calculating months; either as lunar, consisting of twenty eight days, the supposed revolution of the moon, thirteen of which make a year; or, as calendar months, of unequal lengths, according to the Julian division in our common almanacs, commencing at the calends of each month, whereof in a year there are only twelve. A month in law is a lunar month, or twenty eight days, unless otherwise expressed; not only because it is always one uniform period, but because it falls naturally into a quarterly division by weeks. Therefore a lease for “twelve months” is only for forty eight weeks; but 〈3〉 if be for “a twelve-month” in the singular number, it is good for the whole year d. For herein the law recedes from its usual calculation, because the ambiguity between the two methods of computation ceases; it being generally understood that by the space of time called thus, in the singular number, a twelvemonth, is meant the whole year, consisting of one solar revolution. In the space of a day all the twenty four hours are usually reckoned; the law generally rejecting all fractions of a day, in order to avoid disputes e. Therefore, if I am bound to pay money

a We may here remark, once for all, that the terminations of “–or” and “–ee” obtain, in law, the one an active, the other a passive signification; the former usually denoting the doer of any act, the latter him to whom it is done. The feoffor is he that maketh a feoffment; the feoffee is he to whom it is made: the donor is one that giveth lands in tail; the donee is he who receiveth it: he that granteth a lease is denominated the lessor; and he to whom it is granted the lessee. (Litt. §. 57.)

b Ibid. 58.

c Ibid. 67.

d [Gateward’s case] 6 Rep. 61.

e Co. Litt. 135.

96 of the rights of things

on any certain day, I discharge the obligation if I pay it before twelve o’clock at night; after which the following day commences. But to return to estates for years.

These estates were originally granted to mere farmers or husbandmen, who every

year rendered some equivalent in money, provisions, or other rent, to the lessors or landlords; but, in order to encourage them to manure and cultivate the ground, they had a permanent interest granted them, not determinable at the will of the lord. And yet their possession was esteemed of so little consequence, that they were rather considered as the bailiffs or servants of the lord, who were to receive and account for

142 the profits at a settled price, than as having any property of their own. And therefore

they were not allowed to have a freehold estate: but their interest (such as it was) vested after their deaths in their executors, who were to make up the accounts of their testator with the lord, and his other creditors, and were intitled to the stock upon the farm. The lessee’s estate might also, by the antient law, be at any time defeated, by a common recovery suffered by the tenant of the freehold f; which annihilated all leases for years then subsisting, unless afterwards renewed by the recoveror, whose title was supposed superior to his by whom those leases were granted.

While estates for years were thus precarious, it is no wonder that they were usually

very short, like our modern leases upon rack rent; and indeed we are told g that by the antient law no leases for more than forty years were allowable, because any longer possession (especially when given without any livery declaring the nature and dura-tion of the estate) might tend to defeat the inheritance. Yet this law, if it ever existed, was soon antiquated: for we may observe, in Madox’s collection of antient instruments, some leases for years of a pretty early date, which considerably exceed that period h; and long terms, for three hundred 〈4〉 years at least, were certainly in use in the time of Edward III i, and probably of Edward I k. But certainly, when by the statute 21 Hen. VIII. c. 15. the termor (that is, he who is intitled to the term of years) was protected against these fictitious recoveries, and his interest rendered secure and permanent, long terms began to be more frequent than before; and were afterwards extensively introduced, being found extremely convenient for family settlements and mortgages: continuing subject, however, to the same rules of succession, and with the same

143 inferiority to freeholds, as when they were little better than tenancies at the will of the

landlord.

Every estate which must expire at a period certain and prefixed, by whatever

words created, is an estate for years. And therefore this estate is frequently called a term, terminus, because its duration or continuance is bounded, limited, and deter-mined: for every such estate must have a certain beginning, and certain end l. But id certum est, quod certum reddi potest [that is certain which can be made certain]:

f Co. Litt. 46.

g Mirror. c. 2. §. 27. Co. Litt. 45, 46.

h o o Madox Formulare Anglican. n . 239. fol . 140. Demise for eighty years, 21 Ric. II .…. Ibid. n. 245. fol. 146: for the like term, a.d. 1429 …… Ibid. no. 248. fol. 148. for fifty years, 7 Edw. IV.

i 〈5〉 [YB 32 Edw. III] 32 Ass. pl. 6.

k Stat. of mortmain, 7 Edw. I.

l Co. Litt. 45.





chapter 9 97


therefore if a man make a lease to another, for so many years as J. S. shall name, it is a good lease for years m; for though it is at present uncertain, yet when J. S. hath named the years, it is then reduced to a certainty. If no day of commencement is named in the creation of this estate, it begins from the making, or delivery, of the lease n. A lease for so many years as J. S. shall live, is void from the beginning o; for it is neither certain, nor can ever be reduced to a certainty, during the continuance of the lease. And the same doctrine holds, if a parson make a lease of his glebe for so many years as he shall continue parson of Dale; for this is still more uncertain. But a lease for twenty or more years, if J. S. shall so long live, or if 〈6〉 he shall so long continue parson, is good p: for there is a certain period fixed, beyond which it cannot last; though it may determine sooner, on the death of J. S. or his ceasing to be parson there.

We have before remarked, and endeavoured to assign the reason of, the inferiority

in which the law places an estate for years, when compared with an estate for life, or an inheritance: observing, that an estate for life, 〈7〉 even it be pur auter vie, is a freehold; but that an estate for a thousand years is only a chattel, and reckoned part of the personal estate q. Hence it follows, that a lease for years may be made to commence in futuro [in the future], though a lease for life cannot. As, if I grant lands to Titius to hold from Michaelmas next for twenty years, this is good; but to hold from Michaelmas 144

next for the term of his natural life, is void. For no estate of freehold can commence in futuro; because it cannot be created at common law without livery of seisin, or corporal possession of the land: and corporal possession cannot be given of an estate now, which is not to commence now, but hereafterr. And, because no livery of seisin is necessary to a lease for years, such lessee is not said to be seised, or to have true legal seisin, of the lands. Nor indeed does the bare lease vest any estate in the lessee; but only gives him a right of entry on the tenement, which right is called his interest in the term, or interesse termini: but when he has actually so entered, and thereby accepted the grant, the estate is then and not before vested in him, and he is possessed, not properly of the land, but of the term of years s: the possession or seisin of the land remaining still in him who hath the freehold. Thus the word, term, does not merely signify the time specified in the lease, but the estate also and interest that passes by that lease: and therefore the term may expire, during the continuance of the time; as by surrender, forfeiture, and the like. For which reason, if I grant a lease to A for the term of three years, and after the expiration of the said term to B for six years, and A surrenders or forfeits his lease at the end of one year, B’s interest shall immediately take effect: but if the remainder had been to B from and after the expiration of the said three years, or from and after the expiration of the said time, in this case B’s interest will not commence till the time is fully elapsed, whatever may become of A’s term t.

m [Bishop of Bath’s case] 6 Rep. 35.

n Co. Litt. 46.

o Ibid. 45.

p Ibid.

q Ibid. 46.

r [Barwick’s case] 5 Rep. 94.

s Co. Litt. 46.

t Ibid. 45.

98 of the rights of things

Tenant for term of years hath incident to, and inseparable from his estate, unless

by special agreement, the same estovers, which we formerly observedu that tenant for life was entitled to; that is to say, house-bote, fire-bote, plough-bote, and hay-botew: terms which have been already explained x.

145 With regard to emblements, or profits of land sowed by tenant for years, there

is this difference between him, and tenant for life: that where the term of tenant for years depends upon a certainty, as if he holds from midsummer for ten years, and in the last year he sows a crop of corn, and it is not ripe and cut before mid-summer, the end of his term, the landlord shall have it; for the tenant knew the expiration of his term, and therefore it was his own folly to sow what he never could reap the profits of y. But where the lease for years depends upon an uncertainty; as, upon the death of the lessor, being himself only tenant for life, or being a husband seised in right of his wife; or if the term of years be determinable upon a life or lives; in all these cases, the estate for years not being certainly to expire at a time foreknown, but merely by the act of God, the tenant, or his executors, shall have the emblements in the same manner, that a tenant for life or his executors shall be intitled theretoz. Not so, if it determine by the act of the party himself; as if tenant for years does any thing that amounts to a forfeiture: in which case the emblements shall go to the lessor, and not to the lessee, who hath determined his estate by his own default a.

II. The second species of estates not freehold are estates at will. An estate at will is

where lands and tenements are let by one man to another, to have and to hold at the will of the lessor; and the tenant by force of this lease obtains possessionb. Such tenant hath no certain indefeasible estate, nothing that can be assigned by him to any other; 〈8〉 for that the lessor may determine his will, and put him out whenever he pleases. But every estate at will is at the will of both parties, landlord and tenant, so that either of them may determine his will, and quit his connexions with the other at his own pleasurec. Yet this must be understood with some restriction. For,

146 if the tenant at will sows his land, and the landlord before the corn is ripe, or before

it is reaped, puts him out, yet the tenant shall have the emblements, and free ingress, egress, and regress, to cut and carry away the profitsd. And this for the same reason, upon which all the cases of emblements turn; viz. the point of uncertainty: since the tenant could not possibly know when his landlord would determine his will, and therefore could make no provision against it; and having sown the land, which is for the good of the public, upon a reasonable presumption, the law will not suffer him to be a loser by it. But it is otherwise, and upon reason equally good, where the

u pag. 122 [II. 82].

w Co. Litt. 45. [The reference is apparently to Co. Litt. 41b.]

x pag. 35 [II. 21–2].

y Litt. §. 68.

z Co. Litt. 56.

a Ibid. 55.

b Litt. §. 68.

c Co. Litt. 55.

d Co. Litt. 56.





chapter 9 99


tenant himself determines the will; for in this case the landlord shall have the profits of the lande.

What act does, or does not, amount to a determination of the will on either side,

has formerly been matter of great debate in our courts. But it is now, I think, settled, that (besides the express determination of the lessor’s will, by declaring that the lessee shall hold no longer; which must either be made upon the land f, or notice must be given to the lesseeg) the exertion of any act of ownership by the lessor, as entring upon the premises and cutting timber h, taking a distress for rent and 〈9〉 impounding them thereoni, or making a feoffment, or lease for years of the land to commence immediately k; any act of desertion by the lessee, as assigning his estate to another, or committing waste, which is an act inconsistent with such a tenure l; or, which is instar omnium [equal to all], the death or outlawry, of either lessor or lessee m; puts an end to or determines the estate at will.

The law is however careful, that no sudden determination of the will by one party

shall tend to the manifest and unforeseen prejudice of the other. This appears in the case of emblements before-mentioned; and, by a parity of reason, the lessee after the 147

determination of the lessor’s will, shall have reasonable ingress and egress to fetch away his goods and utensilsn. And, if rent be payable quarterly or half-yearly, and the lessee determines the will, the rent shall be paid to the end of the current quarter or half-year o. And, upon the same principle, courts of law have of late years 〈10〉 leant as much as possible against construing demises, where no certain term is mentioned, to be tenancies at will; but have rather held them to be tenancies from year to year so long as both parties please, especially where an annual rent is reserved: in which case they will not suffer either party to determine the tenancy even at the end of the year, without reasonable notice to the 〈11〉 other.

There is one species of estates at will, that deserves a more particular regard than

any other; and that is, an estate held by copy of court roll; or, as we usually call it, a copyhold estate. This, as was before observed p, was in its original and foundation nothing better than a mere estate at will. But, the kindness and indulgence of successive lords of manors having permitted these estates to be enjoyed by the tenants and their heirs, according to particular customs established in their respective districts; therefore, though they still are held at the will of the lord, and so are in general expressed in the court rolls to be, yet that will is qualified, restrained, and limited, to be exerted according to the custom of the manor. This custom, being suffered to grow up by the

e Ibid. 55.

f Ibid.

g [Hinchman v Iles] 1 Ventr. 248.

h Co. Litt. 55.

i Ibid. 57.

k 1 Roll. Abr. 860. [Dinsdale v Iles] 2 Lev. 88.

l Co. Litt. 57.

m [Oland’s case] 5 Rep. 116. Co. Litt. 57. 62.

n Litt. §. 69.

o [Leighton v Theed] Salk. 414. [Kighly v Bulkly] 1 Sid. 339.

p pag. 93 [II. 62].

100 of the rights of things

lord, is looked upon as the evidence and interpreter of his will: his will is no longer arbitrary and precarious; but fixed and ascertained by the custom to be the same, and no other, that has time out of mind been exercised and declared by his ancestors. A copyhold tenant is therefore now full as properly a tenant by the custom, as a tenant at will, the custom having arisen from a series of uniform wills. And therefore it is

148 rightly observed by Calthorpe q, that “copyholders and customary tenants differ not so

much in nature as in name: for although some be called copyholders, some customary, some tenants by the virge, some base tenants, some bond tenants, and some by one name and some by another, yet do they all agree in substance and kind of tenure: all the said lands are holden in one general kind, that is, by custom and continuance of time; and the diversity of their names doth not alter the nature of their tenure.”

Almost every copyhold tenant being therefore thus tenant at the will of the lord

according to the custom of the manor; which customs differ as much as the humour and temper of the respective antient lords, (from whence we may account for their great variety) such tenant, I say, may have, so far as the custom warrants, any other of the estates or quantities of interest, which we have hitherto considered, or may hereafter consider, 〈12〉 to hold united with this customary estate at will. A copyholder may, in many manors, be tenant in fee-simple, in fee-tail, for life, by the curtesy, in dower, for years, at sufferance, or on condition: subject however to be deprived of these estates upon the concurrence of those circumstances which the will of the lord, promulged by immemorial custom, has declared to be a forfeiture or absolute determination of those interests; as in some manors the want of issue male, in others the cutting down timber, the nonpayment of a fine, and the like. Yet none of these interests amount to freehold; for the freehold of the whole manor abides always in the lord only r, who hath granted out the use and occupation, but not the corporal seisin or true possession, of certain parts and parcels thereof, to these his customary tenants at will.

The reason of originally granting out this complicated kind of interest, so that the

same man shall, with regard to the same land, be at one and the same time tenant in fee-simple and also tenant at the lord’s will, seems to have arisen from the nature of

149 villenage tenure; in which a grant of any estate of freehold, or even for years absolutely,

was an immediate enfranchisement of the villeins. The lords therefore, though they were willing to enlarge the interest of their villeins, by granting them estates which might endure for their lives, or sometimes by descendible to their issue, yet did not care to manumit them 〈13〉 entirely; and for that reason it seems to have been contrived, that a power of resumption at the will of the lord should be annexed to these grants, whereby the tenants were still kept in a state of villenage, and no freehold at all was conveyed to them in their respective lands: and of course, as the freehold of all lands must necessarily rest and abide somewhere, the law 〈14〉 supposes it to continue and remain in the lord. Afterwards, when these villeins became modern copyholders, and had acquired by custom a sure and indefeasible estate in their lands, on 〈15〉 performing the usual

q on copyholds. 51. 54.

r Litt. §. 81. 2 Inst. 325.

s Mirr. c. 2. §. 28. Litt. §. 204, 5, 6.





chapter 9 101


services, but yet continued to be stiled in their admissions tenants at the will of the lord,—the law still supposed it an absurdity to allow, that such as were thus nominally tenants at will could have any freehold interest: and therefore continued, 〈16〉 and still continues, to determine, that the freehold of lands so holden abides in the lord of the manor, and not in the tenant; for though he really holds to him and his heirs for ever, yet he is also said to hold at another’s will. But, with regard to certain other copyholders, of free or privileged tenure, which are derived from the antient tenants in villein-socaget, and are not said to hold at the will of the lord, but only according to the custom of the manor, there is no such absurdity in allowing them to be capable of enjoying a freehold interest; and therefore the law doth not suppose the freehold of such lands to rest in the lord of whom they are holden, but in the tenants themselves u; who 〈17〉 are allowed to have a freehold interest, though not a freehold tenure.

However, in common cases, copyhold estates are still ranked (for the reasons

above-mentioned) among tenancies at will; though custom, which is the life of the 150 common law, has established a permanent property in the copyholders, who were formerly nothing better than bondmen, equal to that of the lord himself, in the tenements holden of the manor: nay sometimes even superior; for we may now look upon a copyholder of inheritance, with a fine certain, to be little inferior to an absolute freeholder in point of interest, and in other respects, particularly in the clearness and security of his title, to be frequently in a better situation.

III. An estate at sufferance, is where one comes into possession of land by lawful

title, but keeps it afterwards without any title at all. As if a man takes a lease for a year, and, after the year is expired, continues to hold the premises without any fresh leave from the owner of the estate. Or, if a man maketh a lease at will, and dies, the estate at will is thereby determined; but if the tenant continueth possession, he is tenant at sufferancew. But no man can be tenant at sufferance against the king, to whom no laches, or neglect, in not entering and ousting the tenant, is ever imputed by law: but his tenant, so holding over, is considered as an absolute intruder x. But, in the case of a subject, this estate may be destroyed whenever the true owner shall make an actual entry on the lands and oust the tenant; for, before entry, he cannot maintain an action of trespass against the tenant by sufferance, as he might against a stranger y: and the reason is, because the tenant being once in by a lawful title, the law (which presumes no wrong in any man) will suppose him to continue upon a title equally lawful; unless the owner of the land by some public and avowed act, such as entry is, will declare his continuance to be tortious, or, in common language, wrongful.

Thus stands the law, with regard to tenants by sufferance; and landlords are

obliged in these cases to make formal entries upon their lands z, and recover possession

t See pag. 98, &c. [II. 66.]

u Fitzh. Abr. tit. corone. 310. custom. 12. Bro. Abr. tit. custom. 2. 17. tenant per copie. 22. [Combes’s case] 9 Rep. 76. Co. Litt. 59. Co. Copyh. §. 32. [Hughs v Harrys] Cro. Car. 229. [Rowles v Mason] 1 Roll. Abr. 562. [Rogers v Bradly] 2 Ventr. 143. [Gale v Noble] Carth. 432. [Crowther v Oldfield] Lord Raym. 1225.

w Co. Litt. 57.

x Ibid.

y Ibid.

z [Trevillian v Andrew] 5 Mod. 384.

102 of the rights of things

151 by the legal process of ejectment: and at the utmost, by the common law, the tenant

was bound to account for the profits of the land so by him detained. But now, by statute 4 Geo. II. c. 28. in case any tenant for life or years, or other person claiming under or by collusion with such tenant, shall wilfully hold over after the determination of the term, and demand 〈18〉 made in writing for recovering the possession of the premises, by him to whom the remainder or reversion thereof shall belong; such person, so holding over, shall pay, for the time he continues, at the rate of double the yearly value of the lands so detained. This has almost put an end to the practice of tenancy by sufferance, unless with the tacit consent of the owner of the tenement.





chapter the tenth. 152




of estates upon condition.

Besides the several divisions of estates, in point of interest, which we have considered in the three preceding chapters, there is also another species still remaining, which is called an estate upon condition; being such whose existence depends upon the happening or not happening of some uncertain event, whereby the estate may be either originally created, or enlarged, or finally defeateda. And these conditional estates I have chosen to reserve till last, because they are indeed more properly qualifications of other estates, than a distinct species of themselves; seeing that any quantity of interest, a fee, a freehold, or a term of years, may depend upon these provisional restrictions. Estates then upon condition, thus understood, are of two sorts: 1. Estates upon condition implied: 2. Estates upon condition expressed: under which last may be included, 3. Estates held in vadio, gage, or pledge: 4. Estates by statute merchant or statute staple: 5. Estates held by elegit.

I. Estates upon condition implied in law, are where a grant of an estate has a

condition annexed to it inseparably, from its essence and constitution, although no condition be expressed in words. As if a grant be made to a man of an office, generally, without adding other words; the law tacitly annexes hereto a secret condition, that the grantee shall duly execute his officeb, on breach of which condition it is lawful for 153

the grantor, or his heirs, to oust him, and grant it to another personc. For an office, either public or private, may be forfeited by mis-user or non-user; both of which are breaches of this implied condition. 1. By mis-user, or abuse; as if a judge takes a bribe, or a park-keeper kills deer without authority. 2. By non-user, or neglect; which in public offices, that concern the administration of justice, or the commonwealth, is of itself a direct and immediate cause of forfeiture: but non-user of a private office is no cause of forfeiture, unless some special damage is proved to be occasioned thereby d. For in the one case delay must necessarily be occasioned in the affairs of the public, which require a constant attention; but, private offices not requiring so regular and unremitted a service, the temporary neglect of them is not necessarily productive of mischief; upon which account some special loss must be proved, in order to vacate these. Franchises also, being regal privileges in the hands of a subject, are held to be granted on the same condition of making a proper use of them; and therefore they may be lost and forfeited, like offices, either by abuse or by neglect e.

Upon the same principle proceed all the forfeitures which are given by law of life

estates and others; for any acts done by the tenant himself, that are incompatible with

a Co. Litt. 201.

b Litt. §. 378.

c Litt. §. 379.

d Co. Litt. 233.

e [Earl of Shrewsbury’s case] 9 Rep. 50.

104 of the rights of things

the estate which he holds. As if tenants for life or years enfeoff a stranger in fee-simple: this is, by the common law, a forfeiture of their several estates; being a breach of the condition which the law annexes thereto, viz. that they shall not attempt to create a greater estate than they themselves are entitled tof. So if any tenants for years, for life, or in fee, commit a felony; the king or other lord of the fee is entitled to have their tenements, because their estate is determined by the breach of the condition, “that they shall not commit felony,” which the law tacitly annexes to every feodal donation.

154 II. An estate on condition expressed in the grant itself, is where an estate is

granted, either in fee-simple or otherwise, with an express qualification annexed, whereby the estate granted shall either commence, be enlarged, or be defeated, upon performance or breach of such qualification or condition g. These conditions are therefore either precedent, or subsequent. Precedent are such as must happen or be performed before the estate can vest or be enlarged; subsequent are such, by the failure or nonperformance of which an estate already vested may be defeated. Thus, if an estate for life be limited to A upon his marriage with B, the marriage is a precedent condition, and till that happens no estate h is vested in A. Or, if a man grant to his lessee for years, that upon payment of a hundred marks1 within the term he shall have the fee, this also is a condition precedent, and the fee-simple passeth not till the hundred marks be paid i. But if a man grant an estate in fee-simple, reserving to himself and his heirs a certain rent; and that, if such rent be not paid at the times limited, it shall be lawful for him and his heirs to re-enter, and avoid the estate; in this case the grantee and his heirs have an estate upon condition subsequent, which is defeasible if the condition be not strictly performed k. To this class may also be referred all base fees, and fee-simples conditional at the common lawl. Thus an estate to a man and his heirs, tenants of the manor of Dale, is an estate on condition that he and his heirs continue tenants of that manor. And so, if a personal annuity be granted at this day to a man and the heirs of his body; as this is no tenement within the statute of Westminster the second, it remains, as at common law, a fee-simple on condition that the grantee has heirs of his body. Upon the same principle depend all the determinable estates of freehold, which we mentioned in the eighth chapter; as durante viduitate [during widowhood], &c: these are estates upon condition that the

155 grantees do not marry, and the like. And, on the breach of any of these subsequent

conditions by the failure of these contingencies; by the grantee’s not continuing tenant of the manor of Dale, by not having heirs of his body, or by not continuing sole; the estates which were respectively vested in each grantee are wholly determined and void.

f Co. Litt. 215.

g Co. Litt. 201.

h [Wood v Duke of Southampton] Show. Parl. Cas. 83, &c.

i Co. Litt. 217.

k Litt. §. 325.

l See pag. 109, 110, 111 [II. 73–4].

1 A mark was worth 13 shillings and four pence, or two-thirds of a pound.





chapter 10 105


A distinction is however made between a condition in deed and a limitation,

which Littletonm denominates also a condition in law. For when an estate is so expressly confined and limited by the words of its creation, that it cannot endure for any longer time than till the contingency happens upon which the estate is to fail, this is denominated a limitation: as when land is granted to a man, so long as he is parson of Dale, or while he continues unmarried, or until out of the rents and profits he shall have made 500l. and the like n. In 〈1〉 such cases the estate determines as soon as the contingency happens, (when he ceases to be parson, marries a wife, or has received the 500l.) and the next subsequent estate, which depends upon such determination, becomes immediately vested, without any act to be done by him who is next in expectancy. But when an estate is, strictly speaking, upon condition in deed (as if granted expressly upon condition to be void upon the payment of 40l. by the grantor, or so that the grantee continues unmarried, or provided he goes to York, &c.o) the law permits it to endure beyond the time when such contingency happens, unless the grantor or his heirs or assigns take advantage of the breach of the condition, and make either an entry or a claim in order to avoid the estate p. But, though strict words of condition be used in the creation of the 〈2〉 estate, yet if on breach of the condition the estate be limited over to a third person, and does not immediately revert to the grantor or his representatives, (as if an estate be granted by A to B, on condition that within two years B intermarry with C, and on failure thereof then to D and his heirs) this the law construes to be a limitation and not a conditionq: because, if it were a 156 condition, then, upon the breach thereof, only A or his representatives could avoid the estate by entry, and so D’s remainder might be defeated by their neglecting to enter; but, when it is a limitation, the estate of B determines, and that of D 〈3〉 commences, the instant that the failure happens. So also, if a man by his will devises land to his heir at law, on condition that he pays a sum of money, and for non-payment devises it over, this shall be considered as a limitation; otherwise no advantage could be taken of the non-payment, for none but the heir himself could have entered for a breach of conditionr.

In all these instances, of limitations or conditions subsequent, it is to be observed,

that so long as the condition, either express or implied, either in deed or in law, remains unbroken, the grantee may have an estate of freehold, provided the estate upon which such condition is annexed be in itself of a freehold nature; as if the original grant express either an estate of inheritance, or for life, or no estate at all, which is constructively an estate for life. For the breach of these conditions being contingent and uncertain, this uncertainty preserves the freeholds; because the estate is capable to last for ever, or at least for the life of the tenant, supposing the condition

m §. 380. 1 Inst. 234.

n [Mary Portington’s case] 10 Rep. 41.

o Ibid. 42.

p Litt. §. 347. Stat. 32 Hen. VIII. c. 34.

q [Lady Anne Fry’s case] 1 Ventr. 202.

r [Wellock v Hammond] Cro. Eliz. 205. [Hamsworth v Pretty] 1 Roll. Abr. 411.

s Co. Litt. 42.

106 of the rights of things

to remain unbroken. But where the estate is at the utmost a chattel interest, which must determine at a time certain, and may determine sooner, (as a grant for ninety nine years, provided A, B, and C, 〈4〉 and the survivor of them, shall so long live) this still continues a mere chattel, and is not, by its uncertainty, ranked among estates of freehold.

These express conditions, if they be impossible at the time of their creation, or

afterwards become impossible by the act of God or the act of the feoffor himself, or if they be contrary to law, or repugnant to the nature of the estate, are void. In any of

157 which cases, if they be conditions subsequent, that is, to be performed after the

estate is vested, the estate shall become absolute in the tenant. As, if a feoffment be made to a man in fee-simple, on condition that unless he goes to Rome in twenty four hours; or unless he marries with Jane S. by such a day; (within which time the woman dies, or the feoffor marries her himself) or unless he kills another; or in case he alienes in 〈5〉 fee; then and in any of such cases the estate shall be vacated and determine: here the condition is void, and the estate made absolute in the feoffee. For he hath by the grant the estate vested in him, which shall not be defeated afterwards by a condition either impossible, illegal, or repugnant t . But if the condition be precedent, or to be performed before the estate vests, as a grant to a man that, if he kills another or goes to Rome in a day, he shall have an estate in fee; here, the void condition being precedent, the estate which depends thereon is also void, and the grantee shall take nothing by the grant: for he hath no estate until the condition be performed u.

There are some estates defeasible upon condition subsequent, that require a more

peculiar notice. Such are

III. Estates held in vadio, in gage, or pledge; which are of two kinds, vivum

vadium, or living pledge; and mortuum vadium, dead pledge, or mortgage.

Vivum vadium, or living pledge, is when a man borrows a sum (suppose 200l.) of

another; and grants him an estate, as, of 20l. per annum, to hold till the rents and profits shall repay the sum so borrowed. This is an estate conditioned to be void, as soon as such sum is raised. And in this case the land or pledge is said to be living: it subsists, and survives the debt; and, immediately on the discharge of that, results back to the borrower w. But mortuum vadium, a dead pledge, or mortgage, (which is

158 much more common than the other) is where a man borrows of another a specific

sum (e.g. 200l.) and grants him an estate in fee, on condition that if he, the mortgagor, shall repay the mortgagee the said sum of 200l. on a certain day mentioned in the deed, that then the mortgagor may re-enter on the estate so granted in pledge; or, as is now the more usual way, 〈6〉 that the mortgagee shall re-convey the estate to the mortgagor: in this case the land, which is so put in pledge, is by law, in case of non-payment at the time limited, for ever dead and gone from the mortgagor; and the mortgagee’s estate in the lands is then no longer conditional, but absolute. But, so

t Co. Litt. 206.

u Ibid.

w Ibid. 205.





chapter 10 107


long as it continues conditional, that is, between the time of lending the money, and the time allotted for payment, the mortgagee is called tenant in mortgage x. But, as it was formerly a doubt y, whether, by taking such estate in fee, it did not become liable to the wife’s dower, and other incumbrances of the mortgagee (though that doubt has been long ago over-ruled by our courts of equity z) it therefore became usual to grant only a long term of years, by way of mortgage; with condition to be void on re-payment of the mortgage-money: which course has been 〈7〉 since continued, principally because on the death of the mortgagee such term becomes vested in his personal representatives, who alone are intitled in equity to receive the money lent, of whatever nature the mortgage may happen to be.

As soon as the estate is created, the mortgagee may immediately enter on the

lands; but is liable to be dispossessed, upon performance of the condition by payment of the mortgage-money at the day limited. And therefore the usual way is to agree that the mortgagor shall hold the land till the day assigned for payment; when, in case of failure, whereby the estate becomes absolute, the mortgagee may enter upon it and take possession, without any possibility at law of being afterwards evicted by the mortgagor, to whom the land is now for ever dead. But here again the courts of equity interpose; and, though a mortgage be thus forfeited, and the estate absolutely 159

vested in the mortgagee at the common law, yet they will consider the real value of the tenements compared with the sum borrowed. And, if the estate be of greater value than the sum lent thereon, they will allow the mortgagor at any reasonable time to re-call or redeem his estate; paying to the mortgagee his principal, interest, and expenses: for otherwise, in strictness of law, an estate worth 1000l. might be forfeited for non-payment of 100l. or a less sum. This reasonable advantage, allowed to mortgagors, is called the equity of redemption: and this enables a mortgagor to call on the mortgagee, who has possession of his estate, to deliver it back and account for the rents and profits received, on payment of his whole debt and interest; thereby turning the mortuum into a kind of vivum vadium. But, on the other hand, the mortgagee may either compel the sale of the estate, in order to get the whole of his money immediately; or else call upon the mortgagor to redeem his estate presently, or, in default thereof, to be for ever foreclosed from redeeming the same; that is, to lose his equity of redemption without possibility of re-call. And also, in some cases of fraudulent mortgagesa, the fraudulent mortgagor forfeits all equity of redemption whatsoever. It is 〈8〉 not therefore usual for mortgagees to take possession of the mortgaged estate, unless where the security is precarious, or small; or where the mortgagor neglects even the payment of interest: when the mortgagee is frequently obliged to bring an ejectment, and take the land into his own hands, in the nature of a pledge, or the pignus of the Roman law: whereas, while it remains in the hands of the mortgagor, it more resembles their hypotheca, which was where the possession of



x Litt. §. 332.

y Ibid. §. 357. [Nash v Preston] Cro. Car. 191.

z [Pawlett v Attorney General] Hardr. 466.

a Stat. 4 & 5 W. & M. c. 16.

108 of the rights of things

the thing pledged remained with the debtor b. But, by statute 7 Geo. II. c. 20. after payment or tender by the mortgagor of principal, interest, and costs, the mortgagee can maintain no ejectment; but may be compelled to reassign his securities. In

160 Glanvil’s time, when the universal method of conveyance was by livery of seisin or

corporal tradition of the lands, no gage or pledge of lands was good unless possession was also delivered to the creditor; “si non sequatur ipsius vadii traditio, curia domini regis hujusmodi privatas conventiones tueri non solet:”2 for which the reason given is, to prevent subsequent and fraudulent pledges of the same land; “cum in tali casu possit eadem res pluribus aliis creditoribus tum prius tum posterius invadiaric.”3 And the frauds which have arisen, since the exchange of these public and notorious conveyances for more private and secret bargains, have well evinced the wisdom of our antient law.

IV. A fourth species of estates, defeasible on condition subsequent, are those held

by statute merchant, and statute staple; which are very nearly related to the vivum vadium before-mentioned, or estate held till the profits thereof shall discharge a debt liquidated or ascertained. For both the statute merchant and statute staple are securities for money; the one entered 〈9〉 into pursuant to the statute 13 Edw. I. de mercatoribus [of merchants], and thence called a statute merchant; the other pursuant to the statute 27 Edw. III. c. 9. before the mayor of the staple, that is to say, the grand mart for the principal commodities or manufactures of the kingdom, formerly held by act of parliament in certain trading 〈10〉 townsd, and thence this security is called a statute staple. They are both, I say, securities for debts, originally permitted only among traders, for the benefit of commerce; whereby the lands of the debtor are conveyed to the creditor, till out of the rents and profits of them his debt may be satisfied: and during such time as the creditor so holds the lands, he is tenant by statute merchant or statute staple. There is also a similar security, the recognizance in the nature of a statute 〈11〉 staple, which extends the benefit of this mercantile trans-action to all the king’s subjects in general, by virtue of the statute 23 Hen. VIII. c. 6.

V. Another similar conditional estate, created by operation of law, for security

161 and satisfaction of debts, is called an estate by elegit. What an elegit is, and why so

called, will be explained in the third part of these commentaries.4 At present I need only mention, that it is the name of a writ, founded on the statute e of Westm. 2. by which, after a plaintiff has obtained judgment for his 〈12〉 debt at law, the sheriff gives

b Pignoris appellatione eam proprie rem contineri dicimus, quae simul etiam traditur creditori. At eam, quae sine traditione nuda conventione tenetur, proprie hypothecae appellatione contineri dicimus [The appellation of pledge is properly given to that security which is delivered immediately to the creditor. But that which is bound by a bare compact without delivery we properly call hypothecae]. Inst l. 4. t. 6. §. 7.

c [Glanvill] l. 10. c. 8.

d See Book I. ch. 8.

e 13 Edw. I. c. 18.

2 ‘If delivery of the pledge itself does not follow, the king’s court is not accustomed uphold private agreements of this kind.’ As with the next quotation, Blackstone draws on Glanvill, bk. 10, ch. 8, but rearranges the text.

3 ‘since in such a case the same thing might be pledged to many other creditors as well before as afterwards.’

4 As Blackstone explains in III. 274–5 the writ of elegit [he has chosen] was so called because it was ‘in the choice or election of the plaintiff whether he will sue out this writ’ or use another one.





chapter 10 109


him possession of one half of the defendant’s lands and tenements, to be held, occupied, and enjoyed, until his debt and damages are fully paid: and, during the time he so holds them, he is called tenant by elegit. It is easy to observe, that this is also a mere conditional estate, defeasible as soon as the debt is levied. But it is remarkable, that the feodal restraints of alienating lands, and charging them with the debts of the owner, were softened much earlier and much more effectually for the benefit of trade and commerce, than for any other consideration. Before the statute of quia emptores f, it is generally thought that the proprietor of lands was enabled to alienate no more than a moiety of them: the statute therefore of Westm. 2. permits only so much of them to be affected by the process of law, as a man was capable of alienating by his own deed. But by the statute de mercatoribus (passed in the same year g) the whole of a man’s lands was liable to be pledged in a statute merchant, for a debt contracted in trade; though only half of them was liable to be taken in execution for any other debt of the owner.

I shall conclude what I had to remark of these estates, by statute merchant, statute

staple, and elegit, with the observation of sir Edward Coke h. “These tenants have uncertain interests in lands and tenements, and yet they have but chattels and no freeholds;” (which makes them an exception to the general rule) “because though they may hold an estate of inheritance, or for life, ut liberum tenementum [as free tenement], until their debt be paid; yet it shall go to their executors: for ut is similitudinary; and though, to recover their estates, they shall have the same remedy (by assise) as a tenant of the freehold shall 〈13〉 have, yet it is but the similitude of 162

a freehold, and nullum simile est idem [nothing similar is the same].” This indeed only proves them to be chattel interests, because they go to the executors, which is inconsistent with the nature of a freehold: but it does not assign the reason why these estates, in contradistinction to other uncertain interests, shall vest in the executors of the tenant and not the heir; which is probably owing to this: that, being a security and remedy provided for personal 〈14〉 debts owing to the deceased, to which debts the executor is intitled, the law has therefore thus directed their succession; as judging it reasonable, from a principle of natural equity, that the security and remedy should be vested in 〈15〉 them, to whom the debts if recovered would belong. And, upon the same principle, if lands be devised to a man’s executor, until out of their profits the debts due from the testator be discharged, this interest in the lands shall be a chattel interest, and on the death of such executor shall go to his executorsi: because they, being liable to pay the original testator’s debts, so far as his assets will extend, are in reason intitled to possess that fund, out of which he has directed them to be paid.

f 18 Edw. I.

g 13 Edw. I.

h 1 Inst. 42, 43.

i Co. Litt. 42.



163 chapter the eleventh.



of estates in possession,

remainder, and reversion.

Hitherto we have considered estates solely with regard to their duration, or the quantity of interest which the owners have therein. We are now to consider them in another view; with regard to the time of their enjoyment, when the actual pernancy of the profits (that is, the taking, perception, or receipt, of the rents and other advantages arising therefrom) begins. Estates therefore, with respect to this consideration, may either be in possession, or in expectancy: and of expectancies there are two sorts; one created by act of the parties, called a remainder; the other by act of law, and called a reversion.

I. Of estates in possession, (which are sometimes called estates executed, whereby

a present interest passes to and resides in the tenant, not depending on any subsequent circumstance or contingency, as in the case of estates executory) there is little or nothing peculiar to be observed. All the estates we have hitherto spoken of are of this kind; for, in laying down general rules, we usually apply them to such estates as are then actually in the tenant’s possession. But the doctrine of estates in expectancy contains some of the nicest and most abstruse learning in the English law. These will therefore require a minute discussion, and demand some degree of attention.

164 II. An estate then in remainder may be defined to be, an estate limited to take

effect and be enjoyed after another estate is determined. As if a man seised in fee-simple granteth lands to A for twenty years, and, after the determination of the said term, then to B and his heirs for ever: here A is tenant for years, remainder to B in fee. In the first place an estate for years is created or carved out of the fee, and given to A; and the residue or remainder of it is given to B. But both these interests are in fact only one estate; the present term of years and the remainder afterwards, when added together, being equal only to one estate in fee a. They are indeed different parts, but they constitute only one whole: they are carved out of one and the same inheritance: they are both created, and may both subsist, together; the one in possession, the other in expectancy. So if land be granted to A for twenty years, and after the deter-mination of the said term to B for life; and, after the determination of B’s estate for life, it be limited to C and his heirs for ever: this makes A tenant for years, with remainder to B for life, remainder over to C in fee. Now here the estate of inheritance undergoes a division into three portions: there is first A’s estate for years carved out of it; and after that B’s estate for life; and then the whole that remains is limited to C and his heirs. And here also the first estate, and both the remainders, for life and in fee, are one estate only; being nothing but parts or portions of one entire inheritance:

a Co. Litt. 143.





chapter 11 111


and if there were a hundred remainders, it would still be the same thing; upon a principle 〈1〉 grounded on mathematical truth, that all the parts are equal, and no more than equal, to the whole. And hence also it is easy to collect, that no remainder can be limited after the grant of an estate in fee-simple b: because a fee-simple is the highest and largest estate, that a subject is capable of enjoying; and he that is tenant in fee hath in him the whole of the estate: a remainder therefore, which is only a portion, or residuary part, of the estate, cannot be reserved after the whole is disposed of. A particular estate, with all the remainders expectant thereon, is only one fee- 165

simple; as 40l. is part of 100l. and 60l. is the remainder of it: wherefore, after a fee-simple once vested, there can no more be a remainder limited thereon, than after the whole 100l. is appropriated there can be any residue subsisting.

Thus much being premised, we shall be the better enabled to comprehend the

rules that are laid down by law to be observed in the creation of remainders, and the reasons upon which those rules are founded.

1. And, first, there must necessarily be some particular estate, precedent to the

estate in remainder c. As, an estate for years to A, remainder to B for life; or, an estate for life to A, remainder to B in tail. This precedent estate is called the particular estate, as being only a small part, or particula, of the inheritance; the residue or remainder of which is granted over to another. The necessity of creating this preceding particular estate, in order to make a good remainder, arises from this plain reason; that remainder is a relative expression, and implies that some part of the thing is previously disposed of: for, where the whole is conveyed at once, there cannot possibly exist a remainder; but the interest granted, whatever it be, will be an estate in possession.

An estate created to commence at a distant period of time, without any intervening

estate, is therefore properly no remainder: it is the whole of the gift, and not a residuary part. And such future estates can only be made of chattel interest, which were considered in the light of mere contracts by the antient law d, to be executed either now or hereafter, as the contracting parties should agree: but an estate of freehold must be created to commence immediately. For it is an antient rule of the common law, 〈3〉 that no estate of freehold can be created to commence in futuro; but it ought to take effect presently either in possession or remainder e: because at common law no freehold in lands could pass without livery of seisin; which must 166 operate either immediately, or not at all. It would therefore be contradictory, if an estate, which is not to commence till hereafter, could be granted by a conveyance which imports an immediate possession. Therefore, though a lease to A for seven years, to commence from next Michaelmas, is good; yet a conveyance to B of lands, to hold to him and his heirs for ever from the end of three years next ensuing, is void. So that when it is intended to grant an estate of freehold, whereof the enjoyment shall



b 〈2〉 [Colthirst v Bejushin] [1] Plowd. 29.

c Co. Litt. 49. [Colthirst v Bejushin] [1] Plowd. 25.

d [Corbet v Stone] Raym. 151.

e [Barwick’s case] 5 Rep. 94.

112 of the rights of things

be deferred till a future time, it is necessary to create a previous particular estate, which may subsist till that period of time is completed; and for the grantor to deliver immediate possession of the land to the tenant of this particular estate, which is construed to be giving possession to him in remainder, since his estate and that of the particular tenant are one and the same estate in law. As, where one leases to A for three years, with remainder to B in fee, and makes livery of seisin to A; here by the livery the freehold is immediately created, and vested in B, during the continuance of A’s term of years. The whole estate passes at once from the grantor to the grantees, and the remainder-man is seised of his remainder at the same time that the termor is possessed of his term. The enjoyment of it must indeed be deferred till hereafter; but it is to all intents and purposes an estate commencing in praesenti [immediately], though to be occupied and enjoyed in futuro.

As no remainder can be created, without such a precedent particular estate,

therefore the particular estate is said to support the remainder. But a lease at will is not held to be such a particular estate, as will support a remainder over f. For an estate at will is of a nature so slender and precarious, that it is not looked upon as a portion of the inheritance; and a portion must first be taken out of it, in order to constitute a remainder. Besides, if it be a freehold remainder, livery of seisin must be given at the time of its creation; and the entry of the grantor, to do this, determines the estate at

167 will in the very instant in which it is made g: or, 〈4〉 if it be a chattel interest, though

perhaps it might operate as a future contract, if the tenant for years be a party to the deed of creation, yet it is void by way of remainder: for it is a separate independent contract, distinct from the precedent estate at will; and every remainder must be part of one and the same estate, out of which the preceding particular estate is takenh. And hence it is generally true, that if the particular estate is void in its creation, or by any means is defeated afterwards, the remainder supported thereby shall be defeated also i: as where the particular estate is an estate for the life of a person not in esse [in being]k ; or an estate for life upon condition, on breach of which condition the grantor enters and avoids the estate l; in either of these cases the remainder over is void.

2. A second rule to be observed is this; that the remainder must commence or

pass out of the grantor at the time of the creation of the particular estate m. As, where there is an estate to A for life, with remainder to B in fee: here B’s remainder in fee passes from the grantor at the same time that seisin is delivered to A of his life estate in possession. And it is this, which induces the necessity at common law of livery of seisin being made on the particular estate, whenever a freehold remainder is created. For, if it be limited even on an estate for years, it is necessary that the lessee for years



f [Lord Stafford’s case] 8 Rep. 75.

g [Anon. (1536)] Dyer. 18 [pl. 106].

h [Corbet v Stone] Raym. 151.

i Co. Litt. 298.

k [YB Trin. 9 Hen. VI] 2 Roll. Abr. 415.

l [Foy v Hyrde] 1 Jon. 58.

m Litt. §. 671. [Colthirst v Bejushin] [1] Plowd. 25. [Litt. § 671 refers to a different point than the one Blackstone is making. A more apposite reference might be either of those cited in the next two notes.]





chapter 11 113


should have livery of seisin, in order to convey the freehold from and out of the grantor; otherwise the remainder is void n. Not that the livery is necessary to strengthen the estate for years; but, as livery of the land is requisite to convey the freehold, and yet cannot be given to him in remainder without infringing the possession of the lessee for years, therefore the law allows such livery, made to the tenant of the particular estate, to relate and enure to him in remainder, as both are but one estate in law o.

3. A third rule respecting remainders is this; that the remainder must vest in the 168

grantee during the continuance of the particular estate, or eo instanti [at the moment] that it determines p. As, if A be tenant for life, remainder to B in tail; here B’s remainder is vested in him, at the creation of the particular estate to A for life: or, if A and B be tenants for their joint lives, remainder to the survivor in fee; here, though during their joint lives the remainder is vested in neither, yet on the death of either of them, the remainder vests instantly in the survivor: wherefore both these are good remainders. But, if an estate be limited to A for life, remainder to the eldest son of B in tail, and A dies before B hath any son; here the remainder will be void, for it did not vest in any one during the continuance, nor at the determination, of the particular estate: and, even supposing that B should afterwards have a son, he shall not take by this remainder; for, as it did not vest at or before the end of the particular estate, it never can vest at all, but is gone for ever q. And this depends upon the principle before laid down, that the precedent particular estate and the remainder are one estate in law; they must therefore subsist and be in esse at one and the same instant of time, either during the continuance of the first estate or at the very instant when that determines, so that no other estate can possibly come between them. For there can be no intervening estate between the particular estate, and the remainder supported thereby r: the thing supported must fall to the ground, if once its support be severed from it.

It is upon these rules, but principally the last; that the doctrine of contingent

remainders depends. For remainders are either vested or contingent. Vested remainders (or remainders executed, whereby a present interest passes to the party, though to be enjoyed in futuro) are where the estate is invariably fixed, to remain to a determinate person, after the particular estate is spent. As if A be tenant for twenty years, 169 remainder to B in fee; here B’s is a vested remainder, which nothing can defeat, or set aside.

Contingent or executory remainders (whereby no present interest passes) are

where the estate in remainder is limited to take effect, either to a dubious and uncertain person, or upon a dubious and uncertain event; so that the particular estate may chance to be determined, and the remainder never take effect s.



n Litt. §. 60.

o Co. Litt. 49.

p [Colthirst v Bejushin] [1] Plowd. 25. [Archer’s case] 1 Rep. 66.

q [Dillon v Freine] 1 Rep. 138.

r [Hynde v Ambrye] 3 Rep. 21.

s [Hynde v Ambrye] 3 Rep. 20.

114 of the rights of things

First, they may be limited to a dubious and uncertain person. As if A be tenant for

life, with remainder to B’s eldest son (then unborn) in tail; this is a contingent remainder, for it is uncertain whether B will have a son or no: but the instant that a son is born, the remainder is no longer contingent, but vested. Though, if A had died before the contingency happened, that is, before B’s son was born, the remainder would have been absolutely gone; for the particular estate was determined before the remainder could vest. Nay, by the strict rule of law, if A were tenant for life, remainder to his own eldest son in tail, and A died without issue born, but leaving his wife enseint or big with child, and after his death a posthumous son was born, this son could not take the land, by virtue of this remainder; for the particular estate determined before there was any person in esse, in whom the remainder could vest t. But, to remedy this hardship, it is enacted by statute 10 & 11 W. III. c. 16. that posthumous children shall be capable of taking in remainder, in the same manner as if they had been born in their father’s lifetime: that is, the remainder is allowed to vest in them, while yet in their mother’s wombu.

This species of contingent remainders, to a person not in being, must however be

limited to some one, that may by common possibility, or potentia propinqua, be in

170 esse at or before the particular estate determinesw. As if an estate be made to A for life,

remainder to the heirs of B: now, if A dies before B, the remainder is at an end; for during B’s life he has no heir, nemo est haeres viventis [no one is heir to the living]: but if B dies first, the remainder then immediately vests in his heir, who will be entitled to the land on the death of A. This is a good contingent remainder, for the possibility of B’s dying before A is potentia propinqua, and therefore allowed in law x. But a remainder to the right heirs of B (if there be no such person as B in esse) is void y. For here there must two contingencies happen; first, that such a person as B shall be born; and, secondly, that he shall also die during the continuance of the particular estate; which make it potentia remotissima, a most improbable possibility. A remainder to a man’s eldest son, who hath none, (we have seen) is good; for by common possibility he may have one; but if it be limited in particular to his son John, or Richard, it is bad, if he have no son of that name; for it is too remote a possibility that he should not only have a son, but a son of a particular name z. A limitation of a remainder to a bastard before it is born, is not good a: for though the law allows the possibility of having bastards, it presumes it to be a very remote and improbable contingency. Thus may a remainder be contingent, on account of the uncertainty of the person who is to take it.

A remainder may also be contingent, where the person to whom it is limited is

fixed and certain, but the event upon which it is to take effect is vague and uncertain.

t [Reeve v Long] Salk. 228. [Reeve v Long] 4 Mod. 282.

u See Vol. I. pag. 126 [I. 88].

w [Cholmley’s case] 2 Rep. 51.

x Co. Litt. 378.

y [Counden v Clerke] Hob. 33.

z [Hall’s case] 5 Rep. 51.

a [Blodwell v Edwards] Cro. Eliz. 509.





chapter 11 115


As, where land is given to A for life, and in case B survives him, then with remainder to B in fee: here B is a certain person, but the remainder to him is a contingent remainder, depending upon a dubious event, the uncertainty of his surviving A. During the joint lives of A and B it is contingent; and if B dies first, it never can vest in his heirs, but is for ever gone; but if A dies first, the remainder to B becomes vested.

Contingent remainders of either kind, if they amount to a freehold, cannot be 171

limited on an estate for years, or any other particular estate, less than a freehold. Thus if land be granted to A for ten years, with remainder in fee to the right heirs of B, this remainder is void b: but if granted to A for life, with a like remainder, it is good. For, unless the freehold passes out of the grantor at the time when the remainder is created, such freehold remainder is void: it cannot pass out of him, without vesting somewhere; and in the case of a contingent remainder it must vest in the particular tenant, else it can vest no where: unless therefore the estate of such particular tenant be of a freehold nature, the freehold cannot vest in him, and consequently the remainder is void.

Contingent remainders may be defeated, by destroying or determining the

particular estate upon which they depend, before the contingency happens whereby they become vested c. Therefore when there is tenant for life, with divers remainders in contingency, he may, not only by his death, but by alienation, surrender, or other methods, destroy and determine his own life-estate, before any of those remainders vest; the consequence of which is that he utterly defeats them all. As, if there be tenant for life, with remainder to his eldest son unborn in tail, and the tenant for life, before any son is born, surrenders his life-estate, he by that means defeats the remainder in tail to his son: for his son not being in esse, when the particular estate determined, the remainder could not then vest; and, as it could not vest then, by the rules before laid down, it never can vest at all. In these cases therefore it is necessary to have trustees appointed to preserve the contingent remainders; in whom there is vested an estate in remainder for the life of the tenant for life, to commence when his determines. If therefore his estate for life determines otherwise than by his 〈5〉 death, their estate, for the residue of his natural life, will then take effect, and become a 172

particular estate in possession, sufficient to support the remainders depending in contingency. This method is said to have been invented by sir Orlando Bridgman, sir Geoffrey Palmer,1 and other eminent council, who betook themselves to conveyancing during the time of the civil wars; in order thereby to secure in family settlements a provision for the future children of an intended marriage, who before were usually left at the mercy of the particular tenant for life d: and when, after the restoration, those gentlemen came to fill the first offices of the law, they supported this invention within reasonable and proper bounds, and introduced it into general use.

b [Chudleigh’s case] 1 Rep. 130.

c Ibid. 66. 135.

d See [Pigot v Heron] Moor. 486. [Wegg v Villers] 2 Roll. Abr. 797. pl. 12. [Heyns v Villars] 2 Sid. 159. [Green v Rooke] 2 Chan. Rep. 170.

1 During the interregnum Bridgeman and Palmer both withdrew from public advocacy. With the return of the monarchy in 1660, Palmer became Attorney General and Bridgeman was appointed Chief Baron of the Exchequer.

116 of the rights of things

Thus the student will observe how much nicety is required in creating and

securing a remainder; and I trust he will in some measure see the general reasons, upon which this nicety is founded. It were endless to attempt to enter upon the particular subtilties and refinements, into which this doctrine, by the variety of cases which have occurred in the course of many centuries, has been spun out and subdivided: neither are they consonant to the design of these elementary disquisitions. I must not however omit, that in devises by last will and testament, (which, being often drawn up when the party is inops concilii [without counsel], are always more favoured in construction than formal deeds, which are presumed to be made with great caution, fore-thought, and advice) in these devises, I say, remainders may be created in some measure contrary to the rules before laid down: though our lawyers will not allow such dispositions to be strictly remainders; but call them by another name, that of executory devises, or devises hereafter to be executed.

An executory devise of lands is such a disposition of them by will, that thereby no

estate vests at the death of the devisor, but only on some future contingency. It differs

173 from a remainder in three very material points: 1. That it needs not any particular

estate to support it. 2. That by it a fee-simple or other less estate, may be limited after a fee-simple. 3. That by this means a remainder may be limited of a chattel interest, after a particular estate for life created in the same.

1. The first case happens when a man devises a future estate; to arise upon a

contingency; and, till that contingency happens, does not dispose of the fee-simple, but leaves it to descend to his heir at law. As if one devises land to a feme-sole and her heirs, upon her day of marriage: here is in effect a contingent remainder without any particular estate to support it; a freehold commencing in futuro. This limitation, though it would be void in a deed, yet is good in a will, by way of executory devise e. For, since by a devise a freehold may pass without corporal tradition or livery of seisin, (as it must do, if it passes at all) therefore it may commence in futuro; because the principal reason why it cannot commence in futuro in other cases, is the necessity of actual seisin, which always operates in praesenti. And, since it may thus commence in futuro, there is no need of a particular estate to support it; the only use of which is to make the remainder, by its unity with the particular estate, a present interest. And hence also it follows, that such an executory devise, not being a present interest, cannot be barred by a recovery, suffered before it commences f.

2. By executory devise a fee, or other less estate, may be limited after a fee. And

this happens where a devisor devises his whole estate in fee, but limits a remainder thereon to commence on a future contingency. As if a man devises land to A and his heirs; but, if he dies before the age of twenty one, then to B and his heirs: this remainder, though void in a deed, is good by way of executory devise g. But, in both these species of executory devises, the contingencies ought to be such as may happen

174 within a reasonable time; as within one or more life or lives in being, or within a

e [Snow v Tucker] 1 Sid. 153.

f [Davies v Warner] Cro. Jac. 593.

g [Taylor v Biddall] 2 Mod. 289.





chapter 11 117


moderate term of years; for courts of justice will not indulge even wills, so as to create a perpetuity, which the law abhorsh: because by perpetuities, (or the settlement of an interest, which shall go in the succession prescribed, without any power of alienationi) estates are made incapable of answering those ends, of social commerce, and providing for the sudden contingencies of private life, for which property was at first established. The utmost length that has been hitherto allowed, for the contingency of an executory devise of either kind to happen in, is that of a life or lives in being, and one and twenty years afterwards. As when lands are devised to such unborn son of a feme-covert, as shall first attain the age of twenty one, and his heirs; the utmost length of time that can happen before the estate can vest, is the life of the mother and the subsequent infancy of her son: and this hath been decreed to be a good executory devise k.

3. By executory devise a term of years may be given to one man for his life, and

afterwards limited over in remainder to another, which could not be done by deed: for by law the first grant of it, to a man for life, was a total disposition of the whole term; a life estate being esteemed of a higher and larger nature than any term of years l. And, at first, the courts were tender, even in the case of a will, of restraining the devisee for life from aliening the term; but only held, that in case he died without exerting that act of ownership, the remainder over should then take place m: for the restraint of the power of alienation, especially in very long terms, was introducing a species of perpetuity. But, soon afterwards, it was heldn, that the devisee for life hath no power of aliening the term, so as to bar the remainder-man: yet in order to prevent the danger of perpetuities, it was settledo, that, though such remainders may be limited to as many persons successively as the devisor thinks proper, yet they must all be in esse during the life of the first devisee; for then all the candles are lighted and 175

are consuming together, and the ultimate remainder is in reality only to that remainder-man who happens to survive the 〈6〉 rest: or, that such remainder may be limited to take effect upon such contingency only, as must happen (if at all) during the life of the first devisee p.

Thus much for such estates in expectancy, as are created by the express words of

the parties themselves; the most intricate title in the law. There is yet another species, which is created by the act and operation of the law itself, and this is called a reversion.

III. An estate in reversion is the residue of an estate left in the grantor, to commence

in possession after the determination of some particular estate granted out by himq. Sir Edward Coke r describes a reversion to be the returning of land to the grantor or

h [Scattergood v Edge] 12 Mod. 287. [Duke of Norfolk v Howard] 1 Vern. 164.

i [Scatterwood v Edge] Salk. 229.

k [Stephens v Stephens] Forr. 232.

l [Manning’s case] 8 Rep. 95.

m Bro. tit. chatteles. 23. [Anon. (1552)] Dyer. 74.

n [Salforde’s case] Dyer. 358. [Manning’s case] 8 Rep. 96.

o [Love v Windham] 1 Sid. 451.

p ms [Lamb v Archer] Skinn. 341. [Atkinson v Hutchinson] 3 P. W. 258.

q Co. Litt. 22.

r 1 Inst. 142.

118 of the rights of things

his heirs after the grant is over. As, if there be a gift in tail, the reversion of the fee is, without any special reservation, vested in the donor by act of law: and so also the reversion, after an estate for life, years, or at will, continues in the lessor. For the fee-simple of all lands must abide somewhere; and if he, who was before possessed of the whole, carves out of it any smaller estate, and grants it away, whatever is not so granted remains in him. A reversion is therefore never created by deed or writing, but arises from construction of law; a remainder can never be limited, unless by either deed or devise. But both are equally transferable, when actually vested, being both estates in praesenti, though taking effect in futuro.

The doctrine of reversions is plainly derived from the feodal constitution. For,

when a feud was granted to a man for life, or to him and his issue male, rendering either rent, or other services; then, on his death or the failure of issue male, the feud

176 was determined and resulted back to the lord or proprietor, to be again disposed of

at his pleasure. And hence the usual incidents to reversions are said to be fealty and rent. When no rent is reserved on the particular estate, fealty however results of course, as an incident quite inseparable, and may be demanded as a badge of tenure, or acknowlegement of superiority; being frequently the only evidence that the lands are holden at all. Where rent is reserved, it is also incident, though not inseparably so, to the reversions. The rent may be granted away, reserving the reversion; and the reversion may be granted away, reserving the rent; by special words: but by a general grant of the reversion, the rent will pass with it, as incident thereunto; though by the grant of the rent generally, the reversion will not pass. The incident passes by the grant of the principal, but not e converso: for the maxim of law is, “accessorium non ducit, sed sequitur, suum principalet [the accessory does not lead, but follows, the principal].”

These incidental rights of the reversioner, and the respective modes of descent, in

which remainders very frequently differ from reversions, have occasioned the law to be careful in distinguishing the one from the other, however inaccurately the parties themselves may describe them. For if one, seised of a paternal estate in fee, makes a lease for life, with remainder to himself and his heirs, this is properly a mere reversionu, to which rent and fealty shall be incident; and which shall only descend to the heirs of his father’s blood, and not to his heirs general, as a remainder limited to him by a third person would have donew: for it is the old estate, which was originally in him, and never yet was out of him. And so likewise, if a man grants a lease for life to A, reserving rent, with reversion to B and his heirs, B hath a remainder descendible to his heirs general, and not a reversion to which the rent is incident; but the grantor shall be intitled to the rent, during the continuance of A’s estate x.

177 In order to assist such persons as have any estate in remainder, reversion, or

expectancy, after the death of others, against fraudulent concealments of their deaths,

s Co. Litt. 143.

t Ibid. 151, 152.

u Cro. Eliz. 321.

w [Godbold v Freestone] 3 Lev. 407.

x [Eton College case] 1 And. 23.





chapter 11 119


it is enacted by the statute 6 Ann. c. 18. that all persons on whose lives any lands or tenements are holden, shall (upon application to the court of chancery and order made thereupon) once in every year, if required, be produced to the court, or its commissioners; or, upon neglect or refusal, they shall be taken to be actually dead, and the person entitled to such expectant estate may enter upon and hold the lands and tenements, till the party shall appear to be living.

Before we conclude the doctrine of remainders and reversions, it may be proper

to observe, that whenever a greater estate and a less coincide and meet in one and the same person, without any intermediate estate y, the less is immediately annihilated; or, in the law phrase, is said to be merged, that is, sunk or drowned, in the greater. Thus, if there be tenant for years, and the reversion in fee-simple descends to or is purchased by him, the term of years is merged in the inheritance, and shall never exist any more. But they must come to one and the same person in one and the same right; else, if the freehold be in his own right, and he has a term in right of another (en auter droit) there is no merger. Therefore, if tenant for years dies, and makes him who hath the reversion in fee his executor, whereby the term of years vests also in him, the term shall not merge; for he hath the fee in his own right, and the term of years in the right of the testator, and subject to his debts and legacies. So also, if he who hath the reversion in fee marries the tenant for years, there is no merger; for he hath the inheritance in his own right, the lease in the right of his wifez. An estate-tail is an exception to this rule: for a man may have in his own right both an estate-tail and a reversion in fee; and the estate-tail, though a less estate, shall not merge in the feea. For estates-tail are protected and preserved from merger by the operation and 178 con struction, though not by the express words, of the statute de donis: which operation and construction have probably arisen upon this consideration; that, in the common cases of merger of estates for life or years by uniting with the inheritance, the particular tenant hath the sole interest in them, and hath full power at any time to defeat, destroy, or surrender them to him that hath the reversion; therefore, when such an estate unites with the reversion in fee, the law considers it in the light of a virtual surrender of the inferior estateb. But, in an estate-tail, the case is otherwise: the tenant for a long time had no power at all over it, so as to bar or to destroy it; and now can only do it by certain special modes, by a fine, a recovery, and the likec: it would therefore have been strangely improvident, to have permitted the tenant in tail, by purchasing the reversion in fee, to merge his particular estate, and defeat the inheritance of his issue: and hence it has become a maxim, that a tenancy in tail, which cannot be surrendered, cannot also be merged in the fee.

y [Duncomb v Duncomb] 3 Lev. 437.

z [Bracebridge v Cook] Plow. 418. [Platt v Sleap] Cro. Jac. 275. Co. Litt. 338.

a [Giles v Wiscot] 2 Rep. 61. [Lord Stafford’s case] 8 Rep. 74.

b [Hughes v Robotham] Cro. Eliz. 302.

c See pag. 116 [II. 77].

179 chapter the twelfth.



of estates in severalty,

joint-tenancy, coparcenary,

and common.

We come now to treat of estates, with respect to the number and connexions of their owners, the tenants who occupy and hold them. And, considered in this view, estates of any quantity or length of duration, and whether they be in actual possession or expectancy, may be held in four different ways; in severalty, in joint-tenancy, in coparcenary, and in common.

1. He that holds lands or tenements in severalty, or is sole tenant thereof, is he that

holds them in his own right only, without any other person being joined or connected with him in point of interest, during his estate therein. This is the most common and usual way of holding an estate; and therefore we may make the same observations here, that we did upon estates in possession, as contradistinguished from those in expectancy, in the preceding chapter: that there is little or nothing peculiar to be remarked concerning it, since all estates are supposed to be of this sort, unless where they are expressly declared to be otherwise; and that, in laying down general rules and doctrines, we usually apply them to such estates as are held in severalty. I shall therefore proceed to consider the other three species of estates, in which there are always a plurality of tenants.

180 II. An estate in joint-tenancy is where lands or tenements are granted to two or

more persons, to hold in fee-simple, fee-tail, for life, for years, or at will. In con-sequence of such 〈1〉 grants the estate is called an estate in joint-tenancy a, and sometimes an estate in jointure, which word as well as the other signifies a union or conjunction of interest; though in common speech the term, jointure, is now usually confined to that joint estate, which by virtue of the statute 27 Hen. VIII. c. 10. is frequently vested in the husband and wife before marriage, as a full satisfaction and bar of the woman’s dower b.

In unfolding this title, and the two remaining ones in the present chapter, we will

first enquire, how these estates may be created; next, their properties and respective incidents; and lastly, how they may be severed or destroyed.

1. The creation of an estate in joint-tenancy depends on the wording of the deed

or devise, by which the tenants claim title; for this estate can only arise by purchase or grant, that is, by the act of the parties, and never by the mere act of law. Now, if an estate be given to a plurality of persons, without adding any restrictive, exclusive, or

a Litt. §. 277.

b See pag. 137 [II. 92].





chapter 12 121


explanatory words, as if an estate be granted to A and B and their heirs, this makes them immediately joint-tenants in fee of the lands. For the law interprets the grant so as to make all parts of it take effect, which can only be done by creating an equal estate in them both. As therefore the grantor has thus united their names, the law gives them a thorough union in all other respects. For,

2. The properties of a joint estate are derived from its unity, which is fourfold; the

unity of interest, the unity of title, the unity of time, and the unity of possession: or, in other words, joint-tenants have one and the same interest, accruing by one and the same conveyance, commencing at one and the same time, and held by one and the same undivided possession.

First, they must have one and the same interest. One joint-tenant cannot be 181

entitled to one period of duration or quantity of interest in lands, and the other to a different: one cannot be tenant for life, and the other for years: one cannot be tenant in fee, and the other in tailc. But, if land be limited to A and B for their lives, this makes them joint-tenants of the freehold; if to A and B and their heirs, it makes them joint-tenants of the inheritanced. If land be granted to A and B for their lives and to the heirs of A; here A and B are joint-tenants of the freehold during their respective lives, and A has the remainder of the fee in severalty: or, if land be given to A and B, and the heirs of the body of A; here both have a joint estate for life, and A hath a several remainder in tail e. Secondly, joint-tenants must also have an unity of title: their estate must be created by one and the same act, whether legal or illegal; as by one and the same grant, or by one and the same disseisinf. Joint-tenancy cannot arise by descent or act of law; but merely by purchase, or acquisition by the act of the party: and, unless that act be one and the same, the two tenants would have different titles; and if they had different titles, one might prove good, and the other bad, which would absolutely destroy the jointure. Thirdly, there must also be an unity of time: their estates must be vested at one and the same period, as well as by one and the same title. As in case of a present estate made to A and B; or a remainder in fee to A and B after a particular estate; in either case A and B are joint tenants of this present estate, or this vested remainder. But if, after a lease for life, the remainder be limited to the heirs of A and B; and during the continuance of the particular estate A dies, which vests the remainder of one moiety in his heir; and then B dies, whereby the other moiety becomes vested in the heir of B: now A’s heir and B’s heir are not joint-tenants of this remainder, but tenants in common; for one moiety vested at one time, and the other moiety vested at another g. Yet, where a feoffment was made to the use 182

of a man, and such wife as he should afterwards marry, for term of their lives, and he afterwards married; in this case it seems to have been held that the husband and wife had a joint estate, though vested at different timesh: because the use of the wife’s estate was

c Co. Litt. 188.

d Litt. §. 277.

e Ibid. §. 285.

f Ibid. §. 278.

g Co. Litt 188.

h [Brent’s case] Dyer. 340. [Shelley’s case] 1 Rep. 101.

122 of the rights of things

in abeyance and dormant till the intermarriage; and, being then awakened, had relation back, and took effect from the original time of creation. Lastly, in joint-tenants, there must be an unity of possession. Joint-tenants are said to be seised per my et per tout, by the half or moiety, and by all; that is, they each of them have the entire possession, as well of every parcel as of the wholei. They have not, one of them a seisin of one half or moiety, and the other of the other moiety; neither can one be exclusively seised of one acre, and his companion of another; but each has an undivided moiety of the whole, and not the whole of an undivided 〈2〉 moiety k.

Upon these principles, of a thorough and intimate union of interest and possession,

depend many other consequences and incidents to the joint-tenant’s estate. If two joint-tenants let a verbal lease of their land, reserving rent to be paid to one of them, it shall enure to both, in respect of the joint reversionl. If their lessee surrenders his lease to one of them, it shall also enure to both, because of the privity, or relation of their estatem. On the same reason, livery of seisin, made to one joint-tenant, shall enure to both of themn: and the entry, or re-entry, of one joint-tenant is as effectual in law as if it were the act of botho. In all actions also relating to their joint estate, one joint-tenant cannot sue or be sued without joining the other p. But if two or more joint-tenants be seised of an advowson, and they present different clerks, the bishop may refuse to admit either; because neither joint-tenant hath a several right of

183 patronage, but each is seised of the whole: and, if they do not both agree within six

months, the right of presentation shall lapse. But the ordinary may, if he pleases, admit a clerk presented by either, for the good of the church, that divine service may be regularly performed; which is no more than he otherwise would be entitled to do, in case their disagreement continued, so as to incur a lapse: and, if the clerk of one joint-tenant be so admitted, this shall keep up the title in both of them; in respect of the privity and union of their estate q. Upon the same ground it is held, that one joint-tenant cannot have an action against another for trespass, in respect of his land r; for each has an equal right to enter on any part of it. But one joint-tenant is not capable by himself to do any act, which may tend to defeat or injure the estate of the other; as to let leases, or to grant copyholdss: and, if any waste be done, which tends to the destruction of the inheritance, one joint-tenant may have an action of waste against the other, by construction of the statute Westm. 2. c. 22 t. So too, though at common law no action of account lay for one joint-tenant against another, unless he had



i Litt. §. 288. [Henstead’s case] 5 Rep. 10.

k Quilibet totum tenet et nihil tenet; scilicet, totum in communi, et nihil separatim per se [Each holds the entirety and yet holds nothing; that is, the entirety in common, and nothing separately by itself]. Bract. l. 5. tr. 5. c. 26 [§ 1].

l Co. Litt. 214.

m Ibid. 192.

n Ibid. 49.

o Ibid. 319. 364.

p Ibid. 195.

q Co. Litt. 185 [recte 186b].

r [Hambleden v Hambleden] 3 Leon. 262.

s [Lancaster v Lucas] 1 Leon. 234.

t 2 Inst. 403.





chapter 12 123


constituted him his bailiff or receiveru, yet now by the statute 4 Ann. c. 16. joint-tenants may have actions of account against each other, for receiving more than their due share of the profits of the tenements held in joint-tenancy.

From the same principle also arises the remaining grand incident of joint estates;

viz. the doctrine of survivorship: by which, when two or more persons are seised of a joint estate of inheritance, for their own lives, or pur auter vie, or are jointly possessed of any chattel interest, the entire tenancy upon the decease of any of them remains to the survivors, and at length to the last survivor; and he shall be entitled to the whole estate, whatever it be, whether an inheritance or a common freehold only, or even a less estatew. This is the natural and regular consequence of the union and entirety of their interest. The interest of two joint-tenants is not only equal or similar, but also 184

is one and the same. One has not originally a distinct moiety from the other; but, if by any subsequent act (as by alienation or forfeiture of either) the interest becomes separate and distinct, the joint-tenancy instantly ceases. But, while it continues, each of two joint-tenants has a concurrent interest in the whole; and therefore, on the death of his companion, the sole interest in the whole remains to the survivor. For the interest, which the survivor originally had, is clearly not devested by the death of his companion; and no other person can now claim to have a joint estate with him, for no one can now have an interest in the whole, accruing by the same title, and taking effect at the same time with his own; neither can any one claim a separate interest in any part of the tenements; for that would be to deprive the survivor of the right which he has in all, and every part. As therefore the survivor’s original interest in the whole still remains; and as no one can now be admitted, either jointly or severally, to any share with him therein; it follows, that his own interest must now be entire and several, and that he shall alone be entitled to the whole estate (whatever it be) that was created by the original grant.

This right of survivorship is called by our antient authorsx the jus accrescendi,

because the right, upon the death of one joint-tenant, accumulates and increases to the survivors; or, as they themselves express it, “pars illa communis accrescit superstitibus, de persona in personam, usque ad ultimum superstitem.”1 And this jus accrescendi ought to be mutual; which I apprehend to 〈3〉 be the reason why neither the kingy, nor any corporationz, can be a joint-tenant with a private person. For here is no mutuality: the private person has not even the remotest chance of being seised of the entirety, by benefit of survivorship, for the king and the corporation can never die.

3. We are, lastly, to enquire, how an estate in joint-tenancy may be severed and 185

destroyed. And this may be done by destroying any of its constituent unities. 1. That of time, which respects only the original commencement of the joint estate, cannot



u Co. Litt. 200.

w Litt. §. 280, 281.

x Bracton, l. 4. tr. 3. c. 9. §. 3. Fleta. l. 3. c. 4.

y Co. Litt. 190. Finch L. 83.

z [Holbech v Bennet] 2 Lev. 12.

1 ‘that common share accrues to the survivors, from one person to another, even to the last survivor’. 124 of the rights of things

indeed (being now past) be affected by any subsequent transactions. But, 2. the joint-tenants’ estate may be destroyed, without any alienation, by merely disuniting their possession. For joint-tenants being seised per my et per tout, every thing that tends to narrow that interest, so that they shall not be seised throughout the whole, and throughout every part, is a severance or destruction of the jointure. And therefore, if two joint-tenants agree to part their lands, and hold them in severalty, they are no longer joint-tenants; for they have now no joint interest in the whole, but only a several interest respectively in the several parts. And, for that reason also, the right of survivorship is by such separation destroyeda. By common law all the joint-tenants might agree to make partition of the lands, but one of them could not compel the 〈4〉 others so to dob: for, this being an estate originally created by the act and agreement of the parties, the law would not permit any one or more of them to destroy the united possession without a similar universal consent. But now by the statutes 31 Hen. VIII. c. 1. and 32 Hen. VIII. c. 32. joint-tenants, either of inheritances or other less estates, are compellable by writ of partition to divide their landsc. 3. The jointure may be destroyed, by destroying the unity of title. As if one joint-tenant alienes and conveys his estate to a third person: here the joint-tenancy is severed, and turned into tenancy in commond; for the grantee and the remaining joint-tenant hold by different titles, (one derived from the original, the other from the subsequent,

186 grantor) though, till partition made, the unity of possession continues. But a devise

of one’s share by will is no severance of the jointure: for no testament takes effect till after the death of the testator, and by such death the right of the survivor (which accrued at the original creation of the estate, and has therefore a priority to the other e) is already vested f . 4. It may also be destroyed, by destroying the unity of interest. And therefore, if there be two joint-tenants for life, and the inheritance is purchased by or descends upon either, it is a severance of the jointure g: though, if an estate is originally limited to two for life, and after to the heirs of one of them, the freehold shall remain in jointure, without merging in the inheritance; because, being created by one and the same conveyance, they are not separate estates, (which is requisite in order to a merger) but branches of one intire estate h. In like manner, if a joint-tenant in fee makes a lease for life of his share, this defeats the jointure i; for it destroys the unity both of title and of interest. And, whenever or by whatever means the jointure ceases or is severed, the right of survivorship or jus accrescendi the same



a Co. Litt. 188. 193.

b Litt. §. 290.

c Thus, by the civil law, nemo invitus compellitur ad communionem [no one is compelled to ownership in common against his will]. (Ff. 12. 6. 26. §. 4.) And again: si non omnes qui rem communem habent, sed certi ex his, dividere desiderant; hoc judicium inter eos accipi potest [if only some of those who hold a thing in common desire a partition, they can have this action between them]. (Ff. 10. 3. 8.)

d Litt. §. 292.

e Jus accrescendi praefertur ultimae voluntati [The right of survivorship is preferred to the last will]. Co. Litt. 185.

f Litt. §. 287.

g [Childs v Wescot] Cro. Eliz. 470.

h [Giles v Wiscot] 2 Rep. 60. Co. Litt. 182.

i Litt. §. 302, 303.





chapter 12 125


instant ceases with it k. Yet, if one of three joint-tenants alienes his share, the two remaining tenants still hold their parts by joint-tenancy and survivorship l : and, if one of three joint-tenants releases his share to one of his companions, though the joint-tenancy is destroyed with regard to that part, yet the two remaining parts are still held in jointure m; for they still preserve their original constituent unities. But when, by any act or event, different interests are created in the several parts of the estate, or they are held by different titles, or if merely the possession is separated; so that the tenants have no longer these four indispensable properties, a sameness of interest, 〈5〉 an undivided possession, a title vesting at one and the same time, and by one and the same act or grant; the jointure is instantly dissolved.

In general it is advantageous for the joint-tenants to dissolve the jointure; since 187

thereby the right of survivorship is taken away, and each may transmit his own part to his own heirs. Sometimes however it is disadvantageous to dissolve the joint estate: as if there be joint-tenants for life, and they make partition, this dissolves the jointure; and, though before they each of them had an estate in the whole for their own lives and the life of their companion, now they have an estate in a moiety only for their own lives merely; and, on the death of either, the reversioner shall enter on his moiety n. And therefore, if there be two joint-tenants for life, and one grants away his part for the life of his companion, it is a forfeitureo: for, in the first place, by the severance of the jointure he has given himself in his own moiety only an estate for his own life; and then he grants the same land for the life of another: which grant, by a tenant for his own life merely, is a forfeiture of his estate p; for it is creating an estate which may by possibility last longer than that which he is legally entitled to.

III. An estate held in coparcenary is where lands of inheritance descend from

the ancestor to two or more persons. It arises either by common law, or particular custom. By common law: as where a person seised in fee-simple or in fee-tail dies, and his next heirs are two or more females, his daughters, sisters, aunts, cousins, or their representatives; in this case they shall all inherit, as will be more fully shewn, when we treat of descents hereafter: and these co-heirs are then called coparceners; or, for brevity, parceners only q. Parceners by particular custom are where lands descend, as in gavelkind, to all the males in equal degree as sons, brothers, uncles, &cr. And, in either of these cases, all the parceners put together make but one heir; and have but one estate among thems.

The properties of parceners are in some respects like those of joint-tenants; they 188

having the same unities of interest, title, and possession. They may sue and be sued

k Nihil de re accrescit ei, qui nihil in re quando jus accresceret habet [No part of the estate accrues to him, who has nothing in the estate when the right accrues]. Co. Litt. 188.

l Litt. §. 294.

m Ibid. §. 304.

n [Eustace v Scowen] 1 Jones. 55.

o [Anon. (1607)] 4 Leon. 237.

p Co. Litt. 252.

q Litt. §. 241, 242.

r Ibid. §. 265.

s Co. Litt. 163.

126 of the rights of things

jointly for matters relating to their own landst: and the entry of one of them shall in some cases enure as the entry of them allu. They cannot have an action of trespass against each other: but herein they differ from joint-tenants, that they are also excluded from maintaining an action of wastew; for coparceners could at all times put a stop to any waste 〈7〉 by a writ of partition, but till the statute of Henry the eighth joint-tenants had no such power. Parceners also differ materially from joint-tenants in four other points: 1. They always claim by descent, whereas joint-tenants always claim by purchase. Therefore if two sisters purchase lands, to hold to them and their heirs, they are not parceners, but joint-tenantsx: and hence it likewise follows, that no lands can be held in coparcenary, but estates of inheritance, which are of a descendible nature; whereas not only estates in fee and in tail, but for life or years, may be held in joint-tenancy. 2. There is no unity of time necessary to an estate in coparcenary. For if a man hath two daughters, to whom his estate descends in coparcenary, and one dies before the other; the surviving daughter and the heir of the other, or, when both are dead, their two heirs, are still parceners y; the estates vesting in each of them at different times, though it be the same quantity of interest, and held by the same title. 3. Parceners, though they have a unity, have not an entirety, of interest. They are properly intitled each to the whole of a distinct moiety z; and of course there is no jus accrescendi, or survivorship between them: for each part descends severally to their respective heirs, though the unity of possession continues. And as long as the lands continue in a course of descent, and united in possession, so long are the 〈8〉 tenants thereof, whether male

189 or female, called parceners. But if the possession be once severed by partition, they are

no longer parceners, but tenants in severalty; or if one parcener aliens her share, though no partition be made, then are the lands no longer held in coparcenary, but in commona.

Parceners are so called, saith Littletonb, because they may be constrained to

make partition. And he mentions many methods of making it c; four of which are by consent, and one by compulsion. The first is, where they agree to divide the lands into equal parts in severalty, and that each shall have such a determinate part. The second is, when they agree to chuse some friend to make partition for them, and then the sisters shall chuse each of them her part according to seniority of age; or otherwise, as shall be agreed. 〈9〉 But this privilege of seniority is then personal; for if the eldest sister be dead, her issue shall not chuse first, but the next sister. But, if an advowson descend in coparcenary, and the sisters cannot agree in the presentation, the eldest and her issue, nay her husband, or her assigns, shall present alone, before the younger d. And the reason given is that the former privilege, of priority in choice

t Co. Litt. 164.

u 〈6〉 Ibid. 188.

w 2 Inst. 403.

x Litt. §. 254.

y Co. Litt. 164. 174.

z Ibid. 163, 164.

a Litt. §. 309.

b §. 241.

c §. 243 to 264.

d Co. Litt. 166. [Walker v Harris] 3 Rep. 22.





chapter 12 127


upon a division, arises from an act of her own, the agreement to make partition; and therefore is merely personal: the latter, of presenting to the living, arises from the act of the law, and is annexed not only to her person, but to her estate also. A third method of partition is, where the eldest divides, and then she shall chuse last; for the rule of law is, cujus est divisio, alterius est electio [where one makes the division, the other has the choice]. The fourth method is where the sisters agree to cast lots for their shares. And these are the methods by consent. That by compulsion is, where one or more sue out a writ of partition against the others, whereupon the sheriff shall go to the lands, and make partition thereof by the verdict of a jury there impanneled, and assign to each of the parceners her part in severalty e. But there are some things which are in their nature impartible. The mansion-house, common of estovers, 190 common of piscary uncertain, or any other common without stint, shall not be divided; but the eldest sister, if she pleases, shall have them, and make the others a reasonable satisfaction in other parts of the inheritance; or, if that cannot be, then they shall have the profits of the thing by turns, in the same manner as they take the advowsonf.

There is yet another consideration attending the estate in coparcenary; that if one

of the daughters has had an estate given with her in frankmarriage by her ancestor (which we may remember was a species of estates-tail, freely given by a relation for advancement of his kinswoman in marriage g) in this case, if lands descend from the same ancestor to her and her sisters in fee-simple, she or her heirs shall have no share of them, unless they will agree to divide the lands so given in frankmarriage in equal proportion with the rest of the lands descending h. 〈10〉 This general division was known in the law of the Lombardsi, which direct the woman so preferred in marriage, and claiming her share of the inheritance, mittere in confusum cum sororibus, quantum pater aut frater ei dederit, quando ambulaverit ad maritum.2 With us it is denominated bringing those lands into hotchpot k; which term I shall explain in the very words of Littletonl: “it seemeth that this word, hotchpot, is in English, a pudding; for in a pudding is not commonly put one thing alone, but one thing with other things together.” By this housewifely metaphor our ancestors meant to inform usm, that the lands, both those given in frankmarriage and those descending in fee-simple, should be mixed and blended together, and then divided in equal portions among all the daughters. But this was left to the choice of the donee in frankmarriage, and if she did not chuse to put her lands 〈11〉 in hotchpot, she was presumed to be sufficiently 191



e By statute 8 & 9 W. III. c. 3. an easier method of carrying on the proceedings on a writ of partition, of lands held either in joint-tenancy, parcenary, or common, than was used at the common law, is chalked out and provided.

f Co. Litt. 164, 165.

g See pag. 115 [II. 77].

h Bracton. l. 2. c. 34. Litt. §. 266 to 273.

i l. 2. t. 14. c. 15 [Lindenbrog, 604].

k Britton. c. 72.

l §. 267.

m Litt. §. 268.

2 ‘to put into the pot with her sisters as much as the father or brother gave her when she went to her husband’. 128 of the rights of things

provided for, and the rest of the inheritance was divided among her other sisters. The law of hotchpot took place then only, when the other lands descending from the ancestor were fee-simple; for, if they descended in tail, the donee in frankmarriage was entitled to her share, without bringing her lands so given into hotchpotn. And the reason is, because lands descending in fee-simple are distributed by the policy of law, for the maintenance of all the daughters; and, if one has a sufficient provision out of the same inheritance, equal to the rest, it is not reasonable that she should have more: but lands, descending in tail, are not distributed by the operation of 〈12〉 law, so properly as per formam doni [by the form of the gift]; it matters not therefore how unequal this distribution may be. Also no lands, but such as are given in frankmarriage, shall be brought into hotchpot; for no others are looked upon in law as given for the advancement of the woman, or by way of marriage-portiono. And therefore, as gifts in frankmarriage are fallen into disuse, I should hardly have mentioned the law of hotchpot, had not this method of division been revived and copied by the statute for distribution of personal estates, which we shall hereafter consider at large.

The estate in coparcenary may be dissolved, either by partition; which disunites

the possession; by alienation of one parcener, which disunites the title, and may disunite the interest; or by the whole at last descending to and vesting in one single person, which brings it to an estate in severalty.

IV. Tenants in common are such as hold by several and distinct titles, but by

unity of possession; because none knoweth his own severalty, and therefore they all occupy promiscuously p. This tenancy therefore happens, where there is an unity of possession merely, but perhaps an entire disunion of interest, of title, and of time. For, if there be two tenants in common of lands, one may hold his part in fee-simple,

192 the other in tail, or for life; so that there is no necessary unity of interest: one may

hold by descent, the other by purchase; or the one by purchase from A, the other by purchase from B; so that there is no unity of title: one’s estate may have been vested fifty years, the other’s but yesterday; so there is no unity of time. The only unity there is, is that of possession; and for this Littleton gives the true reason, because no man can certainly tell which part is his own: otherwise even this would be soon destroyed.

Tenancy in common may be created, either by the destruction of the two other

estates, in joint-tenancy and coparcenary, or by special limitation in a deed. By the destruction of the two other estates, I mean such destruction as does not sever the unity of possession, but only the unity of title or interest. As, if one of two joint-tenants in fee alienes his estate for the life of the alienee, the alienee and the other joint-tenant are tenants in common: for they now have several titles, the other joint-tenant by the original grant, the alienee by the new alienationq; and they also have several interests, the former joint-tenant in fee-simple, the alienee for his own life only. So, if one joint-tenant 〈13〉 give his part to A in tail, and the other gives his to



n Litt. §. 274.

o Ibid. 275.

p Ibid. 292.

q Litt. §. 293.





chapter 12 129


B in tail, the donees are tenants in common, as holding by different titles and conveyancesr. If one of two parceners alienes, the alienee and the remaining parcener are tenants in commons; because they hold by different titles, the parcener by descent, the alienee by purchase. So likewise, if there be a grant to two men, or two women, and the heirs of their bodies, here the grantees shall be joint-tenants of the life-estate, but they shall have several inheritances; because they cannot possibly have one heir of their two bodies, as might have been the case had the limitation been to a man and woman, and the heirs of their bodies begottent: and in this, and the like cases, their issues shall be tenants in common; because they must claim by different titles, one as heir of A, and the other as heir of B; and those too not titles by purchase, but descent. 193

In short, whenever an estate in joint-tenancy or coparcenary is dissolved, so that there be no partition made, but the unity of possession continues, it is turned into a tenancy in common.

A tenancy in common may also be created by express limitation in a deed: but

here care must be taken not to insert words which imply a joint estate; and then if lands be given to two or more, and it be not joint-tenancy, it must be a tenancy in common. But the law is apt in its constructions to favour joint-tenancy rather than tenancy in commonu; because the divisible services issuing from land (as rent, &c) are not divided, nor the entire services (as fealty) multiplied, by joint-tenancy, as they must necessarily be upon a tenancy in common. Land given to two, to be holden the one moiety to one, and the other moiety to the other, is an estate in commonw; and, if one grants to another half his land, the grantor and grantee are also tenants in commonx: because, as has been beforey observed, joint-tenants do not take by distinct halves or moieties; and by such grants the division and severalty of the estate is so plainly expressed, that it is impossible they should take a joint interest in the whole of the tenements. But a devise to two persons, to hold jointly and severally, 〈14〉 is a joint-tenancy; because that 〈15〉 is implied in the word “jointly,” even though the word “severally” seems to imply the direct reverse z: and an estate given to A and B, equally to be divided between them, though in deeds it hath been said to be a joint-tenancy a, (for it implies no more than the law has annexed to that estate, viz. divisibility b) yet in wills it is certainly a tenancy in commonc; because the devisor may be presumed to have meant what is most beneficial to both the devisees, though his meaning is imperfectly expressed. And this nicety in the wording of grants makes it the most usual as well as the safest way, when a tenancy in common is meant to be 194

r Ibid. 295.

s Ibid. 309.

t Ibid. 283.

u [Fisher v Wigg] Salk. 392.

w Litt. §. 298.

x Ibid. 299.

y See pag. 182 [II. 122].

z [Morgan’s case] Poph. 52.

a 1 Equ. Cas. abr. 291.

b ms [Fisher v Wigg] 1 P. W. 17.

c [Ratcliff’s case] 3 Rep. 39. [Pibus v Mitford] 1 Ventr. 32 [recte 372].

130 of the rights of things

created, to add express words of exclusion as well as description, and limit the estate to A and B, to hold as tenants in common, and not as joint-tenants.

As to the incidents attending a tenancy in common: tenants in common (like

joint-tenants) are compellable by the statutes of Henry VIII and William III, before-mentionedd, to make partition of their lands; which they were not at common law. They properly take by distinct moieties, and have no entirety of interest; and therefore there is no survivorship between tenants in common. Their other incidents are such as merely arise from the unity of possession; and are therefore the same as appertain to joint-tenants merely upon that account: such as being liable to reciprocal actions of waste, and of account, by the statutes of Westm. 2. c. 22. and 4 Ann. c. 16. For by the common law no tenant in common was liable to 〈16〉 account to his companion for embezzling the profits of the estatee; though, if one actually turns the other out of possession, an action of ejectment will lie against himf. But, as for other incidents of joint-tenants, which arise from the privity of title, or the union and entirety of interest, (such as joining or being joined in actions g, unless in the case where some intire or indivisible thing is to be recoveredh) these are not applicable to tenants in common, whose interests are distinct, and whose titles are not joint but several.

Estates in common can only be dissolved two ways: 1. By uniting all the titles and

interests in one tenant, by purchase or otherwise; which brings the whole to one severalty: 2. By making partition between the several tenants in common, which gives them all respective severalties. For indeed tenancies in common differ in nothing from sole estates, but merely in the blending and unity of possession. And this finishes our enquiries with respect to the nature of estates.

d pag. 185, & 186 [II. 124, 127 note e].

e Co. Litt. 199.

f Ibid. 200.

g Litt. §. 311.

h Co. Litt. 197.





chapter the thirteenth. 195




of the title to things

real, in general.

The foregoing chapters having been principally employed in defining the nature of things real, in describing the tenures by which they may be holden, and in distinguishing the several kinds of estate or interest that may be had therein, I come now to consider, lastly, the title to things real, with the manner of acquiring and losing it. A title is thus defined by sir Edward Cokea, titulus est justa causa possidendi id quod nostrum est; or, it is the means whereby the owner of lands hath the just possession of his property.

There are several stages or degrees requisite to form a complete title to lands and

tenements. We will consider them in a progressive order.

I. The lowest and most imperfect degree of title consists in the mere naked

possession, or actual occupation of the estate; without any apparent right, or any shadow or pretence of right, to hold and continue such possession. This may happen, when one man invades the possession of another, and by force or surprize turns him out of the occupation of his lands; which is termed a disseisin, being a deprivation of that actual seisin, or corporal freehold of the lands, which the tenant before enjoyed. 196

Or it may happen, that after the death of the ancestor and before the entry of the heir, or after the death of a particular tenant and before the entry of him in remainder or reversion, a stranger may contrive to get possession of the vacant land, and hold out him that had a right to enter. In all which cases, and many others that might be here suggested, the wrongdoer has only a mere naked possession, which the rightful owner may put an end to, by a variety of legal remedies, as will more fully appear in the third book of these commentaries. But in the mean time, till some act be done by the rightful owner to devest this possession and assert his title, such actual possession is, prima facie, evidence of a legal title in the possessor; and it may, by length of time, and negligence of him who hath the right, by degrees ripen into a perfect and indefeasible title. And, at all events, without such actual possession no title can be completely good.

II. The next step to a good and perfect title is the right of possession, which may

reside in one man, while the actual possession 〈1〉 is either in himself or in another. For if a man be disseised, or otherwise kept out of possession, by any of the means before-mentioned, though the actual possession be lost, yet he has still remaining in him the right of possession; and may exert it whenever he thinks proper, by entering upon the disseisor, and turning him out of that occupancy which he has so illegally gained. But this right of possession is of two sorts: an apparent right of possession,

a 1 Inst. 345.

132 of the rights of things

which may be defeated by proving a better; and an actual right of possession, which will stand the test against all opponents. Thus if the disseisor, or other wrongdoer, dies possessed of the land whereof he so became seised by his own unlawful act, and the same descends to his heir; 〈2〉 now the heir hath obtained an apparent right, though the actual right of possession resides in the person disseised; and it shall not be lawful for the person disseised to devest this apparent right by mere entry or other

197 act of his own, but only by an action at law b. For, until the contrary be proved by legal

demonstration, the law will rather presume the right to reside in the heir, whose ancestor died seised, than in one who has no such presumptive evidence to urge in his own behalf. Which doctrine in some measure arose from the principles of the feodal law, which, after feuds became hereditary, much favoured the right of descent; in order that there might be a person always 〈4〉 on the spot to perform the feodal duties and servicesc: and therefore, when a feudatory died in battle, or otherwise, it presumed always that his children were entitled to the feud, till the right was otherwise determined by his fellow-soldiers and fellow-tenants, the peers of the feodal court. But if he, who has the actual right of possession, puts in his claim and brings his action within a reasonable time, and can prove by what unlawful means the ancestor became seised, he will then by sentence of law recover that possession, to which he hath such actual right. Yet, if he omits to bring this his possessory action within a competent time, his adversary may imperceptibly gain an actual right of possession, in consequence of the other’s negligence. And by this, and certain other means, the party kept out of possession may have nothing left in him, but what we are next to speak of; viz.

III. The mere right of property, the jus proprietatis, without either possession or

even the right of possession. This is frequently spoken of in our books under the name of the mere right, jus merum; and the estate of the owner is in such cases said to be totally devested, and put to a right d. A person in this situation may have the true ultimate property of the lands in himself: but by the intervention of certain circumstances, either by his own negligence, the solemn act of his ancestor, or the determination of a court of justice, the presumptive evidence of that right is strongly in favour of his antagonist; who has thereby obtained the absolute right of possession. As, in the first place, if a person disseised, or turned out of possession of his estate,

198 neglects to pursue his remedy within the time limited by law; by this means the

disseisor or his heirs gain the actual right of possession: for the law presumes that either he had a good right originally, in virtue of which he entered on the lands in question, or that since such his entry he has procured a sufficient title; and therefore, after so long an acquiescence, the law will not suffer his possession to be disturbed without enquiring into the absolute right of property. Yet, still, if the person disseised or his heir hath the true right of property remaining in himself, his estate is indeed said to be turned into a mere right; but, by proving such his better right, he may at

b 〈3〉 Litt. §. 386.

c Gilb. Ten. 18.

d Co. Litt. 345.





chapter 13 133


length recover the lands. Again; if a tenant in tail discontinues his estate-tail, by alienating the lands to a stranger in fee, and dies; here the issue in tail hath no right of possession, independent of the right of property: for the law presumes prima facie that the ancestor would not disinherit, or attempt to disinherit, his heir, unless he had power so to do; and therefore, as the ancestor had in himself the right of possession, and has transferred the same to a stranger, the law will not permit that possession now to be disturbed, unless by shewing the absolute right of property to reside in another person. The heir therefore in this case has only a mere right, and must be strictly held to the proof of it, in order to recover the lands. Lastly, if by accident, neglect, or otherwise, judgment is given for either party in any possessory action, (that is, such wherein the right of possession only, and not that of property, is contested) and the other party hath indeed in himself the right of property, this is now turned to a mere right; and upon proof thereof in a subsequent action, denominated a writ of right, he shall recover his seisin of the lands.

Thus, if a disseisor turns me out of possession of my lands, he thereby gains a mere

naked possession, and I still retain the right of possession, and right of property. If the disseisor dies, and the lands descend to his son, the son gains an apparent right of possession; but I still retain the actual right both of possession and property. If I acquiesce for thirty years, without bringing any action to recover possession of the lands, the son gains the actual right of possession, and I retain nothing but the mere 199

right of property. And even this right of property will fail, or at least it will be without a remedy, unless I pursue it within the space of sixty years. So also if the father be tenant in tail, and alienes the estate-tail to a stranger in fee, the alienee thereby gains the right of possession, and the son hath only the mere right or right of property. And hence it will follow, that one man may have the possession, another the right of pos­ session, and a third the right of property. For if tenant in tail enfeoffs A in fee-simple, and dies, and B disseises A; now B will have the possession, A the right of possession, and the issue in tail the right of property: A may recover the possession against B; and afterwards the issue in tail may evict A, and unite in himself the possession, the right of possession, and also the right of property. In which union consists,

IV. A complete title to lands, tenements, and hereditaments. For it is an antient

maxim of the law e, that no title is completely good, unless the right of possession be joined with the right of property; which right is then denominated a double right, jus duplicatum, or droit droitf. And when to this double right the actual possession is also united, when there is, according to the expression of Fletag, juris et seisinae conjunctio [the union of right and seisin], then, and then only, is the title completely legal.

e Mirr. l. 2. c. 27.

f Co. Litt. 266. Bract. l. 5. tr. 3. c. 5.

g l. 3. c. 15. §. 5. [Blackstone quotes the same phrase again; see II. 212, text accompanying note g.]



200 chapter the fourteenth.



of title by descent.

The several gradations and stages, requisite to form a complete title to lands, tenements, and hereditaments, having been briefly stated in the preceding chapter, we are next to consider the several manners, in which this complete title (and therein principally the right of propriety) may be reciprocally lost and acquired: whereby the dominion of things real is either continued, or transferred from one man to another.1 And here we must first of all observe, that (as gain and loss are terms of relation, and of a reciprocal nature) by whatever method one man gains an estate, by that same method or its correlative some other man has lost it. As where the heir acquires by descent, the ancestor has first lost or 〈1〉 abandoned the estate by his death: where the lord gains land by escheat, the estate of the tenant is first of all lost by the natural or legal extinction of all his hereditary blood: where a man gains an interest by occupancy, the former owner has previously relinquished his right of possession: where one man claims by prescription or immemorial usage, another man has either parted with his right by an antient and now forgotten grant, or has forfeited it by the supineness or neglect of himself and his ancestors for ages: and so, in case of forfeiture, the tenant by his own misbehaviour or neglect has renounced his interest in the estate; whereupon it devolves to that person who by law may take advantage of such default: and, in alienation by common assurances, the two considerations of loss

201 and acquisition are so interwoven, and so constantly contemplated together, that

we never hear of a conveyance, without at once receiving the 〈2〉 idea as well of the grantor as the grantee.

The methods therefore of acquiring on the one hand, and of losing on the other, a

title to estates in things real, are reduced by our law to two: descent, where the title is vested in a man by the single operation of law; and purchase, where the title is vested in him by his own act or agreement a.

Descent, or hereditary succession, is the title whereby a man on the death of his

ancestor acquires his estate by right of representation, as his heir at law. An heir therefore is he upon whom the law casts the estate immediately on the death of the ancestor: and an estate, so descending to the heir, is in law called the inheritance.

The doctrine of descents, or law of inheritances in fee-simple, is a point of the

highest importance; and is indeed the principal object of the laws of real property in England. All the rules relating to purchases, whereby the legal course of descents is broken and altered, perpetually refer to this settled law of inheritance, as a datum or first principle universally known, and upon which their subsequent limitations are to

a Co. Litt. 18.

1 This chapter borrows extensively from Blackstone’s A Treatise on … Descents in Fee-Simple (1759), which is also the source of the table at the chapter’s close.





chapter 14 135


work. Thus a gift in tail, or to a man and the heirs of his body, is a limitation that cannot be perfectly understood without a previous knowlege of the law of descents in fee-simple. One may well perceive, that this is an estate confined in its descent to such heirs only of the donee, as have sprung or shall spring from his body; but who those heirs are, whether all his children both male and female, or the male only, and (among the males) whether the eldest, youngest, or other son alone, or all the sons together, shall be his heir; this is a point, that we must result back to the standing law of descents in fee-simple to be informed of.

In order therefore to treat a matter of this universal consequence the more clearly, 202

I shall endeavour to lay aside such matters as will only tend to breed embarassment and confusion in our enquiries, and shall confine myself entirely to this one object. I shall therefore decline considering at present who are, and who are not, capable of being heirs; reserving that for the chapter of escheats. I shall also pass over the frequent division of descents, 〈3〉 into those by custom, statute, and common law: for descents by particular custom, as to all the sons in gavelkind, and to the youngest in borough-english, have already been oftenb hinted at, and may also be incidentally touched upon again; but will not make a separate consideration by themselves, in a system so general as the present: and descents by statute, or 〈4〉 fee-tail per formam doni [by the form of the gift], in pursuance of the statute of Westminster the second, have also been already c copiously handled; and it has been seen that the descent in tail is restrained and regulated according to the words of the original donation, and does not intirely pursue the common law doctrine of inheritance; which, and which only, it will now be our business to explain.

And, as this depends not a little on the nature of kindred, and the several degrees

of consanguinity, it will be previously necessary to state, as briefly as possible, the true notion of this kindred or alliance in bloodd.

Consanguinity, or kindred, is defined by the writers on these subjects to be

“vinculum personarum ab eodem stipite descendentium;” the connexion or relation of persons descended from the same stock or common ancestor. This consanguinity is either lineal, or collateral.

Lineal consanguinity is that which subsists between persons, of whom one is 203

descended in a direct line from the other: as between John Stiles (the propositus [the person whose descent is being traced] in the table of consanguinity) and his father, grandfather, great-grandfather, and so upwards in the direct ascending line; or between John Stiles and his son, grandson, great-grandson, and so downwards in the direct descending line. Every generation, in this lineal direct consanguinity, constitutes a different degree, reckoning either upwards or downwards: the father of John Stiles is related to him in the first degree, and so likewise is his son; his grandsire



b See Vol. I. pag. 74, 75 [I. 56]. Vol. II. pag. 83, 85 [II. 55–7].

c See pag. 112, &c. [II. 75–80].

d For a fuller explanation of the doctrine of consanguinity, and the consequences resulting from a right apprehension of its nature, see an essay on collateral 〈5〉 consanguinity, in the first volume of law tracts. Oxon. 1762. 8º. [Blackstone first published this essay anonymously in 1750.]



FIGURE 1 Table of Consanguinity.

Source: Rare Book Collection, Lillian Goldman Law Library, Yale Law School.





chapter 14 137


and grandson in the second; his great-grandsire, and great-grandson in the third. This is the only natural way of reckoning the degrees in the direct line, and therefore universally obtains, as well in the civil e, and canonf, as in the common law g.

The doctrine of lineal consanguinity is sufficiently plain and obvious; but it is at

the first view astonishing to consider the number of lineal ancestors which every man has, within no very great number of degrees: and so many different bloodsh is a man said to contain in his veins, as he hath lineal ancestors. Of these he hath two in the first ascending degree, his own parents; he hath four in the second, the parents of his father and the parents of his mother; he hath eight in the third, the parents of his two grandfathers and two grandmothers; and, by the same rule of progression, he hath an hundred and twenty eight in the seventh; a thousand and twenty four in the tenth; and at the twentieth degree, or the distance of twenty generations, every man hath above a million of ancestors, as common arithmetic will demonstrate i . This lineal consanguinity, we may observe, falls strictly within the definition of vinculum personarum ab eodem stipite descendentium; since lineal relations are such as descend 204

one from the other, and both of course from the same common ancestor.



e Ff. 38. 10. 10.

f Decretal. l. 4. tit. 14.

g Co. Litt. 23.

h Ibid. 12.

i This will seem surprizing to those who are unacquainted with the encreasing power of progressive numbers; but is palpably evident from the following table of a geometrical progression, in which the first term is 2, and the denominator also 2: or, to speak more intelligibly, it is evident, for that each of us has two ancestors in the first degree; the number of whom is doubled at every remove, because each of our ancestors has also two immediate ancestors of his own.

Lineal Degrees. Number of Ancestors.

1 ------------------------------ 2

2 ------------------------------ 4

3 ------------------------------ 8

4 ----------------------------- 16

5 ----------------------------- 32

6 ----------------------------- 64

7 ---------------------------- 128

8 ---------------------------- 256

9 ---------------------------- 512

10 --------------------------- 1024

11 -------------------------- 2048

12 -------------------------- 4096

13 --------------------------- 8192

14 -------------------------- 16384

15 -------------------------- 32768

16 ------------------------- 65536

17 ------------------------- 131072

18 ------------------------ 262144

19 ------------------------ 524288

20 ----------------------- 1048576

A shorter method of finding the number of ancestors at any even degree is by squaring the number of

ancestors at half that number of degrees. Thus 16 (the number of ancestors at four degrees) is the square of 4,

the number of ancestors at two; 256 is the square of 16; 65536 of 256; and the number of ancestors at 40

degrees would be the square of 1048576, or upwards of a million millions.

138 of the rights of things

Collateral kindred answers to the same description: collateral relations agreeing

with the lineal in this, that they descend from the same stock or ancestor; but differing in this, that they do not 〈6〉 descend from each other. Collateral 〈7〉 kinsmen as such then as lineally spring from one and the same ancestor, who is the stirps, or root, the stipes, trunk, or common stock, from whence these relations are branched out. As if John Stiles

205 hath two sons, who have each a numerous issue; both these issues are lineally descended

from John Stiles as their common ancestor; and they are collateral kinsmen to each other, because they are all descended from this common ancestor, and all have a portion of his blood in their veins, which denominates them consanguineos [kinsmen].

We must be careful to remember, that the very being of collateral consanguinity

consists in this descent from one and the same common ancestor. Thus Titius and his brother are related; why? because both are derived from one father: Titius and his first cousin are related; why? because both descend from the same grandfather: and his second cousin’s claim to consanguinity is this, that they both are derived from one and the same great-grandfather. In short, as many ancestors as a man has, so many common stocks he has, from which collateral kinsmen may be derived. And as we are taught by holy writ, that there is one couple of ancestors belonging to us all, from whom the whole race of mankind is descended, the obvious and undeniable consequence is, that all men are in some degree related to each other. For indeed, if we only suppose each couple of our ancestors to have left, one with another, two children; and each of those children on an average to have left two more; (and, without such a supposition, the human species must be daily diminishing) we shall find that all of us have now subsisting near two hundred and seventy millions of kindred in the fifteenth degree, at the same distance from the several common ancestors as ourselves are; besides those that are one or two descents nearer to or farther from the common stock, who may amount to as many more k. And, if this



k This will swell more considerably than the former calculation: for here, though the first term is but 1, the denominator is 4; that is, there is one kinsman (a brother) in the first degree, who makes, together with the propositus, the two descendants from the first couple of ancestors; and in every other degree the number of kindred must be the quadruple of those in the degree which immediately precedes it. For, since each couple of ancestors has two descendants, who encrease in a duplicate ratio, it will follow that the ratio, in which all the descendants encrease downwards, must be double to that in which the ancestors encrease upwards but we have seen that the ancestors 〈8〉 encrease in a duplicate ratio: therefore the descendants must encrease in a double duplicate, that is, in a quadruple, ratio.

Collateral Degrees. Number of Kindred.

1 ---------------------- ------- 1

2 ----------------------------- 4

3 ---------------------------- 16

4 ---------------------------- 64

5 -------------------------- 256

6 ------------------------- 1024

7 ------------------------- 4096

8 ------------------------ 16384

9 ------------------------ 65536

10 ----------------------- 262144

11 ----------------------1048576

12 ----------------------4194304





chapter 14 139


calculation should appear incompatible with the number of inhabitants on the earth, it is because, by intermarriages among the several descendants from the same ancestor, a hundred or a thousand modes of consanguinity may be consolidated in one person, or he may be related to us a hundred or a thousand different ways.

The method of computing these degrees in the canon law l , which our law has 206

adoptedm, is as follows. We begin at the common ancestor, and reckon down-wards; and in whatsoever degree the two persons, or the most remote of them, is distant from the common ancestor, that is the degree in which they are related to 207 each other. Thus Titius and his brother are related in the first degree; for from the father to each of them is counted only one: Titius and his nephew are related in the second degree; for the nephew is two degrees removed from the common ancestor; viz. his own grandfather, the father of Titius. Or, (to give a more illustrious instance from our English annals) king Henry the seventh, who slew Richard the third in the battle of Bosworth,2 was related to that prince in the fifth degree. Let the propositus therefore in the table of consanguinity represent king Richard the third, and the class marked (e) king Henry the seventh. Now their common stock or ancestor was king Edward the third, the abavus [great-great-grandfather] in the same table: from him to Edmond duke of York, the proavus [great-grandfather], is one degree; to Richard earl of Cambridge, the avus [grandfather], two; to Richard duke of York, the pater [father], three; to king Richard the third, the propositus, four: and from king Edward the third to John of Gant (a) is one degree; to John earl of Somerset (b) two; to John duke of Somerset (c) three; to Margaret countess of Richmond (d) four; to king Henry the seventh (e) five. Which last mentioned prince, being the farthest removed from the common stock, gives the denomination to the degree of kindred in the canon and municipal law. Though according to the computation of the civilians, (who count upwards, from either of the persons related, to the common stock, and then downwards again to the other; reckoning a degree for each person both

13 -----------------------------16777216

14 ---------------------------- 67108864

15 -------------------------- 268435456

16 -------------------------- 1073741824

17 ------------------------- 4294967296

18 ------------------------- 17179869184

19 ------------------------ 68719476736

20 ---------------------- 274877906944

This calculation may also be formed by a more compendious process, viz. by squaring the couples, or half the

number, of ancestors at any given degree; which will furnish us with the number of kindred we have in the same

degree, at equal distance with ourselves from the common stock, besides those at unequal distances. Thus, in the

tenth lineal degree, the number of ancestors is 1024; its half, or the couples, amount to 512; the number of

kindred in the tenth collateral degree amounts therefore to 262144, or the square of 512. And if we will be at the

trouble to recollect the state of the several families within our own knowlege, and observe how far they agree

with this account; that is, whether, on an average, every man has not one brother or sister, four first cousins,

sixteen second cousins, and so on; we shall find that the present calculation is very far from being over-charged.

l Decretal. 4. 14. 3 & 9.

m Co. Litt. 23.

2 Henry’s victory in 1485 ended the Wars of the Roses and inaugurated the Tudor dynasty.

140 of the rights of things

ascending and descending) these two princes were related in the ninth degree: for from king Richard the third to Richard duke of York is one degree; to Richard earl of Cambridge, two; to Edmond duke of York, three; to king Edward the third, the common ancestor, four; to John of Gant, five; to John earl of Somerset, six; to John duke of Somerset, seven; to Margaret countess of Richmond, eight; to king Henry the seventh, ninen.

208 The nature and degrees of kindred being thus in some measure explained, I shall

next proceed to lay down a series of rules, or canons of inheritance, according to which estates are transmitted from the ancestor to the heir; together with an explana-tory comment, remarking their original and progress, the reasons upon which they are founded, and in some cases their agreement with the laws of other nations.

I. The first rule is, that inheritances shall lineally descend to the issue of the 〈9〉

person last actually seised, in infinitum; but shall never lineally ascend.

To explain the more clearly both this and the subsequent rules, it must first be

observed, that by law no inheritance can vest, nor can any person be the actual complete heir of another, till the ancestor is previously dead. Nemo est haeres viventis [No one is heir to the living]. Before that time the person who is next in the line of succession is called an heir apparent, or heir presumptive. Heirs apparent are such, whose right of inheritance is indefeasible, provided they outlive the ancestor; as the eldest son or his issue, who must by the course of the common law be heirs to the father whenever he happens to die. Heirs presumptive are such, who, if the ancestor should die immediately, would in the present circumstances of things be his heirs; but whose right of inheritance may be defeated by the contingency of some nearer heir being born: as a brother, or nephew, whose presumptive succession may be destroyed by the birth of a child; or a daughter, whose present hopes may be hereafter cut off by the birth of a son. Nay, even if the estate hath descended, by the death of the owner, to such brother, or nephew, or daughter; in the former cases the estate shall be devested and taken away by the birth of a posthumous child; and, in the latter, it shall also be totally devested by the birth of a posthumous sono.

209 We must also remember, that no person can be properly such an ancestor, as that

an 〈10〉 inheritance in lands or tenements can be derived from him, unless he hath had actual seisin of such lands, either by his own entry, or by the possession of his own or his ancestor’s lessee for years, or by receiving rent from a lessee of the freehold p: or unless he hath had what is equivalent to corporal seisin in hereditaments that are incorporeal; such as the receipt of rent, a presentation to the church in case of an advowsonq, and the like. But he shall not be accounted an ancestor, who hath had only a bare right or title to enter or be otherwise seised. And therefore all the



n See the table of consanguinity annexed [II. 136]; wherein all the degrees of collateral kindred to the propositus are computed, so far as the tenth of the civilians and the seventh of the canonists inclusive; the former being distinguished by the numeral letters, the latter by the common ciphers.

o Bro. tit. descent. 58.

p Co. Litt. 15.

q Ibid. 11.





chapter 14 141


cases, which will be mentioned in the present chapter, are upon the supposition that the deceased (whose inheritance is now claimed) was the last person actually seised thereof. For the law requires this notoriety of possession, as evidence that the ancestor had that property in himself, which is now to be transmitted to his heir. Which notoriety hath succeeded in the place of the antient feodal investiture, whereby, while feuds were precarious, the vasal on the descent of lands was formerly admitted in the lord’s court (as is still the practice in Scotland) and there received his seisin, in the nature of a renewal of his ancestor’s grant, in the presence of the feodal peers: till at length, when the right of succession became indefeasible, an entry on any part of the lands within the county (which if disputed was afterwards to be tried by those peers) or other notorious possession, was admitted as equivalent to the formal grant of seisin, and made the tenant capable of transmitting his estate by descent. The seisin therefore of any person, thus understood, makes him the root or stock, from which all future inheritance by right of blood must be derived: which is very briefly expressed in this maxim, seisina facit stipitemr [seisin makes the stock].

When therefore a person dies so seised, the inheritance first goes to his issue: 210

as if there be Geoffrey, John, and Matthew, grandfather, father, and son; and John purchases land and dies; his son Matthew shall succeed him as heir, and not the grandfather Geoffrey; to whom the land shall never ascend, but shall rather escheat to the lords.

This rule, so far as it is affirmative and relates to lineal descents, is almost

universally adopted by all nations; and it seems founded on a principle of natural reason, that (whenever a right of property transmissible to representatives is admit ted) the possessions of the parents should go, upon their decease, in the first place to their children, as those to whom they have given being, and for whom they are there fore bound to provide. But the negative branch, or total exclusion of parents and all lineal ancestors from succeeding to the inheritance of their offspring, is peculiar to our own laws, and such as have been deduced from the same original. For, by the Jewish law, on failure of issue the father succeeded to the son, in exclusion of brethren, unless one of them married the widow and raised up seed to his brother t. And, by the laws of Rome, in the first place the children or lineal descendants were pre-ferred; and, on failure of these, the father and mother or lineal ascendants succeeded together with the brethren and sistersv; though by the law of the twelve tables the mother was originally, on account of her sex, excludedu. Hence this rule of our laws has been censured and declaimed against, as absurd and derogating from the maxims of equity and natural justicew. Yet that there is nothing unjust or absurd in it, but

r Flet. l. 6. c. 2. §. 2. [Blackstone quotes the same phrase again; see II. 213, note l.]

s Litt. §. 3.

t Selden. de success. Ebraeor. c. 12.

v Ff. 38. 15. 1. Nov. 118. 127.

u Inst. 3. 3. 1.

w Craig. de jur. feud. [1716 ed.] l. 2. t. 13. §. 15. Locke on gov. part. 1. §. 90. [Craig takes the view that Blackstone endorses—namely, that this prohibition ‘might seem puzzling to some’. By contrast, Locke writes that ‘the father has a Right in Nature to possess [the son’s] Goods, and inherit his Estate (whatever the Municipal Laws of some Countries, may absurdly direct otherwise)’.]

142 of the rights of things

that on the contrary it is founded upon very good reason, may appear from con-sidering as well the nature of the rule itself, as the occasion of introducing it into our laws.

211 We are to reflect, in the first place, that all rules of succession to estates are creatures

of the civil polity, and juris positivi [positive law] merely. The right of property, which is gained by occupancy, extends naturally no farther than the life of the present possessor; after which the land by the law of nature would again become common, and liable to be seised by the next occupant: but society, to prevent the mischiefs that might ensue from a doctrine so productive of contention, has established conveyances, wills, and successions; whereby the property originally gained by possession is continued, and transmitted from one man to another, according to the rules which each state has respectively thought proper to prescribe. There is certainly therefore no injustice done to individuals, whatever be the path of descent marked out by the municipal law.3

If we next consider the time and occasion of introducing this rule into our law, we

shall find it to have been grounded upon very substantial reasons. I think there is no doubt to be made, but that it was introduced at the same time with, and in consequence of, the feodal tenures. For it was an express rule of the feodal law x, that successionis feudi talis est natura, quod ascendentes non succedunt [the nature of feudal succession is such that those in the ascending line do not inherit]; and therefore the same maxim obtains also in the French law to this day y. Our Henry the first indeed, among other restorations of the old Saxon laws, restored the right of succession in the ascending line z: but this soon fell again into disuse; for so early as Glanvil’s time, who wrote under Henry the second, we find it laid down as established law a, that haereditas nunquam ascendit [the inheritance never ascends]; which has remained an invariable maxim ever since. These circumstances evidently shew this rule to be of feodal original; and, taken in that light, there are some arguments in its favour, besides those which are drawn merely from the reason of the thing. For if the feud, of which the

212 son died seised, was really feudum antiquum, or one descended to him from his

ancestors, the father could not possibly succeed to it, because it must have passed him in the course of descent, before it could come to the son; unless it were feudum maternum, or one descended from his mother, and then for other reasons (which will appear hereafter) the father could in no wise inherit it. And if it were feudum novum, or one newly acquired by the son, then only the descendants from the body of the



x 2 Feud. 50.

y Domat. p. 2. l. 2. t. 2. Montesqu. Esp. l. 31. c. 33. [Neither Domat nor Montesquieu cites this rule, but Domat discusses limits on parents’ rights to inherit from their children, and Montesquieu discusses the consequences of having fiefs descend from parent to child.]

z LL. Hen. I. c. 70.

a l. 7. c. 1.

3 At this point in the analysis, Blackstone’s A Treatise on … Descents in Fee-Simple accounted for the bar on inheritances that ascend lineally by reference to parental ‘magnanimity, honour, and … affection’ (18). Ruffhead’s criticism of this argument (see Editor’s Introduction, II. xiii, note 38) may have helped persuade Blackstone to

jettison it.





chapter 14 143


feudatory himself could succeed, by the known maxim of the early feodal constitutionsb; which was founded as well upon the personal merit of the vasal, which might be transmitted to his children but could not ascend to his progenitors, as also upon this consideration of military policy, that the decrepit grandsire of a vigorous vasal would be but indifferently qualified to succeed him in his feodal services. Nay, even if this feudum novum were held by the son ut feudum antiquum, or with all the qualities annexed of a feud descended from his ancestors, such feud must in all respects have descended as if it had been really an antient feud; and therefore could not go to the father, because, if it had been an antient feud, the father must have been dead before it could have come to the son. Thus whether the feud was strictly novum, or strictly antiquum, or whether it was novum held ut antiquum, in none of these cases the father could possibly succeed. These reasons, drawn from the history of the rule itself, seem to be more satisfactory than that quaint one of Bractonc, adopted by sir Edward Coked, which regulates the descent of lands according to the laws of gravitation.

II. A second general rule or canon is, that the male issue shall be admitted before

the female.

Thus sons shall be admitted before daughters; or, as our male lawgivers have 213

somewhat uncomplaisantly expressed it, the worthiest of blood shall be preferrede. As if John Stiles hath two sons, Matthew and Gilbert, and two daughters, Margaret and Charlotte, and dies; first Matthew, and (in case of his death without issue) then Gilbert, shall be admitted to the succession in preference to both the daughters.

This preference of males to females is entirely agreeable to the law of succession

among the Jewsf, and also among the states of Greece, or at least among the Athenians g; but was totally unknown to the laws of Rome h, (such of them, I mean, as are at present extant) wherein brethren and sisters were allowed to succeed to equal portions of the inheritance. I shall not here enter into the comparative merit of the Roman and the other constitutions in this particular, nor examine into the greater dignity of blood in the male or female sex; but shall only observe, that our present preference of males to females seems to have arisen entirely from the feodal law. For though our British ancestors, the Welsh, appear to have given a preference to malesi, yet 〈11〉 our subsequent Danish predecessors seem to have made no distinction of sexes, but to have admitted all the children at once to the inheritance k. But the feodal law of the Saxons on the continent (which was probably brought over hither, and first altered by



b 1 Feud. 20.

c Descendit itaque jus, quasi ponderosum quid, cadens deorsum recta linea, et nunquam reascendit [Therefore the right descends, like a weight falling in a straight line, and never reascends]. l. 2. c. 29.

d 1 Inst. 11.

e Hal. H. C. L. 235.

f Numb. c. 27.

g Petit. LL. Attic. l. 6. t. 6.

h Inst. 3. 1. 6.

i Stat. Wall. [Statutes of Wales] 12 Edw. 1 [s. 13]. [See Wotton, 541–2. Under this provision, the Welsh maintained their practice of partible inheritance, rather than giving preference to the oldest son.]

k LL. Canut. c. 68. [Wilkins, 144; see also II. 331, text accompanying note p.]

144 of the rights of things

the law of king Canute) gives an evident preference of the male to the female sex. “Pater aut mater, defuncti, filio non filiae haereditatem relinquent. ... Qui defunctus non filios sed filias reliquerit, ad eas omnis haereditas pertineatl.”4 It is possible therefore that this preference might be a branch of that imperfect system of feuds,

214 which obtained here before the conquest; especially as it subsists among the customs

of gavelkind, and as, in the charter or laws of king Henry the first, it is not (like many Norman innovations) given up, but rather enforcedm. The true reason of preferring the males must be deduced from feodal principles: for, by the genuine and original policy of that constitution, no female could ever succeed to a proper feudn, inasmuch as they were incapable of performing those military services, for the sake of which that system was established. But our law does not extend to a total exclusion of females, as the Salic law,5 and others, where feuds were most strictly retained: it only postpones them to males; for, though daughters are excluded by sons, yet they succeed before any collateral relations: our law, like that of the Saxon feudists before-mentioned, thus steering a middle course, between the absolute rejection of females, and the putting them on a footing with males.

III. A third rule, or canon of descent, is this; that, where there are two or more

males in equal degree, the eldest only shall inherit; but the females all together.

As if a man hath two sons, Matthew and Gilbert, and two daughters, Margaret and

Charlotte, and dies; Matthew his eldest son shall alone succeed to his estate, in exclusion of Gilbert the second son and both the daughters: but, if both the sons die without issue before the father, the daughters Margaret and Charlotte shall both inherit the estate as coparcenerso.

This right of primogeniture in males seems antiently to have only obtained among

the Jews, in whose constitution the eldest son had a double portion of the inheritance p; in the same manner as with us, by the laws of king Henry the first q, the eldest son had

215 the capital fee or principal feud of his father’s possessions, and no other pre-eminence;

and as the eldest daughter had afterwards the principal mansion, when the estate descended in coparcenary r. The Greeks, the Romans, the Britons, the Saxons, and even originally the feudists, divided the lands equally; some among all the children at large, some among the males only. This is certainly the most obvious and natural way;



l [Lex Saxonum] tit. 7. §. 1 & 4.

m c. 70.

n 1 Feud. 8.

o Litt. §. 5. Hale, H. C. L. 238.

p Selden. de succ. Ebr. c. 5.

q c. 70.

r Glanvil. l. 7. c. 3.

4 ‘The father or mother, at their death, shall leave the inheritance to the son not the daughter … If the deceased has no sons and only daughters, the whole inheritance shall belong to them.’ These two provisions appear in Leibniz’s Scriptores Rerum Brunsvicensium, i. 80, which was apparently Blackstone’s source; his citation does not match other collections that include the Lex Saxonum.

5 This Frankish code of law, which excluded females from an inheritance because they could not perform feudal duties, was revived in the fourteenth century to prevent Edward III of England from inheriting the French throne through his mother, Isabella of France.





chapter 14 145


and has the appearance, at least in the opinion of younger brothers, of the greatest impartiality and justice. But when the emperors began to create honorary feuds, or titles of nobility, it was found necessary (in order to preserve their dignity) to make them impartible s, or (as they stiled them) feuda individua [an indivisible fee], and in consequence descendible to the eldest son alone. This example was farther enforced by the inconveniences that attended the splitting of estates; namely, the division of the military services, the multitude of infant tenants incapable of performing any duty, the consequential weakening of the strength of the kingdom, and the inducing younger sons to take up with the business and idleness of a country life, instead of being serviceable to themselves and the public, by engaging in mercantile, in military, in civil, or in ecclesiastical employments t. These reasons occasioned an almost total change in the method of feodal inheritances abroad; so that the eldest male began universally to succeed to the whole of the lands in all military tenures: and in this condition the feodal constitution was established in England by William the conqueror.

Yet we find, that socage estates frequently descended to all the sons equally, so

lately as when Glanvilu wrote, in the reign of Henry the second; and it is mentioned in the mirrorw as a part of our antient constitution, that knights’ fees should descend to the eldest son, and socage fees should be partible among the male children. However in Henry the third’s time we find by Bractonx that socage lands, in imitation of lands in chivalry, had almost entirely fallen into the right of succession by 216 primogeniture, as the law now stands: except in Kent, where they gloried in the preservation of their antient gavelkind tenure, of which a principal branch was the joint inheritance of all the sonsy; and except in some particular manors and townships, where their local customs continued the descent, sometimes to all, sometimes to the youngest son only, or in other more singular methods of succession.

As to the females, they are still left as they were by the antient law: for they were all

equally incapable of performing any personal service; and therefore, one main reason of preferring the eldest ceasing, such preference would have been injurious to the rest: and the other principal purpose, the prevention of the too minute subdivision of estates, was left to be considered and provided for by the lords, who had the disposal of these female heiresses in marriage. However, the succession by primogeniture, even among females, took place as to the inheritance of the crownz; wherein the necessity of a sole and determinate succession is as great in the one sex as the other. And the right of sole succession, though not of primogeniture, was also established with respect to female dignities and titles of honour. For if a man holds an earldom to him and the heirs of his body, and dies, leaving only daughters; the eldest shall not

s 2 Feud. 55.

t Hale. H. C. L. 221.

u l. 7. c. 3.

w c. 1. §. 3.

x l. 2. c. 30, 31.

y Somner. Gavelk. 7.

z Co. Litt. 165.

146 of the rights of things

of course be countess, but the dignity is in suspense or abeyance till the king shall declare his pleasure; for he, being the fountain of honour, may confer it on which of them he pleasesa. In which disposition is preserved a strong trace of the antient law of feuds, before their descent by primogeniture even among the males was established; namely, that the lord might bestow them on which of the sons he thought proper:— “progressum est, ut ad filios deveniret, in quem scilicet dominus hoc vellet beneficium confirmareb.”6

217 IV. A fourth rule, or canon of descents, is this; that the lineal descendants, in

infinitum, of any person deceased shall represent their ancestor; that is, shall stand in the same place as the person himself would have done, had he been living.

Thus the child, grandchild, or great-grandchild (either male or female) of the

eldest son succeeds before the younger son, and so in infinitumc. And these representatives shall take neither more nor less, but just so much as their principals would have done. As if there be two sisters, Margaret and Charlotte; and Margaret dies, leaving six daughters; and then John Stiles the father of the two sisters dies, without other issue: these six daughters shall take among them exactly the same as their mother Margaret would have done, had she been living; that is, a moiety of the lands of John Stiles in coparcenary: so that, upon partition made, if the land be divided into twelve parts, thereof Charlotte the surviving sister shall have six, and her six neices, the daughters of Margaret, one apiece.

This taking by representation is 〈12〉 called a succession in stirpes, according to the

roots; since all the branches inherit the same share that their root, whom they represent, would have done. And in this manner also was the Jewish succession directed d; but the Roman somewhat differed from it. In the descending line the right of representation continued in infinitum, and the inheritance still descended in stirpes: as if one of three daughters died, leaving ten children, and then the father died; the two surviving daughters had each one third of his effects, and the ten grandchildren had the remaining third divided between them. And so among collaterals, if any 〈13〉 persons of equal degree with the persons represented were still subsisting, (as if the deceased left one brother, and two nephews the sons of another brother) the succession was still guided by the roots: but, if both the brethren were

218 dead leaving issue, then (I apprehend) their representatives in equal degree became

themselves principals, and shared the inheritance per capita, that is, share and share alike; they being themselves now the next in degree to the ancestor, in their own right, and not by right of representatione. So, if the next heirs of Titius be six nieces, three by one sister, two by another, and one by a third; his inheritance by the Roman law was divided into six parts, and one given to each of the nieces: whereas the law of

a Ibid.

b 1 Feud. 1 [§ 1].

c Hale. H. C. L. 236, 237.

d Selden. de succ. Ebr. c. 1.

e Nov. 118. c. 3. Inst. 3. 1. 6.

6 ‘It passed on so as to come to sons, namely to the one on whom the lord wished to confirm this benefice.’





chapter 14 147


England in this case would still divide it only into three parts, and distribute it per stirpes, thus; one third to the three children who represent one sister, another third to the two who represent the second, and the remaining third to the one child who is the sole representative of her mother.

This mode of representation is a necessary consequence of the double preference

given by our law, first to the male issue, and next to the firstborn among the males, to both which the Roman law is a stranger. For if all the children of three sisters were in England to claim per capita, in their own 〈14〉 rights as next of kin to the ancestor, without any respect to the stocks from whence they sprung, and those children were partly male and partly female; then the eldest male among them would exclude not only his own brethren and sisters, but all the issue of the other two daughters; or else the law in this instance must be inconsistent with itself, and depart from the preference which it constantly gives to the males, and the firstborn, among persons in equal degree. Whereas, by dividing the inheritance according to the roots or stirpes, the rule of descent is kept uniform and steady: the issue of the eldest son excludes all other pretenders, as the son himself (if living) would have done; but the issue of two daughters divide the inheritance between them, provided their mothers (if living) would have done the same: and among these several issues, or representatives of the respective roots, the same preference to males and the same right of primogeniture obtain, as would have obtained at the first among the roots themselves, the sons or daughters of the deceased. As if a man hath two sons, A and B, and A 219 dies leaving two sons, and then the grandfather dies; now the eldest son of A shall succeed to the whole of his grandfather’s estate: and if A had left only two daughters, they should have succeeded also to equal moieties of the whole, in exclusion of B and his issue. But if a man hath only three daughters, C, D, and E; and C dies leaving two sons, D leaving two daughters, and E leaving a daughter and a son who is younger than his sister: here, when the grandfather dies, the eldest son of C shall succeed to one third, in exclusion of the younger; the two daughters of D to another third in partnership; and the son of E to the remaining third, in exclusion of his elder sister. And the same right of representation, guided and restrained by the same rules of descent, prevails downwards in infinitum.

Yet this right does not appear to have been thoroughly established in the time

of Henry the second, when Glanvil wrote; and therefore, in the title to the crown especially, we find frequent contests between the younger (but surviving) brother, and his nephew (being the son and representative of the elder deceased) in regard to the inheritance of their common ancestor: for the uncle is certainly nearer of kin to the common stock, by one degree, than the nephew; though the nephew, by representing his father, has in him the right of primogeniture. The uncle also was usually better able to perform the services of the fief; and besides had frequently superior interest and strength, to back his pretensions and crush the right of his nephew. And even to this day, in the lower Saxony, proximity of blood takes place of representative primogeniture; that is, the younger surviving brother is admitted to the inheritance before the son of an elder deceased: which occasioned the disputes 148 of the rights of things

between the two houses of Mecklenburg, Schwerin and Strelitz, in 1692 f.7 Yet Glanvil, with us, even in the twelfth century, seems g to declare for the right of the nephew by representation; provided the eldest son had not received a provision in lands from

220 his father, (or as the civil law would call it) had not been forisfamiliated,8 in his

lifetime. King John, however, who kept his nephew Arthur from the throne,9 by disputing this right of representation, did all in his power to abolish it throughout the realmh: but in the time of his son, king Henry the third, we find the rule indisputably settled in the manner we have here laid it downi, and so it has continued ever since. And thus much for lineal descents.

V. A fifth rule is, that, on failure of lineal 〈15〉 descendants, or issue, of the person

last seised, the inheritance shall descend to the blood of the first purchasor; subject to the three preceding rules.

Thus if Geoffrey Stiles purchases land, and it descends to John Stiles his son, and

John dies seised thereof without issue; whoever succeeds to this inheritance must be of the blood of Geoffrey the first purchasor of this family k. The first purchasor, perquisitor, is he who first acquired the estate to his family, whether the same was transferred to him by sale, or by gift, or by any other method, except only that of descent.

This is a rule almost peculiar to our own laws, and those of a similar original. For

it was entirely unknown among the Jews, Greeks, and Romans: none of whose laws looked any farther than the person himself who died seised of the estate; but assigned him an heir, without considering by what title he gained it, or from what ancestor he derived it. But the law of Normandy l agrees with our law in this respect: nor indeed is that agreement to be wondered at, since the law of descents in both is of feodal original; and this rule or canon cannot otherwise be accounted for than by recurring to feodal principles.

When feuds first began to be hereditary, it was made a necessary qualification of

the heir, who would succeed to a feud, that he should be of the blood of, that is

221 lineally descended from, the first feudatory or purchasor. In consequence whereof, if

a vasal 〈16〉 died possessed of a feud of his own acquiring, or feudum novum, it could not descend to any but his own offspring; no, not even to his brother, because he was



f Mod. Un. Hist. xlii. 334.

g l. 7. c. 3.

h Hale. H. C. L. 217, 229.

i Bracton. l. 2. c. 30. §. 2.

k Co. Litt. 12.

l Gr. Coustum. c. 25.

7 This conflict, involving different factions of the house of Mecklenberg (a North Germany dynasty), arose in the 1690s after the death of Christian Louis I, duke of Mecklenburg-Schwerin. The conflict was resolved by the Treaty of Hamburg (1701), which gave the duchy of Mecklenburg-Strelitz to Adolf Frederick II (the younger surviving brother), and the duchy of Mecklenburg-Schwerin to Frederick William I (son of Christian’s deceased elder brother).

8 By having been already given part of his father’s estate, which would exclude him from any further inheritance.

9 Arthur (1187–c. 1203) was the son of John’s older brother, Geoffrey. After the death of John’s older brother, Richard I, in 1199, Arthur challenged John’s claim to the throne; captured by John’s forces in 1202, Arthur disappeared a year later.





chapter 14 149


not descended, nor derived his blood, from the first acquirer. But if it was feudum antiquum, that is, one descended to the vasal from his ancestors, then his brother, or such other collateral relation as was descended and derived his blood from the first feudatory, might succeed to such inheritance. To this purpose speaks the following rule; “frater fratri sine legitimo haerede defuncto, in beneficio quod eorum patris fuit, succedat: sin autem unus e fratribus a domino feudum acceperit, eo defuncto sine legitimo haerede, frater ejus in feudum non succeditm.”10 The true feodal reason for which rule was this; that what was given to a man, for his personal service and personal merit, ought not to descend to any but the heirs of his person. And therefore, as in estates-tail, (which a proper feud very much resembled) so in the feodal donation, “nomen haeredis, in prima investitura expressum, tantum ad descendentes ex corpore primi vasalli extenditur; et non ad collaterales, nisi ex corpore primi vasalli sive stipitis descendantn:”11 the will of the donor, or original lord, (when feuds were turned from life estates into inheritances) not being to make them absolutely hereditary, like the Roman allodium, but hereditary only sub modo [to a certain degree]; not hereditary to the collateral relations, or lineal ancestors, or husband, or wife of the feudatory, but to the issue descended from his body only.

However, in process of time, when the feodal rigour was in part abated, a method

was invented to let in the collateral relations of the grantee to the inheritance, by granting him a feudum novum to hold ut feudum antiquum; that is, with all the qualities annexed of a feud derived from his ancestors; and then the collateral relations were admitted to succeed even in infinitum, because they might have been of the blood of, that is descended from, the first imaginary purchasor. For since it is not ascertained in such general grants, whether this feud shall be held ut feudum 222 paternum [as a paternal fee], or feudum avitum [an ancestral fee], but ut feudum antiquum merely, as a feud of indefinite antiquity; that is, since it is not ascertained from which of the ancestors of the grantee this feud shall be supposed to have descended; the law will not ascertain it, but will suppose any of his ancestors, pro re nata [as the circumstances arise], to have been the first purchasor: and therefore it admits any of his collateral kindred (who have the other necessary requisites) to the inheritance, because every collateral kinsman must be descended from some one of his lineal ancestors.

Of this nature are all the grants of fee-simple estates of this kingdom; for there is

now in the law of England no such thing as a grant of a feudum novum, to be held ut novum [as something new]; unless in the case of a fee-tail, and there we see that this rule is strictly observed, and none but the lineal descendants of the first donee (or



m 1 Feud. 1. §. 2.

n Crag. l. 1. t. 9. §. 36.

10 ‘A brother may succeed to his brother dying without a lawful heir, in the estate which was their father’s: but if one of the brothers shall have received the fee from the lord, and die without a lawful heir, his brother does not succeed.’

11 ‘The name of heir expressed in the first investiture extends only to the descendants of the body of the first

vassal, and not to the collaterals unless they descend from the body or stock of the first vassal.’

150 of the rights of things

purchasor) are admitted: but every grant of lands in fee-simple is with us a feudum novum to be held ut antiquum, as a feud whose antiquity is indefinite; and therefore the collateral kindred of the grantee, or descendants from any of his lineal ancestors, by whom the lands might have possibly been purchased, are capable of being called to the inheritance.

Yet, when an estate hath really descended in a course of inheritance to the person last

seised, the strict rule of the feodal law is still observed; and none are admitted, but the heirs of those through whom the inheritance hath passed: for all others have demonstrably none of the blood of the first purchasor in them, and therefore shall never succeed. As, if lands come to John Stiles by descent from his mother Lucy Baker, no relation of his father (as such) shall ever be his heir of these lands; and, vice versa, if they descended from his father Geoffrey Stiles, no relation of his mother (as such) shall ever be admitted thereto; for his father’s kindred have none of his mother’s blood, nor have his mother’s relations any share of his father’s blood. And so, if the estate descended from his father’s father,

223 George Stiles; the relations of his father’s mother, Cecilia Kempe, shall for the same reason

never be admitted, but only those of his father’s father. This is also the rule of the French law o, which is derived from the same feodal fountain.

Here we may observe, that, so far as the feud is really antiquum, the law traces it

back, and will not suffer any to inherit but the blood of those ancestors, from whom the feud was conveyed to the late proprietor. But when, through length of time, it can trace it no farther; as if it be not known whether his grandfather, George Stiles, inherited it from his father Walter Stiles, or his mother Christian Smith; or if it appear that his grandfather was the first grantee, and so took it (by the general law) as a feud of indefinite antiquity; in either of these cases the law admits the descendants of any ancestor of George Stiles, either paternal or maternal, to be in their due order the heirs to John Stiles of this estate: because in the first case it is really uncertain, and in the second case it is supposed to be uncertain, whether the grandfather derived his title from the part of his father or his mother.

This then is the great and general principle, upon which the law of collateral

inheritances depends; that, upon failure of issue in the last proprietor, the estate shall descend to the blood of the first purchasor; or, that it shall result back to the heirs of the body of that ancestor, from whom it either really has, or is supposed by fiction of law to have, originally descended: according to the rule laid down in the yearbooks p, Fitzherbert q, Brook r, and Hale s; “that he who would have been heir to the father of the deceased” (and, of course, to the mother, or any 〈17〉 other purchasing ancestor) “shall also be heir to the son.”

〈18〉 The remaining rules are only rules of evidence, calculated to investigate who that

224 purchasing ancestor was; which, in feudis vere antiquis [in truly ancient fees], has in

process of time been forgotten, and is supposed so to be in feuds that are held ut antiquis.

o Domat. part. 2. pr.

p [YB] M. 12. Edw. IV. 14.

q Abr. t. discent. 2.

r Ibid. 38.

s H. C. L. 243.





chapter 14 151


VI. A sixth rule or canon therefore is, that the collateral heir of the person last

seised must be his next collateral kinsman, of the whole blood.

First, he must be his next collateral kinsman, either personally or jure rep-

resentationis [by right of representation]; which proximity is reckoned accord ing to the canonical degrees of consanguinity before-mentioned. Therefore, the brother being in the first degree, he and his descendants shall exclude the uncle and his issue, who is only in the second. And herein consists the true reason of the different methods of computing the degrees of consanguinity, in the civil law on the one hand, and in the canon and common laws on the other. The civil law regards consanguinity principally with respect to successions, and therein very naturally considers only the person deceased, to whom the relation is claimed: it therefore counts the degrees of kindred according to the number of persons through whom the claim must be derived from him; and makes not only his great-nephew but also his first-cousin to be both related to him in the fourth degree; because there are three persons between him and each of them. The canon law regards consanguinity principally with a view to prevent incestuous marriages, between those who have a large portion of the same blood running in their respective veins; and therefore looks up to the author of that blood, or the common ancestor, reckoning the degrees from him: so that the great-nephew is related in the third canonical degree to the person proposed, and the first-cousin in the second; the former being distant three degrees from the common 〈19〉 ancestor, and therefore deriving only one fourth of his blood from the same fountain with the propositus; the latter, and also the propositus, being each of them distant only two degrees from the common ancestor, and therefore having one half of each of their bloods the same. The common law regards consanguinity principally with respect to descents; and, having therein the same object in view as the civil, it 225 may seem as if it ought to proceed according to the civil computation. But as it also respects the purchasing ancestor, from whom the estate was derived, it therein resembles the canon law, and therefore counts its degrees in the same manner. Indeed the designation of person (in seeking for the next of kin) will come to exactly the same end (though the degrees will be differently numbered) whichever method of computation we suppose the law of England to use; since the right of 〈20〉 representation (of the father by the son, &c) is allowed to prevail in infinitum. This allowance was absolutely necessary, else there would have frequently been many claimants in exactly the same degree of kindred, as (for instance) uncles and nephews of the deceased; which multiplicity, though 〈21〉 no inconvenience in the Roman law of partible inheritances, yet would have been productive of endless confusion where the right of sole succession, as with us, is established. The issue or descendants therefore of John Stiles’s brother are all of them in the first degree of kindred with respect to 〈22〉 inheritances, as their father also, when living, was; those of his uncle in the second; and so on; and are severally called to the succession in right of such their representative proximity.

The right of representation being thus established, the former part of the present

rule amounts to this; that, on failure of issue of the person last seised, the inheritance 152 of the rights of things

shall descend 〈23〉 to the issue of his next immediate ancestor. Thus if John Stiles dies without issue, his estate shall descend to Francis his 〈24〉 brother, who is lineally descended from Geoffrey Stiles his next immediate ancestor, or father. On failure of brethren, or sisters, and their issue, it shall descend to the uncle of John Stiles, the lineal descendant of his grandfather George, and so on in infinitum. Very similar to which was the law of inheritance among the antient Germans, our progenitors: “haeredes successoresque sui cuique liberi, et nullum testamentum: si liberi non sunt, proximus gradus in possessione, fratres, patrui, avunculi t.”12

226 Now here it must be observed, that the lineal ancestors, though (according to the

first rule) incapable themselves of succeeding to the estate, because it is supposed to have already passed them, are yet the common stocks from which the next successor must spring. And therefore in the Jewish law, which in this respect entirely corresponds with oursu, the father or other lineal ancestor is himself said to be the heir, though long since dead, as being represented by the persons of his issue; who are held to succeed not in their own rights, as brethren, uncles, &c, but in right of representation, as 〈25〉 the sons of the father, grandfather, & c, of the deceasedv. But, though the common ancestor be thus the root of the inheritance, yet with us it is not necessary to name him in making out the pedigree or descent. For the descent between two brothers is held to be an immediate descent; and therefore title may be made by one brother or his representatives to or through another, without mentioning their common fatherw. If Geoffrey Stiles hath two sons, John and Francis, Francis may claim as heir to John, without naming their father Geoffrey: and so the son of Francis may claim as cousin and heir to Matthew the son of John, without naming the grandfather; viz. as son of Francis, who was the brother of John, who was the father of Matthew. But though the common ancestors are not named in deducing the pedigree, yet the law still respects them as the fountains of inheritable blood: and therefore in order to ascertain the collateral heir of John Stiles, 〈26〉 it is in the first place necessary to recur to his ancestors in the first degree; and if they have left any other issue besides John, that issue will be his heir. On default of such, we must ascend one step higher to the ancestors in the second degree, and then to those in the third, and fourth, and so upwards in infinitum; till 〈27〉 some ancestors be found, who have other issue descending from them besides the deceased, in a parallel or collateral line. From these ancestors the heir of John Stiles must derive his descent; and in such

227 derivation the same rules must be observed, with regard to sex, primogeniture, and

representation, that 〈28〉 have just been laid down with regard to lineal descents from the person of the last proprietor.

t Tacitus de mor. Germ. 21 [recte 20].

u Numb. c. 27.

v Selden. de succ. Ebr. c. 12.

w [Collingwood v Pays] 1 Sid. 193. [Collingwood v Pace] 1 Lev. 60. [Blackborough v Davis] 12 Mod. 619. [The Collingwood litigation (1656–70) was part of a complicated inheritance dispute involving the partially escheated landholdings of John Ramsey, earl of Holderness.]

12 ‘His heirs and successors are his children and there is no testament; if there are no children, the closest degree in possession are brothers, paternal uncles and maternal uncles.’





chapter 14 153


But, secondly, the heir need not be the nearest kinsman absolutely, but only sub

modo; that is, he must be the nearest kinsman of the whole blood; for, if there be a much nearer kinsman of the half blood, a distant kinsman of the whole blood shall be admitted, and the other entirely 〈29〉 excluded.

A kinsman of the whole blood is he that is derived, not only from the same ancestor,

but from the same couple of ancestors. For, as every man’s own blood is compounded of the bloods of his respective ancestors, he only is properly of the whole or entire blood with another, who hath (so far as the distance of degrees will permit) all the same ingredients in the composition of his blood that the other hath. Thus, the blood of John Stiles being composed of those of Geoffrey Stiles his father and Lucy Baker his mother, therefore his brother Francis, being descended from both the same parents, hath entirely the same blood with John Stiles; or, he is his brother of the whole blood. But if, after the death of Geoffrey, Lucy Baker the mother marries a second husband, Lewis Gay, and hath issue by him; the blood of this issue, being compounded of the blood of Lucy Baker (it is true) on the one part, 〈30〉 but of that of Lewis Gay (instead of Geoffrey Stiles) on the other part, it hath therefore only half the same ingredients with that of John Stiles; so that he is only his brother of the half blood, and for that reason they shall never inherit to each other. So also, if the father has two sons, A and B, by different venters or wives; now these two brethren are not brethren of the whole blood, and therefore shall never inherit to each other, but the estate shall rather escheat to the lord. Nay, even if the father dies, and his lands descend to his eldest son A, who enters thereon, and dies seised without issue; still B shall not be heir to this estate, because he is only of the half blood to A, the person last 〈31〉 seised: but, had A died without entry, then B might have inherited; not as heir 228

to A his half-brother, but as heir to their common father, who was the person last actually seised x.

This total exclusion of the half blood from the inheritance, being almost peculiar

to our own law, is looked upon as a strange hardship by such as are unacquainted with the reasons on which it is grounded. But these censures arise from a misapprehension of the rule; which is not so much to be considered in the light of a rule of descent, as of a rule of evidence; an auxiliary rule, to carry a former into execution. And here we must again remember, that the great and most universal principle of collateral inheritances being this, 〈32〉 that an heir to a feudum antiquum must be of the blood of the first feudatory or purchasor, that is, derived in a lineal descent from him; it was originally requisite, as upon gifts in tail it still is, to make out the pedigree of the heir from the first donee or purchasor, and to shew that such heir was his lineal representative. But when, by length of time and a long course of descents, it came (in those rude and unlettered ages) to be forgotten who was really the first feudatory or purchasor, and thereby the proof of an actual descent from him became impossible; then the law substituted what sir Martin Wright y calls a reasonable, in the stead of an impossible, proof: for it remits the proof of an actual descent from

x Hale. H. C. L. 238.

y Tenures. 186.

154 of the rights of things

the first purchasor; and only requires, in lieu of it, that the claimant be next of the whole blood to the person last in possession; (or derived from the same couple of ancestors) which will probably answer the same end as if he could trace his pedigree in a direct line from the first purchasor. For he who is my kinsman of the whole blood can have no ancestors beyond or higher than the common stock, but what are equally my ancestors also; and mine are vice versa his: he therefore is very likely to be derived from that unknown ancestor of mine, from whom the inheritance descended. But a kinsman of the half blood has but one half of his ancestors above the common

229 stock the same as mine; and therefore there is not the same probability of that

standing requisite in the law, that he be derived from the blood of the first purchasor.

To illustrate this by example. Let there be John Stiles, and Francis, brothers by the

same father and mother, and another son of the same mother by Lewis Gay a second husband. Now, if John dies seised of lands, but it is uncertain whether they descended to him from his father or mother; in this case his brother Francis, of the whole blood, is qualified to be his heir; for he is sure to be in the line of descent from the first purchasor, whether it were the line of the father or the mother. But if Francis should die before John, without issue, the mother’s son by Lewis Gay (or brother of the half blood) is utterly incapable of being heir; for he cannot prove his descent from the first purchasor, who is unknown, nor has he that fair probability which the law admits as presumptive evidence, since he is to the full as likely not to be descended from the line of the first purchasor, as to be descended: and therefore the inheritance shall go to the nearest relation possessed of this presumptive proof, the whole blood.

And, as this is the case in feudis antiquis, where there really did once exist a

purchasing ancestor, who is forgotten; it is also the case in feudis novis held ut antiquis, where the purchasing ancestor is merely ideal, and never existed but only in fiction of law. Of this nature are all grants of lands in fee-simple at this day, which are inheritable as if they descended from some uncertain indefinite ancestor, and therefore any of the collateral kindred of the real modern purchasor (and not his own offspring only) may inherit them, provided they be of the whole blood; for all such are, in judgment of law, likely enough to be derived from this indefinite ancestor: but those of the half blood are excluded, for want of the same probability. Nor should this be thought hard, that a brother of the purchasor, though only of the half blood, must thus be disinherited, and a more remote relation of the whole blood admitted,

230 merely upon a supposition and fiction of law; since it is only upon a like supposition

and fiction, that brethren of purchasors (whether of the whole or half blood) are entitled to inherit at all: for we have seen that in feudis strictè novis [strictly new fees] neither brethren nor any other collaterals were admitted. As therefore in feudis antiquis we have seen the reasonableness of excluding the half blood, if by a fiction of law a feudum novum be made descendible to collaterals as if it was feudum antiquum, it is just and equitable that it should be subject to the same restrictions as well as the same latitude of descent.

Perhaps by this time the exclusion of the half blood does not appear altogether so

unreasonable, as at first sight it is apt to do. It is certainly a very fine-spun and subtile





chapter 14 155


nicety: but, considering the principles upon which our law is founded, it 〈33〉 is neither an injustice nor a hardship; since even the succession of the whole blood was originally a beneficial indulgence, rather than the strict right of collaterals: and, though that indulgence is not extended to the demi-kindred, yet they are rarely abridged of any right which they could possibly have enjoyed before. The doctrine 〈34〉 of whole blood was calculated to supply the frequent impossibility of proving a descent from the first purchasor, without some proof of which (according to our fundamental maxim) there can be no inheritance allowed of. And this purpose it answers, for the most part, effectually enough. I speak with these restrictions, because it does not, neither can any other method, answer this purpose entirely. For though all the ancestors of John Stiles, above the common stock, are also the ancestors of his collateral kinsman of the whole blood; yet, unless that common stock be in the first degree, (that is, unless they have the same father and mother) there will be intermediate ancestors below the common stock, 〈35〉 that may belong to either of them respectively, from which the other is not descended, and therefore can have none of their blood. Thus, though John Stiles and his brother of the whole blood can each have no other ancestors, than what are in common to them both; yet with regard to his uncle, where the common stock is removed one degree higher, (that is, the grandfather and grandmother) one 231 half of John’s ancestors will not be the ancestors of his uncle: his patruus, or father’s brother, derives not his descent from John’s maternal ancestors; nor his avunculus, or mother’s brother, from those in the paternal line. Here then the supply of proof is deficient, and by no means amounts to a certainty: and, the higher the common stock is removed, the more will even the probability decrease. But it must be observed, that (upon the same principles of calculation) the half blood have always a much less chance to be descended from an unknown indefinite ancestor of the deceased, than the whole blood in the same degree. As, in the first degree, the whole brother of John Stiles is sure to be descended from that unknown ancestor; his half brother has only an even chance, for half John’s ancestors are not his. So, in the second degree, John’s uncle of the whole blood has an even chance; but the chances are three to one against his uncle of the half blood, for three fourths of John’s ancestors are not his. In like manner, in the third degree, the chances are only three to one against John’s great uncle of the whole blood, but they are seven to one against his great uncle of the half blood, for seven eighths of John’s ancestors have no connexion in blood with him. Therefore the much less probability of the half blood’s descent from the first purchasor, compared with that of the whole blood, in the several degrees, has occasioned a general exclusion of the half blood in all.

But, while I thus illustrate the reason of excluding the half blood in general, I must

be impartial enough to own, that, in some instances, the practice is carried farther than the principle upon which it goes will warrant. 〈36〉 Particularly, when a man has two sons by different venters, and the estate on his death descends from him to the eldest, who enters, and dies without issue: 〈37〉 now the younger son cannot inherit this estate, because he is not of the whole blood to the last proprietor. This, it must be owned, carries a hardship with it, even upon feodal principles: for the rule was introduced only to supply the proof of a descent from the first purchasor; but here, as 156 of the rights of things

232 this estate notoriously descended from the father, and as both the brothers confessedly

sprung from him, it is demonstrable that the half brother must be of the blood of the first purchasor, who was either the father or some of the father’s ancestors. When therefore there is actual demonstration of the thing to be proved, it is hard to exclude a man by a rule substituted to supply that proof when deficient. So far as the inheritance can be evidently traced back, there seems no need of calling in this presumptive proof, this rule of probability, to investigate what is already certain. Had the elder brother indeed been a purchasor, there would have been no hardship at all, for the reasons already given: or had the frater uterinus only, or brother by the mother’s side, been excluded from an inheritance which descended from the father, it had been highly reasonable.

Indeed it is this very instance, of excluding a frater consanguineus, or brother by

the father’s side, from an inheritance which descended a patre [from the father], that Craig z has singled out, on which to ground his strictures on the English law of half blood. And, really, it should seem, as 〈38〉 if the custom of excluding the half blood in Normandy a extended only to exclude a frater uterinus, when the inheritance descended a patre, and vice versa: 〈39〉 as even with us it remained a doubt, in the time of Bractonb, and of Fletac, whether the half blood on the father’s side were excluded from the inheritance which originally descended from the common father, or only from such as descended from the respective mothers, and from newly purchased lands. And the rule of law, as laid down by our Fortescued, extends no farther than this; frater fratri uterino non succedet in haereditate paterna [a brother shall not succeed in the paternal inheritance to his (half) brother by the mother’s side]. It is moreover worthy of observation, that by our law, as it now stands, the crown (which is the highest inheritance in the nation) may descend to the half blood of the preceding sovereigne, so as it be the blood of the first monarch, purchasor, or

233 (in the feodal language) conqueror, of the reigning family. Thus it actually did

descend from king Edward the sixth to queen Mary, and from her to queen Elizabeth, who were respectively of the half blood to each other. For, the royal pedigree being always a matter of sufficient notoriety, there is no occasion to call in the aid of this presumptive rule of evidence, to render probable the descent from the royal stock; which was formerly king William the Norman, and is now (by act of parliament f) the princess Sophia of Hanover. Hence also it is, that in estates-tail, where the pedigree from the first donee must be strictly proved, half blood is no impediment to the descent g: because, when the lineage is clearly made out, there is no need of this auxiliary proof. How far it might be desirable for the legislature to give relief, by amending the law of descents 〈40〉 in this single instance, and ordaining that the half blood might inherit,

z l. 2. t. 15. §. 14.

a Gr. Coustum. c. 25.

b l. 2. c. 30. §. 3.

c l. 6. c. 1. §. 14.

d de laud. LL. Angl. [ch.] 5.

e [Willion v Berkeley] [1] Plowd. 245. Co. Litt. 15.

f 12 Will. III. c. 2.

g Litt. §. 14, 15.





chapter 14 157


where the estate notoriously descended from its own proper ancestor, but not other-wise; or how far a private inconvenience should 〈41〉 be submitted to, rather than a long established rule should be shaken; it is not for me to determine.

The rule then, together with its illustration, amounts to this: that, in order to keep

the estate of John Stiles as nearly as possible in the line of his purchasing ancestor, it must descend to the issue of the nearest couple of ancestors that have left descendants behind them; because the descendants of one ancestor only are not so likely to be in the line of that purchasing ancestor, as those who are descended 〈42〉 from two.

But here another difficulty arises. In the second, third, fourth, and every superior

degree, every man has many couples of ancestors, increasing according to the dis tances in a geometrical progression upwardsh, the descendants of all which respective couples are (representatively) related to him in the same degree. Thus in the second degree, the issue of George and Cecilia Stiles and of Andrew and Esther Baker, the two grandsires and grandmothers of John Stiles, are each in the same degree of propinquity; in the 234 third degree, the respective issues of Walter and Christian Stiles, of Luke and Frances Kempe, of Herbert and Hannah Baker, and of James and Emma Thorpe, are (upon the extinction of the two inferior degrees) all equally entitled to call themselves the next kindred of the whole blood to John Stiles. To which therefore of these ancestors must we first resort, in order to find out descendants to be preferably called to the inheritance? In answer to this, and 〈43〉 to avoid the confusion and uncertainty that must arise between the several stocks, wherein the purchasing ancestor may be 〈44〉 sought for,

VII. The seventh and last rule or canon is, that in collateral inheritances the male

stocks shall be preferred to the female; (that is, kindred derived from the blood of the 〈45〉 male ancestors shall be admitted before those from the blood of the female)— unless where the lands have, in fact, descended from a female.

Thus the relations on the father’s side are admitted in infinitum, before those on

the mother’s side are admitted at all i; and the relations of the father’s father, before those of the father’s mother; and so on. And in this the English law is not singular, but warranted by the examples of the Hebrew and Athenian laws, as stated by Seldenk, and Petit l ; though among the Greeks, in the time of Hesiodm, when a man died without wife or children, all his kindred (without any distinction) divided his estate among them. It is likewise warranted by the example of the Roman laws; wherein the agnati, or relations by the father, were preferred to the cognati, or relations by the mother, till the edict of the emperor Justiniann abolished all distinction between them. It is also conformable to the customary law of Normandy o, which indeed in most respects agrees with 〈46〉 our law of inheritance.



h See pag. 204 [II. 137].

i Litt. §. 4.

k de succ. Ebraeor. c. 12.

l LL. Attic. l. 1. t. 6.

m Θεογον [Theogony]. 606.

n Nov. 118 [ch. 4].

o Gr. Coustum. c. 25.

158 of the rights of things

235 However, I am inclined to think, that this rule of our laws does not owe its immediate

original to any view of conformity to those which I have just now mentioned; but was established in order to effectuate and carry into execution the fifth rule 〈47〉 or canon before laid down; that every heir must be of the blood of the first purchasor. For, when such first purchasor was not easily to be discovered after a long course of descents, the lawyers not only endeavoured to investigate him by taking the next relation of the whole blood to the person last in possession; but also, considering that a preference had been given to males (by virtue of the second canon) through the whole course of lineal descent from the first purchasor to the present time, they judged it more likely that the lands should have descended to the last tenant from his male than from his female ancestors; from the father (for instance) rather than from the mother; from the father’s father, rather 〈48〉 than the father’s mother: and therefore they hunted back the inheritance (if I may be allowed the expression) through the male line; and gave it to the next relations on the side of the father, the father’s father, and so upwards; imagining with reason that this was the most probable way of continuing it in the line of the first purchasor. A conduct much more rational than the preference of the agnati by the Roman laws: which, as they gave no advantage to the males in the first instance or direct lineal succession, had no reason for preferring them in the transverse collateral one: upon which account this preference was very wisely abolished by Justinian.

That this was the true foundation of the preference of the agnati or male stocks,

in our law, will farther appear if we consider, that, whenever the lands have notoriously descended to a man from his mother’s side, this rule is totally reversed, and no relation of his by the father’s side, as such, can ever be admitted to them; because he cannot possibly be of the blood of the first purchasor. And so, e converso, if the lands

236 descended from the father’s side, no relation of the mother, as such, shall ever inherit.

So also, if they in fact descended to John Stiles from his father’s mother Cecilia Kempe; here not only the blood of Lucy Baker his mother, but also of George Stiles his father’s father, is perpetually excluded. And, in like manner, if they be known to have descended from Frances Holland the mother of Cecilia Kempe, the line not only of Lucy Baker, and of George Stiles, but also of Luke Kempe the father of Cecilia, is excluded. Whereas when the side from which they descended is forgotten, or never known, (as in the case of an estate newly purchased to be holden ut feudum antiquum) here the right of inheritance first runs up all the father’s side, with a preference to the male stocks in every instance; and, if it finds no heirs there, it then, and then only, resorts to the mother’s side; leaving no place untried, in order to find heirs that may by possibility be derived from the original purchasor. The greatest probability of finding such was among those descended from the male ancestors; but, upon failure of issue there, they may possibly be found among those derived from the females.

This I take to be the true reason of the constant preference of the agnatic succes-

sion, or issue derived from the male ancestors, through all the stages of collateral inheritance; as the ability for personal service was the reason for preferring the males at first in the direct lineal succession. We see clearly, that, if males had been perpetually admitted, in utter exclusion of females, the tracing the inheritance back through the male line of ancestors must at last have inevitably brought us up to the first purch-asor: but, as males have not been perpetually admitted, but only generally preferred; as





chapter 14 159


females have not been utterly excluded, but only generally postponed to males; the tracing the inheritance up through the male stocks will not give us absolute demonstration, but only a strong probability, of arriving at the first purchasor; which, joined with the other probability, of the wholeness or entirety of blood, will fall little short of a certainty.

Before we conclude this branch of our enquiries, it may not be amiss to exemplify 237

these rules by a short sketch of the manner in which we must search for the heir of a person, as John Stiles, who dies seised of land which he acquired, and which therefore he held as a feud of indefinite antiquity p.

In the first place succeeds the eldest son, Matthew Stiles, or his issue: (no 1.)—if his

line be extinct, then Gilbert Stiles and the other sons, respectively, in order of birth, or their issue: (no 2.)—in default of these, all the daughters together, Margaret and Charlotte Stiles, or their issue. (no 3.)—On failure of the descendants of John Stiles himself, the issue of Geoffrey and Lucy Stiles, his parents, is called in: viz. first, Francis Stiles, the eldest brother of the whole blood, or his issue: (no 4.)—then Oliver Stiles, and the other whole brothers, respectively, in order of birth, or their issue: (no 5.)— then the sisters of the whole blood, all together, Bridget and Alice Stiles, or their issue. (no 6.)—In defect of these, the issue of George and Cecilia Stiles, his father’s parents; respect being still had to their age and sex: (no 7.)—then the issue of Walter and Christian Stiles, the parents of his paternal grandfather: (no 8.)—then the issue of Richard and Anne Stiles, the parents of his paternal grandfather’s father: (no 9.)—and so on in the paternal grandfather’s paternal line, or blood of Walter Stiles, in infinitum. In defect of these, the issue of William and Jane Smith, the parents of his paternal grandfather’s mother: (no 10.)—and so on in the paternal grandfather’s maternal line, or blood of Christian Smith, in infinitum; till both the immediate bloods of George Stiles, the paternal grandfather, are spent.—Then we must resort to the issue of Luke and Frances Kempe, the parents of John Stiles’s paternal grandmother: (no 11.)—then to the issue of Thomas and Sarah Kempe, the parents of his paternal grandmother’s father: (no 12.)—and so on in the paternal grandmother’s paternal line, or blood of Luke Kempe, in infinitum.—In default of which, we must call in the issue of Charles 238 and Mary Holland, the parents of his paternal grandmother’s mother: (no 13.)—and so on in the paternal grandmother’s maternal line, or blood of Frances Holland, in infinitum; till both the immediate bloods of Cecilia Kempe, the paternal grandmother, are also spent.—Whereby the paternal blood of John Stiles entirely failing, recourse must then, and not before, be had to his maternal relations; or the blood of the Bakers, (no 14, 15, 16.) Willis’s, (no 17.) Thorpes, (no 18, 19.) and Whites; (no 20.) in the same regular successive order as in the paternal line.

The student should however be informed, that the class, no 10, would be postponed

to no 11, in consequence of the doctrine laid down, arguendo [in the course of argument], by justice Manwoode, in the case of Clere and Brooke q; from whence it is adopted by lord Baconr, and sir Matthew 〈49〉 Hale s. And yet, notwithstanding these

p See the table of descents annexed [II. 162–3].

q [Clere v Brook] [2] Plowd. 450.

r Elem. c. 1.

s H. C. L. 240, 244.

160 of the rights of things

respectable authorities, the compiler of this table hath 〈50〉 ventured to give the preference therein to no 10 before no 11; for the following reasons: 1. Because this point was not the principal question in the case of Clere and Brooke; but the law concerning it is delivered obiter only, and in the course of argument, by justice Manwoode; though afterwards said to be confirmed by the three other justices in separate, extrajudicial, conferences with the reporter. 2. Because the chief-justice, sir James Dyer, in reporting the resolution of the court in what seems to be the same caset, takes no notice of this doctrine. 3. Because it appears, from Plowden’s report, that very many gentlemen of the law were dissatisfied with this position of justice 〈51〉 Manwoode. 4. Because the position itself destroys the otherwise entire and regular symmetry of our legal course of descents, as is manifest by inspecting the 〈52〉 table; and destroys also that constant preference of the male stocks in the law of inheritance, for which an additional reason is before given, besides the mere dignity of blood. 5. Because it introduces all that

239 uncertainty and contradiction, which is pointed out by an ingenious author u; and

establishes a collateral doctrine, incompatible with the principal point resolved in the case of Clere and Brooke, viz. the preference of no 11 to no 14. And, though that learned writer proposes to rescind the principal point then resolved, in order to clear this difficulty; it is apprehended, that the difficulty may be better cleared, by rejecting the collateral doctrine, which was never yet resolved at all. 6. Because by the reason that is given for this doctrine, in Plowden, Bacon, and Hale, (viz. that in any degree, paramount the first, the law respecteth proximity, and not dignity of blood) no 18 ought also to be preferred to no 16; which is directly contrary to the eighth rule laid down by Hale himself w. 7. Because this position seems to contradict the allowed doctrine of sir Edward Coke x; who lays it down (under different names) that the blood of the Kempes (alias Sandies) shall not inherit till the blood of the Stiles’s (alias Fairfields) fail. Now the blood of the Stiles’s does certainly not fail, till both no 9 and no 10 are extinct. Wherefore no 11 (being the blood of the Kempes) ought not to inherit till then. 8. Because in the case, [YB] Mich. 12 Edw. IV. 14 y. (much relied on in that of Clere and Brooke) it is laid down as a rule, that “ cestuy, que doit inheriter al pere, doit inheriter al fits [one who is entitled to inherit from the father is entitled to inherit from the son].” And so sir Matthew Halez says, “that though the law excludes the father from inheriting, yet it substitutes and directs the descent, as it should have been, had the father inherited.” Now it is settled, by the resolution in Clere and Brooke, that no 10 should have inherited to Geoffrey Stiles, the father, before no 11; and therefore no 10 ought also to be preferred in inheriting to John Stiles, the son.

In case John Stiles was not himself the purchasor, but the estate in fact came to him by

descent from his father, mother, or any higher ancestor, there is this difference; that the

240 blood of that line of ancestors, from which it did not descend, can never inherit. Thus, if

t [Cleer v Brook] Dyer. 314.

u d Law of inheritances. 2 edit. pag. 30, 38, 61, 62, 66.

w Hist. C. L. 247.

x Co. Litt. 12. Hawk. abr. in loc.

y Fitzh. abr. tit. discent. 2. Bro. abr. t. discent. 3 [recte 38].

z Hist. C. L. 243.





chapter 14 161


it descended from Geoffrey Stiles, the father, the blood of Lucy Baker, the mother, is perpetually excluded: and so, vice versa, if it descended from Lucy Baker, it cannot descend to the blood of Geoffrey Stiles. This, in either case, cuts off one half of the table from any possible succession. And farther, if it can be shewn to have descended from George Stiles, this cuts off three fourths; for now the blood, not only of Lucy Baker, but also of Cecilia Kempe, is excluded. If, lastly, it descended from Walter Stiles, this narrows the succession still more, and cuts off seven eighths of the table; for now, neither the blood of Lucy Baker, nor of Cecilia Kempe, nor of Christian Smith, can ever succeed to the inheritance. And the like rule will hold upon descents from any other ancestors.

The student should bear in mind, that, during this whole process, John Stiles is the

person supposed to have been last actually seised of the estate. For if ever it comes to vest in any other person, as heir to John Stiles, a new order of succession must be observed upon the death of such heir; since he, by his own seisin, now becomes himself an ancestor, or stipes, and must be put in the place of John Stiles. The figures therefore denote the order, in which the several classes would succeed to John Stiles, and not to each other: and, before we search for an heir in any of the higher figures, (as no 8.) we must be first assured that all the lower classes (from no 1 to 7.) were extinct, at John Stiles’s decease.

162 of the rights of things





FIGURE 2 Table of Descents

Source: Rare Book Collection, Lillian Goldman Law Library, Yale Law School.





chapter 14 163





241 chapter the fifteenth.



of title by purchase, and

first by escheat.

Purchase, perquisitio, taken in its largest and most extensive sense, is thus defined by Littletona; the possession of lands and tenements, which a man hath by his own act or agreement; and not by descent from any of his ancestors or kindred. In this sense it is contradistinguished from acquisition by right of blood, and includes every other method of coming to an estate, but merely that by inheritance; wherein the title is vested in a person, not by his own act or agreement, but by the single operation of law b.

Purchase, indeed, in its vulgar and confined acceptation, is applied only to such

acquisitions of land, as are obtained by way of bargain and sale, for money, or some other valuable consideration. But this falls far short of the legal idea of purchase: for, if I give land freely to another, he is in the eye of the law a purchasor c; and falls within Littleton’s definition, for he comes to the estate by his own agreement, that is, he consents to the gift. A man who has his father’s estate settled upon him in tail, before 〈1〉 he is born, is also a purchasor; for he takes quite another estate than the law of descents would have given him. Nay even if the ancestor devises his estate to his heir at law by will, with other limitations or in any other shape than the course of descents would direct, such heir shall take by purchased. But if a man, seised in fee, devises his whole estate to his heir at law, so that the heir takes neither a greater nor a less estate

242 by the devise than he would have done without it, he shall be adjudged to take by

descent e, even though it be charged with incumbrancesf; for the benefit of creditors, and others, who have demands on the estate of the ancestor. If a remainder be limited to the heirs of Sempronius,1 here Sempronius himself takes nothing; but, if he dies during the continuance of the particular estate, his heirs shall take as purchasors g. But, if an estate be made to A for life, remainder to his right heirs in fee, his heirs shall take by descent: for it is an antient rule of law, that wherever the ancestor takes an estate for life, the heir cannot by the same conveyance take an estate in fee by purchase, but only by descenth. And, if A dies before entry, still his heir shall take by descent, and not by purchase; for, where the heir takes any thing that might have vested in the

a §. 12.

b Co. Litt. 18.

c Ibid.

d [Emerson v Inchbird] Lord Raym. 728.

e [Counden v Clerke] 1 Roll. Abr. 626.

f [Carter v Tash] Salk. 241. [Emerson v Inchbird] Lord Raym. 728.

g 1 Roll. Abr. 627 [pl. 5].

h [Shelley’s case] 1 Rep. 104. [King v Melling] 2 Lev. 60. [James v Richardson] Raym. 334.

1 Like Titius (see II. 6, note 4), a name frequently used in civil law texts on property law to designate a party, presumably because of its use in those roles in Justinian’s Digest. These Roman names were not, however, typically used by common lawyers, who preferred names like John Style. Blackstone’s use reflects the academic context of his original lectures.





chapter 15 165


ancestor, he takes by way of descent i. The ancestor, during his life, beareth in himself all his heirs k; and therefore, when once he is or might have been seised of the 〈3〉 land, the inheritance so limited to his heirs vests in the ancestor himself: and the word “heirs” in this case is not esteemed a word of purchase, but a word of limitation, enuring so as to encrease the estate of the ancestor from a tenancy for life to a fee-simple. And, had it been otherwise, had the heir (who is uncertain till the death of the ancestor) been allowed to take as a purchasor originally nominated in the deed, as must have been the case if the remainder had been expressly limited to Matthew or Thomas by name; then, in the times of strict feodal tenure, the lord would have been defrauded by such a limitation of the fruits of his signiory, arising from a descent to the heir.

What we call purchase, perquisitio, the feudists 〈4〉 call conquest, conquaestus, or

conquisitio l: both denoting any means of acquiring an estate out of the common course of inheritance. And this is still the proper phrase in the law of Scotlandm; as it was, among the Norman jurists, who stiled the first purchasor (that is, he 〈5〉 who 243 first brought the estate into the family which at present owns it) the conqueror or conquereurn. Which seems to be all that was meant by the appellation which was given to William the Norman, when his manner of ascending the throne of England was, in his own and his successors’ charters, and by the historians of the times, entitled conquaestus, and himself conquaestor or conquisitoro; signifying, that he was the first of his family who acquired the crown of England, and from whom therefore all future claims by descent must be derived: though now, from our disuse of the feodal sense of the word, together with the reflexion on his forcible method of acquisition, we are apt to annex the idea of victory to this name of conquest or conquisition; a title which, however just with regard to the crown, the conqueror never pretended with regard to the realm of England; nor, in fact, ever had p.

The difference in effect, between the acquisition of an estate by descent and by

purchase, consists principally in these two points: 1. That by purchase the estate acquires a new inheritable quality, and is descendible to the owner’s blood in general, and not the blood only of some particular ancestor. For, when a man takes an estate by purchase, he takes it not ut feudum paternum or maternum [as a paternal or maternal fee], which would descend only to the heirs by the father’s or the mother’s side: but he takes it ut feudum antiquum, as a feud of indefinite antiquity; whereby it becomes inheritable to his heirs general, first of the paternal, and then of the maternal lineq. 2. An estate taken by purchase will not make the heir answerable for the acts of the ancestor, as an estate by descent will. For, if the ancestor by any deed, obligation, covenant, or the like, bindeth himself and his heirs, and dieth; this deed, obligation, or covenant, shall

i [Shelley’s case] 1 Rep. 98.

k 〈2〉 Co. Litt. 23.

l Crag. l. 1. t. 10. §. 18.

m Dalrymple of feuds. 210.

n Gr. Coustum. Gloss. c. 25. pag. 40 [fol. 40v].

o Spelm. Gloss. 145.

p See Book I. ch. 3.

q 〈6〉 See pag. 236 [II. 158].

166 of the rights of things

be binding upon the heir, so far forth only as 〈7〉 he had any estate of inheritance

244 vested in him (or in some other in trust for himr) by descent from that ancestor,

sufficient to answer the charge s; whether he remains in possession, or hath aliened it before action brought t: which sufficient estate is in law called assets; from the French word, assez, enoughu. Therefore if a man covenants, for himself and his heirs, to keep my house in repair, I can then (and then only) compel his heir to perform this covenant, when he has an estate sufficient for this purpose, or assets, by descent from the covenantor: for though the covenant descends to the heir, whether he inherits any estate or no, it lies dormant, and is not compulsory, until he has assets by descentv.

This is the legal signification of the word perquisitio, or purchase; and in this sense

it includes the five following methods of acquiring a title to estates: 1. Escheat. 2. Occupancy. 3. Prescription. 4. Forfeiture. 5. Alienation. Of all these in their order.

I. Escheat, we may rememberw, was one of the fruits and consequences of feodal

tenure. The word itself is originally French or Normanx, in which language it signifies chance or accident; and with us denotes an obstruction of the course of descent, and a consequent determination of the tenure, by some unforeseen contingency: in which case the land naturally results back, by a kind of reversion, to the original grantor or lord of the fee y.

Escheat therefore being a title frequently vested in the lord by inheritance, as

being the fruit of a signiory to which he was intitled by descent, (for which reason the lands escheating shall attend the signiory, and be inheritable by such only of his heirs as are capable of inheriting the other z) it may seem in such cases to fall more properly under the former general head of acquiring title to estates, viz. by descent, (being

245 vested in him by act of law, and not by his own act or agreement) than under the

present, by purchase. But it must be remembered that in order to complete this title by escheat, it is necessary that the lord perform an act of his own, by entering on the lands and tenements so escheated, or suing out a writ of escheata: on failure of which, or by doing any act that amounts to an implied waiver of his right, as by accepting homage or rent of a stranger who usurps the possession, his title by escheat is barredb. It is therefore in some respect a title acquired by his own act, as well as by act of law. Indeed this may also be said of descents themselves, in which an entry or other seisin is required, in order to make a complete title; and therefore this 〈9〉 distribution by our legal writers seems in this respect rather inaccurate: for, as escheats must follow the nature of the signiory to which they belong, they may vest by either purchase or

r 〈8〉 Stat. 29 Car. II. c. 3.

s ms [Coleman v Winch] 1 P. W. 777.

t Stat. 3 & 4 W. & M. c. 14.

u Finch. law. 119.

v Finch. Rep. 86.

w See pag. 72 [II. 48].

x Eschet or êchet, formed from the verb eschoir or êchoir, to happen.

y 1 Feud. 86. Co. Litt. 13.

z Co. Litt. 13.

a Bro. Abr. tit. escheat. 26.

b Ibid. tit. acceptance. 25. Co. Litt. 268.





chapter 15 167


descent, according as the signiory is vested. And, though sir Edward Coke considers the lord by escheat as in some respects the assignee of the last tenant c, and therefore taking by purchase; yet, on the other hand, the lord is more frequently considered as being ultimus haeres [the final heir], and therefore taking by descent in a kind of caducary succession.2

The law of escheats is founded upon this single principle, that the blood of the

person last seised in fee-simple is, by some means or other, utterly extinct and gone: and, since none can inherit his estate but such as are of his blood and consanguinity, it follows as a regular consequence, that when such blood is extinct, the inheritance itself must fail; the land must become what the feodal writers denominate feudum apertum [an open fee]; and must result back again to the lord of the fee, by whom, or by those whose estate he hath, it was given.

Escheats are frequently divided into those propter defectum sanguinis [because of

failure of blood] and those propter delictum tenentis [because of the tenant’s offence]: the one sort, if the tenant dies without heirs; the other, if his blood be attainted d. But 246

both these species may well be comprehended under the first denomination only; for he that is attainted suffers an extinction of his blood, as well as he that dies without relations. The inheritable quality is expunged in one instance, and expires in the other; or, as the doctrine of escheats is very fully expressed in Fletae, “dominus capitalis feodi loco haeredis habetur, quoties per defectum vel delictum extinguitur sanguis tenentis.”3

Escheats therefore arising merely upon the deficiency of the blood, whereby the

descent is impeded, their doctrine will be better illustrated by considering the several cases wherein hereditary blood may be deficient, than by any other method whatsoever.

1, 2, 3. The first three cases, wherein inheritable blood is wanting, may be collected

from the rules of descent laid down and explained in the preceding chapter, and therefore will need very little illustration or comment. First, when the tenant dies without any relations on the part of any of his ancestors: secondly, when he dies without any relations on the part of those ancestors from whom his estate descended: thirdly, when he dies without any relations of the whole blood. In two of these cases the blood of the first purchasor is certainly, in the other it is probably, at an end; and therefore in all of them the law directs, that the land shall escheat to the lord of the fee: for the lord would be manifestly prejudiced, if, contrary to the inherent condition tacitly annexed to all feuds, any person should be suffered to succeed 〈10〉 to lands, who is not of the blood of the first feudatory, to whom for his personal merit the estate is supposed to have been granted.

4. A monster, which hath not the shape of mankind, but in any part evidently

bears the resemblance of the brute creation, hath no inheritable blood, and cannot be heir to any land, albeit it be brought forth in marriage: but, although it hath deformity 247

c 1 Inst. 215.

d Co. Litt. 13. 92.

e l. 6. c. 1. [§ 18]

2 i.e. succession through escheat, forfeiture, or confiscation.

3 ‘The chief lord of the fee is in place of the heir, whenever the blood of the tenant is extinguished for lack (of issue) or an offence.’

168 of the rights of things

in any part of its body, yet if it hath human shape, it may be heir f . This is a very antient rule in the law of England g; and its reason is too obvious, and too shocking, to bear a minute discussion. The Roman law agrees with our own in excluding such births from successions h: yet accounts them, however, children in some respects, where the parents, or at least the father, could reap any advantage thereby i; (as the jus trium liberorum [the right of three children],4 and the like) esteeming them the misfortune, rather than the fault, of that parent. But our law will not admit a birth of this kind to be such an issue, as shall intitle the husband to be tenant by the curtesy k; because it is not capable of inheriting. And therefore, if there appears no other heir than such a prodigious birth, the land shall escheat to the lord.

5. Bastards are incapable of being heirs. Bastards, by our law, are such children as

are not born either in lawful wedlock, or within a competent time after its determinationl. Such are held to be nullius filii, the sons of nobody; for the maxim of law is, qui ex damnato coitu nascuntur, inter liberos non computanturm [the offspring of an illicit relationship are not treated as children]. Being thus the sons of nobody, they have no blood in them, at least no inheritable blood; consequently, none of the blood of the first purchasor: and therefore, if there be no other claimant than such illegitimate children, the land shall escheat to the lordn. The civil law differs from ours in this point, and allows a bastard to succeed to an inheritance, if after its birth the mother was married to the father o: and also, if the father had no lawful wife or child, then, even if the concubine was never married to the father, yet she and her bastard son

248 were admitted each to one twelfth of the inheritance p, and a bastard was likewise

capable of succeeding to the whole of his mother’s estate, although she was never married; the mother being sufficiently certain, though the father is not q. But our law, in favour of marriage, is much less indulgent to bastards.

There is indeed one instance, in which our law has shewn them some little regard;

and that is usually termed the case of bastard eignè and mulier puisnè. This happens when a man has a bastard son, and afterwards marries the mother, and by her has a

f Co. Litt. 7, 8.

g Qui contra formam humani generis converso more procreantur, ut si mulier monstrosum vel prodigiosum enixa sit, inter liberos non computentur. Partus tamen, cui natura aliquantulum addiderit vel diminuerit, ut si sex vel tantum quatuor digitos habuerit, bene debet inter liberos connumerari: et, si membra sint inutilia aut tortuosa, non tamen est partus monstrosus [Those born with an unnatural form are not considered children, such as when a woman produces a monstrous or unnatural creature. But the offspring is considered a child if nature has only added a little, or withheld something natural; as if it has six, or only four fingers; and even if the limbs are useless or crooked, it is not considered a monstrous birth]. Bracton. l. 1. c. 6. & l. 5. tr. 5. c. 30. [¶ 10]. [Blackstone combines passages from two sections of Bracton, altering the language in part but preserving its overall sense; cf. Justinian’s Digest 1. 5. 14.]

h Ff. 1. 5. 14.

i Ff. 50. 16. 135. Paul. 4 sent. 9. §. 63. [Blackstone refers to Julius Paulus’s sententiae, bk. 4, sent. 9 (Ad senatus consultum Tertullianum), discussing parental rights and monstrous births.]

k Co. Litt. 29.

l See Book I. ch. 16.

m Co. Litt. 8.

n Finch. law. 117.

o Nov. 89. c. 8.

p Ibid. c. 12.

q Cod. 6. 57. 5.

4 Roman law conferred various benefits on citizens who had at least three children.





chapter 15 169


legitimate son, who in the language of the law is called a mulier, or as Glanvilr expresses it in his Latin, filius mulieratus; the woman before marriage being concubina, and afterwards mulier. Now here the eldest son is bastard, or bastard eignè; and the younger son is legitimate, or mulier puisnè. If then the father dies, and the bastard eignè enters upon his land, and enjoys it to his death, and dies seised thereof, whereby the inheritance descends to his issue; in this case the mulier puisnè, and all other heirs, (though minors, feme-coverts, or under any incapacity whatsoever) are totally barred of their right s. And this, 1. As a punishment on the mulier for his negligence, in not entering during the bastard’s life, and evicting him. 2. Because the law will not suffer a man to be bastardized after his death, who entered as heir and died seised, and so passed for legitimate in his lifetime. 3. Because the canon law (following the civil) did allow such bastard eignè to be legitimate, on the subsequent marriage of his mother: and therefore the laws of England (though they would not admit either the civil or canon law to rule the inheritances of this kingdom, yet) paid such a regard to a person thus peculiarly circumstanced, that, after the land had descended to his issue, they would not unravel the matter again, and suffer his estate to be shaken. But this indulgence was shewn to no other kind of bastard; for, if the mother was never married to the father, such bastard could have no colourable title at all t.

As bastards cannot be heirs themselves, so neither can they have any heirs but 249

those of their own bodies. For, as all collateral kindred consists in being derived from the same common ancestor, and as a bastard has no legal ancestors, he can have no collateral kindred; and, consequently, can have no legal heirs, but such as claim by a lineal descent from himself. And therefore if a bastard purchases land, and dies seised thereof without issue, and intestate, the land shall escheat to the lord of the feeu.

6. Aliens also are incapable of taking by descent, or inheritingw: for they are not

allowed to have any inheritable blood in them; rather indeed upon a principle of national or civil policy, than upon reasons strictly feodal. Though, if lands had been suffered to fall into their hands who owe no allegiance to the crown of England, the design of introducing our feuds, the defence of the kingdom, would have been defeated. Wherefore if a man leaves no other relations but aliens, his land shall escheat to the lord.

As aliens cannot inherit, so far they are on a level with bastards; but, as they are

also disabled to hold by purchase x, they are under still greater disabilities. And, as they can neither hold by purchase, nor by inheritance, it is almost superfluous to say that they can have no heirs, since they can have nothing for an heir to inherit: but so it is expressly holdeny, because they have not in them any inheritable blood.

And farther, if an alien be made a denizen by the king’s letters patent, and then

purchases lands, (which the law allows such a one to do) his son, born before his denization, shall not (by the common law) inherit those lands; but a son born afterwards

r l. 7. c. 1.

s Litt. §. 399. Co. Litt. 244.

t Litt. §. 400.

u Bract. l. 2. c. 7. Co. Litt. 244.

w Co. Litt. 8.

x Ibid. 2.

y Ibid. [Collingwood v Pace] 1 Lev. 59.

170 of the rights of things

may, even though his elder brother be living; for the father, before denization, had no

250 inheritable blood to communicate to his eldest son; but by denization it acquires an

hereditary quality, which will be transmitted to his subsequent posterity. Yet, if he had been naturalized by act of parliament, such eldest son might then have inherited; for that cancels all defects, and is allowed to have a retrospective energy, which simple denization has not z.

Sir Edward Cokea also holds, that if an alien cometh into England, and there hath

issue two sons, who are thereby natural born subjects; and one of them purchases land, and dies; yet neither of these brethren can be heir to the other. For the commune vinculum, or common stock of their consanguinity, is the father; and, as he had no inheritable blood in him, he could communicate none to his sons; and, when the sons can by no possibility be heirs to the father, the one of them shall not be heir to the other. And this opinion of his seems founded upon solid principles of the antient law; not only from the rule before citedb, that cestuy, que doit inheriter al pere, doit inheriter al fits; but also because we have seen that the only feodal foundation upon which newly purchased land can possibly descend to a brother, is the supposition and fiction of law, that it descended from some one of his ancestors: but in this case as the immediate ancestor was an alien, from whom it could by no possibility descend, this should destroy the supposition, and impede the descent, and the land should be inherited ut feudum stricte novum [as a strictly new fee]; that is, by none but the lineal descendants of the purchasing brother; and, on failure of them, should escheat to the lord of the fee. But this opinion hath been since overruledc: and it is now held for law, that the sons of an alien, born here, may inherit to 〈12〉 each other. And reasonably enough upon the whole: for, as (in common purchases) the whole of the supposed descent from indefinite ancestors is but fictitious, the law may as well suppose the requisite ancestor as suppose the requisite descent.

251 It is also enacted, by the statute 11 & 12 W. III. c. 6. that all persons, being natural-

born subjects of the king, may inherit and make their titles by descent from any of their ancestors lineal or collateral; although their father, or mother, or other ancestor, by, from, through, or under whom they derive their pedigrees, were born out of the king’s allegiance. But inconveniences were afterwards apprehended, in case persons should thereby gain a future capacity to inherit, who did not exist at the death of the person last seised. As, if Francis the elder brother of John Stiles be an alien, and Oliver the younger be a natural-born subject, upon John’s death without issue his lands will descend to Oliver the younger brother: now, if afterwards 〈13〉 Francis hath a child, it was feared that, under the statute of king William, this newborn child might defeat the estate of his uncle Oliver. Wherefore it is provided, by the statute 25 Geo. II. c. 39. that no right of inheritance shall accrue by virtue of the former statute to any persons whatsoever, unless they are in being and capable to take as heirs at the death of the person last seised:—with an exception however to the case, where lands

z Co. Litt. 129.

a 1 Inst. 8.

b See pag. 223 and 239 [II. 150, 160].

c 〈11〉 [Collingwood v Pace] 1 Ventr. 473. [Collingwood v Pace] 1 Lev. 59. [Collingwood v Pays] 1 Sid. 193.





chapter 15 171


shall descend to the daughter of an alien; 〈14〉 which daughter shall resign such inheritance to her after-born brother, or divide it with her after-born sisters, according to the usual ruled of descents by the common law.

7. By attainder also, for treason or other felony, the blood of the person attainted

is so corrupted, as to be rendered no longer inheritable.

Great care must be taken to distinguish between forfeiture of lands to the king,

and this species of escheat to the lord; which, by reason of their similitude in some circumstances, and because the crown is very frequently the immediate lord of the fee and therefore entitled to both, have been often confounded together. Forfeiture of lands, and of whatever else the offender possessed, was the doctrine of the old Saxon law e, as a part of punishment for the offence; and does not at all relate to the feodal 252

system, nor is the consequence of any signiory or lordship paramount f: but, being a prerogative vested in the crown, was neither superseded nor diminished by the introduction of the Norman tenures; a fruit and consequence of which escheat must undoubtedly be reckoned. Escheat therefore operates in subordination to this more antient and superior law of forfeiture.

The doctrine of escheat upon attainder, taken singly, is this: that the blood of the

tenant, by the commission of any felony, (under which denomination all treasons were formerly comprizedg) is corrupted and stained, and the original donation of the feud is thereby determined, it being always granted to the vasal on the implied condition of dum bene se gesserit [during good behaviour]. Upon the thorough demonstration of which guilt, by legal attainder, the feodal covenant and mutual bond of fealty are held to be broken, the estate instantly falls back from the offender to the lord of the fee, and the inheritable quality of his blood is extinguished and blotted out for ever. In this situation the law of feodal escheat was brought into England at the conquest; and in general superadded to the antient law of forfeiture. In consequence of which corruption and extinction of hereditary blood, the land of all felons would immediately revest in the lord, but that the superior law of forfeiture intervenes, and intercepts it in its passage; in case of treason, for ever; in case of other felony, for only a year and a day, after which time it goes to the lord in a regular course of escheat h, as it would have done to the heir of the felon in case the feodal tenures had never been introduced. And that this is the true operation and genuine history of escheats will most evidently appear from this incident to gavelkind lands, (which 〈15〉 seem to be the old Saxon tenure) that they are in no case subject to escheat for felony, though they are liable to forfeiture for treasoni.

As a consequence of this doctrine of escheat, all lands of inheritance immediately 253

revesting in the lord, the wife of the felon was liable to lose her dower, till the statute 1 Edw. VI. c. 12. enacted, that albeit any person be attainted of misprision of treason, murder, or felony, yet his wife shall enjoy her dower. But she has not this

d See pag. 208 and 214 [II. 140, 144].

e LL. Aelfred. c. 4. LL. Canut. c. 54 [Wilkins, 35, 143].

f 2 Inst. 64. [Sir Salathiel Lovell’s case] Salk. 85.

g 3 Inst. 15. Stat. 25 Edw. III. c. 2. §. 12.

h 2 Inst. 36.

i Somner. 53. Wright. Ten. 118.

172 of the rights of things

indulgence where the antient law of forfeiture operates, for it is expressly provided by the statute 5 & 6 Edw. VI. c. 11. that the wife of one attaint of high treason shall not be endowed at all.

Hitherto we have only spoken of estates vested in the offender, at the time of his

offence, or attainder. And here the law of forfeiture stops; but the law of escheat pursues the matter still farther. For, the blood of the tenant being utterly corrupted and extinguished, it follows, not only that 〈16〉 all he now has should escheat from him, but also that he 〈17〉 should be incapable of inheriting any thing for the future. This may farther illustrate the distinction between forfeiture and escheat. If therefore a father be seised in fee, and the son commits treason and is attainted, and then the father dies: here the land shall escheat to the lord; because the son, by the corruption of his blood, is incapable to be heir, and there can be no other heir during his life: but nothing shall be forfeited to the king, for the son never had any interest in the lands to forfeit k. In this case the escheat operates, and not the forfeiture; but in the following instance the forfeiture works, and not the escheat. As where a new felony is created by act of parliament, and it is provided (as is frequently the case) that it shall not extend to corruption of blood: here the lands of the felon shall not escheat to the lord, but yet the profits of them shall be forfeited to the 〈18〉 king so long as the offender lives l.

There is yet a farther consequence of the corruption and extinction of hereditary

254 blood, which is this: that the person attainted shall not only be incapable himself of

inheriting, or transmitting his own property by heirship, but shall also obstruct the descent of lands or tenements to his posterity, in all cases where they are obliged to derive their title through him from any remoter ancestor. The channel, which conveyed the hereditary blood from his ancestors to him, is not only exhausted for the present, but totally dammed up and rendered impervious for the future. This is a refinement upon the antient law of feuds, which allowed that the grandson might be heir to his grandfather, though the son in the intermediate generation was guilty of felony m. But, by the law of England, a man’s blood is so universally corrupted by attainder, that his sons can neither inherit to him nor to any other ancestor n, at least on the part of their attainted father.

This corruption of blood cannot be absolutely removed but by authority of parliament.

The king may excuse the public punishment of an offender; but cannot abolish the private right, which has accrued or may accrue to individuals as a consequence of the criminal’s attainder. He may remit a forfeiture, in which the interest of the crown is alone concerned: but he cannot wipe away the corruption of blood; for therein a third person hath an interest, the lord who claims by escheat. If therefore a man hath a son, and is attainted, and afterwards pardoned by the king; this son can never inherit to his father, or father’s ancestors; because his paternal blood, being once thoroughly corrupted by his father’s attainder, must continue so: but if the son had been born after the pardon, he might inherit; because by the pardon the father is made a new man, and may convey new inheritable blood to his after-born childreno.

k Co. Litt. 13.

l 3 Inst. 47.

m Van Leeuwen in 2 Feud. 31.

n Co. Litt. 391.

o Ibid. 392.





chapter 15 173


Herein there is however a difference between aliens and persons attainted. Of

aliens, who could never by any possibility be heirs, the law takes no notice: and therefore we have seen, that an alien elder brother shall not impede the descent to a 255

natural-born younger brother. But in attainders it is otherwise: for if a man hath issue a son, and is attainted, and afterwards pardoned, and then hath issue a second son, and dies; here the corruption of blood is not removed from the eldest, and therefore he cannot be heir: neither can the youngest be heir, for he hath an elder brother living, of whom the law takes notice, as he once had a possibility of being heir; and therefore the younger brother shall not inherit, but the land shall escheat to the lord: though, had the elder died without issue in the life of the father, the younger son born after the pardon might well have inherited, for he hath no corruption of bloodp. So if a man hath issue two sons, and the elder in the lifetime of the father hath issue, and then is attainted and executed, and afterwards the father dies, the lands of the father shall not descend to the younger son: for the issue of the elder, which had once a possibility to inherit, shall impede the descent to the younger, and the land shall escheat to the lord q. Sir Edward Coke in this case allows r, that if the ancestor be attainted, his sons born before the attainder may be heirs to each other; and distinguishes it from the case of the sons of an alien, because in this case the blood was inheritable when imparted to them from the father: but he makes a doubt (upon 〈19〉 the same principles, which are now overruleds) whether sons, born after the attainder, can inherit to each other; for they never had any inheritable blood in them.

Upon the whole it appears, that a person attainted is neither allowed to retain his

former estate, nor to inherit any future one, nor to transmit any inheritance to his issue, either immediately from himself, or mediately through himself from any remoter ancestor; for his inheritable blood, which is necessary either to hold, to take, or to transmit any feodal property, is blotted out, corrupted, and extinguished for ever: the consequence of which is, that estates, thus impeded in their descent, result back and escheat to the lord.

This corruption of blood, thus arising from feodal principles, but perhaps 256

extended farther than even those principles will warrant, has been long looked upon as a peculiar hardship: because, the oppressive parts of the feodal tenures being now in general abolished, it seems unreasonable to reserve one of their most inequitable consequences; namely, that the children should not only be reduced to present poverty, (which, however severe, is sufficiently justified upon reasons of public policy) but also be laid under future difficulties of inheritance, on account of the guilt of their ancestors.5 And therefore in most (if not all) of the new felonies, created by parliament since the reign of Henry the eighth, it is declared that they shall not extend to any corruption of blood: and by the statute 7 Ann. c. 21. (the operation of which is

p Co. Litt. 8.

q [Anon. (1541)] Dyer. 48.

r Co. Litt. 8.

s 1 Hal. P. C. 357.

5 Discussing this issue in a letter of 25 January 1766 to Charles Yorke, Blackstone wrote that he was ‘not thoroughly convinced of the Reasonableness & Propriety of Corruption of Blood in Treason & Felony, so far as it creates any future Impediments of Descent to the Offspring of the Person attainted’ (Letters, ed. Prest, 111–12). 174 of the rights of things

postponed by the statute 17 Geo. II. c. 39.) it is enacted, that, after the death of 〈20〉 the pretender, and his sons, no attainder for treason shall extend to the disinheriting any heir, nor the prejudice of any person, other than the offender himself: which provisions have indeed carried the remedy farther, than was required by the hardship above complained of; which is only the future obstruction of descents, where the pedigree happens to be deduced through the blood of an attainted ancestor.

Before I conclude this head, of escheat, I must mention one singular instance in

which lands held in fee-simple are not liable to escheat to the lord, even when their owner is no more, and hath left no heirs to inherit them. And this is the case of a corporation: for if that comes by any accident to be dissolved, the donor or his heirs shall have the land again in reversion, and not the lord by escheat: which is perhaps the only instance where a reversion can be expectant on a grant in fee-simple absolute. But the law, we are told t, doth tacitly annex a condition to every such gift or grant, that if the corporation be dissolved, the donor or grantor shall re-enter; for the cause

257 of the gift or grant faileth. This is indeed founded upon the self-same principle as the

law of escheat; the heirs of the donor being only substituted instead of the chief lord of the fee: which was formerly very frequently the case in subinfeudations, or alienations of lands by a vasal to be holden as of himself; till that practice was restrained by the statute of quia emptores, 18 Edw. I. st. 1. to which this very singular instance still in some degree remains an exception.

There is one more incapacity of taking by descent, which, not being productive of

any escheat, is not 〈21〉 properly reducible to this head, and yet must not be passed over in silence. It is enacted by the statute 11 & 12 Will. III. c. 4. that every papist who shall not abjure the errors of his religion by taking the oaths to the government, and making the declaration against transubstantiation, within six months after he has attained the age of eighteen years, shall be incapable of inheriting, or taking, by descent as well as purchase, any real estates whatsoever; and his next of kin, being a protestant, shall hold them to his own use till such time as he complies with the terms imposed by the act. This incapacity is merely personal; it affects himself only, and does not destroy the inheritable quality of his blood, so as to impede the descent to others of his kindred. In like manner as, even in the times of popery, one who entered into religion and became a monk professed was incapable of inheriting lands, both in our ownu and the feodal law; eo quod desiit esse miles seculi qui factus est miles Christi; nec beneficium pertinet ad eum qui non debet gerere officiumw.6 But yet he was accounted only civiliter mortuus [dead in law]; he did not impede the descent to others, but the next heir was entitled to his or his ancestor’s estate.

These are the several deficiencies of hereditary blood, recognized by the law of

England; which, so often as they happen, occasion lands to escheat to the original proprietary or lord.

t Co. Litt. 13.

u Co. Litt. 132.

w 2 Feud. 21.

6 ‘That is because he who becomes a soldier of Christ has ceased to be a soldier of the world, nor is he entitled to any reward who owes no service.’ Blackstone quotes the same passage at I. 90.





chapter the sixteenth. 258





of title by occupancy.

Occupancy is the taking possession of those things, which before belonged to nobody. This, as we have seena, is the true ground and foundation of all property, or of holding those things in severalty, which by the law of nature, unqualified by that of society, were common to all mankind. But, when once it was agreed that every thing capable of ownership should have an owner, natural reason suggested, that he who could first declare his intention of appropriating any thing to his own use, and, in consequence of such intention, actually took it into possession, should thereby gain the absolute property of it; according to that rule of the law of nations, recognized by the laws of Romeb, quod nullius est, id ratione naturali occupanti conceditur [what belongs to no one, becomes by natural reason the property of the occupier].

This right of occupancy, so far as it concerns real property, (for of personal chattels

I am not in this place to speak) hath been confined by the laws of England within a very narrow compass; and was extended only to a single instance: namely, where a man was tenant pur auter vie, or had an estate granted to himself only (without mentioning his heirs) for the life of another man, and died during the life of cestuy que vie, or him by whose life it was holden: in this case he, that could first enter on the land, might lawfully retain the possession so long as cestuy que vie lived, by right of occupancy c.

This seems to have been recurring to first principles, and calling in the law of 259

nature to ascertain the property of the land, when left without a legal owner. For it did not revert to the 〈1〉 grantor; who had parted with all his interest, so long as cestuy que vie lived: it did not escheat to the lord of the fee; for all escheats must be of the absolute entire fee, and not of any particular estate carved out of it; much less of so minute a remnant as this: it did not belong to the grantee; for he was dead: it did not descend to his heirs; for there were no words of inheritance in the grant: nor could it vest in his executors; for no executors could succeed to a freehold. Belonging therefore to nobody, like the haereditas jacens [unoccupied inheritance] of the Romans, the law left it open to be seised and appropriated by the first person that could enter upon it, during the life of cestuy que vie, under the name of an occupant. But there was no right of occupancy allowed, where the king had the reversion of the lands; for the reversioner hath an equal right with any other man to enter upon the vacant possession, and where the king’s title and a subject’s concur, the king’s shall be always preferred: against the king therefore there could be no prior occupant, because nullum tempus occurrit regid [no time runs against the king]. And, even in

a See pag. 3 & 8 [II. 1–2, 5].

b Ff. 41. 1. 3.

c Co. Litt. 41.

d Ibid.

176 of the rights of things

the case of a subject, had the estate pur auter vie been granted to a man and his heirs during the life of cestuy que vie, there the heir might, and still may, enter and hold possession, and is called in law a special occupant; as having a special exclusive right, by the terms of the original grant, to enter upon and occupy this haereditas jacens, during the residue of the estate granted: though some have thought him so called with no very great propriety e; and that such estate is rather a descendible freehold. But the title of common occupancy is now reduced almost to nothing by two statutes; the one, 29 Car. II. c. 3. which 〈2〉 enacts, that where there is no special occupant, in whom the estate may vest, the tenant pur auter vie may devise it by will, or it shall go to the 〈3〉 executors and be assets in their hands for payment of debts: the other that

260 of 14 Geo. II. c. 20. which enacts, 〈4〉 that it shall vest not only in the executors, but,

in case the tenant dies intestate, in the administrators also; and go in a course of distribution like a chattel interest.

By these two statutes the title of common occupancy is utterly extinct and abolished:

though that of special occupancy, by the heir at law, continues to this day; such heir being held to succeed to the ancestor’s estate, not by descent, for then he must take an estate of inheritance, but as an occupant, specially marked out and appointed by the original 〈5〉 grant. The doctrine of common occupancy may however be usefully remembered on the following account, among others: that, as by the common law no occupancy could be of incorporeal hereditaments, as of rents, tithes, advowsons, commons, or the likef, (because, with respect to them, there could be no actual entry made, or corporal seisin had; and therefore by the death of the grantee pur auter vie a grant of such hereditaments was entirely 〈7〉 determinedg) so now, I apprehend, notwithstanding these statutes, such grant would be determined likewise; and the hereditaments would not be devisable, nor vest in the executors, nor go in a course of distribution. 〈8〉 For the statutes must not be construed so as to create any new estate, or to keep that alive which by the common law was determined, and thereby to defer the grantor’s reversion; but merely to dispose of an interest in being, to which by law there was no owner, and which therefore was left open to the first occupant. When there is a residue left, the statutes give it to the 〈9〉 executors, &c, instead of the first occupant; but they will not create a residue, on purpose to give it the executors. They only meant to provide an appointed instead of a casual, a certain instead of an uncertain, owner, of lands which before were nobody’s; and thereby to supply this casus omissus [omitted case], and render the disposition of law in all respects entirely uniform: this being the only instance wherein a title to a real estate could ever be acquired by occupancy.

261 This, I say, was the only instance; for I think there can be no other case devised,

wherein there is not some owner of the land appointed by the law. In the case of a sole corporation, as a parson of a church, when he dies or resigns, though there is no actual owner of the land till a successor be appointed, yet there is a legal, potential

e [Holden v Smallbrooke] Vaugh. 201.

f 〈6〉 Co. Litt. 41.

g [Holden v Smallbrooke] Vaugh. 201.





chapter 16 177


ownership, subsisting in contemplation of law; and when the successor is appointed, his appointment shall have a retrospect and relation backwards, so as to entitle him to all the profits from the instant that the vacancy commenced. And, in all other instances, when the tenant dies intestate, and no other owner of the lands is to be found in the common course of descents, there the law vests an ownership in the king, or in the subordinate lord of the fee, by escheat.

So also in some cases, where the laws of other nations give a right by occupancy,

as in lands newly created, by the rising of an island 〈10〉 in a river, or by the alluvion or dereliction of the sea; in these instances the law of England assigns them an immediate owner. For Bracton tells ush, that if an island arise in the middle of a river, it belongs in common to those who have lands on each side thereof; but if it be nearer to one bank than the other, it belongs only to him who is proprietor of the nearest shore: which is agreeable to, and probably copied from, the civil law i. Yet this seems only to be reasonable, where the soil of the river is equally divided between the owners of the opposite shores: for if the whole soil is the freehold of any one man, 〈11〉 as it must be whenever a several fishery is claimedk, there it seems just (and so is the usual practice) that the eyotts or little islands, arising in any part of the river, shall be the property of him who owneth the piscary and the soil. However, in case a new island rise in the sea, though the civil law gives it to the first occupant l, yet ours gives it to the king m. And as to lands gained from the sea, either by alluvion, by the washing 262

up of sand and earth, so as in time to make terra firma [firm land]; or by dereliction, as when the sea shrinks back below the usual watermark; in these cases the law is held to be, that if this gain be by little and little, by small and imperceptible degrees, it shall go to the owner of the land 〈13〉 adjoining. For de minimis non curat lex [the law is not concerned with trifles]: and, besides, these owners being often losers by the breaking in of the sea, or at charges to keep it out, this possible gain is therefore a reciprocal consideration for such possible charge or loss. But, if the alluvion or dereliction be sudden and considerable, in this case it belongs to the king: for, as the king is lord of the sea, and so owner of the soil while it is covered with water, it is but reasonable he should have the soil, when the water has left it dry n. So that the quantity of ground gained, and the time during which it is gaining, are what make it either the king’s, or the subject’s property. In the same manner if a river, running between two lordships, by degrees gains upon the one, and thereby leaves the other dry; the owner who loses his ground thus imperceptibly has no remedy: but if the course of the river be changed by a sudden and violent flood, or other hasty means, and thereby a man loses his 〈14〉 ground, he shall have what the river has left in any other place, as a recompence for this sudden losso. And this law of alluvions and derelictions, with

h l. 2. c. 2.

i Inst. 2. 1. 22.

k 〈12〉 [Smith v Kemp] [2] Salk. 637.

l Inst. 2. 1. 18.

m Bract. l. 2. c. 2. Callis of sewers. 22.

n Callis. 24. 28.

o Callis. 28.

178 of the rights of things

regard to rivers, is nearly the same in the imperial law p; from whence indeed those our determinations seem to have been drawn and adopted: but we ourselves, as islanders, have applied them to marine increases; and have given our sovereign the prerogative he enjoys, as well upon the particular reasons before-mentioned, as upon this other general ground of prerogative, which was formerly remarkedq, that whatever hath no other owner is vested by law in the king.

p Inst. 2. 1. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24.

q See Vol. I. pag. 289 [I. 192–3].





chapter the seventeenth. 263




of title by prescription.

A Third method of acquiring real property by purchase is that by prescription; as when a man can shew no other title to what he claims, than that he, and those under whom he claims, have immemorially used to enjoy it. Concerning customs, or imme­ morial usages, in general, with the several requisites and rules to be observed, in order to prove their existence and validity, we enquired at large in the preceding part of these commentariesa. At present therefore I shall only, first, distinguish between custom, strictly taken, and prescription; and then shew, what sort of things may be prescribed for.

And, first, the distinction between custom and prescription is this; that custom is

properly a local usage, and not annexed to any person; such as, a custom in the manor of Dale that lands shall descend to the youngest son: prescription is merely a personal usage; as, that Sempronius, and his ancestors, or those whose estate he hath, have used time out of mind to have such an advantage or privilegeb. As for example: if there be a usage in the parish of Dale, that all the inhabitants of that parish may dance on a certain close, at all times, for their recreation; (which is heldc to be a lawful usage) this is strictly a custom, for it is applied to the place in general, and not to any particular persons: but if the tenant, who is seised of the manor of Dale in fee, 264 alleges that he and his ancestors, or all those whose estate he hath in the said manor, have used time out of mind to have common of pasture in such a close, this is properly called a prescription; for this is a usage annexed to the person of the owner of this estate. All prescription must be either in a man and his ancestors, or in a man and those whose estate he hathd; which last is called prescribing in a que estate. And formerly a man might, by the common law, have prescribed for a right which had been enjoyed by his ancestors or predecessors at any distance of time, though his or their enjoyment of it had been suspendede for an indefinite series of years. But by the statute of limitations, 32 Hen. VIII. c. 2. it is enacted, that no person shall make any prescription by the seisin or possession of his ancestor or predecessor, unless such seisin or possession hath been within threescore years next before such prescription made f.

Secondly, as to the several species of things which may, or may not, be prescribed

for: we may in the first place, observe, that nothing but incorporeal hereditaments can be claimed by prescription; as a right of way, a common, &c; but that no prescription can give a title to lands, and other corporeal substances, of which more certain evidence

a See Vol. I. pag. 75, &c. [I. 56–9].

b Co. Litt. 113. [The reference seems to be to Co. Litt. 114b.]

c [Abbot v Weekly] 1 Lev. 176.

d [Foiston v Crachroode] 4 Rep. 32.

e Co. Litt. 113.

f This title, of prescription, was well known in the Roman law by the name of usucapio; (Ff. 41. 3. 3.) so called, because a man, that gains a title by prescription, may be said usu rem capere [to take the thing by use]. 180 of the rights of things

may be hadg. 〈1〉 For no man can be said to prescribe, that he and his ancestors have immemorially used to hold the castle of Arundel: for this is clearly another sort of title; a title by corporal seisin and inheritance, which is more permanent, and therefore more capable of proof, than that of prescription. But, as to a right of way, a common, or the like, a man may be allowed to prescribe; for of these there is no corporal seisin, the enjoyment will be frequently by intervals, and therefore the right to enjoy them

265 can depend on nothing else but immemorial usage. 2. A prescription must always be

laid in him that is tenant of the fee. A tenant for life, for years, at will, or a copyholder, cannot prescribe, by reason of the imbecillity1 of their estatesh. For, as prescription is usage beyond time of memory, it is absurd that they should pretend to 〈2〉 pre­ scribe, whose estates commenced within the remembrance of man. And therefore the copyholder must prescribe under cover of his lord’s estate, and the tenant for life under cover of the tenant in fee­simple. As, if tenant for life of a manor would prescribe for a right of common as appurtenant to the same, he must prescribe under cover of the tenant in fee­simple; and must plead, that John Stiles and his ancestors had immemorially used to have this right of common, appurtenant to the said manor, and that John Stiles demised the said manor, with its appurtenances, to him the said tenant for life. 3. A prescription cannot be for a thing which cannot be raised by grant. For the law allows prescription only in supply of the loss of a grant, and therefore every prescription presupposes a grant to have existed. 〈3〉 Thus a lord of a manor cannot prescribe to raise a tax or toll upon strangers; for, as such claim could never have been good by any grant, it shall not be good by prescriptioni. 4. A fourth rule is, that what is to arise by matter of record cannot be prescribed for, but must be claimed by grant, entered on record: such as, for instance, the royal franchises of deodands, felons’ goods, and the like. These, not being forfeited till the matter on which they arise is found by the inquisition of a jury, and so made a matter of record, the forfeiture itself cannot be claimed by any inferior title. But the franchises of treasure­trove, waifs, estrays, and the like, may be claimed by prescription; for they arise from private contingencies, and not from any matter of recordk. 5. Among things incorporeal, which may be claimed by prescription, a distinction must be made with regard to the manner of prescribing; that is, whether a man shall prescribe in a que estate, or in himself and his ancestors. For, if a man prescribes in a que estate,

266 (that is, in himself and those whose estate he holds) nothing is claimable by this

prescription, but such things as are incident, appendant, or appurtenant to lands; for it would be absurd to claim any thing as the consequence, or appendix, of an estate, with which the thing claimed has no connexion: but, if he prescribes in himself and his ancestors, he may prescribe for any thing whatsoever that lies in grant; not only things that are appurtenant, but also such as may be in gross l. Therefore a man may

g Dr & St. dial. 1. c. 8. Finch. 132.

h [Foiston v Crachroode] 4 Rep. 31, 32.

i [Potter v North] 1 Ventr. 387.

k Co. Litt. 114.

l Litt. §. 183. Finch. L. 104.

1 i.e. feebleness, weakness.





chapter 17 181


prescribe, that he, and those whose estate he hath in the manor of Dale, have used to hold the advowson of Dale, as appendant to that manor: but, if the advowson be a distinct inheritance, and not appendant, then he can only prescribe in his ancestors. So also a man may prescribe in a que estate for a common appurtenant to a manor; but, if he would prescribe for a common in gross, he must prescribe in himself and his ancestors. 6. Lastly, we may observe, that estates gained by prescription are not, of course, descendible to the heirs general, like other purchased estates, but are an exception to the rule. For, properly speaking, the prescription is rather to be considered as an evidence of a former acquisition, than as an acquisition de novo [anew]: and therefore, if a man prescribes for a right of way in himself and his ancestors, it will descend only to the blood of that line of ancestors in whom he so prescribes; the prescription in this case being indeed a species of descent. But, if he prescribes for it in a que estate, it will follow the nature of that estate in which the prescription is laid, and be inheritable in the same manner, whether that were acquired by descent or purchase: for every accessory followeth the nature of its principal.



267 chapter the eighteenth.



of title by forfeiture.

Forfeiture is a punishment annexed by law to some illegal act, or negligence, in the owner of lands, tenements, or hereditaments; whereby he loses all his interest therein, and they go to the party injured, as a recompense for the wrong which either he alone, or the public together with himself, hath sustained.

Lands, tenements, and hereditaments, may be forfeited in various degrees and by

various means: 1. By crimes and misdemesnors. 2. By alienation contrary to law. 3. By non-presentation to a benefice, when the forfeiture is denominated a lapse. 4. By simony. 5. By non-performance of conditions. 6. By waste. 7. By breach of copyhold customs. 8. By bankruptcy.

I. The foundation and justice of forfeitures for crimes and misdemesnors, and the

several degrees of those forfeitures, proportioned to the several offences, have been hinted at in the preceding volumea; but will be more properly considered, and more at large, in the fourth book of these commentaries. At present I shall only observe in general, that the offences which induce a forfeiture of lands and tenements to the

268 crown are principally the following six; 1. Treason. 2. Felony. 3. Misprision of treason.

4. Praemunire. 5. Drawing a weapon on a judge, or striking any one in the presence of the king’s principal courts of justice. 6. Popish recusancy, or non-observance of certain laws enacted in restraint of papists. But at what time they severally commence, how far they extend, and how long they endure, will with greater propriety be reserved as the object of our future enquiries.

II. Lands and tenements may be forfeited by alienation, or conveying them to

another, contrary to law. This is either alienation in mortmain, alienation to an alien, or alienation by particular tenants; in the two former of which cases the forfeiture arises from the incapacity of the alienee to take, in the latter from the incapacity of the alienor to grant.

1. Alienation in mortmain, in mortua manu [in a dead hand], is an alienation of

lands or tenements to any corporation, sole or aggregate, ecclesiastical or temporal. But these purchases having been chiefly made by religious houses, in consequence whereof the lands became perpetually inherent in one dead hand, this hath occasioned the general appellation of mortmain to be applied to such alienationsb, and the religious houses themselves to be principally considered in forming the statutes of mortmain: in deducing the history of which statutes, it will be matter of curiosity to observe the great address and subtil contrivance of the ecclesiastics in eluding from time to time the laws in being, and the zeal with which successive parliaments have pursued them through all their finesses; how new remedies were still the parents of

a Vol. I. pag. 289 [I. 193].

b See Vol. I. pag. 467 [I. 310–11].





chapter 18 183


new evasions; till the legislature at last, though with difficulty, hath obtained a decisive victory.

By the common law any man might dispose of his lands to any other private man

at his own discretion, especially when the feodal restraints of alienation were worn away. Yet in consequence of these it was always, and is still, necessary c, for corporations 269

to have a 〈1〉 licence of mortmain from the crown, to enable them to purchase lands: for as the king is the ultimate lord of every fee, he ought not, unless by his own consent, to lose his privilege of escheats and other feodal profits, by the vesting of lands in tenants that can never be attainted or die. And such licences of mortmain seem to have been necessary among the Saxons, above sixty years before the Norman conquest d. But, besides this general licence from the king, as lord paramount of the kingdom, it was also requisite, whenever there was a mesne or intermediate lord between the king and the alienor, to obtain his licence also (upon the same feodal principles) for the alienation of the specific land. And if no such licence was obtained, the king or other lord might respectively enter on the lands so aliened in mortmain, as a forfeiture. The necessity of this licence from the crown was acknowleged by the constitutions of Clarendone, in respect of advowsons, which the monks always greatly coveted, as being the groundwork of subsequent appropriationsf. Yet such were the influence and ingenuity of the clergy, that (notwithstanding this fundamental principle) we find that the largest and most considerable dotations of religious houses happened within less than two centuries after the conquest. And (when a licence could not be obtained) their contrivance seems to have been this: that, as the forfeiture for such alienations accrued in the first place to the immediate lord of the fee, the tenant who meant to alienate first conveyed his lands to the religious house, and instantly took them back again, to hold as tenant to the monastery; which kind of instantaneous seisin was probably held not to occasion any forfeiture: and then, by pretext of some other forfeiture, surrender, or escheat, the society entered into those lands in right of such their newly acquired signiory, as immediate lords of the fee. But, when these dotations began to grow numerous, it was observed that the feodal services, ordained for the defence of the kingdom, were every day visibly withdrawn; that the circulation of landed property from man to man began to stagnate; and that 270

the lords were curtailed of the fruits of their signiories, their escheats, wardships, reliefs, and the like: and therefore, in order to prevent this, it was ordained by the second of king Henry III’s great charters g, and afterwards by that printed in our common statute-books, that all such attempts should be void, and the land forfeited to the lord of the fee h.

c F. N. B. 121.

d Selden. Jan. Angl. l. 2. §. 45.

e Ecclesiae de feudo domini regis non possunt in perpetuum dari, absque assensu et consensione ipsius [Churches belonging to the fee of the lord king cannot be given in perpetuity without his consent and approval]. c. 2. a.d. 1164.

f See Vol. I. pag. 373 [I. 248].

g a.d. 1217. cap. 43. edit. Oxon.

h Non liceat alicui de caetero dare terram suam alicui domui religiosae, ita quod illam resumat tenendam de eadem domo; nec liceat alicui domui religiosae terram alicujus sic accipere, quod tradat illam ei a quo ipsam recepit 184 of the rights of things

But, as this prohibition extended only to religious houses, bishops and other sole

corporations were not included therein; and the aggregate ecclesiastical bodies (who, sir Edward Coke observesi, in this were to be commended, that they ever had of their counsel the best learned men that they could get) found many means to creep out of this statute, by buying in lands that were bona fide holden of themselves as lords of the fee, and thereby evading the forfeiture; or by taking long leases for years, which first introduced those extensive terms, for a thousand or more years, which are now so frequent in conveyances. This produced the statute de religiosis, 7 Edw. I; which provided, that no person, religious or other whatsoever, should buy, or sell, or receive, under pretence of a gift, or term of years, or any other title whatsoever, nor should by any art or ingenuity appropriate to himself, any lands or tenements in mortmain; upon pain that the immediate lord of the fee, or, on his default for one year, the lords paramount, and, in default of all of them, the king, might enter thereon as a forfeiture.

This seemed to be a sufficient security against all alienations in mortmain: but, as

these statutes extended only to gifts and conveyances between the parties, the religious houses now began to set up a fictitious title to the land, which it was intended

271 they should have, and to bring an action to recover it against the tenant; who, by

fraud and collusion, made no defence, and thereby judgment was given for the religious house, which then recovered the land by sentence of law upon a supposed prior title. And thus they had the honour of inventing those fictitious adjudications of right, which are since become the great assurance of the kingdom, under the name of common recoveries. But upon this the statute of Westminster the second, 13 Edw. I. c. 32. enacted, that in such cases a jury shall try the true right of the demandants or plaintiffs to the land, and if the religious house or corporation be found to have it, they shall still recover seisin; otherwise it shall be forfeited to the immediate lord of the fee, or else to the next lord, and finally to the king, upon the immediate or other lord’s default. And the like provision was made by the succeeding chapter k, in case the tenants set up crosses upon their lands (the badges of knights templars and hospitallers) in order to protect them from the feodal demands of their lords, by virtue of the privileges of those religious and military 〈2〉 orders. And so careful was this provident prince to prevent any future evasions, that when the statute of quia emptores, 18 Edw. I. abolished all subinfeudations, and gave liberty for all men to alienate their lands to be holden 〈3〉 of the next immediate lord l , a proviso was insertedm that this should not extend to authorize any kind of alienation in mortmain. And when afterwards the method of obtaining the king’s licence by writ of ad quod

tenendam: si quis autem de caetero terram suam domui religiosae sic dederit, et super hoc convincatur, donum suum penitus cassetur, et terra illa domino suo illius feodi incurratur [It is not to be lawful for anyone in future to give his land to a religious house so that he takes it back to hold of that house; neither is it to be lawful for any religious house thus to receive land in order to restore it to its original owner to hold of that house: if anyone shall in future so give his land to a religious house and is convicted of this, his gift shall utterly void, and that land is forfeit to his lord of that fee]. Mag. Cart. 9 Hen. III. c. 36.

i 2 Inst. 75.

k cap. 33.

l 2 Inst. 501.

m cap. 3.





chapter 18 185


damnum [to what harm] was marked out, by the statute 27 Edw. I. st. 2. it was farther provided by statute 34 Edw. I. st. 3. that no such licence should be effectual, without the consent of the mesne or intermediate lords.

Yet still it was found difficult to set bounds to ecclesiastical ingenuity: for when

they were driven out of all their former holds, they devised a new method of conveyance, by which the lands were granted, not to themselves directly, but to nominal feoffees to the use of the religious houses; thus distinguishing between the possession and the use, and receiving the actual profits, while the seisin of the 〈4〉 land 272

remained in the nominal feoffee: who was held by the courts of equity (then under the direction of the clergy) to be bound in conscience to account to his cestuy que use for the rents and emoluments of the estate. And it is to these inventions that our practisers are indebted for the introduction of uses and trusts, the foundation of modern conveyancing. But, unfortunately for the inventors themselves, they did not long enjoy the advantage of their new device, for the statute 15 Ric. II. c. 5. enacts, that the lands which had been so purchased to uses should be amortised by licence from the crown, or else be sold to private persons; and that, for the future, uses shall be subject to the statutes of mortmain, and forfeitable like the lands themselves. And whereas the statutes had been eluded by purchasing large tracts of land, adjoining to churches, and consecrating them by the name of church-yards, such subtile imagination is also declared to be within the compass of the statutes of mortmain. And civil or lay corporations, as well as ecclesiastical, are also declared to be within the mischief, and of course within the remedy provided by those salutary laws. And, lastly, as during the times of popery lands were frequently given to superstitious uses, though not to any corporate bodies; or were made liable in the hands of heirs and devisees to the charge of obits, chaunteries,1 and the like, which were equally pernicious in a well-governed state as actual alienations in mortmain; therefore, at the dawn of the reformation, the statute 23 Hen. VIII. c. 10. declares, that all future grants of lands for any of the purposes aforesaid, if granted for any longer term than twenty years, shall be void.

But, during all this time, it was in the power of the crown, by granting a licence of

mortmain, to remit the forfeiture, so far as related to its own rights; and to enable any spiritual or other corporation to purchase and hold any lands or tenements in perpetuity: which prerogative is declared and confirmed by the statute 18 Edw. III. st. 3. c. 3. But, as doubts were conceived at the time of the revolution how far such licence was validn, since the king had no power to dispense with the statutes of 273 mortmain by a clause of non obstanteo [notwithstanding], which was the usual course, though it seems to have been unnecessary p; and as, by the gradual declension of mesne signiories through the long operation of the statute of quia emptores, the

n 2 Hawk. P. C. 391.

o Stat. 1. W. & M. st. 2. c. 2.

p Co. Litt. 99.

1 An obit was an annual mass said with a particular commemoration of the soul of a deceased person; a chantry was for the support of a single priest saying or singing a daily mass with commemoration of one or more (deceased) individuals.

186 of the rights of things

rights of intermediate lords were reduced to a very small compass; it was therefore provided by the statute 7 & 8 W. III. c. 37. that the crown for the future at its own discretion may grant licences to aliene or take in mortmain, of whomsoever the tenements may be holden.

After the dissolution of monasteries under Henry VIII, though the policy of the

next popish successor affected to grant a security to the possessors of abbey lands, yet, in order to regain so much of them as either the zeal or timidity of their owners might induce them to part with, the statutes of mortmain were suspended for twenty years by the statute 1 & 2 P. & M. c. 8. and, during that time, any lands or tenements were allowed to be granted to any spiritual corporation without any licence whatsoever. And, long afterwards, for a much better purpose, the augmentation of poor livings, it was enacted by the statute 17 Car. II. c. 3. that appropriators may annex the great tithes to the vicarages; and that all benefices under 100l. per annum may be augmented by the purchase of lands, without licence of mortmain in either case: and the like provision hath been since made, in favour of the governors of queen Anne’s bounty q. It hath also been heldr, that the statute 23 Hen. VIII. before-mentioned did not extend to any thing but superstitious uses; and that therefore a man may give lands for the maintenance of a school, an hospital, or any other charitable uses. But as it was apprehended from recent experience, that persons on their deathbeds might make large and improvident dispositions even for these good purposes, and defeat the political ends of the statutes of mortmain; it is therefore enacted by the statute 9 Geo. II. c. 36. that no lands or tenements, or money to be laid

274 out thereon, shall be given for or charged with any charitable uses whatsoever, unless

by deed indented, executed in the presence of two witnesses twelve calendar months before the death of the donor, and enrolled in the court of chancery within six months after its execution, (except stocks in the public funds, which may be transferred within six months previous to the donor’s death) and unless such gift be made to take effect immediately, and be without power of revocation: and that all other gifts shall be void. The two universities, their colleges, and the scholars upon the foundation of the colleges of Eton, Winchester, and Westminster, are excepted out of this act: but such exemption was granted with this proviso, that no college shall be at liberty to purchase more advowsons, than are equal in number to one moiety of the fellows or students, upon the respective foundations.

2. Secondly, alienation to an alien is also a cause of forfeiture to the crown of the

lands so alienated, not only on account of his incapacity to hold them, which occasions him to be passed by in descents of lands, but likewise on account of his presumption in attempting, by an act of his own, to acquire any real property; as was observed in the preceding volume t.



q Stat. 2 & 3 Ann. c. 11.

r [Attorney General v Porter] 1 Rep. 24.

s See pag. 249, 250 [II. 169–70].

t Book I. ch. 10.





chapter 18 187


3. Lastly, alienations by particular tenants, when they are greater than the law

entitles them to make, and devest the remainder or reversionv, are also forfeitures to him whose right is attacked thereby. As, if tenant for his own life alienes by feoffment or fine for the life of another, or in tail, or in fee; these being estates, which either must or may last longer than his own, the creating them is not only beyond his power, and inconsistent with the nature of his interest, but is also a forfeiture of his own particular estate to him in remainder or reversionu. For which there seem to be two reasons. First, because such alienation amounts to a renuntiation of the feodal connexion and dependence; it implies a refusal to perform the due renders and services to the lord of the fee, of which fealty is constantly one; and it tends in its 〈5〉 275

consequences to defeat and devest the remainder or reversion expectant: as therefore that is put in jeopardy, by such act of the particular tenant, it is but just that, upon discovery, the particular estate should be forfeited and taken from him, who has shewn so manifest an inclination to make an improper use of it. The other reason is, because the particular tenant, by granting a larger estate than his own, has by his own act determined and put an entire end to his own original interest; and on such determination the next taker is intitled to enter regularly, as in his remainder or reversion. The same law, which is thus laid down with regard to tenants for life, holds also with respect to all tenants of the mere freehold, or of chattel interests; but if tenant in tail alienes in fee, this is no immediate forfeiture to the remainder-man, but a mere discontinuance (as it is calledw) of the estate-tail, which the issue may afterwards avoid by due course of law x: for he in remainder or reversion hath only a very remote and barely possible interest therein, until the issue in tail is extinct. But, in case of such forfeitures by particular tenants, all legal estates by them before created, as if tenant for twenty years grants a lease for fifteen, and all charges by him lawfully made on the lands, shall be good and available in law y. For the law will not hurt an innocent lessee for the fault of his lessor; nor permit the lessor, after he has granted a good and lawful estate, by his own act to avoid it, and defeat the interest which he himself has created.

Equivalent, both in its nature and its consequences, to an illegal alienation by the

particular tenant, is the civil crime of disclaimer; as where a tenant, who holds of any lord, neglects to render him the due services, and, upon an action brought to recover them, disclaims to hold of his lord. Which disclaimer of tenure in any court of record is a forfeiture of the lands to the lordz, upon reasons most apparently feodal. And so likewise, if in any court of record the particular tenant does any act which amounts 276

to a virtual disclaimer; if he claims any greater estate than was granted him at the first infeodation, or takes upon himself those rights which belong only to tenants of a superior classa; if he affirms the reversion to be in a stranger, by accepting his fine,

v Co. Litt. 251.

u Litt. §. 415.

w See Book III [ch. 10].

x Litt. §. 595, 6, 7.

y Co. Litt. 233.

z Finch. 270, 271.

a Co. Litt. 252.

188 of the rights of things

attorning as his tenant, collusive pleading, and the likeb; such behaviour amounts to a forfeiture of his particular estate.

III. Lapse is a species of forfeiture, whereby the right of presentation to a church

accrues to the ordinary by neglect of the patron to present, to the metropolitan2 by neglect of the ordinary, and to the king by neglect of the metropolitan. For it being for the interest of religion, and the good of the public, that the church should be provided with an officiating minister, the law has therefore given this right of lapse, in order to quicken the patron; who might otherwise, by suffering the church to remain vacant, avoid paying his ecclesiastical dues, and frustrate the pious intentions of his ancestors. This right of lapse was first established about the time (though not by the authority c) of the council of Laterand, which was in the reign of our Henry the second, when the bishops first began to exercise universally the right of institution to churchese. And therefore, where there is no right of institution, there is no right of lapse: so that no donative can lapse to the ordinaryf, unless it hath been augmented by the queen’s bounty g. But no right of lapse can accrue, when the original presentation is in the crownh.

The term, in which the title to present by lapse accrues from the one to the other

successively, is six calendar monthsi; (following in this case the computation of the

277 church, and not the usual one of the common law) and this exclusive of the day of

the avoidance k. But, if the bishop be both patron and ordinary, he shall not have a double time allowed him to collate inl; for the forfeiture accrues by law, whenever the negligence has continued six months in the same person. And also, if the bishop doth not collate his own clerk immediately to the living, and the patron presents, though after the six months are lapsed, yet his presentation is good, and the bishop is bound to institute the patron’s clerkm. For as the law only gives the bishop this title by lapse, to punish the patron’s negligence, there is no reason that, if the bishop himself be guilty of equal or greater negligence, the patron should be deprived of his turn. If the bishop suffer the presentation to lapse to the metropolitan, the patron also has the same advantage if he presents before the arch-bishop has filled up the benefice; and that for the same reason. Yet the ordinary cannot, after lapse to the metropolitan, collate his own clerk to the prejudice of the arch-bishopn. For he had no permanent right and interest in the advowson, as the patron hath, but merely a temporary one;

b Ibid. 253.

c 2 Roll. Abr. 336. pl. 10 [recte 366, sec. X].

d Bracton. l. 4. tr. 2. c. 3.

e See pag. 23 [II. 14].

f 〈6〉 Bro. Abr. tit. Quar. Imped. 131. [Britton v Wade] Cro. Jac. 518.

g Stat. 1 Geo. I. st. 2. c. 10.

h Stat. 17 Edw. II. c. 8. 2 Inst. 273.

i [Catesby’s case] 6 Rep. 62. Registr. 42.

k 2 Inst. 361.

l Gibs. Cod. 769. [Blackstone explains at II. 13 that collation is a single act, combining presentation and institution.]

m 2 Inst. 273.

n 2 Roll. Abr. 368 [pl. 5].

2 i.e. the supervising bishop.





chapter 18 189


which having neglected to make use of during the time, he cannot afterwards retrieve it. But if the presentation lapses to the king, prerogative here intervenes and makes a difference; and the patron shall never recover his right, till the king has satisfied his turn by presentation: for nullum tempus occurrit regio. And therefore it may seem, as if the church might continue void for ever, unless the king shall be pleased to present; and a patron thereby be absolutely defeated of his advowson. But to prevent this inconvenience, the law has lodged a power in the patron’s hands, of as it were compelling the king to present. For if, during the delay of the crown, the patron himself presents, and his clerk is instituted, the king indeed by presenting another may turn out the patron’s 〈7〉 clerk; but if he does not, and the patron’s clerk dies incumbent, or is canonically deprived, the king hath lost his right, which was only to the next or first presentationp.

In case the benefice becomes void by death, or cession through plurality of 278

benefices, there the patron is bound to take notice of the vacancy at his own peril; for these are matters of equal notoriety to the patron and ordinary: but in case of a vacancy by resignation, or canonical deprivation, or if a clerk presented be refused for insufficiency, these being matters of which the bishop alone is presumed to be cognizant, here the law requires him to give notice thereof to the patron, otherwise he can take no advantage by way of lapseq. Neither shall any lapse thereby accrue to the metropolitan or to the king; for it is universally true, that neither the arch-bishop or the king shall ever present by lapse, but where the immediate ordinary might have collated by lapse, within the six months, and hath exceeded his time: for the first step or beginning faileth, et quod non habet principium, non habet finemr [and that which has no beginning has no end]. If the bishop refuse or neglect to examine and admit the patron’s clerk, without good reason assigned or notice given, he is stiled a disturber by the law, and shall not have any title to present by lapse; for no man shall take advantage of his own wrong s . Also if the right of presentation be litigious or contested, and an action be brought against the bishop to try the title, no lapse shall incur till the question of right be decided t.

IV. By simony, the right of presentation to a living is forfeited, and vested pro hac

vice [for the occasion] in the crown. Simony is the corrupt presentation of any one to an ecclesiastical benefice for money, gift, or reward. It is so called from the resemblance it is said to bear to the sin of Simon Magus,3 though the purchasing of holy orders seems to approach nearer to his offence. It was by the canon law a very grievous crime: and is so much the more odious, because, as sir Edward Coke observesu, it is ever accompanied with perjury; for the presentee is sworn to have committed no

o Dr & St. d. 2. c. 36. [R. v Archbishop of Canterbury] Cro. Car. 355.

p [Baskerville’s case] 7 Rep. 28. [Beverley v Cornewall] Cro. Eliz. 44.

q [Holland’s case] 4 Rep. 75. 2 Inst. 632.

r Co. Litt. 344, 345.

s [Palmer v Smith] 2 Roll. Abr. 369.

t Co. Litt. 344.

u 3 Inst. 156.

3 Simon Magus (fl. 1st century ad) is portrayed in Acts 8. 9–24 as seeking to use money to acquire spiritual power.

190 of the rights of things

279 simony. However 〈8〉 it is not an offence punishable in a criminal way at the common

laww; it being thought sufficient to leave the clerk to ecclesiastical censures. But as these did not affect the simoniacal patron, nor were efficacious enough to repel the notorious practice of the thing, divers acts of parliament have been made to restrain it by means of civil forfeitures; which the modern prevailing usage, with regard to spiritual preferments, calls aloud to be put in execution. I shall briefly consider them in this place, because they divest the corrupt patron of the right of presentation, and vest a new right in the crown.

By the statute 31 Eliz. c. 6. it is for avoiding of simony enacted, that if any patron

for any corrupt consideration, by gift or promise, directly or indirectly, shall present or collate any person to an ecclesiastical benefice or dignity; such presentation shall be void, and the presentee be rendered incapable of ever enjoying the same benefice: and the crown shall present to it for that turn 〈9〉 only x. Also by the statute 12 Ann. stat. 2. c. 12. if any person for money or profit shall procure, in his own name or the name of any other, the next presentation to any living ecclesiastical, and shall be presented thereupon, this is declared to be a simoniacal contract; and the party is subjected to all the ecclesiastical penalties of simony, is disabled from holding the benefice, and the presentation devolves to the crown.

Upon these statutes many questions have arisen, with regard to what is, and what

is not simony. And, among others, these points seem to be clearly settled: 1. That to purchase a presentation, the living being actually vacant, is open and notorious simony y; this being expressly in the face of the statute. 2. That for a clerk to bargain for the next presentation, the incumbent being sick and about to die, was simony, even before the statute of queen Anne z: and now, by that statute, to purchase, either

280 in his own name or another’s, the next presentation, and be thereupon presented at

any future time to the living, is direct and palpable simony. But, 3. It is held that for a father to purchase such a presentation, in order to provide for his son, is not simony: for the son is not concerned in the bargain, and the father is by nature bound to make a provision for hima. 4. That if a simoniacal contract be made with the patron, the clerk not being privy thereto, the presentation for that turn shall indeed devolve to the crown, as a punishment of the guilty patron; but the clerk, who is innocent, does not incur any disability or forfeitureb. 5. That bonds given to pay money to charitable uses, on receiving a presentation to a living, are not simoniacalc, provided the patron or his relations be not benefited thereby d; for this is no corrupt consideration, moving to the patron. 6. That bonds of resignation, in case of non-residence or taking any other living, are not simoniacale; there being no corrupt consideration herein, but

w [Oldbury v Gregory] Moor. 564.

x For other penalties inflicted by this statute, see 〈10〉 Book IV.

y [Baker v Rogers] Cro. Eliz. 788. [Baker v Rogers] Moor. 914.

z [Winchcombe v Bishop of Winchester] Hob. 165.

a [Smith v Shelbourn] Cro. Eliz. 686. [Smith v Sherbone] Moor. 916.

b 3 Inst. 154. [R. v Bishop of Norwich] Cro. Jac. 385.

c Noy 142.

d [Peele v Capel] Stra. 534.

e [Babington v Wood] Cro. Car. 180.





chapter 18 191


such only as is for the good of the public. So also bonds to resign, when the patron’s son comes to canonical age, are legal; upon the reason before given, that the father is bound to provide for his sonf. 7. Lastly, general bonds to resign at the patron’s request are held to be legal g: for they may possibly be given for one of the legal considerations before-mentioned; and where there is a possibility that a transaction may be fair, the law will not suppose it iniquitous without proof. But, if the party can prove the contract to have been a corrupt one, such proof will be admitted, in order to shew the bond simoniacal, and therefore void. Neither will the patron be suffered to make an ill use of such a general bond of resignation; as by extorting a composition for tithes, procuring an annuity for his relation, or by demanding a resignation 〈11〉 wantonly and without good cause, such as is approved by the law; as, for the benefit of his own son, or on account of non-residence, plurality of livings, or gross immorality in the incumbent h.

V. The next kind of forfeitures are those by breach or nonperformance of a 281

condition annexed to the estate, either expressly by deed at its original creation, or impliedly by law from a principle of natural reason. Both which we considered at large in a former chapter i.

VI. I therefore now proceed to another species of forfeiture, viz. by waste.

Waste, vastum, is a spoil or destruction in houses, gardens, trees, or other corporeal hereditaments, to the disherison of him that hath the remainder or reversion in fee-simple or fee-tailk.

Waste is either voluntary, which is a crime of commission, as by pulling down a

house; or it is permissive, which is a matter of omission only, as by suffering it to fall for want of necessary reparations. Whatever does a lasting damage to the freehold or inheritance is waste l. Therefore removing wainscot, floors, or other things once fixed to the freehold of a house, is waste m. If a house be destroyed by tempest, lightning, or the like, which is the act of providence, it is no waste: but otherwise, if the house be burnt by the carelessness or negligence of the lessee; though now by the statute 〈12〉 6 Ann. c. 3. no action will lie against a tenant for an accident of this kind, lest misfortune be added to misfortune. Waste may also be committed in ponds, dove-houses, warrens, and the like; by so reducing the number of the creatures therein, that there will not be sufficient for the reversioner when he comes to the inheritance n. Timber also is part of the inheritance o. Such are oak, ash, and elm in all places: and in some particular countries, by local custom, where other trees are generally used for building, they 〈13〉 are thereupon considered as timber; and to cut down such trees, or top them, or do any other act whereby the timber may decay, is waste p. But underwood 282

f [Johns v Lawrence] Cro. Jac. 248. [Lawrence v Johns] 274.

g [Babington v Wood] Cro. Car. 180. [Peele v Earl of Carlisle] Stra. 227.

h [Plucknet v Kirk] 1 Vern. 411. [Hilliard v Stapleton] 1 Equ. Cas. abr. 86, 87. [Peele v Capel] Stra. 534.

i See chap. 10. pag. 152 [II. 103].

k Co. Litt. 53.

l [Barret v Barret] Hetl. 35.

m [Herlakenden’s case] 4 Rep. 64.

n Co. Litt. 53.

o [Herlakenden’s case] 4 Rep. 62.

p Co. Litt. 53.

192 of the rights of things

the tenant may cut down at any seasonable time that he pleasesq; and may take sufficient estovers of common right for house-bote and cart-bote; unless restrained (which is usual) by particular covenants or exceptionsr. The conversion of land from one species to another is waste. To convert wood, meadow, or pasture, into arable; to turn arable, meadow, or pasture into woodland; or to turn arable or woodland into meadow or pasture; are all of them waste s. For, as sir Edward Coke observest, it not only changes the course of husbandry, but the evidence of the estate; when such a close, which is conveyed and described as pasture, is found to be arable, and e converso. And the same rule is observed, for the same reason, with regard to converting one species of edifice into another, even though it is improved in its valueu. To open the land to search for mines of metal, coal, &c, is waste; for that is a detriment to the inheritancew: but, if the pits or mines were open before, it is no waste for the tenant to continue digging them for his own usex; for it is now become the mere annual profit of the land. These three are the general heads of waste, viz. in houses, in timber, and in land. Though, as was before said, 〈14〉 whatever tends to the destruction, or depreciating the value, of the inheritance, is considered by the law as waste.

Let us next see, who are liable to be punished for committing waste. And by the

feodal law, feuds being originally granted for life only, we find that the rule was general for all vasals or feudatories; “si vasallus feudum dissipaverit, aut insigni detrimento deterius fecerit, privabitury.”4 But in our antient common law the rule was by no means so large; for not only he that was seised of an estate of inheritance might do as he pleased with it, but also waste was not punishable in any tenant, save only in

283 three persons; guardian in chivalry, tenant in dower, and tenant by the curtesy z; and

not in tenant for life or yearsa. And the reason of the diversity was, that the estate of the three former was created by the act of the law itself, which therefore gave a remedy against them: but tenant for life, or for years, came in by the demise and lease of the owner of the fee, and therefore he might have provided against the committing of waste by his lessee; and if he did not, it was his own default. But, in favour of the owners of the inheritance, the statutes of Marlbridgeb and Glocester c provided, that the writ of waste shall not only lie against tenants by the law of England, (or curtesy) and those in dower, but against any farmer or other that holds in any manner for life or years. So that, for above five hundred years past, all 〈16〉 tenants for life or for any

q [Gage and Smith’s case] 2 Roll. Abr. 817.

r Co. Litt. 41.

s [Darcy v Askwith] Hob. 296.

t 1 Inst. 53.

u [Cole v Greene] 1 Lev. 309.

w [Saunders’s case] 5 Rep. 12.

x [Darcy v Askwith] Hob. 295.

y Wright. 44 [note q].

z It was however a doubt whether waste was punishable at the common law in tenant by the curtesy. Regist. 72. Bro. Abr. tit. waste. 88. 2 Inst. 301.

a 2 Inst. 299.

b 〈15〉 52 Hen. III. c. 24 [ recte 23].

c 6 Edw. I. c. 5.

4 ‘If a vassal shall have wasted the fee, or diminished its value by any manifest harm, he shall be deprived of it.’





chapter 18 193


less estate, have been punishable or liable to be impeached for waste, both voluntary and permissive; unless their leases be made, as sometimes they are, without impeach-ment of waste, absque impetitione vasti; that is, with a provision or protection that no man shall impetere, or sue him, for waste 〈17〉 committed.

The punishment for waste committed was, by common law and the statute of

Marlbridge, only single damagesd; except in the case of a guardian, who also forfeited his wardshipe by the provisions of the great charterf: but the statute of Glocester directs, that the other four species of tenants shall lose and forfeit the place wherein the waste is committed, and also treble damages, to him that hath the inheritance. The expression of the statute is, “he shall forfeit the thing which he hath wasted;” and it hath been determined, that under these words the place is also includedg. And if waste be done sparsim, or here and there, all over a wood, the whole wood shall be recovered; or if in several rooms of a house, the whole house shall be forfeitedh; because it is impracticable for the reversioner to enjoy only the identical places wasted, when lying interspersed with the other. But if waste be done only in one end 284 of a wood (or perhaps in one room of a house) if that can be conveniently separated from the rest, that part only is the locus vastatus, or thing wasted, and that only shall be forfeited to the reversioner i.

VII. A seventh species of forfeiture is that of copyhold estates, by breach of the

customs of the manor. Copyhold estates are not only liable to the same forfeitures as those which are held in socage, for treason, felony, alienation, and waste; whereupon the lord may seise them without any presentment by the homagek; but also to peculiar forfeitures, annexed to this species of tenure, which are incurred by the breach of either the general customs of all copyholds, or the peculiar local customs of certain particular manors. And we may observe that, as these tenements were originally holden by the lowest and most abject vasals, the marks of feodal dominion continue much the strongest upon this mode of property. Most of the offences, which occa-sioned a resumption of the fief by the feodal law, and were denominated feloniae, per quas vasallus amitteret feuduml [felonies, by which the vassal would lose his fee], still continue to be causes of forfeiture in many of our modern copyholds. As, by subtraction of suit and servicem; si dominum deservire nolueritn [if he refuses to serve his lord]: by disclaiming to hold of the lord, or swearing himself not his copyholder o; si dominum ejuravit, i.e. negavit se a domino feudum haberep [if he has



d 2 Inst. 146.

e Ibid. 300.

f 9 Hen. III. c. 4.

g 2 Inst. 303.

h Co. Litt. 54.

i 2 Inst. 304.

k [Lord Cornwallis’s case] 2 Ventr. 38. [East v Harding] Cro. Eliz. 499.

l Feud. l. 2. t. 26. in calc. [2.26 § 9. Blackstone cites the same provision in IV. 63, note e.]

m [Taverner v Cromwell] 3 Leon. 108. [Grey v Ulisses] Dyer. 211.

n Feud. l. 1. t. 21.

o Co. Copyh. §. 57.

p Feud. l. 2. t. 34. & t. 26. §. 3.

194 of the rights of things

forsworn his lord, that is, denied that he has the fee of the lord]:5 by neglect to be admitted tenant within a year and a day q; si per annum et diem cessaverit in petenda investiturar [if he shall have neglected to claim possession for a year and a day]:6 by contumacy in not appearing in court after three proclamationss; si a domino ter citatus non comparueritt [‘if, being summoned three times by the lord, he has not appeared’]:7 or by refusing, when sworn of the homage, to present the truth according to his oathu; si pares veritatem noverint, et dicant se nescire, cum sciantw [if the peers

285 know the truth, and say they do not, even though they know it]. In these, and a

variety of other cases, which it is impossible here to enumerate, the forfeiture does not accrue to the lord till after the offences are presented by the homage, or jury of the lord’s court baronx; per laudamentum parium suorum y [by the award of his peers]: or, as it is more fully expressed in another placez, nemo miles adimatur de possessione sui beneficii, nisi convicta culpa, quae sit laudanda a per judicium parium suorum.8

VIII. The eighth and last method, whereby lands and tenements may become

forfeited, is that of bankruptcy, or the act of becoming a bankrupt: which unfortunate person may, from the several descriptions given of him in our statute law, be thus defined; a trader, who secretes himself, or does certain other acts, tending to defraud his creditors.

Who shall be such a trader, or what acts are sufficient to denominate him a bankrupt,

with the several connected consequences resulting from that unhappy situation, will be better considered in a subsequent chapter; when we shall endeavour more fully to explain its nature, as it most immediately relates to personal goods and chattels. I shall only here observe the manner in which the property of lands and tenements are transferred, upon the supposition that the owner of them is clearly and indisputably a bankrupt, and that a commission of bankrupt is awarded and issued against him.

By the statute 13 Eliz. c. 7. the commissioners for that purpose, when a man is

declared a bankrupt, shall have full power to dispose of all his lands and tenements, which he had in his own right at the time when he became a bankrupt, or which shall descend or come to him at any time afterwards, before his debts are satisfied or agreed for; and all lands and tenements which were purchased by him jointly with

286 his wife or children to his own use, (or such interest therein as he may lawfully part

q [Stowel v Zouch] [1] Plowd. 372.

r Feud. l. 2. t. 24.

s [Sir Richard Lechford’s case] 8 Rep. 99. Co. Copyh. §. 57.

t Feud. l. 2. t. 22.

u Co. Copyh. §. 57.

w Feud. l. 2. t. 58 [§ 3].

x Co. Copyh. §. 58.

y Feud. l. 1. t. 21 [proem].

z Ibid. t. 22 [§ 2].

a i.e. arbitranda, definienda [to be judged, to be declared]. Du Fresne. IV. 79. [The reference is to du Fresne’s definitions and examples for laudare and laudator.]

5 This language does not appear in the Libri Feudorum 2.34, but it captures the sense of 2.34 § 3. Godefroy, Epitome Feudorum, 548, uses nearly the same words and may well have been Blackstone’s source.

6 Blackstone’s phrasing varies from that at the beginning of Feud. 2.24, but corresponds to Godefroy’s language.

7 The same passage in Godefroy appears to provide the source.

8 ‘No knight shall be removed from the possession of his benefice, unless convicted of some offence, which must be declared by the judgment of his peers.’





chapter 18 195


with) or purchased with any other person upon secret trust for his own use; and to cause them to be appraised to their full value, and to sell the same by deed indented and inrolled, or divide them proportionably among the creditors. 〈18〉 The statute expressly includes not only free, 〈19〉 but copyhold, lands: but did not extend to estates-tail, farther than for the bankrupt’s life; nor to equities of redemption on a mortgaged estate, wherein the bankrupt has no legal interest, but only an equitable reversion. Whereupon the statute 21 Jac. I. c. 19. enacts, that the commissioners shall be impowered to sell or convey, by deed indented and inrolled, any lands or tenements of the bankrupt, wherein he shall be seised of an estate-tail in possession, remainder, or reversion, unless the remainder or reversion thereof shall be in the crown; and that such sale shall be good against all such issues in tail, remaindermen, and reversioners, whom the bankrupt himself might have barred by a common recovery, or other means: and that all equities of redemption upon mortgaged estates, shall be at the disposal of the commissioners; for they shall have power to redeem the same, as the bankrupt himself might have done, and after redemption to sell them. And also, by this and a former act b, all fraudulent conveyances to defeat the intent of these statutes are declared void; but that no purchaser bona fide, for a good or valuable consideration, shall be affected by the bankrupt laws, unless the commission be sued forth within five years after the act of bankruptcy committed.

By virtue of these statutes a bankrupt may lose all his real estates; which may at

once be transferred by his commissioners to their assignees, without his participation or consent.

b 1 Jac. I. c. 15.



287 chapter the nineteenth.



of title by alienation.

The most usual and universal method of acquiring a title to real estates is that of alienation, conveyance, or purchase in its limited sense: under which may be comprized any method wherein estates are voluntarily resigned by one man, and accepted by another; whether that be effected by sale, gift, marriage settlement, devise, or other transmission of property by the mutual consent of the parties.

This means of taking estates, by alienation, is not of equal antiquity in the law of

England with that of taking them by descent. For we may remember that, by the feodal law a, a pure and genuine feud could not be transferred from one feudatory to another without the consent of the lord; lest thereby a feeble or suspicious tenant might have been substituted and imposed upon him, to perform the feodal services, instead of one on whose abilities and fidelity he could depend. Neither could the feudatory then subject the land to his debts; for, if he might, the feodal restraint of alienation would have been easily frustrated and evadedb. And, as he could not aliene it in his lifetime, so neither could he by will defeat the succession, by devising his feud to another family; nor even alter the course of it, by imposing particular limitations, or prescribing an unusual path of descent. Nor, in short, could he aliene the estate, even with the consent of the lord, unless he had also obtained the consent of his own next apparent, or presumptive, heir c. And therefore it was very usual in

288 antient feoffments to express, that the alienation was made by consent of the heirs of

the feoffor; or sometimes for the heir apparent himself to join with the feoffor in the grant d. And, on the other hand, as the feodal obligation was looked upon to be reciprocal, the lord could not aliene or transfer his signiory without the consent of his vasal: for it was esteemed unreasonable to subject a feudatory to a new superior, with whom he might have a deadly enmity, without his own approbation; or even to transfer his fealty, without his being thoroughly apprized of it, that he might know with certainty to whom his renders and services were due, and be able to distinguish a lawful distress for rent from a hostile seising of his cattle by the lord of a neighbouring clane. This consent of the vasal was expressed by what was called attorningf, or

a See pag. 57 [II. 37].

b Feud. l. 1. t. 27.

c Co. Litt. 94. Wright. 168.

d o Madox, Formul. Angl . n. 316. 319. 427.

e Gilb. Ten. 75.

f The same doctrine and the same denomination prevailed in Bretagne [i.e. Brittany].——possessiones in jurisdictionalibus non aliter apprehendi posse, quam per attournances et avirances, ut loqui solent; cum vasallus, ejurato prioris domini obsequio et fide, novo se sacramento novo item domino acquirenti obstringebat; idque jussu auctoris [Possessions cannot be taken in matters of lordship except by attornment and surrenders, as used to be said; when a vassal having abjured the obedience and faith of the prior lord obliged himself with a new oath to the new lord acquiring him and the same is done by the order of the prior lord]. D’Argentre Antiq. Consuet. Brit. apud Dufresne. i. 819, 820. [Blackstone partially quotes d’Argentré’s comments on article 265 (‘Des Appropriances’) of L’ancienne coutume de Bretagne, as reprinted in du Fresne’s Glossarium, under the heading attornatio.]





chapter 19 197


professing to become the tenant of the new lord; which doctrine of attornment was afterwards extended to all lessees for life or years. For if one bought an estate with any lease for life or years standing out thereon, and the lessee or tenant refused to attorn to the purchasor, and to become his tenant, the grant or contract was in most cases void, or at least incompleteg: which was also an additional clog upon alienations.

But by degrees this feodal severity is worn off; and experience hath shewn, that

property best answers the purposes of civil life, especially in commercial countries, when its transfer and circulation are totally free and unrestrained. The road was cleared in the first place by a law of king Henry the first, which allowed a man to sell and dispose of lands which he himself had purchased; for over these he was thought to have a more extensive power, than over what had been transmitted to him in a course of descent from his ancestorsh: a doctrine, which is countenanced by the 289 feodal constitutions themselves j: but he was not allowed to sell the whole of his own acquirements, so as totally to disinherit his children, any more than he was at liberty to aliene his paternal estate i. Afterwards a man seems to have been at liberty to part with all his own acquisitions, if he had previously purchased to him and his assigns by name; but, if his assigns were not specified in the purchase deed, he was not empowered to alienek: and also he might part with one fourth of the inheritance of his ancestors without the consent of his heir l. By the great charter of Henry IIIm, no subinfeudation was permitted of part of the land, unless sufficient was left to answer the services due to the superior lord, which sufficiency was probably interpreted to be one half or moiety of the landn. But these restrictions were in general removed by the statute of quia emptoreso, whereby all persons, except the king’s tenants in capite, were left at liberty to aliene all or any part of their lands at their own discretionp. And even these tenants in capite were by the statute 1 Edw. III. c. 12. permitted to aliene, on paying a fine to the king q. By the temporary statutes 11 Hen. VII. c. 3. and 3 Hen. VIII. c. 4. all persons attending the king in his wars were allowed to aliene their lands without license, and were relieved from other feodal burdens. And, lastly, these very fines for alienations were, in all cases of freehold tenure, entirely abolished by the statute 12 Car. II. c. 24. As to the power of charging lands with the debts of the owner, this was introduced so early as statute Westm. 2. whichr subjected a moiety of the

g Litt. §. 551.

h Emptiones vel acquisitiones suas det cui magis velit. Terram autem quam ei parentes dederunt, non mittat extra cognationem suam [He may give his purchases or acquisitions to whomever he pleases. But he cannot alienate from his kindred the land which his ancestors gave him.] LL. Hen. 1. c. 70. [Wilkins, 266.]

j Feud. l. 2. t. 39.

i Si questum tantum habuerit is, qui partem terrae suae donare voluerit, tunc quidem hoc ei licet; sed non totum questum, quia non potest filium suum haeredem exhaeredare [If he, who wishes to give a part of his land, has only what he has acquired himself, he may lawfully do it; but he cannot alien the whole, because he cannot disinherit his son and heir]. Glanv. l. 7. c. 1.

k Mirr. c. 1. §. 3. This is also borrowed from the feodal law. Feud. l. 2. t. 48.

l Mirr. ibid.

m 9 Hen. III. c. 32.

n Dalrymple of feuds. 95.

o 18 Edw. I. c. 1.

p 〈1〉 See pag. 72 [II. 48].

q 2 Inst. 67.

r 13 Edw. I. c. 18.

198 of the rights of things

tenant’s lands to executions, for debts recovered by law; as the whole of them was likewise subjected to be pawned in a statute merchant by the statute de mercatoribus, made the same year, and in a statute staple by statute 27 Edw. III. c. 9. and in other

290 similar recognizances by statute 23 Hen. VIII. c. 6. And, now, the whole of them is

not only subject to be pawned for the debts of the owner, but likewise to be absolutely sold for the benefit of trade and commerce by the several statutes of bankruptcy. The restraint of devising lands by will, except in some places by particular custom, lasted longer; that not being totally removed, till the abolition of the military tenures. The doctrine of attornments continued still later than any of the rest, and became extremely troublesome, though many methods were invented to evade them; till, at last, they were made no longer 〈2〉 necessary, by statutes 4 & 5 Ann. c. 16. and 11 Geo. II. c. 19.

In examining the nature of alienation, let us first enquire, briefly, who may aliene

and to whom; and then, more largely, how a man may aliene, or the several modes of conveyance.

I. Who may aliene, and to whom; or, in other words, who is capable of conveying

and who of purchasing. And herein we must consider rather the incapacity, than capacity, of the several parties: for all persons in possession are, prima facie, capable both of conveying and purchasing, unless the law has laid them under any particular disabilities. But, if a man has only in him the right of either possession or property, he cannot convey it to any other, lest pretended titles might be granted to great men, whereby justice might be trodden down, and the weak oppresseds. Yet reversions and vested remainders may be granted; because the possession of the particular tenant is the possession of him in reversion or remainder: but contingencies, and mere possibilities, though they may be released, or devised by will, or may pass to the heir or executor, yet cannot (it hath been said) be assigned to a stranger, unless coupled with some present interest s.1

Persons attainted of treason, felony, and praemunire,2 are incapable of conveying,

291 from the time of the offense committed, provided attainder followst: for such

conveyance by them may tend to defeat the king of his forfeiture, or the lord of his escheat. But they may purchase for the benefit of the crown, or the lord of the fee, though they are disabled to hold: the lands so purchased, if after attainder, being subject to immediate forfeiture; if before, to escheat as well as forfeiture, according to the nature of the crimeu. So also corporations, religious or others, may purchase lands; yet, unless they have a licence to hold in mortmain, they cannot retain such purchase; but it shall be forfeited to the lord of the fee.

s Co. Litt. 214.

s ms Sheppard’s touchstone. 238, 239, 322. [Arthur v Bokenham] 11 Mod. 152. 1 [Wind v Jekyl] P. W. 574. [Marks v Marks] Stra. 132.

t Co. Litt. 42.

u Ibid. 2.

1 Subsequent editions replace this duplicate cue letter ‘s’ with a letter ‘ſ’ (the ‘long s’).

2 Blackstone explains in IV, ch. 8, that praemunire originally related to the offence of supporting foreign religious authorities, thereby diminishing the king’s authority; over time, the statutes of praemunire were interpreted increasingly broadly.





chapter 19 199


Idiots and persons of nonsane memory, infants, and persons under duress, are

not totally disabled either to convey or purchase, but sub modo [to a certain degree] only. For their conveyances and purchases are voidable, but not actually void. The king indeed, on behalf of an idiot, may avoid his grants or other actsw. But it hath been said, that a non compos himself, though he be afterwards brought to a right mind, shall not be permitted to allege his own insanity in order to avoid such grant: for that no man shall be allowed to stultify himself, or plead his own disability. The progress of this notion is somewhat curious. In the time of Edward I, non compos was a sufficient plea to avoid a man’s own bond x: and there is a writ in the register y for the alienor himself to recover lands aliened by him during his insanity; dum fuit non compos mentis suae, ut dicit, &c [while he was of unsound mind, as he says, etc.]. But under Edward III a scruple began to arise, whether a man should be permitted to blemish himself, by pleading his own insanity z: and, afterwards, a defendant in assise having pleaded a release by the plaintiff since the last continuance, to which the plaintiff replied (ore tenus [orally], as the manner then was) that he was out of his mind when he gave it, the court adjourned the assise; doubting, whether as the plaintiff was sane both then and at the commencement of the suit, he should be permitted to plead an intermediate deprivation of reason; and the question was 292 asked, how he came to remember the release, if out of his senses when he gave it a. Under Henry VI this way of reasoning (that a man shall not be allowed to disable himself, by pleading his own incapacity, because he cannot know what he did under such a situation) was seriously adopted by the judges in argument b; upon a question, whether the heir was barred of his right of entry by the feoffment of his insane ancestor. And from these loose authorities, which Fitzherbert does not scruple to reject as being contrary to reasonc, the maxim that a man shall not stultify himself hath been handed down as settled law d: though later opinions, feeling the inconvenience of the rule, have in many points endeavoured to restrain it e. And, clearly, the next heir, or other person interested, may, after the death of the idiot or non compos, take advantage of his incapacity and avoid the grant f. And so too, if he purchases under this disability, and does not afterwards upon recovering his senses agree to the purchase, his heir may either waive or accept the estate at his optiong. In like manner, an infant may waive such purchase or conveyance, when he comes to full age; or, if he does not then actually agree to it, his heirs may waive it after himh. Persons also, who purchase or convey under duress, may affirm or avoid such transaction, whenever

w Ibid. 247.

x Britton, c. 28. fol. 66.

y 〈3〉 fol. 228.

z [YB] 5 Edw. III. 70.

a [YB 35 Edw. III] 35 Assis. pl. 10.

b [YB] 39 Hen. VI. 42.

c F. N. B. 202.

d Litt. §. 405. [Stroud v Marshall] Cro. Eliz. 398. 〈4〉 [Beverley’s case] 4 Rep. 123.

e [Thompson v Leach] Comb. 469. [Thompson v Leach] 3 Mod. 310, 311. [Ridler v Ridler] 1 Equ. cas. abr. 279.

f Perkins. §. 21.

g Co. Litt. 2.

h Ibid.

200 of the rights of things

the duress is ceased i. For all these are under the protection of the law; which will not suffer them to be imposed upon, through the imbecility of their present condition; so that their acts are only binding, in case they be afterwards agreed to, when such imbecility 〈5〉 ceases.

The case of a feme-covert is somewhat different. She may purchase an estate

without the consent of her husband, and the conveyance is good during the coverture, till he avoids it by some act declaring his dissent k. And, though he does nothing to

293 avoid it, or even if he actually consents, the feme-covert herself may, after the death

of her husband, waive or disagree to the same: nay, even her heirs may waive it after her, if she dies before her husband, or if in her widowhood she does nothing to express her consent or agreement l. But the conveyance or other contract of a feme-covert (except by some matter of record) is absolutely void, and not merely voidable m; and therefore cannot be affirmed or made good by any subsequent agreement.

The case of an alien born is also peculiar. For he may purchase any thing; but after

purchase he can hold nothing, except a lease for years of a house for convenience of merchandize, in case he be an alien-friend: all other purchases (when found by an inquest of office) being immediately forfeited to the king n.

Papists, lastly, and persons professing the popish 〈6〉 religion, are by statute 11 &

12 W. III. c. 4. disabled to purchase any lands, rents, or hereditaments; and all estates made to their use, or in trust for them, are 〈7〉 void. But this statute is construed to extend only to papists above the age of eighteen; such only being absolutely disabled to purchase: yet the next protestant heir of a papist under eighteen shall have the profits, during his life; unless he renounces his errors within the time limited by law o.

II. We are next, but principally, to enquire, how a man may aliene or convey; which

will lead us to consider the several modes of conveyance.

In consequence of the admission of property, or the giving a separate right by

the law of society to those things which by the law of nature were in common, there was necessarily some means to be devised, whereby that separate right or exclusive property should be originally acquired; which, we have more than once observed,

294 was that of occupancy or first possession. But this possession, when once gained, was

also necessarily to be continued; or else, upon one man’s dereliction of the thing he had seised, it would again become common, and all those mischiefs and contentions would ensue, which property was introduced to prevent. For this purpose therefore, of continuing the possession, the municipal law has established descents and alienations: the former to continue the possession in the heirs of the proprietor, after his involuntary dereliction of it by his death; the latter to continue it in those persons, to whom the proprietor, by his own voluntary act, shall choose to relinquish it in his lifetime. A translation, or transfer, of property being thus admitted by law, it became

i 2 Inst. 483. [Whelpdale’s case] 5 Rep. 119.

k Co. Litt. 3.

l Ibid.

m Perkins. §. 154. [Manby v Scott] 1 Sid. 120.

n Co. Litt. 2.

o ms [Vane v Fletcher] 1 P. W. 354.





chapter 19 201


necessary that this transfer should be properly evidenced: in order to prevent disputes, either about the fact, as whether there was any transfer at all; or concerning the persons, by whom and to whom it was transferred; or with regard to the subject matter, as what the thing transferred consisted of; or, lastly, with relation to the mode and quality of the transfer, as for what period of time (or, in other words, for what estate and interest) the conveyance was made. The legal evidences of this translation of property are called the common assurances of the kingdom; whereby every man’s estate is assured to him, and all controversies, doubts, and difficulties are either prevented or removed.

These common assurances are of four kinds: 1. By matter in pais [in the country],

or deed; which is an assurance transacted between two or more private persons in pais, in the country; that is (according to the old common law) upon the very spot to be transferred. 2. By matter of record, or an assurance transacted only in the king’s public courts of record. 3. By special custom, obtaining in some particular places, and relating only to some particular species of property. Which three are such as take effect during the life of the party conveying or assuring. 4. The fourth takes no effect, till after his death; and that is by devise, contained in his last will and testament. We shall treat of each in its order.



295 chapter the twentieth.



of alienation by deed.

In treating of deeds I shall consider, first, their general nature; and, next, the several sorts or kinds of deeds, with their respective incidents. And in explaining the former, I shall examine, first, what a deed is; secondly, its requisites; and, thirdly, how it may be avoided.

I. First then, a deed is a writing sealed and delivered by the partiesa. It is sometimes

called a charter, carta, from its materials; but most usually, when applied to the transactions of private subjects, it is called a deed, in Latin factum, χατ᾿εξοχην [by way of preeminence], because it is the most solemn and authentic act that a man can possibly perform, with relation to the disposal of his property; and therefore a man shall always be estopped by his own deed, or not permitted to aver or prove any thing in contradiction to what he has once so solemnly and deliberately avowedb. If a deed be made by more parties than one, there ought to be regularly as many copies of it as there are parties, and each should be cut or indented (formerly in acute angles instar dentium [like teeth], but at present in a waving line) on the top or side, to tally or correspond with the other; which deed, so made, is called an indenture. Formerly, when deeds were more concise than at present, it was usual to write both parts on the same piece of parchment, with some word or letters of the alphabet written between them; through

296 which the parchment was cut, either in a strait or indented line, in such a manner as

to leave half the word on one part and half on the other. Deeds thus made were denominated syngrapha by the canonistsc; and with us chirographa, or hand-writingsd; the word cirographum or cyrographum being usually that 〈1〉 which was divided in making the indenture: and this custom is still preserved in making out the indentures of a fine, whereof hereafter. But at length indenting only has come into use, without cutting through any letters at all; and it seems at present to serve for little other purpose, than to give name to the species of the deed. When the several parts of an indenture are interchangeably executed by the several parties, that part or copy which is executed by the grantor is usually called the original, and the rest are counterparts: though of late it is most frequent for all the parties to execute every part; which renders them all originals. A deed made by one party only is not indented, but polled or shaved quite even; 〈2〉 and is therefore called a deed-poll, or a single deede.

II. We are in the next place to consider the requisites of a deed. The first of which

is, that there be persons able to contract and be contracted with, for the purposes intended by the deed; and also a thing, or subject matter to be contracted for; all

a Co. Litt. 171.

b [Smith v Stapleton] [2] Plowd. 434.

c Lyndew. l. 1. t. 10. c. 1.

d Mirror. c. 2. §. 27.

e Ibid. Litt. §. 371, 372.





chapter 20 203


which must be expressed by sufficient names f. So as in every grant there must be a grantor, a grantee, and a thing granted; in every lease a lessor, a lessee, and a thing demised.

Secondly; the deed must be founded upon good and sufficient consideration. Not

upon an usurious contract g; nor upon fraud or collusion, either to deceive purchasors bona fideh, or just and lawful creditorsi; any of which bad considerations will vacate the 〈3〉 deed. A deed also, or other grant, made without any consideration, is, as it were, of no effect; for it is construed to enure, or to be effectual, only to the use of the grantor himself k. The consideration may be either a good, or a valuable one. A good 297

consideration is such as that of blood, or of natural love and affection, when a man grants an estate to a near relation; being founded in motives of generosity, prudence, and natural duty: a valuable consideration is such as money, marriage, or the like, which the law esteems an equivalent given for the grant l; and is therefore founded in motives of justice. Deeds, made upon good consideration only, are considered as merely voluntary, and are frequently set aside in favour of creditors, and bona fide purchasors.

Thirdly; the deed must be written, or I presume printed; for it may be in any

character or any language; but it must be upon paper, or parchment. For if it be written on stone, board, linen, leather, or the like, it is no deedm. Wood or stone may be more durable, and linen less liable to rasures; but writing on paper or parchment unites in itself, more perfectly than any other way, both those desirable qualities: for there is nothing else so durable, and at the same time so little liable to alteration; nothing so secure from alteration, that is at the same time so durable. It must also have the regular stamps, imposed on it by the several statutes for the increase of the public revenue; else it cannot be given in evidence. Formerly many conveyances were made by parol, or word of mouth only, without writing; but this giving a handle to a variety of frauds, the statute 29 Car. II. c. 3. enacts, that no lease or estate in lands, tenements, or 〈4〉 hereditaments, (except leases, not exceeding three years from the making, and whereon the reserved rent is at least two thirds of the real value) shall be looked upon as of greater force than a lease or estate at 〈5〉 will; unless put in writing, and signed by the party granting, or his agent lawfully authorized in writing.

Fourthly; the matter written must be legally and orderly set forth: that is, there

must be words sufficient to specify the agreement and bind the parties: which sufficiency must be left to the courts of law to determine n. For it is not absolutely 298 necessary in law, to have all the formal parts that are usually drawn out in deeds, so as there be sufficient words to declare clearly and legally the party’s meaning. But, as these formal and orderly parts are calculated to convey that meaning in the clearest,

f Co. Litt. 35.

g Stat. 13 Eliz. c. 8.

h Stat. 27 Eliz. c. 4.

i Stat. 13 Eliz. c. 5.

k Perk. §. 533.

l [Twyne’s case] 3 Rep. 83.

m Co. Litt. 229. F. N. B. 122.

n Co. Litt. 225.

204 of the rights of things

distinctest, and most effectual manner, and have been well considered and settled by the wisdom of successive ages, it is prudent not to depart from them without good reason or urgent necessity; and therefore I will here mention them in their usualo order.

1. The premises may be used to set forth the number and names of the parties,

with their additions or titles. They also contain the recital, if any, of such deeds, agreements, or matters of fact, as are necessary to explain the reasons upon which the present transaction is founded: and herein also is set down the consideration upon which the deed is made. And then follows the certainty of the grantor, grantee, and thing grantedp.

2. 3. Next come the habendum [to have] and tenendumq [to hold]. The office of

the habendum is properly to determine what estate or interest is granted by the deed: though this may be performed, and sometimes is performed, in the premises. In which case 〈6〉 the habendum cannot lessen, but it may enlarge, the estate granted in the premises; as if a grant be “to A and the heirs of his body” in the premises, habendum “to him and his heirs for 〈7〉 ever,” here A has an estate-tail, and a fee-simple expectant thereonr. But had it been in the premises “to him and his heirs,” habendum 〈9〉 “to him and the heirs of his body,” the habendum would be utterly voids; for the larger and more beneficial estate is vested in him before the habendum comes, and shall not afterwards be narrowed, or devested, by it. The tenendum, “and to hold,” is now of very little use, and is only kept in by custom. It was sometimes

299 formerly used to signify the tenure, by which the estate granted was to be holden;

viz. “tenendum per servitium militare, in burgagio, in libero socagio, &c.”1 But, all these being now reduced to free and common socage, the tenure is never specified. Before the statute of quia emptores, 18 Edw. I. it was also sometimes used to denote the lord of whom the land should be holden; but that statute directing all future purchasers to hold, not of the immediate grantor, but of the chief lord of the fee, this use of the tenendum hath been also antiquated; though for a long time after we find it mentioned in antient charters, that the tenements shall be holden de capitalibus dominis feodit [of the chief lords of the fee]: but, as this expressed nothing more than the statute had already provided for, it gradually grew out of use.

4. Next follow the 〈11〉 terms or stipulations, if any, upon which the grant is made:

the first of which is the reddendum or reservation, whereby the grantor doth create or reserve some new thing to himself out of what he had before granted. As “rendering therefore yearly the sum of ten shillings, or a pepper corn, or two days ploughing, or the likeu.” 〈12〉 This render, reditus, return, or rent, under the pure feodal system consisted, in chivalry, principally of military services; in villenage, of the most slavish

o Ibid. 6.

p o See appendix, N. 2. §. 2. pag. v [II. 356–7].

q Ibid.

r 〈8〉 Co. Litt. 21.

s 〈10〉 [Altham’s case] 8 Rep. 154.

t o Append. N. I [II. 353]. Madox. Formul. passim.

u o Append. N. II. §. 1. pag. iii [II. 355].

1 ‘to hold by knight service, in burgage, in free socage, etc.’





chapter 20 205


offices; and, in socage, it usually consists of money, though it may consist of services still, or of any other certain profit w. To make a reddendum good, if it be of any thing newly created by the deed, the reservation must be to the grantors, or some, or one of them, and not to any stranger to the deedx. But if it be of antient services or the like, annexed to the land, then the reservation may be to the lord of the fee y.

5. Another of the terms upon which a grant may be made is a condition; which

is a clause of contingency, on the happening of which the estate granted may be defeated; as “provided always, that if the mortgagor shall pay the mortgagee 500l. 300

upon such a day, the whole estate granted shall determine;” and the like z.

6. Next may follow the clause of warranty; whereby the grantor doth, for himself

and his heirs, warrant and secure to the grantee the estate so granteda. By the feodal constitution, if the vasal’s title to enjoy the feud was disputed, he might vouch, or call, the lord or donor to warrant or insure his gift; which if he failed to do, and the vasal was evicted, the lord was bound to give him another feud of equal value in recompenseb. And so, by our antient law, if before the statute of quia emptores a man enfeoffed another in fee, by the feodal verb dedi [I have given], to hold of himself and his heirs by certain services; the law annexed a warranty to this grant, which bound the feoffor and his heirs, to whom the services (which were the consideration and equivalent for the gift) were originally stipulated to be renderedc. Or if a man and his ancestors had immemorially holden land of another and his ancestors by the service of homage (which was called homage auncestrel) this also bound the lord to warranty d; the homage being an evidence of such a feodal grant. And, upon a similar principle, in case, after a partition or exchange of lands of inheritance, either party or his heirs be evicted of his share, the other and his heirs are bound to warranty e, because they enjoy the equivalent. And so, even at this day, upon a gift in tail or lease for life, rendering rent, the donor or lessor and his heirs (to whom the rent is payable) are bound to warrant the title f. But in a feoffment in fee by the verb dedi, since the statute of quia emptores, the feoffor only is bound to the implied warranty, and not his heirs g; because it is a mere personal contract on the part of the feoffor, the tenure (and of course the antient services) resulting back to the superior lord of the fee. And in other forms of alienation, gradually introduced since that statute, no warranty whatsoever 301

is impliedh; they bearing no sort of analogy to the original feodal donation. And therefore in such cases it became necessary to add an express clause of warranty, to



w See pag. 41 [II. 26].

x [Reniger v Fogassa] [1] Plowd. 13. [Whitlock’s case] 8. Rep. 71.

y o Append. N. I. pag. i [II. 353].

z o Append. N. II. §. 2. pag. viii [II. 359].

a o Ibid . N. I. pag. i [II. 353].

b Feud. l. 2. t. 8, & 25.

c Co. Litt. 384.

d Litt. §. 143.

e Co. Litt. 174.

f Ibid. 384.

g Ibid.

h Co. Litt. 102.

206 of the rights of things

bind the grantor and his heirs; which is a kind of covenant real, and can only be created by the verb warrantizo [I warrant] or warranti.

These express warranties were introduced, even prior to the statute of quia emptores,

in order to evade the strictness of the feodal doctrine of non-alienation without the consent of the heir. For, though he, at the death of his ancestor, might have entered on any tenements that were aliened without his concurrence, yet, if a clause of warranty was added to the ancestor’s grant, this covenant descending upon the heir insured the grantee; not so much by confirming his title, as by obliging such heir to yield him a recompense in lands of equal value: the law, in favour of alienations, supposing that no ancestor would wantonly disinherit his next of bloodk; and therefore presuming that he had received a valuable consideration, either in land, or in money which had purchased land, and that this equivalent descended to the heir together with the ancestor’s warranty. So that when either an ancestor, being the rightful tenant of the freehold, conveyed the land to a stranger and his heirs, or released the right in fee-simple to one who was already in possession, and superadded a warranty to his deed, it was held that such warranty not only bound the warrantor himself to protect and assure the title of the warrantee, but it also bound his heir: and this, whether that warranty was lineal, or collateral to the title of the land. Lineal warranty was where the heir derived, or might by possibility have derived, his title to the land warranted, either from or through the ancestor who made the warranty; as, where a father, or an elder son in the life of the father, released to the disseisor of either themselves or the grandfather, with warranty, this was lineal to the younger sonl. Collateral warranty was where the heir’s

302 title to the land neither was, nor could have been, derived from the warranting ancestor;

as, where a younger brother released to his father’s disseisor, with warranty, this was collateral to the elder brotherm. But where the very conveyance, to which the warranty was annexed, immediately followed a disseisin, or operated itself as such (as, where a father tenant for years, with remainder to his son in fee, aliened in fee-simple with warranty) this, being in its original manifestly founded on the tort or wrong of the warrantor himself, was called a warranty commencing by disseisin; and, being too palpably injurious to be supported, was not binding upon any heir of such tortious warrantorn.

In both lineal and collateral warranty, the obligation of the heir (in case the warrantee

was evicted, to yield him other lands in their stead) was only on condition that he had other sufficient lands by descent from the warranting ancestor o. But though, without assets, he was not bound to insure the title of another, yet, in case of lineal warranty, whether assets descended or not, the heir was perpetually barred from claiming the land himself; for, if he could succeed in such claim, he would then gain assets by descent (if he had them not before) and must fulfil the warranty of his ancestor: and the same rule p was with less justice adopted also in respect of collateral warranties,

i Litt. §. 733.

k Co. Litt. 373.

l Litt. §. 703. 706. 707.

m Litt. §. 705. 707.

n Ibid. §. 698. 702.

o Co. Litt. 102.

p Litt. §. 711. 712.





chapter 20 207


which likewise (though no assets descended) barred the heir of the warrantor from claiming the land by any collateral title; upon the presumption of law that he might hereafter have assets by descent either from or through the same ancestor. The inconvenience of this latter branch of the rule was felt very early, when tenants by the curtesy took upon them to aliene their lands with warranty; which collateral warranty of the father descending upon his son (who was the heir of both his parents) barred him from claiming his maternal inheritance: to remedy which the statute of Glocester, 6 Edw. I. c. 3. declared, that such warranty should be no bar to the son, unless assets descended from the father. It was afterwards attempted in 50 Edw. III. to make the same provision universal, by enacting that no collateral warranty should be a bar, unless 303

where assets descended from the same ancestor q; but it then proceeded not to effect.2 However, by the statute 11 Hen. VII. c. 20. notwithstanding any alienation with warranty by tenant in dower, the heir of the husband is not barred, though he be also heir to the wife. And by statute 4 & 5 Ann. c. 16. all warranties by any tenant for life shall be void against those in remainder or reversion; and all collateral warranties by any ancestor who has no estate of inheritance in possession shall be void against his heir. By the wording of which last statute it should seem, that the legislature meant to allow, that the collateral warranty of tenant in 〈13〉 tail, descending (though without assets) upon a remainder-man or reversioner, should still bar the remainder or reversion. For though the judges, in expounding the statute de donis, held that, by analogy to the statute of Glocester, a lineal warranty by the tenant in tail without assets should not bar the issue in tail, yet they held such warranty with assets to be a sufficient barr: which was therefore formerly mentioneds as one of the ways whereby an estate tail might be destroyed; it being indeed nothing more in effect, than exchanging the lands entailed for others of equal value. They also held that collateral warranty was not within the statute de donis; as that act was principally intended to prevent the tenant in tail from disinheriting his own issue: and therefore collateral warranty (though without assets) was allowed to be, as at common law, a sufficient bar of the estate-tail and all remainders and reversions expectant thereont. And so it still continues to be, notwithstanding the statute of queen Anne, if made by tenant in tail in possession: who therefore may now, without the forms of a fine or recovery, in some cases make a good conveyance in fee-simple, by superadding a warranty to his grant; which, if accompanied with assets, bars his own issue, and without them bars such of his heirs as may be in remainder or reversion.

7. After warranty usually follow covenants, or conventions; which are clauses of 304

agreement contained in a deed, whereby either party may stipulate for the truth of certain facts, or may bind himself to perform, or give, something to the other. Thus the grantor may covenant that he hath a right to convey; or for the grantee’s quiet enjoyment; or the like: the grantee may covenant to pay his 〈14〉 rent, to repair the

q Co. Litt. 373.

r Litt. §. 712. 2 Inst. 293.

s pag. 116 [II. 77].

t Co. Litt. 374. 2 Inst. 335.

2 For the unsuccessful attempt in 1376 to ensure that collateral warranties were not binding without assets descended, see PROME, v. 324–5. Blackstone’s source was probably Rotuli Parliamentorum, ii. 334 (no. 77). 208 of the rights of things

premises, &cu. If the covenantor covenants for himself and his heirs, it is then a covenant real, and descends upon the heirs; who are bound to perform it, provided they have assets by descent, but not otherwise: if he covenants also for his executors and administrators, his personal assets, as well as his real, are likewise pledged for the performance of the covenant; which makes such covenant a better security than any 〈15〉 warranty, and it has therefore in modern practice totally superseded the other.

8. Lastly, comes the conclusion, which mentions the execution and date of the

deed, or the time of its being given or executed, either expressly, or by reference to some day and year before-mentionedw. Not but a deed is good, although it mention no date; or hath a false date; or even if it hath an impossible date, as the thirtieth of February; provided the real day of its being dated or given, that is, delivered, can be provedx.

I proceed now to the fifth requisite for making a good deed; the reading of it. This

is necessary, wherever any of the parties desire it; and, if it be not done on his request, the deed is void as to him. If he can, he should read it himself: if he be blind or illiterate, another must read it to him. If it be read falsely, it will be void; at least for so much as is misrecited: unless it be agreed by collusion that the deed shall be read false, on purpose to make it void; for in such case it shall bind the fraudulent party y.

305 Sixthly, it is requisite that the party, whose deed it is, should seal, and in most

cases I apprehend should sign it also. The use of seals, as a mark of authenticity to letters and other instruments in writing, is extremely antient. We read of it among the Jews and Persians in the earliest and most sacred records of history z. And in the book of Jeremiah there is a very remarkable instance, not only of an attestation by seal, but also of the other usual formalities attending a Jewish purchasea. In the civil law alsob, seals were the evidence of truth; and were required, on the part of the witnesses at least, at the attestation of every testament. But in the times of our Saxon ancestors, they were not much in 〈16〉 use here. For though sir Edward Cokec relies on an instance of king Edwyn’s making use of a seal about an hundred years before the conquest, yet it does not follow that this was the usage among the whole nation: and perhaps the charter he mentions may be of doubtful authority, from this very circumstance, of being sealed; since we are assured by all our antient historians, that sealing was not then in common use. The method of the Saxons was for such as could write to subscribe their names, and, whether they could write or not, to affix the sign of the cross: which custom our illiterate vulgar do, for the most part, to this day keep up; by signing a cross for their mark, when unable to write their names. And indeed

u o Append. N. II. §. 2. pag. viii [II. 360].

w Ibid. pag. xii [II. 363].

x Co. Litt. 46. [Anon. (1537)] Dyer. 28.

y [Painter v Manser] 2 Rep. 3. [Thoroughgood’s case] 9. [Pigot’s case] 11 Rep. 27.

z 1 Kings. c. 21. Daniel. c. 6. Esther. c. 8.

a “And I bought the field of Hanameel, and weighed him the money, even seventeen shekels of silver. And I subscribed the evidence, and sealed it, and took witnesses, and weighed him the money in the ballances. And I took the evidence of the purchase, both that which was sealed according to the law and custom, and also that which was open.” c. 32.

b Inst. 2. 10. 2 & 3.

c 1 Inst. 7.





chapter 20 209


this inability to write, and therefore making a cross in its stead, is honestly avowed by Caedwalla, a Saxon king, at the end of one of his chartersd. In like manner, and for the same unsurmountable reason, the Normans, a brave but illiterate nation, at their 306

first settlement in France, used the practice of sealing only, without writing their names: which custom continued, when learning made its way among them, though the reason for doing it had ceased; and hence the charter of Edward the confessor to Westminster abbey, himself being brought up in Normandy, was witnessed only by his seal, and is generally thought to be the oldest sealed charter of any authenticity in Englande. At the conquest, the Norman lords brought over into this kingdom their own fashions; and introduced waxen seals only, instead of the English method of writing their names, and signing with the sign of the 〈17〉 crossf. The impressions of these seals were sometimes a knight on horseback, sometimes other 〈18〉 devises: but coats of arms were not introduced into seals, nor indeed into any other use, till about the reign of Richard the first, who brought them from the croisade in the holy land; where they were first invented and painted on the shields of the knights, to distinguish the variety of persons of every christian nation who resorted thither, and who could not, when clad in complete steel, be otherwise known or ascertained.

This neglect of signing, and resting only upon the authenticity of seals, remained very

long among us; for it was held in all our books that sealing alone was sufficient to authenticate a deed: and so the common form of attesting deeds,—“sealed and delivered,” continues to this day; notwithstanding the statute 29 Car. II. c. 3. before-mentioned revives the Saxon custom, and expressly directs the signing, in all grants of lands, and many other species of deeds; in which therefore signing seems to be now as necessary as sealing, though it hath been sometimes held, that the one includes the other g.

A seventh requisite to a good deed is that it be delivered, by the party himself or

his certain attorney: which therefore is also expressed in the attestation; “sealed and 307

delivered.” A deed takes effect only from this tradition or delivery; for, if the date be false or impossible, the delivery ascertains the time of it. And if another person seals the deed, yet if the party delivers it himself, he thereby adopts the sealing h, and by a parity of reason the signing also, and makes them both his own. A delivery may be either absolute, that is, to the party or grantee himself; or to a third person, to hold till some conditions be performed on the part of the grantee: in which last case it is not delivered as a deed, but as an escrow; that is, as a scrowl or writing, which is not to take



d “Propria manu pro ignorantia literarum signum sanctae crucis expressi et subscripsi [Because of illiteracy, I have impressed and subscribed with my own hand the sign of the holy cross].” Seld. Jan. Angl. l. 1. §. 42. And this (according to Procopius) the emperor Justin in the east, and Theodoric king of the Goths in Italy, had before authorized by their example, on account of their inability to write.

e Lamb. Archeion. 51.

f “Normanni chirographorum confectionem, cum crucibus aureis, aliisque signaculis sacris, in Anglia firmari solitam, in caeram impressam mutant, modumque scribendi Anglicum rejiciunt.” Ingulph. [This quotation, paraphrased in the text above, condenses a longer passage from the work that was still in Blackstone’s day attributed to the first post-Conquest abbot of Croyland, but in fact a later forgery. Blackstone’s source seems to have been Morton, Whitelockes Notes, ii. 398, note a.]

g [Lemayne v Stanley] 3 Lev. 1. [Warneford v Warneford] Stra. 764.

h Perk. §. 130.

210 of the rights of things

effect as a deed till the conditions be performed; and then it is a deed to all intents and purposes i.

The last requisite to the validity of a deed is the attestation, or execution of it in the

presence of witnesses: though this is necessary, rather for preserving the evidence, than for constituting the essence, of the deed. Our modern deeds are in reality nothing more than an improvement or amplification of the brevia testata [short evidences] mentioned by the feodal writersk; which were written memorandums, introduced to perpetuate the tenor of the conveyance and investiture, when grants by parol only became the foundation of frequent dispute and uncertainty. To this end they registered in the deed the persons who attended as witnesses, which was formerly done without their signing their names (that not being always in their power) but they only heard the deed read; and then the clerk or scribe added their names, in a sort of memorandum; thus; “hijs testibus, Johanne Moore, Jacobo Smith, et aliis ad hanc rem convocatis l [witness John Moore, James Smith and others, for this purpose assembled].” This, like all other solemn transactions, was originally done only coram paribusm [before his peers], and frequently when assembled in the court baron, hundred, or county court; which was then expressed in the attestation, teste comitatu, hundredo, &c n [witness the county, hundred, etc.]. Afterwards the attestation

308 of other witnesses was allowed, the trial in case of a dispute being still reserved to the

pares; with whom the witnesses (if more than one) were associated, and joined in the verdicto: till that also was abrogated by the statute of York, 12 Edw. II. st. 1. c. 2. And in this manner, with some such clause of hijs testibus, are all old deeds and charters, particularly magna carta, witnessed. And, in the time of sir Edward Coke, creations of nobility were still witnessed in the same manner p. But in the king’s common charters, writs, or letters patent, the stile is now altered: for, at present, the king is his own witness, and attests his letters patent thus; “teste meipso, witness ourself at Westminster, &c:” a form which was introduced by Richard the first q , but not commonly used till about the beginning of the fifteenth century; nor the clause of hijs testibus intirely discontinued till the reign of Henry the eighthr: which was also the aera of discontinuing it in the deeds of subjects, learning being then revived, and the faculty of writing more general: and therefore ever since that time the witnesses have subscribed their attestation, either at the bottom, or on the back, of the deeds.

III. We are next to consider, how a deed may be avoided, or rendered of no effect.

And from what has been before laid down it will follow, that if a deed wants any of the essential requisites before-mentioned; either, 1. Proper parties, and a proper subject

i Co. Litt. 36.

k Feud. l. 1. t. 4.

l Co. Litt. 7.

m Feud. l. 2. t. 32.

n o Spelm. Gloss . 228. Madox. Formul . n. 221. 322. 660.

o Co. Litt. 6.

p 2 Inst. 77.

q o Madox, Formal . n. 515.

r Ibid. Dissert. fol. 32. [‘A Dissertation Concerning Ancient Titles and Instruments’, p. xxxii.]

s 〈19〉 2 Inst. 78.





chapter 20 211


matter: 2. A good and sufficient consideration: 3. Writing, on paper or parchment, duly stamped: 4. Sufficient and legal words, properly disposed: 5. Reading, if desired, before the execution: 6. Sealing; and, by the statute, 〈20〉 in many cases signing also: or, 7. Delivery: it is a void deed ab initio [from the beginning]. It may also be avoided by matter ex post facto [after the fact]: as, 1. By rasure, interlining, or other alteration in any material part; unless a memorandum be made thereof at the time of the execution and attestationt. 2. By breaking off, or defacing, the sealu. 3. By delivering it 309

up to be cancelled; that is to have lines drawn over it, in the form of lattice work or cancelli; though the phrase is now used figuratively for any manner of obliteration or defacing it. 4. By the disagreement of such, whose concurrence is necessary, in order for the deed to stand: as, the husband, where a feme covert is concerned; an infant, or person under duress, when those disabilities are removed; and the 〈21〉 like. 6. By the judgment or decree of a court of judicature. This was antiently the province of the court of star chamber, and now of the chancery: when it appears that the deed was obtained by fraud, force, or other foul practice; or is proved to be an absolute forgeryw. In any of these cases the deed may be voided, either in part or totally, according as the cause of avoidance is more or less extensive.

And, having thus explained the general nature of deeds, we are next to consider

their several species, together with their respective incidents. And herein I shall only examine the particulars of those, which, from long practice and experience of their efficacy, are generally used in the alienation of real estates: for it would be tedious, nay infinite, to descant upon all the several instruments made use of in personal concerns, but which fall under our general definition of a deed; that is, a writing sealed and delivered. The former, being principally such as serve to convey the property of lands and tenements from man to man, are commonly denominated conveyances: which are either conveyances at common law, or such as receive their force and efficacy by virtue of the statute of uses.

I. Of conveyances by the common law, some may be called original, or primary

conveyances; which are those by means whereof the benefit or estate is created or first arises: others are derivative or secondary; whereby the benefit or estate, originally created, is enlarged, restrained, transferred, or extinguished.

Original conveyances are the following; 1. Feoffment; 2. Gift; 3. Grant; 4. Lease; 310

5. Exchange; 6. Partition: derivative are, 7. Release; 8. Confirmation; 9. Surrender; 10. Assignment; 11. Defeazance.

1. A feoffment, feoffamentum, is a substantive derived from the verb, to enfeoff,

feoffare or infeudare, to give one a feud; and therefore feoffment is properly donatio feudix [the gift of a fee]. It is the most antient method of conveyance, the most solemn and public, and therefore the most easily remembered and proved. And it may properly be defined, the gift of any corporeal hereditament to another. He that so gives, or enfeoffs, is called the feoffor; and the person enfeoffed is denominated the feoffee.

t [Pigot’s case] 11 Rep. 27.

u [Mathewson’s case] 5 Rep. 23.

w o [Watts v Lock] Toth. n. 24. [Redman v Redman] 1 Vern. 348.

x Co. Litt. 9.

212 of the rights of things

This is plainly derived from, or is indeed itself the very mode of the antient feodal

donation; for though it may be performed by the word “enfeoff” or “grant,” yet the aptest word of feoffment is “do or dediy [I give or I have given].” And it is still directed and governed by the same feodal rules; insomuch that the principal rule relating to the extent and effect 〈22〉 of a feodal grant, “tenor est qui legem dat feudo [the tenor of the grant controls what is given in the fee],” is in other words become the maxim of our law with relation to feoffments, “modus legem dat donationiz [the form controls what is given in the gift].” And therefore as in pure feodal donations the lord, from whom the feud moved, must expressly limit and declare the continuance or quantity of 〈23〉 estate he meant to confer, “ne quis plus donasse praesumatur, quam in donatione expresserita [that no one is to be presumed to have granted more than he expressed in the grant];” so, if one grants by feoffment lands or tenements to another, and limits or expresses no estate, the grantee (due ceremonies of law being performed) hath barely an estate for lifeb. For, as the personal abilities of the feoffee were originally presumed to be the immediate or principal inducements to the feoffment, the feoffee’s

311 estate ought to be confined to his person, and subsist only for his life; unless the

feoffor, by express provision in the creation and constitution of the estate, hath given it a longer continuance. These express provisions are indeed generally made; for this was for ages the only conveyance, whereby our ancestors were wont to create an estate in fee-simplec, by giving the land to the feoffee, to hold to him and his heirs for ever; though it serves equally well to convey any other estate of freeholdd.

But by the mere words of the deed the feoffment is by no means perfected. There

remains a very material ceremony to be performed, called livery of seisin; without which the feoffee has but a mere estate at wille. This livery of seisin is no other than the pure feodal investiture, or delivery of corporal possession of the land or tenement; which was held absolutely necessary to complete the donation. “Nam feudum sine investitura nullo modo constitui potuitf [There is no way to create a fee without an investiture]:” and an estate was then only perfect, when, as Fleta expresses it in our law, “fit juris et seisinae conjunctiog [the right and seisin are joined].”

Investitures, in their original rise, were probably intended to demonstrate in

conquered countries the actual possession of the lord; and that he did not grant a bare litigious right, which the soldier was ill qualified to prosecute, but a peaceable and firm possession. And, at a time when writing was seldom practised, a mere oral gift, at a distance from the spot that was given, was not likely to be either long or accurately retained in the memory of by-standers, who were very little interested in the grant. Afterwards they were retained as a public and notorious act, that the country

y Ibid.

z Wright. 21. [Both Latin maxims cited in this sentence are from Wright.]

a pag. 108 [II. 72].

b Co. Litt. 42.

c o See Appendix. N. I [II. 353].

d Co. Litt. 9.

e Litt. §. 66.

f Wright. 37.

g l. 3. c. 15. §. 5.





chapter 20 213


might take notice of and testify the transfer of the estate; and that such as claimed title by other means might know against whom to bring their actions.

In all well-governed nations, some notoriety of this kind has been ever held

requisite, in order to acquire and ascertain the property of lands. In the Roman law 312

plenum dominium [full ownership] was not said to subsist, unless where a man 〈24〉 hath both the right, and the corporal possession; which possession could not be acquired without both an actual intention to possess, and an actual seisin, or entry into the premises, or part of them in the name of the wholeh. And even in ecclesiastical promotions, where the freehold passes to the person promoted, corporal possession is required at this day, to vest the property completely in the new proprietor; who, according to the distinction of the canonistsi, acquires the jus ad rem [right to the thing], or inchoate and imperfect right, by nomination and institution; but not the jus in re, or complete and full right, unless by corporal possession. Therefore in dignities possession is given by installment; in rectories and vicarages by induction, without which no temporal rights accrue to the minister, though every ecclesiastical power is vested in him by institution. So also even in descents of lands, by our law, which are cast on the heir by act of the law itself, the heir has not plenum dominium, or full and complete ownership, till he has made an actual corporal entry into the lands: for if he dies before entry made, his heir shall not be intitled to take the possession, but the heir of the person who was last actually seisedk. It is not therefore only a mere right to enter, but the actual entry, that makes a man complete owner; so as to transmit the inheritance to his own heirs: non jus, sed seisina, facit stipiteml [not right, but seisin, makes the stock].

Yet, the corporal tradition of lands being sometimes inconvenient, a symbolical

delivery of possession was in many cases antiently allowed; by transferring something near at hand, in the presence of credible witnesses, which by agreement should serve to represent the very thing designed to be conveyed; and an occupancy of this sign 313 or symbol was permitted as equivalent to occupancy of the land itself. Among the Jews we find the evidence of a purchase thus defined in the book of Ruthm: “now this was the manner in former time in Israel, concerning redeeming and concerning changing, for to confirm all things: a man plucked off his shoe, and gave it to his neighbour; and this was a testimony in Israel.” Among the antient Goths and Swedes, contracts for the sale of lands were made in the presence of witnesses, who extended the cloak of the buyer, while the seller cast a clod of the land into it, in order to give possession: and a staff or wand was also delivered from the vendor to the vendee,

h Nam apiscimur possessionem corpore et animo: neque per se corpore; neque per se animo. Non autem ita accipiendum est, ut qui fundum possidere velit, omnes glebas circumambulet; sed sufficit quamlibet partem ejus fundi introire [For we take possession both by the body and by the mind, and not the body by itself or the mind by itself. But it is not to be understood, that one who wishes to take possession must walk over every clod; for it is enough to enter on any part of the land]. (Ff. 41. 2. 3 [§ 1].) And again: traditionibus dominia rerum, non nudis pactis, transferuntur [the ownership of things is transferred by delivery, not by bare agreements]. (Cod. 2. 3. 20.)

i [Sext.] Decretal. l. 3. t. 4. c. 40.

k See pag. 209. 227, 228 [II. 140–1, 153–4].

l Flet. l. 6. c. 2. §. 2.

m ch. 4. v. 7.

214 of the rights of things

which passed through the hands of the witnessesn. With our Saxon ancestors the delivery of a turf was a necessary solemnity, to establish the conveyance of lands o. And, to this day, the conveyance of our copyhold estates is usually made from the seller to the lord or his steward by delivery of a rod or virge, and then from the lord to the purchasor by re-delivery of the same, in the presence of a jury of tenants.

Conveyances in writing were the last and most refined improvement. The mere

delivery of possession, either actual or symbolical, depending on the ocular testimony and remembrance of the witnesses, was liable to be forgotten or misrepresented, and became frequently incapable of proof. Besides, the new occasions and necessities, introduced by the advancement of commerce, required means to be devised of charging and incumbering estates, and of making them liable to a multitude of conditions and minute designations for the purposes of raising money, without an absolute sale of the land; and sometimes the like proceedings were found useful in order to make a decent and competent provision for the numerous branches of a family, and for other domestic views. None of which could be effected by a mere, simple, corporal transfer of the soil from one man to another, which was principally

314 calculated for conveying an absolute unlimited dominion. Written deeds were therefore

introduced, in order to specify and perpetuate the peculiar purposes of the party who conveyed: yet still, for a very long series of years, they were never made use of, but in company with the more antient and notorious method of transfer, by delivery of corporal possession.

Livery of seisin, by the common law, is necessary to be made upon every grant of

an estate of freehold in hereditaments corporeal, whether of inheritance or for life only. In hereditaments incorporeal it is impossible to be made; for they are not the object of the senses: and in leases for years, or other chattel interests, it is not necessary. In leases for years indeed an actual entry is necessary, to vest the estate in the lessee: for the bare lease gives him only a right to enter, which is called his interest in the term, or interesse termini; and, when he enters in pursuance of that right, he is then and not before in possession of his term, and complete tenant for years p. This entry by the tenant himself serves the purpose of notoriety, as well as livery of seisin from the grantor could have done; which it would have been improper to have given in this case, because that solemnity is appropriated to the conveyance of a freehold. And this is one reason why freeholds cannot be made to commence in futuro, because they 〈25〉 cannot be made but by livery of seisin; which livery, being an actual manual tradition of the land, must take effect in praesenti, or not at allq.

On the creation of a freehold remainder, at one and the same time with a particular

estate for years, we have before seen that at the common law livery must be made to the particular tenant r. But if such a remainder be created afterwards, expectant on a lease for years now in being, the livery must not be made to the lessee for years, for

n Stiernhook. de jure Sueon. l. 2. c. 4.

o Hickes. Dissert. epistolar. 85.

p Co. Litt. 46.

q See pag. 165 [II. 111].

r pag. 167 [II. 112–13].





chapter 20 215


then it operates nothing; “nam quod semel meum est, amplius meum esse non potests [for what is once mine, cannot be mine more fully]:” but it must be made to the 315 remainder-man himself, by consent of the lessee for years: for without his consent no livery of the possession can be givent; partly because such forcible livery would be an ejectment of the tenant from his term, and partly for the reasons before givenu for introducing the doctrine of attornments.

Livery of seisin is either in deed, or in law. Livery in deed is thus performed. The

feoffor, lessor, or his attorney, together with the feoffee, lessee, or his attorney, (for this may as effectually be done by deputy or attorney, as by the principals themselves in person) come to the land, or to the house; and there, in the presence of witnesses, declare the contents of the feoffment or lease, on which livery is to be made. And then the feoffor, if it be of land, doth deliver to the feoffee, all other persons being out of the ground, a clod or turf, or a twig or bough there growing, with words to this effect. “I deliver these to you in the name of seisin of all the lands and tenements contained in this deed.” But, if it be of a house, the feoffor must take the ring, or latch of the door, the house being quite empty, and deliver it to the feoffee in the same form; and then the feoffee must enter alone, and shut to the door, and then open it, and let in the othersw. If the conveyance or feoffment be of divers lands, lying scattered in one and the same county, then in the feoffor’s possession, livery of seisin of any parcel, in the name of the rest, sufficeth for all x; but, if they be in several counties, there must be as many liveries as there are counties. For, if the title to these lands comes to be disputed, there must be as many trials as there are counties, and the jury of one county are no judges of the notoriety of a fact in another. Besides, antiently this seisin was obliged to be delivered coram paribus de vicineto, before the peers or freeholders of the neighbourhood, who attested such delivery in the body or on the back of the deed; according to the rule of the feodal law y, pares debent interesse investiturae feudi, et non alii [the peers should be present at the investiture of a fee, and no one else]: for which this reason is expressly given; because the peers or vasals 316

of the lord, being bound by their oath of fealty, will take care that no fraud be committed to his prejudice, which strangers might be apt to connive at. And though, afterwards, the ocular attestation of the pares was held unnecessary, and livery might be made before any credible witnesses, yet the trial, in case it was disputed, (like that of all other attestationsz) was still reserved to the pares or jury of the county a. Also, if the lands be out on lease, though all lie in the same county, there must be as many liveries as there are tenants: because no livery can be made in this case, but by the consent of the particular tenant; and the consent of one will not bind the rest b. And

s Co. Litt. 49.

t Co. Litt. 48.

u pag. 288 [II. 196–7].

w Co. Litt. 48. West. Symb. 251.

x Litt. §. 414. [The correct reference would appear to be Litt. § 61.]

y Feud. l. 2. t. 58 [§ 1].

z See pag. 307 [II. 209–10].

a Gilb. Ten. 35.

b [Anon. (1536)] Dyer. 18 [pl. 106].

216 of the rights of things

in all these cases it is prudent, and usual, to endorse the livery of seisin on the back of the deed, specifying the manner, place, and time of making it; together with the names of the witnessesc. And thus much for livery in deed.

Livery in law is where the same is not made on the land, but in sight of it only; the

feoffor saying to the feoffee, “I give you yonder land, enter and take possession.” Here, if the feoffee enters during the life of the feoffor, it is a good livery, but not otherwise; unless he dares not enter, through fear of his life or bodily harm: and then his continual claim, made yearly, in due form of law, as near as possible to the landsd, will suffice without an entry e. This livery in law cannot however be given or received by attorney, but only by the parties themselvesf.

2. The conveyance by gift, donatio, is properly applied to the creation of an estate-

tail, as feoffment is to that of an estate in fee, and lease to that of an estate for life or years. It differs in nothing from a feoffment, but in the nature of the estate passing by it: for the operative words of conveyance in this case are do or dedig; and gifts in tail

317 are equally imperfect without livery of seisin, as feoffments in fee-simpleh. And this

is the only distinction that Littleton seems to take, when he saysi, “it is to be understood that there is feoffor and feoffee, donor and donee, lessor and lessee;” viz. feoffor is applied to a feoffment in fee-simple, donor to a gift in tail, and lessor to a lease for life, or for years, or at will. In common acceptation gifts are frequently confounded with the next species of deeds: which are,

3. Grants, concessiones; the regular method by the common law of transferring the

property of incorporeal hereditaments, or, such things whereof no livery can be hadk. For which reason all corporeal hereditaments, as lands and houses, are said to lie in livery; and the others, as advowsons, commons, rents, reversions, &c, to lie in grantl. And the reason is given by Bractonm: “traditio, or livery, nihil aliud est quam rei corporalis de persona in personam, de manu in manum, translatio aut in possessionem inductio; sed res incorporales, quae sunt ipsum jus rei vel corpori inhaerens, traditionem non patiuntur.”3 These therefore pass merely by the delivery of the deed. And in signiories, or reversions of lands, such grant, together with the attornment of the tenant (while attornments were requisite) were held to be of equal notoriety with, and therefore equivalent to, a feoffment and livery of lands in immediate possession. It therefore differs but little from a feoffment, except in its subject matter: for the operative words therein commonly used are dedi et concessi, “have given and granted.”

c o See appendix. N. I [II. 353].

d Litt. §. 421, &c.

e Co. Litt. 48.

f Ibid. 52.

g West’s Symbol. 256.

h Litt. §. 59.

i §. 57.

k Co. Litt. 9.

l Ibid. 172.

m l. 2. c. 18.

3 ‘Livery is nothing other than the transfer of something corporeal from one person (or one hand) to another, or the putting into possession [of that thing]; but incorporeal things (which are the very right to a thing or inherent in a body) do not allow any livery.’





chapter 20 217


4. A lease is properly a conveyance of any lands or tenements, (usually in

consideration of rent or other annual recompense) made for life, for years, or at will, but always for a less time than the lessor hath in the premises: for if it be for the whole interest, it is more properly an assignment than a lease. The usual words of operation in it are, “demise, grant, and to farm let; dimisi, concessi, et ad firmam tradidi.” Farm, 318

or feorme, is an old Saxon word signifying provisionsn: and it came to be used instead of rent or render, because antiently the greater part of rents were reserved in provisions; in corn, in poultry, and the like; till the use of money became more frequent. So that a farmer, firmarius, was one who held his lands upon payment of a rent or feorme: though at present, by a gradual departure from the original sense, the word farm is brought to signify the very estate or lands so held upon farm or rent. By this conveyance an estate for life, for years, or at will, may be created, either in corporeal or incorporeal hereditaments: though livery of seisin is indeed incident and necessary to one species of leases, viz. leases for life of corporeal hereditaments; but to no other.

Whatever 〈26〉 restrictions, by the severity of the feodal law, might in times of

very high antiquity be observed with regard to leases; yet by the common law, as it has stood for many centuries, all persons seised of any estate might let leases to endure so long as their own interest lasted, but no longer. Therefore tenant in fee-simple might let leases of any duration; for he hath the whole interest: but tenant in tail, or tenant for life, could make no leases which should bind the issue in tail or reversioner; nor could a husband, seised jure uxoris [in the right of his wife], make a firm or valid lease for any longer term than the joint lives of himself and his wife, for then his interest expired. Yet some tenants for life, where the fee-simple was in abeyance, might (with the concurrence of such as have the guardianship of the fee) make leases of equal duration with those granted by tenants in fee-simple: such as parsons and vicars with consent of the patron and ordinary o. So also bishops, and deans, and such other sole ecclesiastical corporations as are seised of the fee-simple of lands in their corporate right, might, with the concurrence and confirmation of such persons as the law requires, have made leases for years, or for life, estates in tail, or in fee, without any limitation or controll. And corporations aggregate might have 319

made what estates they pleased, without the confirmation of any other person whatsoever. Whereas now, by several statutes, this power where it was unreasonable, and might be made an ill use of, is restrained; and, where in the other cases the restraint by the common law seemed too hard, it is in some measure removed. The former statutes are called the restraining, the latter the enabling statute. We will take a view of them all, in order of time.

And, first, the enabling statute, 32 Hen. VIII. c. 28. empowers three manner of

persons to make leases, to endure for three lives or one and twenty years, which could not do so before. As, first, tenant in tail, may by such leases bind his issue in tail, but not those in remainder or reversion. Secondly, a husband seised in right of

n Spelm. Gl. 229.

o Co. Litt. 44.

218 of the rights of things

his wife, in fee-simple or fee-tail, provided the wife joins in such lease, may bind her and her heirs thereby. Lastly, all persons seised of an estate of fee-simple in right of their 〈27〉 churches, except parsons and vicars, may (without the concurrence of any other person) bind their successors. But then there must many requisites be observed, which the statute specifies, otherwise such leases are not binding p. 1. The lease must be by indenture; and not by deed poll, or by parol. 2. It must begin from the making, or day of the making, and not at any greater distance of time. 3. If there be any old lease in being, it must be first absolutely surrendered, or be within a year of expiring. 4. It must be either for twenty one years, or three lives; and not for both. 5. It must not exceed the term of three lives, or twenty one years, but may be for a shorter term. 6. It must be of corporeal hereditaments, and not of such things as lie merely in grant; for no rent can be reserved thereout by the common law, as the lessor cannot resort

320 to them to distreinq. 7. It must be of lands and tenements most commonly letten for

twenty years past; so that if they 〈29〉 have been let for above half the time (or eleven years out of the twenty) either for life, for years, at will, or by copy of court roll, it is sufficient. 8. The most usual and customary feorm or rent, for twenty years past, must be reserved yearly on such lease. 9. Such leases must not be made without impeachment of waste. These are the guards, imposed by the statute (which was avowedly made for the security of farmers and the consequent improvement of tillage) to prevent unreasonable abuses, in prejudice of the issue, the wife, or the successor, of the reasonable indulgence here given.

Next follows, in order of time, the disabling or restraining statute, 1 Eliz. c. 19.

(made entirely for the benefit of the successor) which enacts, that all grants by archbishops and bishops (which include even those confirmed by the dean and chapter; the which, however long or unreasonable, were good at common law) other than for the term of one and twenty years or three lives from the making, or without reserving the usual rent, shall be void. Concurrent leases, if confirmed by the dean and chapter, are held to be within the exception of this statute, and therefore valid; provided they do not exceed (together with the lease in being) the term permitted by the actr. But, by a saving expressly made, this statute of 1 Eliz. did not extend to grants made by any bishop to the crown; by which means queen Elizabeth procured many fair possessions to be made over to her by the prelates, either for her own use, or with intent to be granted out again to her favourites, whom she thus gratified without any expense to herself. To prevent whichs for the future, the statute 1 Jac. I. c. 3. extends the prohibition to grants and leases made to the king, as well as to any of his subjects.

Next comes the statute 13 Eliz. c. 10. explained and enforced by the statutes 14 Eliz.

321 c. 11 & 14. 18 Eliz. c. 11. and 43 Eliz. c. 29. which extend the restrictions, laid by the last

mentioned statute on bishops, to certain other inferior corporations, both sole and

p Co. Litt. 44.

q But now by the statute 5 Geo. III. c. 17. a lease of tithes or other incorporeal hereditaments, alone, may be granted by any 〈28〉 bishop or ecclesiastical or eleemosynary corporation, and the successor shall be intitled to recover the rent by an action of debt, which (in case of a freehold lease) he could not have brought at the common law.

r Co. Litt. 45.

s [Magdalen College case] 11 Rep. 71.





chapter 20 219


aggregate. From laying all which together we may collect, that all colleges, cathedrals, and other ecclesiastical, or eleemosynary corporations, and all parsons and vicars, are restrained from making any leases of their lands, unless under the following regulations: 1. They must not exceed twenty one years, or three lives, from the making. 2. The accustomed rent, or more, must be yearly reserved thereon. 3. Houses in corporations, or market towns, may be let for forty years; provided they be not the mansion-houses of the lessors, nor have above ten acres of ground belonging to them; and provided the lessee be bound to keep them in repair: and they may also be aliened in fee-simple for lands of equal value in recompense. 4. Where there is an old lease in being, no concurrent lease shall be made, unless where the old one will expire within three years. 5. No lease (by the equity of the statute) shall be made without impeachment of wastet. 6. All bonds and covenants tending to frustrate the provisions of the statutes 13 & 18 Eliz. shall be void.

Concerning these restrictive statutes there are two observations to be made.

First, that they do not, by any construction, enable any persons to make such leases as they were by common law disabled to make. Therefore a parson, or vicar, though he is restrained from making longer leases than for twenty one years or three lives, even with the consent of patron and ordinary, yet is not enabled to make any lease at all, so as to bind his successor, without obtaining such consent u. Secondly, that though leases contrary to these acts are declared void, yet they are good against the lessor during his life, if he be a sole corporation; and are also good against an aggregate corporation so long as the head of it lives, who is presumed to be the most concerned in interest. For the act was intended for the benefit of the successor only; and no man shall make an advantage of his own wrongw.

There is yet another restriction with regard to college leases, by statute 18 Eliz. c. 322

6. which directs, that one third of the old rent, then paid, should for the future be reserved in wheat or malt, reserving a quarter of wheat for each 6s. 8d., or a quarter of malt for every 5s.; or that the lessees should pay for the same according to the price that wheat and malt should be sold for, in the market next adjoining to the respective colleges, on the market-day before the rent becomes due. This is saidx to have been an invention of lord treasurer Burleigh, and sir Thomas Smith, then principal secretary of state; who, observing how greatly the value of money had sunk, and the price of all provisions risen, by the quantity of bullion imported from the newfound Indies, (which effects were likely to increase to a greater degree) devised this method for upholding the revenues of colleges. Their fore-sight and penetration has in this respect been very apparent: for, though the rent so reserved in corn was at first but one third of the old rent, or half of what was still reserved in money, yet now the proportion is nearly inverted; and the money arising from corn rents is, communibus annis [in an average year], almost double to the rents reserved in money.



t Co. Litt. 45.

u Ibid. 44.

w Ibid. 4.

x Strype’s annals of Eliz. [This event first appears in the 1725 edition of Strype’s book, i. 455.]

220 of the rights of things

The leases of beneficed clergymen are farther restrained, in case of their non-

residence, by statutes 13 Eliz. c. 20. 14 Eliz. c. 11. 〈30〉 and 18 Eliz. c. 11. which direct, that, if any beneficed clergyman be absent from his cure above fourscore days in any one year, he shall not only forfeit one year’s profit of his benefice, to be distributed among the poor of the parish; but that all leases made by him, of the profits of such benefice, and all covenants and agreements of like nature, shall cease and be void: except in the case of licensed pluralists, who are allowed to demise the living, on which they are non-resident, to their curates only; provided such curates do not absent themselves above forty days in any one year. And thus much for leases, with their several enlargements and restrictions y.

323 5. An exchange is a mutual grant of equal interests, the one in consideration of

the other. The word “exchange” is so individually requisite and appropriated by law to this case, that it cannot be supplied by any other word or expressed by any circumlocutionz. The estates exchanged must be equal in quantity a; not of value, for that is immaterial, but of interest; as fee-simple for fee-simple, a lease for twenty years for a lease for twenty years, and the like. And the exchange may be of things that lie either in grant or in livery b. But no livery of seisin, even in exchanges of freehold, is necessary to perfect the conveyancec: for each party stands in the place of the other and occupies his right, and each of them hath already had corporal possession of his own land. But entry must be made on both sides; for, if either party die before entry, the exchange is void, for want of sufficient notoriety d. And so also, if two parsons, by consent of patron and ordinary, exchange their preferments; and the one is presented, instituted, and inducted, and the other is presented, and instituted, but dies before induction; the former shall not keep his new benefice, because the exchange was not completed, and therefore he shall return back to his owne. For if, after an exchange of lands or other hereditaments, either party be evicted of those which were taken by him in exchange, through defect of the other’s title; he shall return back to the possession of his own, by virtue of the implied warranty contained in all exchangesf.

6. A partition, is when two or more joint-tenants, coparceners, or tenants in

common, agree to divide the lands so held among them in severalty, each taking a

324 distinct part. Here, as in some instances there is a unity of interest, and in all a unity

of possession, it is necessary that they all mutually convey and assure to each other the several estates, which they are to take and enjoy separately. By the common law coparceners, being compellable to make partition, might have made it by parol only; but joint-tenants and tenants in common must have done it by deed: and in both

y For the other learning relating to leases, which is very curious and diffusive, I must refer the student to 3 Bac. abridg. 295. (title, leases and terms for years) where the subject is treated in a perspicuous and masterly manner; being supposed to be extracted from a manuscript of sir Geoffrey Gilbert.

z Co. Litt. 50, 51.

a Litt. §. 64, 65.

b Co. Litt. 51.

c Litt. §. 62.

d Co. Litt. 50.

e Perk. §. 288.

f pag. 301 [II. 205–6].





chapter 20 221


cases the conveyance must have been perfected by livery of seising. And the statutes of 31 Hen. VIII. c. 1. and 32 Hen. VIII. c. 32. made no alteration in this point. But the statute of frauds 29 Car. II. c. 3. hath now abolished this distinction, and made a deed in all cases necessary.

These are the several species of primary, or original conveyances. Those which

remain are of the secondary, or derivative sort; which presuppose some other conveyance precedent, and only serve to enlarge, confirm, alter, restrain, restore, or transfer the interest granted by such original conveyance. As,

7. Releases; which are a discharge or conveyance of a man’s right in lands or tene-

ments, to another that hath some former estate in possession. The words generally used therein are “remised, released, and for ever quit-claimedh.” And these releases may enure either, 1. By way of enlarging an estate, or enlarger l’estate: as, if there be tenant for life or years, remainder to another in fee, and he in remainder releases all his right to the particular tenant and his heirs, this gives him the estate in fee i. But in this case the relessee must be in possession of some estate, for the release to work upon; for if there be lessee for years, and, before he enters and is in possession, the lessor releases to him all his right in the reversion, such release is void for want of possession in the relessee k. 2. By way of passing an estate, or mitter l’estate: as when one of two coparceners releaseth all her right to the other, this passeth the fee-simple of the whole l. And in both these cases there must be a privity of estate between the relessor and relesseem; that is, one of their estates must be so related to the other, as to make but one and the 325

same estate in law. 3. By way of passing a right, or mitter le droit: as if a man be disseised, and releaseth to his disseisor all his right; hereby the disseisor acquires a new right, which changes the quality of his estate, and renders that lawful which before was 〈31〉 tortiousn. 4. By way of extinguishment: as if my tenant for life makes a lease to A for life, remainder to B and his heirs, and I release to A; this extinguishes my right to the reversion, and shall enure to the advantage of B’s remainder as well as of A’s particular estateo. 5. By way of entry and feoffment: as if there be two joint disseisors, and the disseisee releases to one of them, he shall be sole seised, and shall keep out his former companion; which is the same in effect as if the disseisee had entered, and thereby put an end to the disseisin, and afterwards had enfeoffed one of the disseisors in fee p. And hereupon we may observe, that when a man has in himself the possession of lands, he must at the common law convey the freehold by feoffment and livery; which makes a notoriety in the country: but if a man has only a right or a future interest, he may convey that right or interest by a mere release to him that is in possession of the land: for the occupancy of the relessee is a matter of sufficient notoriety already.

g Litt. §. 250. Co. Litt. 169.

h Litt. §. 445.

i Ibid. §. 465.

k Ibid. §. 459.

l Co. Litt. 273.

m Ibid. 272, 273.

n Litt. §. 466.

o Ibid. §. 470.

p Co. Litt. 278.

222 of the rights of things

8. A confirmation is of a nature nearly allied to a release. Sir Edward Coke

defines it q to be a conveyance of an estate or right in esse [in being], whereby a voidable estate is made sure and unavoidable, or whereby a particular estate is encreased: and the words of making it are these, “have given, granted, ratified, approved, and confirmedr.” An instance of the first branch of the definition is, if tenant for life leaseth for forty years, and dieth during that term; here the lease for years is voidable by him in reversion: yet, if he hath confirmed the estate of the lessee for years, before the death of tenant for life, it is no longer voidable but sures. The

326 latter branch, or that which tends to the encrease of a particular estate, is the same in

all respects with that species of release, which operates by way of enlargement.

9. A surrender, sursumredditio, or rendering up, is of a nature directly opposite

to a release; for, as that operates by the greater estate’s descending upon the less, a surrender is the falling of a less estate into a greater by deed. It is defined t, a yielding up of an estate for life or years to him that hath the immediate reversion or remainder, wherein the particular estate may merge or drown, by mutual agreement between them. It is done by these words, “hath surrendered, granted, and yielded up.” The surrenderor must be in possessionu; and the surrenderee must have a higher estate, in which the estate surrendered may merge: therefore tenant for life cannot surrender to him in remainder for yearsw. In a surrender there is no occasion for livery of seisinx; for there is a privity of estate between the surrenderor, and the surrenderee; the one’s particular estate, and the other’s remainder are one and the same estate; and livery having been once made at the creation of it, there is no necessity for having it afterwards. And, for the same reason, no livery is required on a release or confirmation in fee to tenant for years or at will, though a freehold thereby passes; since the reversion of the relessor, or confirmor, and the particular estate of the relessee, or confirmee, are one and the same estate; and where there is already a possession, derived from such a privity of estate, any farther delivery of possession would be vain and nugatory y.

10. An assignment is properly a transfer, or making over to another, of the right one

has in any estate; but it is usually applied to an estate for life or years. And it differs from a lease only in this: that by a lease one grants an interest less than his own,

327 reserving to himself a reversion; in assignments he parts with the whole property,

and the assignee stands to all intents and purposes in the place of the assignor.

11. A defeazance is a collateral deed, made at the same time with a feoffment or

other conveyance, containing certain conditions, upon the performance of which the estate then created may be defeatedz or totally undone. And in this manner mortgages

q 1 Inst. 295.

r Litt. §. 515, 531.

s Ibid. §. 516.

t Co. Litt. 337.

u Ibid. 338.

w Perk. §. 589.

x Co. Litt. 50.

y Litt. §. 460.

z From the French verb defaire, infectum reddere.





chapter 20 223


were in former times usually made; the mortgagor enfeoffing the mortgagee, and he at the same time executing a deed of defeazance, whereby the feoffment was rendered void on re-payment of the money borrowed at a certain day. And this, when executed at the same time with the original feoffment, was considered as part of it by the antient law a; and, therefore only, indulged: no subsequent secret revocation of a solemn conveyance, executed by livery of seisin, being allowed in those days of simplicity and truth; though, when uses were afterwards introduced, a revocation of such uses was permitted by the courts of equity. But things that were merely executory, or to be completed by matter subsequent, (as rents, of which no seisin could be had till the time of payment; and so also annuities, conditions, warranties, and the like) were always liable to be recalled by defeazances made subsequent to the time of their creationb.

II. There yet remain to be spoken of some few conveyances, which have their

force and operation by virtue of the statute of uses.

Uses and trusts are in their original of a nature very similar, or rather exactly the

same: answering more to the fidei-commissum [trust] than the usus-fructus [usufruct], of the civil law; which latter was the temporary right of using a thing, without having the ultimate property, or full dominion of the substancec. But the fidei-commissum, which usually was created by will, was the disposal of an inheritance to one, in confidence that he should convey it or dispose of the profits at the will of another. 328 And it was the business of a particular magistrate, the praetor fidei-commissarius [judge of trusts], instituted by Augustus, to enforce the observance of this confidenced. So that the right thereby given was looked upon as a vested right, and entitled to a remedy from a court of justice: which occasioned that known division of rights by the Roman law, into jus legitimum, a legal right, which was remedied by the ordinary course of law; jus fiduciarium, a right in trust, for which there was a remedy in conscience; and jus precarium, a right in courtesy, for which the remedy was only by intreaty or request e. In our law, a use might be ranked under the rights of the second kind; being a confidence reposed in another who was tenant of the land, or terre-tenant, that he should dispose of the land according to the intentions of cestuy que use, or him to whose use it was granted, and suffer him to take the profits f. As, if a feoffment was made to A and his heirs, to the use of (or in trust for) B and his heirs; here at the common law A the terre-tenant had the legal property and possession of the land, but B the cestuy que use was in conscience and equity to have the profits and disposal of it.

This notion was transplanted into England from the civil law, about the close of

the reign of Edward III g, by means of the foreign ecclesiastics; who introduced it to evade the statutes of mortmain, by obtaining grants of lands, not to their religious

a Co. Litt. 236.

b Ibid. 237.

c Ff. 7. 1. 1.

d [Justinian] Inst. 2. tit. 23.

e Ff. 43. 26. 1. Bacon on uses. 8º. 306.

f [Dalamere v Barnard] [1] Plowd. 352.

g Stat. 50 Edw. III. c. 6. 〈32〉 1 Ric. II. c. 9.

224 of the rights of things

houses directly, but to the use of the religious housesh: which the clerical chancellors of those times held to be fidei-commissa, and binding in conscience; and therefore assumed the jurisdiction, which Augustus had vested in his praetor, of compelling the execution of such trusts in the court of chancery. And, as it was most easy to obtain such grants from dying persons, a maxim was established, that though by law the lands themselves were not devisable, yet if a testator had enfeoffed another to his

329 own use, and so was possessed of the use only, such use was devisable by will. But we

have seeni how this evasion was crushed in its infancy, by statute 15 Ric. II. c. 5. with respect to religious houses.

Yet, the idea being once introduced, however fraudulently, it afterwards continued

to be often innocently, and sometimes very laudably, applied to a number of civil purposes: particularly as it removed the restraint of alienations by will, and permitted the owner of lands in his lifetime to make various designations of their profits, as prudence, or justice, or family convenience, might from time to time require. Till at length, during our long wars in France and the subsequent civil commotions between the houses of York and Lancaster, uses grew almost universal: through the desire that men had (when their lives were continually in hazard) of providing for their children by will, and of securing their estates from forfeitures; when each of the contending parties, as they became uppermost, alternately attainted the other. Wherefore about the reign of Edward IV, (before whose time, lord Bacon remarks k, there are not six cases to be found relating to the doctrine of uses) the courts of equity began to reduce them to something of a regular system.

Originally it was held that the chancery could give no relief, but against the very

person himself intrusted for cestuy que use, and not against his heir or alienee. This was altered in the reign of Henry VI, with respect to the heir l ; and afterwards the same rule, by a parity of reason, was extended to such alienees as had purchased either without a valuable consideration, or with an express notice of the usem. But a purchasor for a valuable consideration, without notice, might hold the land discharged of any trust or confidence. And also it was held, that neither the king or queen, on account of their dignity royaln, nor any corporation aggregate, on account of its

330 limited capacity o, could be seised to any use but their own; that is, they might hold the

lands, but were not compellable to execute the trust. And, if the feoffee to uses died without heir, or committed a forfeiture, or married, neither the lord who entered for his escheat or forfeiture, nor the husband who retained the possession as tenant by the curtesy, nor the 〈33〉 wife who was assigned her dower, were liable to perform the use p; because they were not parties to the trust, but came in by act of law: though doubtless their title in reason was no better than that of the heir.

h See pag. 271 [II. 184].

i pag. 272 [II. 185].

k on uses. 313.

l [Anon. (1502)] Keilw. 42. Yearbook 22 Edw. IV. 6.

m [Anon. (1502)] Keilw. 46. Bacon of uses. 312.

n Bro. Abr. tit. Feoffm. al uses. 31. Bacon of uses. 346, 347.

o Bro. Abr. tit. Feoffm. al uses. 40 Bacon. 347.

p [Chudleigh’s case] 1 Rep. 122.





chapter 20 225


On the other hand the use itself, or interest of cestuy que use, was learnedly refined

upon with many elaborate distinctions. And, 1. It was held that nothing could be granted to a use, whereof the use is inseparable from the possession; as annuities, ways, commons, and authorities, quae ipso usu consumunturq [which are consumed by the use itself]: or whereof the seisin could not be instantly givenr. 2. A use could not be raised without a sufficient consideration. For where a man makes a feoffment to another without any consideration, equity presumes that he meant it to the use of himself s: unless he expressly declares it to be to the use of another, and then nothing shall be presumed contrary to his own expressionst. But, if either a good or a valuable consideration appears, equity will immediately raise a use correspondent to such considerationu. 3. Uses were descendible according to the rules of the common law, in the case of inheritances in possessionw; for in this and many other respects aequitas sequitur legem [equity follows law], and cannot establish a different rule of property from that which the law has established. 4. Uses might be assigned by secret deeds between the parties x, or be devised by last will and testament y: for, as the legal estate in the soil was not transferred by these transactions, no livery of seisin was necessary; and, as the intention of the parties was the leading principle in this species of property, any instrument declaring that intention was allowed to be binding in equity. But 331 cestuy que use could not at common law aliene the legal interest of the lands, without the concurrence of his feoffeez; to whom he was accounted by law to be only tenant at sufferancea. 5. Uses were not liable to any of the feodal burthens; and particularly did not escheat for felony or other defect of blood; for escheats, &c, are the consequence of tenure, and uses are held of nobody: but the land itself was liable to escheat, whenever the blood of the feoffee to uses was extinguished by crime or by defect; and the lord (as was before observed) might hold it discharged of the useb. 6. No wife could be endowed, or husband have his curtesy, of a usec: for no trust was declared for their benefit, at the original grant of the estate. And therefore it became customary, when most estates were put in use, to settle before marriage some joint estate to the use of the husband and wife for their lives; which was the original of modern jointuresd. 7. A use could not be extended by writ of elegit, or other legal process, for the debts of cestuy que usee. For, being merely a creature of equity, the



q [Oxford Earldom case] 1 Jon. 127.

r [Yelverton v Yelverton] Cro. Eliz. 401.

s See pag. 296 [II. 203].

t [Anon. (1535)] 1 And. 37.

u [Ward v Sudman] Moor. 684.

w 2 Roll. Abr. 780.

x Bacon of uses. 312.

y Ibid. 308.

z Stat. 1 Ric. III. c. 1.

a Bro. Abr. ibid. 23.

b [Anon. (1506)] Jenk. 190.

c [Vernon’s case] 4 Rep. 1. [Cromwell v Andrews] 2 And. 75.

d See pag. 137 [II. 92–3].

e Bro. Abr. tit. executions. 90.

226 of the rights of things

common law, which looked no farther than to the person actually seised of the land, could award no process against it.

It is impracticable, upon our present plan, to pursue the doctrine of uses through

all the refinements and niceties, which the ingenuity of the times (abounding in subtile disquisitions) deduced from this child of the imagination; when once a departure was permitted from the plain simple rules of property established by the antient law. These principal outlines will be fully sufficient to shew the ground of lord Bacon’s complaintf, that this course of proceeding “was turned to deceive many of their just and reasonable rights. A man, that had cause to sue for land, knew not against whom to bring his action, or who was the owner of it. The wife was defrauded

332 of her thirds; the husband of his curtesy; the lord of his wardship, relief, heriot, and

escheat; the creditor of his extent for debt; and the poor tenant of his lease.” To remedy these inconveniences abundance of statutes were provided, which made the lands liable to be extended by the creditors of cestuy que useg; allowed actions for the freehold to be brought against him, if in the actual pernancy or enjoyment of the profitsh; made him liable to actions of wastei; established his conveyances and leases made without the concurrence of his feoffeesk; and gave the lord the wardship of his heir, with certain other feodal perquisites l.

These provisions all tended to consider cestuy que use as the real owner of the

estate; and at length that idea was carried into full effect by the statute 27 Hen. VIII. c. 10. which is usually called the statute of uses, or, in conveyances and pleadings, the statute for transferring uses into possession. The hint seems to have been derived from what was done at the accession of king Richard III; who having, when duke of Glocester, been frequently made a feoffee to uses, would upon the assumption of the crown (as the law was then understood) have been intitled to hold the lands discharged of the use. But, to obviate so notorious an injustice, an act of parliament was immediately passedm, which ordained that, where he had been so infeoffed jointly with other persons, the land should vest in the other feoffees, as if he had never been named; and that, where he stood solely infeoffed, the estate itself should vest in cestuy que use in like manner as he had the use. And so the statute of Henry VIII, after reciting the various inconveniences before-mentioned and many others, enacts, that “when any person shall be seised of lands, &c, to the use, confidence, or trust, of any other person or body politic, the person or corporation intitled to the

333 use in fee-simple, fee-tail, for life, or years, or otherwise, shall from thenceforth stand

and be seised or possessed of the land, &c, of and in the like estates as they have in the use, trust, or confidence; and that the estate of the person so seised to uses shall be deemed to be in him or them that have the use, in such quality, manner, form, and condition, as they had before in the use.” The statute thus executes the use, as our

f Use of the law. 153.

g Stat. 50 Edw. III. c. 6. 2 Ric. II. sess. 2. c. 3. 19 Hen. VII. c. 15.

h Stat. 1 Ric. II. c. 9. 4 Hen. IV. c. 7. 11 Hen. VI. c. 3. 1 Hen. VII. c. 1.

i Stat. 11 Hen. VI. c. 5.

k Stat. 1 Ric. III. c. 1.

l Stat. 4 Hen. VII. c. 17. 19 Hen. VII. c. 15.

m 1 Ric. III. c. 5.





chapter 20 227


lawyers term it; that is, it conveys the possession to the use, and transfers the use into possession: thereby making cestuy que use complete owner of the lands and tenements, as well at law as in equity.

The statute having thus, not abolished the conveyance to uses, but only annihilated

the intervening estate of the feoffee, and turned the interest of cestuy que use into a legal instead of an equitable ownership; the courts of common law began to take cognizance of uses, instead of sending the party to seek his relief in chancery. And, considering them now as merely a mode of conveyance, very many of the rules before established in equity were adopted with improvements by the judges of the common law. The same persons only were held capable of being seised to a use, the same considerations were necessary for raising it, and it could only be raised of the same hereditaments, as formerly. But as the statute, the instant it was raised, converted it into an actual possession of the land, a great number of the incidents, that formerly attended it in its fiduciary state, were now at an end. The land could not escheat or be forfeited by the act or defect of the feoffee, nor be aliened to any purchasor discharged of the use, nor be liable to dower or curtesy on account of the seisin of such feoffee; because the legal estate never rests in him for a moment, but is instantaneously transferred to cestuy que use, as soon as the use is declared. And, as the use and the land were now convertible terms, they became liable to dower, curtesy, and escheat, in consequence of the seisin of cestuy que use, who was now become the terre-tenant also; and they likewise were no longer devisable by will.

The various necessities of mankind induced also the judges very soon to depart 334

from the rigour and simplicity of the rules of the common law, and to allow a more minute and complex construction upon conveyances to uses than upon others. Hence it was adjudged, that the use need not always be executed the instant the conveyance is made: but, if it cannot take effect at that time, the operation of the statute may wait till the use shall arise upon some future contingency, to happen within a reasonable period of time; and in the mean while the antient use shall remain in the original grantor: as, when lands are conveyed to the use of A and B, after a marriage shall be had between themn, or to the use of A and his heirs till B shall pay him a sum of money, and then to the use of B and his heirso. Which doctrine, when devises by will were again introduced, and considered as equivalent in point of construction to declarations of uses, was also adopted in favour of executory devisesp. But herein these, which are called contingent or springing, uses differ from an executory devise; in that there must be a person seised to such uses at the time when the contingency happens, else they can never be executed by the statute; and therefore, if the estate of the feoffee to such use be destroyed by alienation or otherwise, before the contingency arises, the use is destroyed for ever q: whereas by an executory devise the freehold itself is transferred to the future devisee. And, in both these cases, a fee may be



n [Woodliff v Drury] 2 Roll. Abr. 791. [Woodliff v Drury] Cro. Eliz. 439.

o Bro. Abr. tit. Feoffm. al uses. 30.

p See pag. 173 [II. 116].

q [Chudleigh’s case] 1 Rep. 134. 138. [Woodliff v Drury] Cro. Eliz. 439.

228 of the rights of things

limited to take effect after a feer; because, though that was forbidden by the common law in favour of the lord’s escheat, yet, when the legal estate was not extended beyond one fee-simple, such subsequent uses (after a use in fee) were before the statute permitted to be limited in equity; and then the statute executed the legal estate in the same manner as the use before subsisted. It was also held that a use, though executed,

335 may change from one to another by circumstances ex post factos; as, if A makes a feoffment

to the use of his intended wife and her eldest son for their lives, upon the marriage the wife takes the whole use in severalty; and, upon the birth of a son, the use is executed jointly in them botht. This is sometimes called a secondary, sometimes a shifting, use. And, whenever the use limited by the deed expires, or cannot vest, it returns back to him who raised it, after such expiration or during such impossibility, and is stiled a resulting use. As, if a man makes a feoffment to the use of his intended wife for life, with remainder to the use of her first-born son in tail: here, till he marries the use results back to himself; after marriage, it is executed in the wife for life; and, if she dies without issue, the whole results back to him in feeu. It was likewise held, that the uses originally declared may be revoked at any future time, and new uses be declared of the land, provided the grantor reserved to himself such a power at the creation of the estate; whereas the utmost that the common law would allow, was a deed of defeazance coeval with the grant itself (and therefore esteemed a part of it) upon events specifically mentionedw. And, in case of such a revocation, the old uses were held instantly to cease, and the new ones to become executed in their steadx. And this was permitted, partly to indulge the convenience, and partly the caprice of mankind; who (as lord Bacon observes y) have always affected to have the disposition of their property revocable in their own time, and irrevocable ever afterwards.

By this equitable train of decisions in the courts of law, the power of the court of

chancery over landed property was greatly curtailed and diminished. But one or two technical scruples, which the judges found it hard to get over, restored it with tenfold increase. They held in the first place, that “no use could be limited on a usez,” and that when a man bargains and sells his land for money, which raises a use by implication

336 to the bargainee, the limitation of a farther use to another person is repugnant and

therefore voida. And therefore, on a feoffment to A and his heirs, to the use of B and his heirs, in trust for C and his heirs, they held that the statute executed only the first use, and that the second was a mere nullity: not adverting, that the instant the first use was executed in B, he became seised to the use of C, which second use the statute might as well be permitted to execute as it did the first; and so the legal estate might be instantaneously transmitted down, through a hundred uses upon uses, till finally

r [Carpenter v Smith] Pollexf. 78. [Marks v Marks] 10 Mod. 423.

s Bro. Abr. tit. Feoffm. al uses. 30.

t Bacon of uses. 351.

u Ibid. 350. 1 Rep. 120.

w See. pag. 327 [II. 222–3].

x Co. Litt. 237.

y on uses. 316.

z [Tyrrel’s case] Dyer. 155.

a [Tyrrel’s case] 1 And. 37. [Corbet’s case] [2 And.] 136.





chapter 20 229


executed in the last cestuy que use. Again; as the statute mentions only such persons as were seised to the use of others, this was held not to extend to terms of years, or other chattel interests, whereof the termor is not seised, but only possessedb; and therefore, if a term of one thousand years be limited to A, to the use of (or in trust for) B, the statute does not execute this use, but leaves it as at common law c. And lastly, (by more modern resolutions) where lands are given to one and his heirs, in trust to receive and pay over the profits to another, this use is not executed by the statute: for the land must remain in the trustee to enable him to perform the trust d.

Of the two more antient distinctions the courts of equity quickly availed themselves.

In the first case it was evident, that B was never intended by the parties to have any beneficial interest; and, in the second, the cestuy que use of the term was expressly driven into the court of chancery to seek his remedy: and therefore that court determined, that though these were not uses, which the statute could execute, yet still they were trusts in equity, which in conscience ought to be 〈34〉 performed. To this the reason of mankind assented, and the doctrine of uses was revived, under the denomination of trusts: and thus, by this strict construction of the courts of law, a statute made upon great deliberation, and introduced in the most solemn manner, has had little other effect than to make a slight alteration in the formal words of a conveyance e.

However, the courts of equity, in the exercise of this new jurisdiction, have wisely 337

avoided in a great degree those mischiefs which made uses 〈35〉 intolerable. They now consider a trust-estate (either when expressly declared or resulting by necessary implication) as equivalent to the legal ownership, governed by the same rules of property, and liable to every charge in equity, which the other is subject to in law: and, by a long series of uniform determinations, for now near a century past, with some assistance from the legislature, they have raised a new system of rational jurisprudence, by which trusts are made to answer in general all the beneficial ends of uses, without their inconvenience or frauds. The trustee is considered as merely the instrument of conveyance, and can in no shape affect the estate, unless by alienation for a valuable consideration to a purchasor without noticef; which, as cestuy que use is generally in possession of the land, is a thing that can rarely happen. The trust will descend, may be aliened, is liable to 〈36〉 debts, to forfeiture, to leases and other incumbrances, nay even to the curtesy of the husband, as if it was an estate at law. It has not yet indeed been subjected to dower, more from a cautious adherence to some hasty precedents g, than from any well-grounded principle. It hath also been held not liable to escheat to the lord, in consequence of attainder or want of heirsh: because the trust could never be intended for his benefit. But let us now return to the statute of uses.

b Bacon law of uses. 335. [Anon. (1580)] Jenk. 244.

c [Dillon v Fraine] Poph. 76. [Anon. (1580)] Dyer. 369.

d [Jones v Lord Say and Seal] 1 Equ. Cas. abr. 383, 384.

e [Dixies v Harrison] Vaugh. 50. [Hopkins v Hopkins] Atk. 591.

f [Hyde v Seymour] 2 Freem. 43.

g ms [Colt v Colt] 1 Chanc. Rep. 254. [Milner v Colmer] 2 P. W. 640.

h [Attorney General v Sands] Hardr. 494. Burgess & Wheate. Hil. 32 Geo. II. in Canc.

230 of the rights of things

The only service, as was before observed, to which this statute is now consigned,

is in giving efficacy to certain new and secret species of conveyances; introduced in order to render transactions of this sort as private as possible, and to save the trouble of making livery of seisin, the only antient conveyance of corporeal freeholds: the security and notoriety of which public investiture abundantly overpaid the labour of going to the land, or of sending an attorney in one’s stead. But this now has given way to

338 12. A twelfth species of conveyance, called a covenant to stand seised to uses: by

which a man, seised of lands, covenants in consideration of blood or marriage that he will stand seised of the same to the use of his child, wife, or kinsman; for life, in tail, or in fee. Here the statute executes at once the estate; for the party intended to be benefited, having thus acquired the use, is thereby put at once into corporal possession of the landi, without ever seeing it, by a kind of parliamentary magic. But this conveyance can only operate, when made upon such weighty and interesting considerations as those of blood or marriage.

13. A thirteenth species of conveyance, introduced by this statute, is that of a

bargain and sale of lands; which is a kind of a real contract, whereby the bargainor for some pecuniary consideration bargains and sells, that is, contracts to convey, the land 〈37〉 to the bargainee; and becomes by such bargain a trustee for, or seised to the use of, the bargainee; and then the statute of uses completes the purchase j: or, as it hath been well expressedk, the bargain first vests the use, and then the statute vests the possession. But as it was foreseen that conveyances, thus made, would want all those benefits of notoriety, which the old common law assurances were calculated to give; to prevent therefore clandestine conveyances of freeholds, it was enacted in the same session of parliament by statute 27 Hen. VIII. c. 16. that such bargains and sales should not enure to pass a freehold, unless the same be made by indenture, and enrolled within six months in one of the courts of Westminster-hall or with the custos rotulorum [keeper of the rolls] of the county. Clandestine bargains and sales of chattel interests, or leases for years, were thought not worth regarding, as such interests were very precarious till about six years before l; which also occasioned them to be overlooked in framing the statute of uses: and therefore such bargains and sales are not directed

339 to be enrolled. But how 〈38〉 impossible is it to foresee, and provide against, all the

consequences of innovations! This omission has given rise to

14. A fourteenth species of conveyance, viz. by lease and release; first invented by

serjeant Moore, soon after the statute of uses, and now the most common of any, and therefore not to be shaken; though very great lawyers (as, particularly, Mr 〈39〉 Noy) have formerly doubted its validity m. It is thus contrived. A lease, or rather bargain and sale, upon some pecuniary consideration, for one year, is made by the tenant of the freehold to the lessee or bargainee. Now this, without any enrollment, makes the bargainor stand seised to the use of the bargainee, and vests in the bargainee the use

i Bacon. Use of the law. 151.

j Ibid. 150.

k [Eustace v Scawen] Cro. Jac. 696.

l See pag. 142 [II. 96].

m [Barker v Keat] 2 Mod. 252.





chapter 20 231


of the term for a year; and then the statute immediately annexes the possession. He therefore, being thus in possession, is capable of receiving a release of the freehold and reversion; which, we have seen beforen, must be made to a tenant in possession: and accordingly, the next day, a release is granted to himo. This is held to supply the place of livery of seisin; and so a conveyance by lease and release is said to amount to a feoffment p.

15. To these may be added deeds to lead or declare the uses of other more direct

conveyances, as feoffments, fines, and recoveries; of which we shall speak in the next chapter: and,

16. Deeds of revocation of uses; hinted at in a former pageq, and founded in a

previous power, reserved at the raising of the usesr, to revoke such as were then declared; and to appoint others in their stead, which is incident to the power of revocations. And this may suffice for a specimen of conveyances founded upon the statute of uses; and will finish our observations upon such deeds as serve to transfer real property.

Before we conclude, it will not be improper to subjoin a few remarks upon such 340

deeds as are used not to convey, but to charge or incumber, lands, and discharge them again: of which nature are, obligations or bonds, recognizances, and defeazances upon them both.

1. An obligation, or bond, is a deed t whereby the obligor obliges himself, his heirs,

executors, and administrators, to pay a certain sum of money to another at a day appointed. If this be all, the bond is called a single one, simplex obligatio [a simple obligation]; but there is generally a condition added, that if the obligor does some particular act, the obligation shall be void, or else shall remain in full force: as, payment of rent; performance of covenants in a deed; or repayment of a principal sum of money borrowed of the obligee, with interest, which principal sum is usually one half of the penal sum specified in the bond. In case this condition is not performed, the bond becomes forfeited, or absolute at law, and charges the obligor while living; and after his death the obligation descends upon his heir, who (on defect of personal assets) is bound to discharge it, provided he has real assets by descent as a recompense. So that it may be called, though not a direct, yet a collateral, charge upon the lands. How it affects the personal property of the obligor, will be more properly considered hereafter.

If the condition of a bond be impossible at the time of making it, or be to do a

thing contrary to some rule of law that is merely positive, or be uncertain, or insensible, the condition alone is void, and the bond shall stand single and unconditional: for it is the folly of the obligor to enter into such an obligation, from which he can never be released. If it be to do a thing that is malum in se [wrong in itself], the obligation

n pag. 324 [II. 221].

o o See Appendix. N. II. §. 1, 2 [II. 354, 355].

p Co. Litt. 270. Cro. Jac. 604.

q pag. 335 [II. 228].

r o See Appendix. N. II. pag. xi [II. 363].

s Co. Litt. 237.

t o See Appendix. N. III. pag. xiii [II. 363].

232 of the rights of things

itself is void: for the whole is an unlawful contract, and the obligee shall take no

341 advantage from such a transaction. And if the condition be possible at the time of

making it, and afterwards becomes impossible by the act of God, the act of law, or the act of the obligee himself, there the penalty of the obligation is saved: for no prudence or foresight of the obligor could guard against such a contingency u. On the forfeiture of a bond, or its becoming single, the whole penalty 〈40〉 was recoverable at law: but here the courts of equity interposed, and would not permit a man to take more than in conscience he ought; viz. his principal, interest, and expenses, in case the forfeiture accrued by non-payment of money borrowed; the damages sustained, upon non-performance of covenants; and the like. 〈41〉 And the statute 4 & 5 Ann. c. 16. hath also enacted, in the same spirit of equity, that in case of a bond, conditioned for the payment of money, the payment or tender of the principal sum due, with interest, and costs, even though the bond be forfeited and a suit commenced thereon, shall be a full satisfaction and discharge.

2. A recognizance is an obligation of record, which a man enters into before some

court of record or magistrate duly authorizedw, with condition to do some particular act; as to appear at the assises, to keep the peace, to pay a debt, or the like. It is in most respects like another bond: the difference being chiefly this; that the bond is the creation of a fresh debt or obligation de novo [anew], the recognizance is an acknowlegement of a former debt upon record; the form whereof is, “that A. B. doth acknowlege to owe to our lord the king, to the plaintiff, to C. D. or the like, the sum of ten pounds,” with condition to be void on performance of the thing stipulated: in which case the king, the plaintiff, C. D. &c, is called the cognizee, “is cui cognoscitur [the one to whom it is acknowledged];” as he that enters into the recognizance is called the cognizor, “is qui cognoscit [the one who acknowledges].” This, being either certified to, or taken by the officer of some court, is witnessed only by the record of that court, and not by the party’s seal: so that it is not in strict propriety a deed, though the effects of it are greater than a common obligation; being allowed a priority

342 in point of payment, and binding the lands of the cognizor, from the time of

enrollment on recordx. There are also other recognizances, of a private kind, in nature of a statute staple, by virtue of the statute 23 Hen. VIII c. 6. Which have been already explainedy, and shewn to be a charge upon real property.

3. A Defeazance, on a bond, or recognizance, or judgement recovered, is a

condition which, when performed, defeats or undoes it, in the same manner as a defeazance of an estate before-mentioned. It differs only from the common condition of a bond, in that the one is always inserted in the deed or bond itself, the other is made between the same parties by a separate and frequently a subsequent deedz. This, like the condition of a bond, when performed, discharges and disincumbers the estate of the obligor.

u Co. Litt. 206.

w Bro. Abr. tit. recognizance. 24.

x 〈42〉 Stat. 29 Car. II. c. 3. §. 18.

y See pag. 160 [II. 108].

z Co. Litt. 237. [Fowell v Forrest] 2 Saund. 47.





chapter 20 233


These are the principal species of deeds or matter in pais [out of court, in the

country], by which estates may be either conveyed, or at least affected. Among which the conveyances to uses are by much the most frequent of any; though in these there is certainly one palpable defect, the want of sufficient notoriety: so that purchasers or creditors cannot know with any absolute certainty, what the estate, and the title to it, in reality are, upon which they are to lay out or to lend their money. In the antient feodal method of conveyance (by giving corporal seisin of the lands) this notoriety was in some measure answered; but all the advantages resulting from thence are now totally defeated by the introduction of death-bed devices and secret conveyances: and there has never been yet any sufficient guard provided against fraudulent charges and incumbrances; since the disuse of the old Saxon custom of transacting all conveyances at the county court, and entering a memorial of them in the chartulary or leger-book of some adjacent monastery a; and the failure of the general register established by king Richard the first, 〈43〉 for mortgages made to Jews, in the capitula 343

de Judaeis,4 of which Hoveden has preserved a copy. How far the establishment of a general register, for deeds, and wills, and other acts affecting real property, would remedy this inconvenience, deserves to be well considered. In Scotland every act and event, regarding the transmission of property, is regularly entered on recordb. And some of our own provincial divisions, particularly the extended county of York, and the populous county of Middlesex, have prevailed with the legislaturec to erect such registers in their several districts. But, however plausible these provisions may appear in theory, it hath been doubted by very competent judges, whether more disputes have not arisen in those counties by the inattention and omissions of parties, than prevented by the use of registers.



a Hickes Dissertat. epistolar. 9.

b Dalrymple on feodal property. 262, &c.

c Stat. 2 & 3 Ann. c. 4. 6 Ann. c. 35. 7 Ann. c. 20. 8 Geo. II. c. 6.

4 A set of laws for the recording of loans undertaken by Jews; see Roger of Howden, Chronica, iii. 266 (entry for 1194).



344 chapter the twenty first.



of alienation by matter

of record.

Assurances by matter of record are such as do not entirely depend on the act or consent of the parties themselves: but the sanction of a court of record is called in, to substantiate, preserve, and be a perpetual testimony of, the transfer of property from one man to another; or of its establishment, when already transferred. Of this nature are, 1. Private acts of parliament. 2. The king’s grants. 3. Fines. 4. Common recoveries.

I. Private acts of parliament are, especially of late years, become a very common

mode of assurance. For it may sometimes happen, that, by the ingenuity of some, and the blunders of other practitioners, an estate is most grievously entangled by a mul­ titude of contingent remainders, resulting trusts, springing uses, executory devises, and the like artificial contrivances; (a confusion unknown to the simple conveyances of the common law) so that it is out of the power of either the courts of law or equity to relieve the owner. Or it may sometimes happen, that, by the strictness or omissions of family settlements, the tenant of the estate is abridged of some reasonable power, (as letting leases, making a jointure for a wife, or the like) which power cannot be given him by the ordinary judges either in common law or equity. Or it may be necessary, in settling an estate, to secure it against the claims of infants or other

345 persons under legal disabilities; who are not bound by any judgments or decrees of

the ordinary courts of justice. In these, or other cases of the like kind, the transcendent power of parliament is called in, to cut the Gordian knot; and by a particular law, enacted for this very purpose, to unfetter an estate; to give its tenant reasonable powers; or to assure it to a purchasor, against the remote or latent claims of infants or disabled persons, by settling a proper equivalent in proportion to the interest so barred. This practice was carried to a great length in the year succeeding the resto­ ration; by setting aside many conveyances alleged to have been made by constraint, or in order to screen the estates from being forfeited during the usurpation. And at last it proceeded so far, that, as the noble historian expresses it a, every man had raised an equity in his own imagination, that he 〈1〉 thought ought to prevail against any descent, testament, or act of law, and to find relief in parliament: which occasioned the king at the close of the session to remark b, that the good old rules of law are the best security; and to wish, that men might not have too much cause to fear, that the settlements which they make of their estates shall be too easily unsettled when they are dead, by the power of parliament.

Acts of this kind are however at present carried on, in both houses, with great

deliberation and caution; particularly in the house of lords they are usually referred

a Lord Clar. Contin. 162.

b Ibid. 163.





chapter 21 235


to two judges, to examine and report the facts alleged, and to settle all technical forms. Nothing also is done without the consent, expressly given, of all parties in being and capable of consent, that have the remotest interest in the matter; unless such consent shall appear to be perversely and without any reason withheld. And, as was before hinted, an equivalent in money or other estate is usually settled upon infants, or persons not in esse [in being], or not of capacity to act for themselves, who are to be concluded by this act. And a general saving is constantly added, at the close of the bill, of the right and interest of all persons whatsoever; except those whose 346 consent is so given or purchased, and who are therein particularly 〈2〉 named.

A law, thus made, though it binds all parties to the bill, is yet looked upon rather

as a private conveyance, than as the solemn act of the legislature. It is not therefore allowed to be a public, but a mere private statute; it is not printed or published among the other laws of the 〈3〉 session; and no judge or jury is bound to take notice of it, unless the same be specially set forth and pleaded to them. It remains however enrolled among the public records of the nation, to be for ever preserved as a perpetual testimony of the conveyance or assurance so made or established.

II. The king’s grants are also matter of public record. For, as St. Germyn saysc, the

king’s excellency is so high in the law, that no freehold may be given to the king, nor derived from him, but by matter of record. And to this end a variety of offices are erected, communicating in a regular subordination one with another, through which all the king’s grants must pass, and be transcribed, and enrolled; that the same may be narrowly inspected by his officers, who will inform him if any thing contained therein is improper, or unlawful to be granted. These grants, whether of lands, honours, liberties, franchises, or ought besides, are contained in charters, or letters patent, that is, open letters, literae patentes: so called because they are not sealed up, but exposed to open view, with the great seal pendant at the bottom; and are usually directed or addressed by the king to all his subjects at large. And therein they differ from certain other letters of the king, sealed also with his great seal, but directed to particular persons, and for particular purposes: which therefore, not being proper for public inspection, are closed up and sealed on the outside, and are thereupon called writs close, literae clausae; and are recorded in the close-rolls, in the same manner as the others are in the patent-rolls.

Grants or letters patent must first pass by bill: which is prepared by the attorney 347

and solicitor general, in consequence of a warrant from the crown; and is then signed, that is, superscribed at the top, with the king’s own sign manual, and sealed with his privy signet, which is always in the custody of the principal secretary of state; and then sometimes it immediately passes under the great seal, in which case the patent is subscribed in these words, “per ipsum regem, by the king himself d.” Otherwise the course is to carry an extract of the bill to the keeper of the privy seal, who makes out a writ or warrant thereupon to the chancery; so that the sign manual is the warrant to the privy seal, and the privy seal is the warrant to the great seal: and in this last case

c Dr & Stud. L. 1. d. 8.

d [The Prince’s case] 9 [recte 8] Rep. 18.

236 of the rights of things

the patent is subscribed, “per breve de privato sigillo, by writ of privy seal e.” But there are some grants, which only pass through certain offices, as the admiralty or treasury, in consequence of a sign manual, without the confirmation of either the signet, the great, or the privy seal.

The manner of granting by the king, does not more differ from that by a subject,

than the construction of his grants, when made. 1. A grant made by the king, at the suit of the grantee, shall be taken most beneficially for the king, and against the party: whereas the grant of a subject is construed most strongly against the grantor. Where­ fore it is usual to insert in the king’s grants, that they are made, not at the suit of the grantee, but “ex speciali gratia, certa scientia, et mero motu regis;”1 and then they have a more liberal constructionf. 2. A subject’s grant shall be construed to include many things, besides what are expressed, if necessary for the operation of the grant. There­ fore, in a private grant of the profits of land for one year, free ingress, egress, and regress, to cut and carry away those profits, are also inclusively grantedg: and if a

348 feoffment of land was made by a lord to his villein, this operated as a manumissionh;

for he was otherwise unable to hold it. But the king’s grant shall not enure to any other intent, than that which is precisely expressed in the grant. As, if he grants land to an alien, it operates nothing; for such grant shall not also enure to make him a denizen, that so he may be capable of taking by granti. 3. When it appears, from the face of the grant, that the king is mistaken, or deceived, either in matter of fact or matter of law, as in case of false suggestion, misinformation, or misrecital of former grants; or if his own title to the thing granted be different from what he supposes; or if the grant be informal; or if he grants an estate contrary to the rules of law; in any of these cases the grant is absolutely voidk. For instance; if the king grants lands to one and his heirs male, this is merely void: for it shall not be an estate­tail, because there want words of procreation, to ascertain the body, out of which the heirs shall issue: neither is it a fee­simple, as in common grants it would be; because it may reasonably be supposed, that the king meant to give no more than an estate­tail l: the grantee is therefore (if any thing) nothing more than tenant at willm. And, to prevent deceits of the king, with regard to the value of the estate granted, it is particularly provided by the statute 1 Hen. IV. c. 6. that no grant of his shall be good, unless, in the grantee’s petition for them, express mention be made of the real value of the lands.

III. We are next to consider a very usual species of assurance, which is also of

record; viz. a fine of lands and tenements. In which it will be necessary to explain, 1. The nature of a fine; 2. Its several kinds; and 3. Its force and effect.

e Ibid. 2 Inst. 555.

f Finch. L. 100. [Arthur Legat’s case] 10 Rep. 112.

g Co. Litt. 56.

h Litt. §. 206.

i Bro. Abr. tit. Patent. 62. Finch. L. 110.

k [More’s case] Freem. 173.

l Finch. 101, 102.

m Bro. Abr. tit. Estates. 34. tit. Patents. 104. [YB Trin. 17 Edw. III (1343)] Dyer. 270. [Case of the Dean and Chapter of Fernes] Dav. 45.

1 ‘by the special favour, with the certain knowledge, and by the free wish of the king’.





chapter 21 237


1. A fine is sometimes said to be a feoffment of recordn: though it might with more

accuracy be called, an acknowledgement of a feoffment on record. By which is to be understood, that it has at least the same force and effect with a feoffment, in the conveying 349

and assuring of lands: though it is one of those methods of transferring estates of freehold by the common law, in which livery of seisin is not necessary to be actually given; the supposition and acknowlegement thereof in a court of record, however fictitious, inducing an equal notoriety. But, more particularly, a fine may be described to be an amicable composition or agreement of a suit, either actual or fictitious, by leave of the king or his justices; whereby the lands in question become, or are acknowleged to be, the right of one of the partieso. In its original it was founded on an actual suit, commenced at law for recovery of the possession of 〈4〉 land; and the possession thus gained by such composition was found to be so sure and effectual, that fictitious actions were, and continue to be, every day commenced, for the sake of obtaining the same security.

A fine is so called because it puts an end, not only to the suit thus commenced,

but also to all other suits and controversies concerning the same matter. Or, as it is expressed in an antient record of parliament p, 18 [recte 19] Edw. I. “non in regno Angliae providetur, vel est, aliqua securitas major vel solennior, per quam aliquis statum certiorem habere possit, neque ad statum suum verificandum aliquod solennius testi monium producere, quam finem in curia domini regis levatum: qui quidem finis sic vocatur, eo quod finis et consummatio omnium placitorum esse debet, et hac de causa providebatur.”2 Fines indeed are of equal antiquity with the first rudiments of the law itself; are spoken of by Glanvilq and Bractonr in the reigns of Henry II, and Henry III, as things then well known and long established; and instances have been produced of them 〈5〉 even before the Norman invasions. So that the statute 18 Edw. I. called modus levandi fines [the manner of levying fines], did not give them original, but only declared and regulated the manner in which they should be levied, or carried on. And that is as follows:

1. The party, to whom the land is to be conveyed or assured, commences an action 350

or suit at law against the other, generally an action of 〈6〉 covenant, by suing out a writ or praecipe, called a writ of covenant t : the foundation of which is a supposed agreement or covenant, that the one shall convey the lands to the other; on the breach of which agreement the action is brought. On this writ there is due to the king, by antient prerogative, a primer fine, or a noble for every five marks of land sued for; that is, one tenth of the annual valueu. The suit being thus commenced, then follows,

n Co. Litt. 50.

o Co. Litt. 120.

p 2 Roll. Abr. 13.

q l. 8. c. 1.

r l. 5. t. 5. c. 28.

s [Stowel v Zouch] [1] Plowd. 369.

t o See Appendix, N. IV. §. 1 [II. 364].

u 2 Inst. 511.

2 ‘And in this realm no greater or more solemn security has been provided or exists, through which anyone can have a more secure estate or produce any more solemn testimony to prove their estate than a fine levied in the court of the lord king, which fine is indeed so called because it should be the end and termination of all pleas and was provided for this reason.’ Blackstone slightly alters the language from Rotuli Parliamentorum, i. 66, which describes the rival claims of the earl of Gloucester and Margery, the wife of the exiled chief justice Weyland, to the manor of Sodbury, seized into the hands of the king on the chief justice’s abjuration of the realm in 1290. See PROME, i. 247. 238 of the rights of things

2. The licentia concordandi, or leave to agree the suitw. For, as soon as the action

is brought, the defendant, knowing himself to be in the wrong, is supposed to make overtures of peace and accommodation to the plaintiff. Who, accepting them, but having, upon suing out the writ, given pledges to prosecute his suit, which he endangers if he now deserts it without licence, he therefore applies to the court for leave to make the matter up. This leave is readily granted, but for it there is also another fine due to the king by his prerogative; which is an antient revenue of the crown, and is called the king’s silver, or sometimes the post fine, with respect to the primer fine before­mentioned. And it is as much as the primer fine, and half as much more, or ten shillings for every five marks of land; that is, three twentieths of the supposed annual value x.

3. Next comes the concord, or agreement itself y, after leave obtained from the

court; which is usually an acknowlegement from the deforciants (or those who keep the other out of possession) that the lands in question are the right of the complainant. And from this acknowlegement, or recognition of right, the party levying the fine is

351 called the cognizor, and he to whom it is levied the cognizee. This acknowlegement

must be made either openly in the court of common pleas, or 〈9〉 before one of the judges of that court, or else before commissioners in the country, empowered by a special authority called a writ of dedimus potestatem [we have given power]; which judges and commissioners are bound by statute 18 Edw. I. st. 4. to take care that the cognizors be of full age, sound memory, and out of prison. If there be any feme­ covert among the cognizors, she is privately examined whether she does it willingly and freely, or by compulsion of her husband.

By these acts all the essential parts of a fine are completed; and, if the cognizor dies

the next moment after the fine is acknowleged, provided it be subsequent to the day on which the writ is made returnable z, still the fine shall be carried on in all its remaining parts: of which the next is

4. The note of the finea: which is only an abstract of the writ of covenant, and the

concord; naming the parties, the parcels of land, and the agreement. This must be enrolled of record in the proper office, by direction of the statute 5 Hen. IV. c. 14.

5. The fifth part is the foot of the fine, or conclusion of it: which includes the whole

matter, reciting the parties, day, year, and place, and before whom it was acknowleged or leviedb. Of this there are indentures made, or engrossed, at the chirographer’s office,3 and delivered to the cognizor and the cognizee; usually beginning thus, “haec est finalis concordia, this is the final agreement,” and then reciting the whole proceeding at length. And thus the fine is completely levied at common law.

By several statutes still more solemnities are superadded, in order to render the

fine more universally public, and less liable to be levied by fraud or covin. And, first,

w o 〈 7 〉 Append. N. IV. §. 2 [II. 364].

x [Tey’s case] 5 Rep. 39. 〈8〉 2 Inst. 511.

y o Append. N. IV. §. 3 [II. 365].

z [Price v Davies] Comb. 71.

a o Append. N. IV. §. 4 [II. 365].

b Ibid. §. 5.

3 The chirographer was the clerk in the court of Common Pleas charged with enrolling fines.





chapter 21 239


by 27 Edw. I. c. 1. the note of the fine shall be openly read in the court of common 352 pleas, at two several days in one week, and during such reading all pleas shall cease. By 5 Hen. IV. c. 14. and 23 Eliz. c. 3. all the proceedings on fines either at the time of acknowlegement, or previous, or subsequent thereto, shall be enrolled of record in the court of common pleas. By 1 Ric. III. c. 7. confirmed and enforced by 4 Hen. VII. c. 24. the fine, after engrossment, shall be openly read and proclaimed 〈10〉 in court sixteen times; viz. four times in the term in which it is made, and four times in each of the three succeeding terms; during which time all pleas shall cease: but this is reduced to once in each term by 31 Eliz. c. 2. and these proclamations are endorsed on the back of the recordc. It is also enacted by 23 Eliz. c. 3. that the chirographer of fines shall every term write out a table of the fines levied in each county in that term, and shall affix them in some open part of the court of common pleas all the next term: and shall also deliver the contents of such table to the sheriff of every county, who shall at the next assises fix the same in some open place in the court, for the more public notoriety of the fine.

2. Fines, thus levied, are of four kinds. 1. What in our law French is called a fine

“sur cognizance de droit, come ceo que il ad de son done;” or, a fine upon acknowlegement of the right of the cognizee, as that which he hath of the gift of the cognizor d. This is the best and surest kind of fine; for thereby the deforciant, in order to keep his covenant with the plaintiff, of conveying to him the lands in question, and at the same time to avoid the formality of an actual feoffment and livery, acknowleges in court a former feoffment, or gift in possession, to have been made by him to the plaintiff. This fine is therefore said to be a feoffment of record; the livery thus acknowleged in court, being equivalent to an actual livery: so that this assurance is rather a confession of a former conveyance, than a conveyance now originally made; for the deforciant, or cognizor, acknowleges, cognoscit, the right to be in the plaintiff, 353

or cognizee, as that which he hath de son done, of the proper gift of himself, the cognizor. 2. A fine “sur cognizance de droit tantum,” or, upon acknowlegement of the right merely; not with the circumstance of a preceding gift from the cognizor. This is commonly used to pass a reversionary interest, which is in the cognizor. For of such reversions there can be no feoffment, or donation with livery, supposed; as the possession during the particular estate belongs to a third persone. It is worded in this manner; “that the cognizor acknowleges the right to be in the cognizee; and grants for himself and his heirs, that the reversion, after the particular estate determines, shall go to the cognizeef.” 3. A fine “sur concessit” is where the cognizor, in order to make an end of disputes, though he acknowleges no precedent right, yet grants to the cognizee an estate de novo, usually for life or years, by way of supposed composition. And this may be done reserving a rent, or the like: for it operates as a new grant g. 4. A fine “sur done, grant, et render [on the gift, grant, and surrender],” is



c o Append. N. IV. §. 6 [II. 366].

d o This is that sort, of which an example is given in the appendix, N. IV [II. 364].

e [Sir Charles Danvers’s case] Moor. 629.

f West. Symb. p. 2. §. 95.

g West. p. 2. §. 66.

240 of the rights of things

a double fine, comprehending the fine sur cognizance de droit come ceo, &c, and the fine sur concessit; and may be used to create particular limitations of estate: whereas the fine sur cognizance de droit come ceo, &c, conveys nothing but an absolute estate, either of inheritance or at least of freeholdh. In this last species of fine, the cognizee, after the right is acknowleged to be in him, grants back again, or renders to the cognizor, or perhaps to a stranger, some other estate in the premises. But, in general, the first species of fine, “sur cognizance de droit come ceo, &c,” is the most used, as it conveys a clean and absolute freehold, and gives the cognizee a seisin in law, without any actual livery; and is therefore called a fine executed, whereas the others are but executory.

3. We are next to consider the force and effect of a fine. These principally depend,

at this day, on the common law, and the two statutes, 4 Hen. VII. c. 24. and 32 Hen.

354 VIII. c. 36. The antient common law, with respect to this point, is very forcibly

declared by the statute 18 Edw. I. in these words. “And the reason, why such solemnity is required in the passing of a fine, is this; because the fine is so high a bar, and of so great force, and of a nature so powerful in itself, that it precludes not only those which are parties and privies to the fine, and their heirs, but all other persons in the world, who are of full age, out of prison, of sound memory, and within the four seas4 the day of the fine levied; unless they put in their 〈11〉 claim within a year and a day.” But this doctrine, of barring the right by non-claim, was abolished for a time by a statute 〈12〉 made in 34 Edw. I. [recte III] c. 16 which admitted persons to claim, and falsify a fine, at any indefinite distancei: whereby, as sir Edward Coke observesk, great contention arose, and few men were sure of their possessions, till the parliament held 4 Hen. VII reformed that mischief, and excellently moderated between the latitude given by the statute and the rigour of the common law. For the statute, then made l , restored the doctrine of non claim; but extended the time of claim. So that now, by that statute, the right of all strangers whatsoever is bound, unless they make 〈14〉 claim, not within one year and a day, as by the common law, but within five years after proclamations made: except feme-coverts, infants, prisoners, persons beyond the seas,5 and such as are not of whole mind; who have five years allowed to them and their heirs, after the death of their husbands, their attaining full age, recovering their liberty, returning into England, or being restored to their right mind.

It seems to have been the intention of that politic prince, king Henry VII, to have

covertly by this statute extended fines to have been a bar of estates­tail, in order to unfetter the more easily the estates of his powerful nobility, and lay them more open to alienations; being well aware that power will always accompany property.

h [Hunt v Bourne] Salk 340.

i Litt. §. 441.

k 2 Inst. 518.

l 〈13〉 4 Hen. VII. c. 24.

4 i.e. the English Channel, the Irish Sea, and the North Sea (at that time divided in two: the Scottish Sea, east of Scotland, and the German Sea, between England and the Netherlands); see Hargrave’s edition of Co. Litt., 107 (note

115).

5 i.e. beyond the ‘four seas’ just mentioned.





chapter 21 241


But doubts having arisen whether they could, by mere implication, be adjudged a sufficient bar, (which they were expressly declared not to be by the statute de donis) 355

the statute 32 Hen. VIII. c. 36. was thereupon made; which removes all difficulties, by declaring that a fine levied by any person of full age, to whom or to whose ancestors lands have been entailed, shall be a perpetual bar to them and their heirs claiming by force of such entail: unless the fine be levied by a woman after the death of her husband, of lands which were, by the gift of him or his ancestor, assigned to her in tail for her jointurem; or unless it be of lands entailed by act of parliament or letters patent, and whereof the reversion belongs to the crown.

From this view of the common law, regulated by these statutes, it appears, that a

fine is a solemn conveyance on record from the cognizor to the cognizee, and that the persons bound by a fine are parties, privies, and strangers.

The parties are either the cognizors, or cognizees; and these are immediately

concluded by the fine, and barred of any latent right they might have, even though under the legal impediment of coverture. And indeed, as this is almost the only act that a feme-covert, or married woman, is permitted by law to do, (and that because she is privately examined as to her voluntary consent, which removes the general suspicion of compulsion by her husband) it is therefore the usual and almost the only safe method, whereby she can join in the sale, settlement, or incumbrance, of any estate.

Privies to a fine are such as are any way related to the parties who levy the fine,

and claim under them by any right of blood, or other right of representation. Such as are the heirs general of the cognizor, the issue in tail since the statute of Henry the eighth, the vendee, the devisee, and all others who must make title by the persons who levied the fine. For the act of the ancestor shall bind the heir, and the act of the principal his substitute, or such as claim under any conveyance made by him 356 subsequent to the fine so leviedn.

Strangers to a fine are all other persons in the world, except only parties and

privies. And these are also bound by a fine, unless, within five years after proclamations made, they interpose their claim; provided they are under no legal impediments, and have then a present interest in the estate. The impediments, as hath before been said, are coverture, infancy, imprisonment, insanity, and absence beyond sea: and persons, who are thus incapacitated to prosecute their rights, have five years allowed them to put in their claims after such impediments are removed. Persons also that have not a present, but a future interest only, as those in remainder or reversion, have five years allowed them to claim in, from the time that such right accrueso. And if within that time they neglect to claim, or (by the statute 4 Ann. c. 16.) if they do not bring an action to try the right, within one year after making such claim, and prosecute the same with effect, all persons whatsoever are barred of whatever right they may have, by force of the statute of non­claim.

m See statute 11 Hen. VII. c. 20.

n [Case of Fines] 3 Rep. 87.

o Co. Litt. 372.

242 of the rights of things

But, in order to make a fine of any avail at all, it is necessary that the parties

should have some interest or estate in the lands to be affected by it. Else it were possible that two strangers, by a mere confederacy, might without any risque defraud the owners by levying fines of their lands; for if the attempt be discovered, they can be no sufferers, but must only remain in statu quo [as they were before]: whereas if a tenant for 〈15〉 life or years levies a fine, it is an absolute forfeiture of his estate to the remainder­man or reversionerp, if claimed in proper time. It is not therefore to be supposed that such tenants will frequently run so great a hazard; but if they do, and the claim is not duly made within five years after their respective

357 terms expireq, the estate is for ever barred by it. Yet where a stranger, whose

presumption cannot thus be punished, officiously interferes in an estate which in no wise belongs to him, his fine is of no effect; and may at any time be set aside (unless by such as are parties or privies thereuntor) by pleading that “partes finis nihil 〈16〉 habuerunt [the parties to the fine had no interest in the land].” And thus much for the conveyance or assurance by fine: which not only like other conveyances binds the grantor himself, and his heirs; but also all mankind, whether concerned in the transfer or no, if they fail to put in their claims within the time allotted by law.

IV. The fourth species of assurance, by matter of record, is a common recovery.

Concerning the original of which, it was formerly observeds, that common recoveries were invented by the ecclesiastics to elude the statutes of mortmain; and afterwards encouraged by the finesse of the courts of law in 12 Edw. IV.6 in order to put an end to all fettered inheritances, and bar not only estates­tail, but also all remainders and reversions expectant thereon. I am now therefore only to consider, first, the nature of a common recovery; and, secondly, its force and effect.

1. And, first, the nature of it; or what a common recovery is. A common recovery

is so far like a fine, that it is a suit or action, either actual or fictitious: and in it the lands are recovered against the tenant of the freehold; which recovery, being a supposed adjudication of the right, binds all persons, and vests a free and absolute fee­simple in the recoveror. A recovery therefore being in the nature of an action at law, not immediately compromised like a fine, but carried on through every regular stage of proceeding, I am greatly apprehensive that its form and method will not be easily understood by the student, who is not yet acquainted with the course of judicial proceedings; which cannot be thoroughly explained, till treated of at large in the third book of these commentaries. However I shall endeavour to state its nature and

358 progress, as clearly and concisely as I can; avoiding, as far as possible, all technical

terms, and phrases not hitherto interpreted.



p Ibid. 251.

q [Whaley v Tankard] 2 Lev. 52.

r [Mackwilliams’s case] Hob. 334.

s pag. 117. 271 [II. 78, 184–5].

6 See Blackstone’s previous comments (II. 78, note n) on Taltarum’s case (1472).





chapter 21 243


Let us, in the first place, suppose David Edwardst to be tenant of the freehold, and

desirous to suffer a common recovery, in order to bar all entails, remainders, and reversions, and to convey the same in fee­simple to Francis Golding. To effect this, Golding is to bring an action against him for the lands; and he accordingly sues out a writ, called a praecipe quod reddat [command him to hand over], because those were its initial or most operative words, when the law proceedings were in Latin. In this writ the demandant Golding alleges, that the defendant Edwards (here called the tenant) has no legal title to the land; but that he came into possession of it after one Hugh Hunt had turned the demandant out of it v. The subsequent proceedings are made up into a record or recovery roll u, in which the writ and complaint of the demandant are first recited: whereupon the tenant appears, and calls upon one Jacob Morland, who is supposed, at the original purchase, to have warranted the title to the tenant; and thereupon he prays, that the said Jacob Morland may be called in to defend the title which he so warranted. This is called the voucher, vocatio, or calling of Jacob Morland to warranty; and Morland is called the vouchee. Upon this, Jacob Morland, the vouchee, appears, is impleaded, and defends the title. Whereupon Golding, the demandant, desires leave of the court to imparl, or confer with the vouchee in private; which is (as usual) allowed him. And soon afterwards the demandant, Golding, returns to court, but Morland the vouchee disappears, or makes default. Whereupon judgment is given for the demandant, Golding, now called the recoveror, to recover the lands in question against the tenant, Edwards, who is now the recoveree: and Edwards has judgment to recover of Jacob Morland lands of equal value, in recompense for the lands so warranted by him, and now lost by his default; which is agreeable to the doctrine of warranty mentioned in the preceding chapterw. This is called the recompense, or recovery in value. But Jacob 359 Morland having no lands of his own, being usually the cryer of the court (who, from being frequently thus vouched, is called the common vouchee) it is plain that Edwards has only a nominal recompense for the lands so recovered against him by Golding; which lands are now absolutely vested in the said recoveror by judgment of law, and seisin thereof is delivered by the sheriff of the county. So that this collusive recovery operates merely in the nature of a conveyance in fee­simple, from Edwards the tenant in tail, to Golding the purchasor.

The recovery, here described, is with a single voucher only; but sometimes it is

with double, treble, or farther voucher, as the exigency of the case may require. And indeed it is now usual always to have a recovery with double voucher at the least; by first conveying an estate of freehold to any indifferent person, against whom the praecipe is brought; and then he vouches the tenant in tail, who vouches over the common voucheex. For, if a recovery be had immediately against tenant in tail, it bars



t o See appendix, N. V [II. 366].

v §. 1.

u §. 2.

w pag. 301 [II. 205–6].

x See appendix, pag. xviii [II. 368].

244 of the rights of things

only such estate in the premises of which he is then actually seised; whereas if the recovery be had against another person, and the tenant in tail be vouched, it bars every latent right and interest which he may have in the lands recovered y. If Edwards therefore be tenant of the freehold in possession, and John Barker be tenant in tail in remainder, here Edwards doth first vouch Barker, and then Barker vouches Jacob Morland the common vouchee; who is always the last person vouched, and always makes default: whereby the demandant Golding recovers the land against the tenant Edwards, and Edwards recovers a recompense of equal value against Barker the first vouchee; who recovers the like against Morland the common vouchee, against whom such ideal recovery in value is always ultimately awarded.

360 This supposed recompense in value is the reason why the issue in tail is held to be

barred by a common recovery. For, if the recoveree 〈17〉 should ever obtain a recompense in lands from the common vouchee (which there is a possibility in contemplation of law, though a very improbable one, of his doing) these lands would supply the place of those so recovered from him by collusion, and would descend to the issue in tailz. This reason will also hold, with equal force, as to most remainder­ men and reversioners; to whom the possibility will remain and revert, as a full recompense for the reality, which they were otherwise entitled to: but it will not always hold; and therefore, as Pigott saysa, the judges have been even astuti [cunning], in inventing other reasons to maintain the authority of recoveries. And, in particular, it hath been said, that, though the estate­tail is gone from the recoveree, yet it is not destroyed, but only transferred; and still subsists, and will ever continue to subsist (by construction of law) in the recoveror, his heirs, and assigns: and, as the estate­tail so continues to subsist for ever, the remainders or reversions expectant on the determination of such estate­tail can never take place.

To such awkward shifts, such subtile refinements, and such strange reasoning,

were our ancestors obliged to have recourse, in order to get the better of that stubborn statute de donis. The design, for which these contrivances were set on foot, was certainly laudable; the unrivetting the fetters of estates­tail, which were attended with a legion of mischiefs to the commonwealth: but, while we applaud the end, we cannot but7 admire the means. Our modern courts of justice have indeed adopted a more manly way of treating the subject; by considering common recoveries in no other light, than as the formal mode of conveyance, by which tenant in tail is enabled to aliene his lands. But, since the ill consequences of fettered inheritances are now generally seen and allowed, and of course the utility and expedience of setting them

361 at liberty are apparent; it hath often been wished, that the process of this conveyance

was shortened, and rendered less subject to niceties, by either totally repealing the statute de donis; which perhaps, by reviving the old doctrine of conditional fees, might give birth to many litigations: or by vesting in every tenant in tail of full age the

y Bro. Abr. tit. Taile. 32. [Basset and Morgan v Manxel] [2] Plowd. [App.] 8.

z Dr. & St. l. 1. dial. 26.

a of com. recov. 13, 14.

7 While this expression reads oddly to modern eyes, Blackstone may have been expressing guarded or ironic respect for the technical virtuosity of the counsel and judges who devised the common recovery.





chapter 21 245


same absolute fee­simple at once, which now he may obtain whenever he pleases, by the collusive fiction of a common recovery; though this might possibly bear hard upon those in remainder or reversion, by abridging the chances they would other­ wise frequently have, as no recovery can be suffered in the intervals between term and term, which sometimes continue for near five months together: or, lastly, by empowering the tenant in tail to bar the estate­tail by a solemn deed, to be made in term time and enrolled in some court of record; which is liable to neither of the other objections, and is warranted not only by the usage of our American 〈18〉 colonies, but by the precedent of the statuteb 21 Jac. I. c. 19. which, in case of a bankrupt tenant in tail, empowers his commissioners to sell the estate at any time, by deed indented and enrolled. And if, in so national a concern, the emoluments of the officers, concerned in passing recoveries, are thought to be worthy attention, those might be provided for in the fees to be paid upon each enrollment.

2. The force and effect of common recoveries may appear, from what has been

said, to be an absolute bar not only of all estates­tail, but of remainders and reversions expectant on the determination of such estates. So that a tenant in tail may, by this method of assurance, convey the lands held in tail to the recoveror his heirs and assigns, absolutely free and discharged of all conditions and limitations in tail, and of all remainders and reversions. But, by statute 34 & 35 Hen. VIII. c. 20. no recovery had against tenant in tail, of the king’s gift, whereof the remainder or reversion is in the king, shall bar such estate­tail, or the remainder or reversion of the crown. And by the statute 11 Hen. VII. c. 20. no woman, after her husband’s death, shall suffer a recovery of lands 〈19〉 settled on her in tail by way of jointure by her husband or any 362

of his ancestors. And by statute 14 Eliz. c. 8. no tenant for life, of any sort, can suffer a recovery, so as to bind them in remainder or reversion. For which reason, if there be tenant for life, with remainder in tail, and other remainders over, and the tenant for life is desirous to suffer a valid recovery; either he, or the tenant to the praecipe by him made, must vouch the remainder­man in tail, otherwise the recovery is void: but if he does vouch such remainder­man, and he appears and vouches the common vouchee, it is then good; for if a man be vouched and appears, and suffers the recovery to be 〈20〉 had, it is as effectual to bar the estate­tail as if he himself were the recovereec.

In all recoveries it is necessary that the recoveree, or tenant to the praecipe, as he is

usually called, be actually seised of the freehold, else the recovery is voidd. For all actions, to recover the seisin of lands, must be brought against the actual tenant of the freehold, else the suit will lose its effect; since the freehold cannot be recovered of him who has it not. And, though these recoveries are in themselves fabulous and fictitious, yet it is necessary that there be actores fabulae [actors of the fiction],



b See pag. 286 [II. 195].

c [Page v Hayward] Salk. 571.

d Pigott. 28.

246 of the rights of things

properly qualified. But the nicety thought by some modern practitioners to be requisite in conveying the legal freehold, in order to make a good tenant to the praecipe, is removed by the provisions of the statute 14 Geo. II. c. 20. which enacts, with a retrospect and conformity to the antient rule of law e, that, though the legal freehold be vested in lessees, yet those who are intitled to the next freehold estate in remainder or reversion may make a good tenant to the 〈21〉 praecipe: and that, though the deed or fine which creates such tenant be subsequent to the judgment of recovery, yet, if it be in the same term, the recovery shall be valid in law: and that, though the recovery itself do not appear to be entered, or be not regularly entered, on record, yet the deed to make a tenant to the praecipe, and declare the uses of the recovery, shall

363 after a possession of twenty years be sufficient evidence, on behalf of a purchasor for

valuable consideration, that such recovery was duly suffered. And this may suffice to give the student a general idea of common recoveries, the last species of assurances by matter of record.

Before I conclude this head, I must add a word concerning deeds to lead, or to

declare, the uses of fines, and of recoveries. For if they be levied or suffered without any good consideration, and without any uses declared, they, like other conveyances, enure only to the use of him who levies or suffers themf. And if a consideration appears, yet as the most usual fine, “sur cognizance de droit come ceo, &c,” conveys an absolute estate, without any limitations, to the cognizee; and as common recoveries do the same to the recoveror; these assurances could not be made to answer the purpose of family settlements, (wherein a variety of uses and designations is very often expedient) unless their force and effect were subjected to the direction of other more complicated deeds, wherein particular uses can be more particularly expressed. The fine or recovery itself, like a power once gained in mechanics, may be applied and directed to give efficacy to an infinite variety of movements, in the vast and intricate machine of a voluminous family settlement. And, if these deeds are made previous to the fine or recovery, they are called deeds to lead the uses; if subsequent, deeds to declare them. As, if A tenant in tail, 〈22〉 with remainder to himself in fee, would settle his estate on B for life, remainder to C in tail, remainder to D in fee; this is what by law he has no power of doing effectually, while his own estate­tail is in being. He therefore 〈23〉 usually covenants to levy a fine (or, if there be any remainders over, to suffer a recovery) to E, and that the same shall enure to the uses in such settlement mentioned. This is now a deed to lead the uses of the fine or recovery; and the fine when levied, or recovery when suffered, shall enure to the uses so specified and no other. For though E, 〈24〉 the conusee or recoveree, hath a fee­simple vested

364 in himself by the fine or recovery; yet, by the operation of this deed, he becomes a

mere instrument or conduit­pipe, seised only to the use of B, C, and D, in successive



e Pigott. 41, &c. [Taylor v Horde] 4 Burr. I. 115. [The reference is to 1 Burr. 115; Blackstone adds the ‘4’ because Burrow styled his first two volumes as ‘part the fourth’.]

f [Anon. (1536)] Dyer. 18 [pl. 105].





chapter 21 247


order: which use is executed immediately, by force of the statute of usesg. Or, if a fine or recovery be had without any previous settlement, and a deed be afterwards made between the parties, declaring the uses to which the same shall be applied, this will be equally good, as if it had been expressly levied or suffered, in consequence of a deed directing its operation to those particular uses. For by statute 4 & 5 Ann. c. 16. indentures to declare the uses of fines and recoveries, made after the fines and recoveries had and suffered, shall be good and effectual in law, and the fine and recovery shall enure to such uses, and be esteemed to be only in trust, 〈29〉 not­ withstanding the statute of frauds 29 Car. II. c. 3. enacts, that all trusts shall be declared in writing, at (and not after) the time when such trusts are created.



g This doctrine may perhaps be more clearly illustrated by example. In the deed or marriage settlement in the appendix, No. II. §. 2. [II. 355] we may suppose the lands to have been originally settled on Abraham and Cecilia Barker for life, remainder to John Barker in tail, with divers other remainders over, reversion to Cecilia Barker in fee; and now intended to be settled to the several uses therein expressed, viz. 〈25〉 of Abraham and Cecilia Barker till the 〈26〉 marriage; remainder to John Barker for life; remainder to trustees to preserve the contingent remainders; remainder to his widow for life, for her jointure; remainder to other trustees, for a term of five hundred years; remainder to their first and other sons in tail; remainder to their daughters in tail; remainder to John Barker in tail; remainder to Cecilia Barker in fee. Now it is necessary, in order to bar the estate­tail of John Barker, and the remainders expectant thereon, that a recovery be suffered of the premises; and it is thought proper (for though usual, it is by no means necessary: see [Robinson v Comyns] Forrester. 167.) that in order to make a good tenant of the freehold, or tenant to the praecipe, during the coverture, a fine should be levied by Abraham, Cecilia, and John Barker; 〈27〉 and it is agreed that the recovery itself be suffered against this tenant to the praecipe, who shall vouch John Barker, and thereby bar his estate­tail; and become tenant of the fee­simple by virtue of such recovery: the uses of which estate, so acquired, 〈28〉 are declared to be those expressed in this deed. Accordingly the parties covenant to do these several acts, (see [Appendix] pag. viii. [II. 360]) And in consequence thereof the fine and recovery are had and suffered (No. IV. and No. V. [II. 364, 366]) of which this conveyance is a deed to lead the uses.



365 chapter the twenty second.



of alienation by

special custom.

We are next to consider assurances by special custom, obtaining only in particular places, and relative only to a particular species of real property. This therefore is a very narrow title; being confined to copyhold lands, and such customary estates, as are holden in antient demesne, or in manors of a similar nature: which, being of a very peculiar kind, and originally no more than tenancies in pure or privileged villenage, were never alienable by deed; for, as that might tend to defeat the lord of his signiory, it is therefore a forfeiture of a copyholda. Nor are they transferrable by matter of record, even in the king’s courts, but only in the court baron of the lord. The method of doing this is generally by surrender; though in some manors, by special custom, recoveries may be suffered of copyholdsb: but these differing in nothing material from recoveries of free land, save only that they are not suffered in the king’s courts, but in the court baron of the manor, I shall confine myself to conveyances by surrender, and their consequences.

Surrender, sursumredditio, is the yielding up of the estate by the tenant into the

hands of the lord, for such purposes as in the surrender are expressed. As, it may be, to the use and behoof of A and his heirs; to the use of his own will; and the like. The

366 process, in most manors, is, that the tenant comes to the steward, either in court, (or,

if the custom permits, out of court) or else to two customary tenants of the same manor, 〈1〉 provided that also have a custom to warrant it; and there by delivering up a rod, a glove, or other symbol, as the custom directs, resigns into the hands of the lord, by the hands and acceptance of his said steward, or of the said two tenants, all his interest and title to the estate; in trust to be again granted out by the lord, to such persons and for such uses as are named in the surrender, and the custom of the manor will warrant. If the surrender be made out of court, then, at the next or some subsequent court, the jury or homage must present and find it upon their oaths; which presentment is an information to the lord or his steward of what has been transacted out of court. Immediately upon such surrender in court, or upon presentment of a surrender made out of court, the lord by his steward grants the same land again to cestuy que use, (who is sometimes, though rather improperly, called the surrenderee) to hold by the antient rents and customary services; and thereupon admits him tenant to the copyhold, according to the form and effect of the surrender, which must be exactly pursued. And this is done by delivering up to the new tenant the rod, or glove, or the like, in the name, and as the symbol, of corporal

a Litt. §. 74.

b [Church v Wyat] Moor. 637.





chapter 22 249


seisin of the lands and tenements. Upon which admission he pays a fine to the lord, according to the custom of the manor, and takes the oath of fealty.

In this brief abstract, of the manner of transferring copyhold estates, we may

plainly trace the visible footsteps of the feodal institutions. The fief, being of a base nature and tenure, is unalienable without the knowlege and consent of the lord. For this purpose it is resigned up, or surrendered into his hands. Custom, and the indulgence of the law, which favours liberty, has now given the tenant a right to name his successor; but formerly it was far otherwise. And I am apt to suspect that this right is of much the same antiquity with the introduction of uses with respect to freehold lands: for the alienee of a copyhold had merely jus fiduciarium [right in trust], for which there was no remedy at law, but only by subpoena in chancery c. 367

When therefore the lord had accepted a surrender of his tenant’s interest, upon confidence to re-grant the estate to another person, either then expressly named or to be afterwards named in the tenant’s will, the chancery inforced this trust as a matter of conscience; which jurisdiction, though seemingly new in the time of Edward IV d, was generally acquiesced in, as it opened the way for the alienation of copyholds, as well as of freehold estates, and as it rendered the use of them both equally devisable by testament. Yet, even to this day, the new tenant cannot be admitted but by composition with the lord, and paying him a fine by way of acknowlegement for the licence of alienation. Add to this the plain feodal investiture, by delivering the symbol of seisin in presence of the other tenants in open court; “quando hasta vel aliud corporeum quidlibet porrigitur a domino se investituram facere dicente; quae saltem coram duobus vasallis 〈2〉 solenniter fieri debet e:”1 and, to crown the whole, the oath of 〈3〉 fealty annexed, the very bond of feodal subjection. From all which we may fairly conclude, that, had there been no other evidence of the fact in the rest of our tenures and estates, the very existence of copyholds, and the manner in which they are transferred, would incontestably prove the very universal reception, which this northern system of property for a long time obtained in this island; and which communicated itself, or at least its similitude, even to our very villeins and bondmen.

This method of conveyance is so essential to the nature of a copyhold estate, that

it cannot 〈4〉 possibly be transferred by any other assurance. 〈5〉 No feoffment, fine, or recovery (in the king’s courts) has any operation thereupon. If I would exchange a copyhold estate with another, I cannot do it by an ordinary deed of exchange at the common law; but we must surrender to each other’s use, and the lord will admit us accordingly. If I would devise a copyhold, I must surrender it to the use of my last will 368

and testament; and in my will I must declare my intentions, and name a devisee, who will then be entitled to 〈6〉 admissionf.

c [Ford v Hoskins] Cro. Jac. 568 [recte 368].

d Bro. Abr. tit. Tenant per copie. 10.

e Feud. l. 2. t. 2.

f Co. Copyh. §. 36.

1 ‘When a spear or other corporeal thing is presented by the lord, saying that he is making an investiture; which should be done solemnly in the presence of at least two vassals.’

250 of the rights of things

In order the more clearly to apprehend the nature of this peculiar assurance, let us

take a separate view of its several parts; the surrender, the presentment, and the admittance.

1. A surrender, by an admittance subsequent whereto the conveyance is to receive

its perfection and confirmation, is rather a manifestation of the alienor’s intention, than a transfer of any interest in possession. For, till admittance of cestuy que use, the lord taketh notice of the surrenderor as his tenant; and he shall receive the profits of the land to his own use, and shall discharge all services due to the lord. Yet the interest remains in him not absolutely, but sub modo [to a certain degree]; for he cannot pass away the land to any other, or make it subject to any other incumbrance than it was subject to at the time of the surrender. But no manner of legal interest is vested in the nominee before admittance. If he enters, he is a trespasser and punishable in an action of trespass: and if he surrenders to the use of another, such surrender is merely void, and by no matter ex post facto can be confirmed. For though he be admitted in pursuance of the original surrender, and thereby acquires afterwards a sufficient and plenary interest as absolute owner, yet his second surrender previous to his own admittance is absolutely void ab initio [from the beginning]; because at the time of such surrender he had but a possibility of an interest, and could therefore transfer nothing: and no subsequent admittance can make an act good, which was ab initio void. Yet, though upon the original surrender the nominee hath but a possibility, it is however such a possibility, as may whenever he pleases be reduced to a certainty: for he cannot either by force or fraud be deprived or deluded of the effect and fruits of the surrender; but if the lord refuse to admit him, he is compellable to do it by a bill in chancery or a mandamus g [we command]: and the surrenderor can in no wise defeat his grant; his

369 hands being for ever bound from disposing of the land in any other way, and his mouth

for ever stopped from revoking or countermanding his own deliberate 〈7〉 act h; except in the case of a surrender to the use of his will, which is always revocable j.

2. As to the presentment: that, by the general custom of manors, is to be made at

the next court baron immediately after the surrender; but by special custom in some places it will be good, though made at the second or other subsequent court. And it is to be brought into court by the same persons that took the surrender, and 〈8〉 then presented by the homage; and in all points material must correspond with the true tenor of the surrender itself. And therefore, if the surrender be conditional, and the presentment be absolute, both the surrender, presentment, and admittance thereupon are wholly voidi: the surrender, as being never truly presented; the presentment, as being false; and the admittance, as being founded on such untrue presentment. If a man surrenders out of court, and dies before presentment, and presentment be made after his death, according to the custom, this is sufficientk. So too, if cestuy que use dies before presentment, yet, upon presentment made after his death, his heir

g [Sir Thomas Lucey v Oldson] 2 [recte 1] Roll. Rep. 107.

h Co. Copyh. §. 39.

j [Fitch v Stuckley] 4 Rep. 23.

i Co. Copyh. 40.

k Co. Litt. 62.





chapter 22 251


according to the custom shall be admitted. The same law is, if those, into whose hands the surrender is made, die before presentment; for, upon sufficient proof in court that such a surrender was made, the lord shall be compelled to admit accordingly. And if the steward, the tenants, or others into whose hands such surrender is made, refuse or neglect to bring it in to be presented, upon a petition preferred to the lord in his court baron the party grieved shall find remedy. But if the lord will not do him right and justice, he may sue both the lord, and them that took the surrender, in chancery, and shall there find relief l.

3. Admittance is the last stage, or perfection, of copyhold assurances. And this 370

is of three sorts: first, an admittance upon a voluntary grant from the lord; secondly, an admittance upon surrender by the former tenant; and thirdly, an admittance upon a descent from the ancestor.

In admittances, even upon a voluntary grant from the lord, when copyhold lands

have escheated or reverted to him, the lord is considered as an instrument. For, though it is in his power to keep the lands in his own hands, or to dispose of them at his pleasure, by granting an absolute fee-simple, a freehold, or a chattel interest therein; and quite to change their nature from copyhold to socage tenure, so that he may well be reputed their absolute owner and lord; yet, if he will still continue to dispose of them as copyhold, he is bound to observe the antient custom precisely in every point, and can neither in tenure nor estate introduce any kind of alteration; for that were to create a new copyhold: wherefore in this respect the law accounts him custom’s instrument. For if a copyhold for life falls into the lord’s hands, by the tenant’s death, though the lord may destroy the tenure and enfranchise the land, yet if he grants it out again by copy, he can neither add to nor diminish the antient rent, nor make any the minutest variation in other respectsm: nor is the tenant’s estate, so granted, subject to any charges or incumbrances by the lordn.

In admittances upon surrender of another, the lord is to no intent reputed as

owner, but wholly as an instrument: and the tenant admitted shall likewise be subject to no charges or incumbrances of the lord; for his claim to the estate is solely under him that made the surrender o.

And, as in admittances upon surrenders, so in admittances upon descents by the 371

death of the ancestor, the lord is used as a mere instrument; and, as no manner of interest passes into him by the surrender or the death of his tenant, so no interest passes out of him by the act of admittance. And therefore neither in the one case, nor the other, is any respect had to the quantity or quality of the lord’s estate in the manor. For whether he be tenant in fee or for years, whether he be in possession by right or by wrong, it is not material; since the admittances made by him shall not be impeached on account of his title, because they are judicial, or rather ministerial, acts, which every lord in possession is bound to perform p.

l Co. Copyh. §. 40.

m Co. Cop. §. 41.

n [Swayne’s case] 8 Rep. 63.

o [Taverner v Cromwell] 4 Rep. 27. Co. Litt. 59.

p 4 Rep. 27. [Dillon v Fraine] 1 Rep. 140.

252 of the rights of things

Admittances, however, upon surrender differ from admittances upon descent

in this; that by surrender nothing is vested in cestuy que use before admittance, no more than in voluntary admittances; but upon descent the heir is tenant by copy immediately upon the death of his ancestor: not indeed to all intents and purposes, for he cannot be sworn on the homage nor maintain an action in the lord’s court as tenant; but to most intents the law taketh notice of him as of a perfect tenant of the land instantly upon the death of his ancestor, especially where he is concerned with any stranger. He may enter into the land before admittance; may take the profits; may punish any trespass done upon the groundq; nay, upon satisfying the lord for his fine due upon the descent, may surrender into the hands of the lord to whatever use he pleases. For which reasons we may conclude, that the admittance of an heir is principally for the benefit of the lord, to intitle him to his fine, and not so much necessary for the strengthening and compleating the heir’s title. Hence indeed an observation might arise, that if the benefit, which the heir is to receive by the admittance, is not equal to the charges of the fine, he will never come in and be

372 admitted to his copyhold in court; and so the lord may be defrauded of his fine.

But to this we may reply in the words of sir Edward Coker, “I assure myself, if it were in the election of the heir to be admitted or not to be admitted, he would be best contented without admittance; but the custom in every manor is in this point compulsory. For, either upon pain of forfeiture of their copyhold, or of incurring some great penalty, the heirs of copyholders are inforced, in every manor, to come into court and be admitted according to the custom, within a short time after notice given of their ancestor’s decease.”

q [Bullock v Dibley] 4 Rep. 23.

r Copyh. §. 41.





chapter the twenty third. 373




of alienation by devise.

The last method of conveying real property, is by devise, or disposition contained in a man’s last will and testament. And, in considering this subject, I shall not at present enquire into the nature of wills and testaments, which are more properly the instruments to convey personal estates; but only into the original and antiquity of devising real estates by will, and the construction of the several statutes upon which that power is now founded.

It seems sufficiently clear, that, before the conquest, lands were devisable by willa.

But, upon the introduction of the military tenures, the restraint of devising lands naturally took place, as a branch of the feodal doctrine of non-alienation without the consent of the lordb. And some have questioned, whether this restraint (which we may trace even from the antient Germansc) was not founded upon truer principles of policy, than the power of wantonly disinheriting the heir by will, and transferring the estate, through the dotage or caprice of the ancestor, from those of his blood to utter strangers. For this, it is alleged, maintained the ballance of property, and prevented one man from growing too big or powerful for his neighbours; since it rarely happens, 374

that the same man is heir to many others, though by art and management he may frequently become their devisee. Thus the antient law of the Athenians directed that the estate of the deceased should always descend to his children; or, on failure of lineal descendants, should go to the collateral relations: which had an admirable effect in keeping up equality and preventing the accumulation of estates. But when Solond made a slight alteration, by permitting them (though only on failure of issue) to dispose of their lands by testament, and devise away estates from the collateral heir, this soon produced an excess of wealth in some, and of poverty in others: which, by a natural progression, first produced popular tumults and dissentions; and these at length ended in tyranny, and the utter extinction of liberty; which was quickly followed by a total subversion of their state and nation. On the other hand, it would now seem hard, on account of some abuses, (which are the natural consequence of free agency, when coupled with human infirmity) to debar the owner of lands from distributing them after his death, as the exigence of his family affairs, or the justice due to his creditors, may perhaps require. And this power, if prudently managed, has with us a peculiar propriety; by preventing the very evil which resulted from Solon’s institution, the too great accumulation of property: which is the natural consequence of our doctrine of succession by primogeniture, to which the Athenians were



a Wright of tenures. 172.

b See pag. 57 [II. 37].

c Tacit. de mor. Germ. c. 21.

d Plutarch. in vita Solon.

254 of the rights of things

strangers. Of this accumulation the ill effects were severely felt even in the feodal times; but it should always be strongly discouraged in a commercial country, whose welfare depends on the number of moderate fortunes engaged in the extension of trade.

However this be, we find that, by the common law of England since the conquest,

no estate, greater than for term of years, could be disposed of by testament e; except only in Kent, and in some antient burghs, and a few particular manors, where their

375 Saxon immunities by special indulgence subsistedf. And though the feodal restraint

on alienations by deed vanished very early, yet this on wills continued for some centuries after; from an apprehension of infirmity and imposition on the testator in extremis [in his last moments], which made such devises 〈1〉 suspicious. Besides, in devises there was wanting that general notoriety, and public designation of the successor, which in descents is apparent to the neighbourhood, and which the simplicity of the common law always required in every transfer and new acquisition of property.

But when ecclesiastical ingenuity had invented the doctrine of uses, as a thing

distinct from the land, uses began to be devised very frequently g, and the devisee of the use could in chancery compel its execution. For it is observed by Gilbert h, that, as the popish clergy then generally sate in the court of chancery, they considered that men are most liberal when they can enjoy their possessions no longer; and therefore at their death would choose to dispose of them to those, who, according to the superstition of the times, could intercede for their happiness in another world. But, when the statute of usesi had annexed the possession to the use, these uses, being now the very land itself, became no longer devisable: which might have occasioned a great revolution in the law of devises, had not the statute of wills been made about five years after, viz. 32 Hen. VIII. c. 1. explained by 34 Hen. VIII. c. 5. which enacted, that all persons being seised in fee-simple (except feme-coverts, infants, idiots, and persons of nonsane memory) might by will and testament in writing devise to any other 〈3〉 person, but not to bodies corporate, two thirds of their lands, tenements, and hereditaments, held in chivalry, and the whole of those held in socage: which now, through the alteration of tenures by the statute of Charles the second, amounts to the whole of their landed property, except their copyhold tenements.

Corporations were excepted in these statutes, to prevent the extension of gifts in

376 mortmain; but now, by construction of the statute 43 Eliz. c. 4. it is held, that a devise

to a corporation for a charitable use is valid, as operating in the nature of an appointment, rather than of a bequest. And indeed the piety of the judges hath formerly carried them great lengths in supporting such charitable uses k; it being held that the statute of Elizabeth, which favours appointments to charities, supersedes and repeals

e 2 Inst. 7.

f Litt. §. 167. 1. Inst. 111.

g [Newis v Lark & Hunt] [2] Plowd. 414.

h on devises. 7.

i 〈2〉 27 Hen. VIII. c. 10.

k [Attorney General ex rel. Sidney College v Bains] Ch. Prec. 272.





chapter 23 255


all former statutes l, and supplies all defects of assurancesm: and therefore not only a devise to a corporation, but a devise by a copyhold tenant without surrendering to the use of his willn, and a devise (nay even a settlement) by tenant in tail without either fine or recovery, if made to a charitable use, are good by way of appointment o.

With regard to devises in general, experience soon shewed how difficult and

hazardous a thing it is, even in matters of public utility, to depart from the rules of the common law; which are so nicely constructed and so artificially connected together, that the least breach in any one of them disorders for a time the texture of the whole. Innumerable frauds and perjuries were quickly introduced by this parliamentary method of inheritance: for so loose was the construction made upon this act by the courts of law, that bare notes in the hand writing of another person were allowed to be good wills within the statute p. To remedy which, the statute of frauds and perjuries, 29 Car. II. c. 3. directs, that all devises of lands and tenements shall not only be in writing, but signed by the testator, or some other person in his presence, and by his express direction; and be subscribed, in his presence, by three or four credible witnesses. 〈4〉 And a similar solemnity is requisite for revoking a 〈5〉 devise.

In the construction of this last statute, it has been adjudged that the testator’s

name, written with his own hand, at the beginning of his will, as, “I John Mills do make this my last will and testament,” is a sufficient signing, without any name at the 377

bottomq; though the other is the safer way. It has also been determined, that though the witnesses must all see the testator sign, or at least acknowlege the signing, yet they may do it at different timesr. But they must all subscribe their names as witnesses in his presence, lest by any possibility they should mistake the instruments. And, 〈6〉 in a case determined about twenty years agot, the judges were extremely strict in regard to the credibility, or rather the competency, of the witnesses: for they would not allow any legatee, nor by consequence a creditor, where the legacies and debts were charged on the real estate, to be a competent witness to the devise, as being too deeply concerned in interest not to wish the establishment of the will; for, if it were established, he gained a security for his legacy or debt from the real estate, whereas otherwise he had no claim but on the personal assets. This determination however alarmed many purchasors and creditors, and threatened to shake most of the titles in the kingdom, that depended on devises by will. For, if the will was attested by a servant to whom wages were due, by the apothecary or attorney whose very attendance made them creditors, or by the minister of the parish who had any demand for tithes or ecclesiastical dues, (and these are the persons most likely to be present in the testator’s



l ms [Jennor v Harper] Gilb. Rep. 45. [Jenner v Harper] 1 P. W. 248.

m [Christ’s Hospital v Hawes] Duke’s charit. uses. 84.

n [Rivet’s case] Moor. 890.

o [Attorney General ex rel. Pettifer v Rye] 2 Vern. 453. [Tay v Slaughter] Ch. Prec. 16.

p [Brown v Sackville] Dyer. 72. [Nash v Edmunds] Cro. Eliz. 100.

q [Lemayne v Stanley] 3 Lev. 1.

r [Anon. (1680)] Freem. 486. [Anon. (1682)] 2 Ch. Cas. 109. [Cook v Parsons] Pr. Ch. 185.

s ms [Longford v Eyre] 1 P. W. 740.

t [Holdfast v Dowsing] Stra. 1253.

256 of the rights of things

last illness) and if in such case the testator had charged his real estate with the payment of his debts, the whole will, and every disposition therein, so far as related to real property, were held to be utterly void. This occasioned the statute 25 Geo. II. c. 6. which restored both the competency and the credit of such legatees, by declar-ing void all legacies given to witnesses, and thereby removing all possibility of their interest affecting their testimony. The same statute likewise established the com-petency of creditors, by directing the testimony of all such creditors to be admitted, but leaving their 〈7〉 credit (as well as that of all other witnesses) to be considered, on

378 a view of all the circumstances, by the court and jury before whom such will shall

be contested. And in a much later caseu the testimony of three witnesses, who were creditors, was held to be sufficiently credible, though the land was charged with the payment of debts; and the 〈8〉 reasons of the former determination were adjudged to be insufficient.

Another inconvenience was found to attend this new method of conveyance

by devise; in that creditors by bond and other specialties, which affected the heir provided he had assets by descent, were now defrauded of their securities, not having the same remedy against the devisee of their debtor. To obviate which, the statute 3 & 4 W. & M. c. 14. hath provided, that all wills, and testaments, limitations, dispositions, and appointments of real estates, by tenants in fee-simple or having power to dispose by will, shall (as against such creditors only) be deemed to be fraudulent and void: and that such creditors may maintain their actions jointly against both the heir and the devisee.

A will of lands, made by the permission and under the control of these statutes,

is considered by the courts of law not so much in the nature of a testament, as of a conveyance declaring the uses to which the land shall be subject: with this difference, that in other conveyances the actual subscription of the witnesses is not required by laww, though it is prudent for them so to do, in order to assist their memory when living and to supply their evidence when dead; but in devises of lands such subscrip-tion is now absolutely necessary by statute, in order to identify a conveyance, which in its nature can never be set up till after the death of the devisor. And upon this notion, that a devise affecting lands is merely a species of conveyance, is founded this distinction between such devises and testaments of personal chattels; that the latter will operate upon whatever the testator dies possessed of, the former only upon such real estates as were his at the time of executing and publishing his willx. Where fore

379 no after-purchased lands will pass under such devise y, unless, subsequent to the pur-

chase or contract z, the devisor re-publishes his willa.

We have now considered the several species of common assurances, whereby a

title to lands and tenements may be transferred and conveyed from one man to

u [Windham v Chetwynd] M. 31 Geo. II. 4 Burr. I. 430.

w See pag. 307 [II. 210].

x ms 〈 9 〉 [Wind v Jekyl] 1 P. W. 575.

y [Anon. (1587)] Moor. 255. [Brunker v Cook] 11 Mod. 127.

z [Davie v Beardsham] 1 Ch. Cas. 39. [Prideux v Gibben] 2 Ch. Cas. 144.

a [Bunter v Coke] Salk. 238.





chapter 23 257


another. But, before we conclude this head, it may not be improper to take notice of a few general rules and maxims, which have been laid down by courts of justice, for the construction and exposition of them all. These are

1. That the construction be favourable, and as near the minds and apparent

intents of the parties, as the rules of law will admit b. For the maxims of law are, that “verba intentioni debent inservire [words should be subservient to the intention];” and, “benigne interpretamur chartas propter simplicitatem laicorum [we give charters a favourable interpretation because of the ignorance of laymen].” And therefore the construction must also be reasonable, and agreeable to common understanding c.

2. That quoties in verbis nulla est ambiguitas, ibi nulla expositio contra verba

fienda estd [where the words are unambiguous, they should be given the most obvious meaning]: but that, where the intention is clear, too minute a stress be not laid on the strict and precise signification of words; nam qui haeret in litera, haeret in cortice [for he who sticks to the letter sticks to the surface]. Therefore, by a grant of a remainder a reversion may well pass, and e conversoe. And another maxim of law is, that “mala grammatica non vitiat chartam;” neither false English nor bad Latin will destroy a deedf. Which perhaps a classical critic may think to be no unnecessary caution.

3. That the construction be made upon the entire deed, and not merely upon

disjointed parts of it. “Nam ex antecedentibus et consequentibus fit optima interpretatiog 380

[the best interpretation is made from what comes before and what follows].” And therefore that every part of it, be (if possible) made to take effect; and no word but what may operate in some shape or other h. “Nam verba debent intelligi cum effectu, ut res magis valeat quem pereati [For words should be interpreted so as to give effect to the whole of what is written, rather than to undermine it].”

4. That the deed be taken most strongly against him that is the agent or contractor,

and in favour of the other party. “Verba fortius accipiuntur contra 〈10〉 proferentem [words are to be taken more strongly against the one proffering them].” For the principle of self-preservation will make men sufficiently careful, not to prejudice their own interest by the too extensive meaning of their words: and hereby all manner of deceit in any grant is avoided; for men would always affect ambiguous and intricate expressions, provided they were afterwards at liberty to put their own construction upon them. But here a distinction must be taken between an indenture and a deed poll: for the words of an indenture, executed by both parties, are to be considered as the words of them both; for, though delivered as the words of one party, yet they are not his words only, 〈11〉 but the other party hath given his consent to every one of them. But in a deed poll, executed only by the grantor, they are the words of the



b [Windham v Windham] And. 60.

c [Hewet v Painter] 1 Bulstr. 175. [London v Southwell Collegiate Church] Hob. 304.

d [Lanyon v Carne] 2 Saund. 157.

e [Roll v Osborn] Hob. 27.

f [Osborn’s case] 10 Rep. 133. Co. Litt. 223. [Fountain v Guavers] 2 Show. 334.

g [Turpine v Forreyner] 1 Bulstr. 101.

h ms [Butler v Duncomb] 1 P. W. 457.

i [Throckmerton v Tracy] [1] Plowd. 156 [recte 160].

258 of the rights of things

grantor only, and shall be taken most strongly against 〈12〉 himk. However, this, being a rule of some strictness and rigor, is the last to be resorted to, and is never to be relied upon, but where all other rules of exposition fail l.

5. That, if the words will bear two senses, one agreeable to, and another against,

law; that sense be preferred, which is most agreeable theretom. As if tenant in tail lets a 〈13〉 lease for life generally, it shall be construed for his own life only, for that stands with the law; and not for the life of the lessee, which is beyond his power to grant.

381 6. That, in a deed, if there be two clauses so totally repugnant to each other, that

they cannot stand together, the first shall be received and the latter rejectedn: wherein it differs from a will; for there, of two such repugnant clauses the latter shall stando. Which is owing to the different natures of the two instruments; for the first deed, and the last will are always most available in law. Yet in both cases we should rather attempt to reconcile themp.

7. That a devise be most favourably expounded, to pursue if possible the will of

the devisor, who for want of advice or learning may have omitted the 〈14〉 legal and proper phrases. And therefore many times the law dispenses with the want of words in devises, that are absolutely requisite in all other instruments. Thus a fee may be conveyed without words of inheritanceq; and an estate-tail without words of procreationr. By a will also an estate may pass by mere implication, without any express words to direct its course. As, where A devises lands to his heir at law, after the death of his wife: here, though no estate is given to the wife in express terms, yet she shall have an estate for life by implications; for the intent of the testator is clearly to postpone the heir till after her death; and, if she does not take it, nobody else can. So also, where a devise is of black-acre to A and of white-acre to B in tail, and if they both die without issue, then to C in fee: here A and B have cross remainders by implication, and on the failure of either’s issue, the other or his issue shall take the whole; and C’s remainder over shall be postponed till the issue of both shall failt. But, to avoid confusion, 〈16〉 no cross remainders are allowed between more than two deviseesu: and, in general, where any implications are allowed, they must be such as

382 are necessary (or at least highly probable) and not merely possible implicationsw. And

herein there is no distinction between the rules of law and of equity; for the will, being considered in both courts in the light of a limitation 〈17〉 to usesx, is construed



k [Browning v Beston] [1] Plowd. 134.

l Bacon’s Elem. c. 3.

m Co. Litt. 42.

n [James v Blunck] Hardr. 94.

o Co. Litt. 112.

p [Sharplus v Hankinson] Cro. Eliz. 420. [Fane v Fane] 1 Vern. 30.

q See pag. 108 [II. 72].

r See pag. 115 [II. 77].

s 〈15〉 [Pibus v Mitford] 1 Ventr. 376.

t [Holmes v Willet] Freem. 484.

u [Gilbert v Whitty] Cro. Jac. 655. [Cole v Levingston] 1 Ventr. 224. [Zinzon v Talmash] 2 Show. 130.

w [Gardner v Sheldon] Vaugh. 262.

x [Arthur v Bockenham] Fitzg. 236. [Arthur v Bokenham] 11 Mod. 153.





chapter 23 259


in each with equal favour and benignity, and expounded rather on its own particular circumstances, than by any general rules of positive law.

And thus we have taken a transient view, in this and the three preceding chapters,

of a very large and diffusive subject, the doctrine of common assurances: which concludes our observations on the title to things real, or the means by which they may be reciprocally lost and acquired. We have before considered the estates which may be had in them, with regard to their duration or quantity of interest, the time of their enjoyment, and the number and connexions of the persons entitled to hold them: we have examined the tenures, both antient and modern, whereby those estates have been, and are now, holden: and have distinguished the object of all these enquiries, namely, things real, into the corporeal or substantial, and incorporeal or ideal kind; and have thus considered the rights of real property in every light wherein they are contemplated by the laws of England. A system of laws, that differs much from every other system, except those of the same feodal origin, in its notions and regulations of landed estates; and which therefore could in this particular be very seldom compared with any other.

The subject, which has thus employed our attention, is of very extensive use, and

of as extensive variety. And yet, I am afraid, it has afforded the student less amusement and pleasure in the pursuit, than the matters discussed in the preceding volume. To say the truth, the vast alterations which the doctrine of real property has undergone from the conquest to the present time; the infinite determinations upon points that continually arise, and which have been heaped one upon another for a course of 383 seven centuries, without any order or method; and the multiplicity of acts of parliament which have amended, or sometimes only altered, the common law; these 〈18〉 cases have made the study of this branch of our national jurisprudence a little perplexed and intricate. It hath been my endeavour principally to select such parts of it, as were of the most general use, where the principles were the most simple, the reasons of them the most obvious, and the practice the least embarrassed. Yet I cannot presume that I have always been thoroughly intelligible to such of my readers, as were before strangers even to the very terms of art, which I have been obliged to make use of: though, whenever those have first occurred, I have generally attempted a short explication of their meaning. These are indeed the more numerous, on account of the different languages which our law has at different periods been taught to speak; the difficulty arising from which will insensibly diminish by use and familiar acquaintance. And therefore I shall close this branch of our enquiries with the words of sir Edward Coke y: “albeit the student shall not at any one day, do what he can, reach to the full meaning of all that is here laid down, yet let him no way discourage himself, but proceed; for on some other day, in some other place,” (or perhaps upon a second perusal of the same) “his doubts will be probably removed.”

y Proeme to 1 Inst.

384 chapter the twenty fourth.



of things personal.

Under the name of things personal are included all sorts of things moveable, which may attend a man’s person wherever he goes; and therefore, being only the objects of the law while they remain within the limits of its jurisdiction, and being also of a perishable quality, are not esteemed of so high a nature, nor paid so much regard to by the law, as things that are in their nature more permanent and immoveable, as lands, and houses, and the profits issuing thereout. These being constantly within the reach, and under the protection of the law, were the principal favourites of our first legislators: who took all imaginable care in ascertaining the rights, and directing the disposition, of such property as they imagined to be lasting, and which would answer to posterity the trouble and pains that their ancestors employed about them; but at the same time entertained a very low and contemptuous opinion of all personal estate, which they regarded only as a transient commodity. The amount of it indeed was, comparatively, very trifling, during the scarcity of money and the ignorance of luxurious refinements, which prevailed in the feodal ages. Hence it was, that a tax of the fifteenth, tenth, or sometimes a much larger proportion, of all the moveables of the subject, was frequently laid without scruple, and is mentioned with much unconcern by our antient historians, though now it would justly alarm our opulent merchants and stockholders. And hence likewise may be derived the frequent

385 forfeitures inflicted by the common law, of all a man’s goods and chattels, for mis­

behaviours and inadvertencies that at present hardly seem to deserve so severe a punishment. Our antient law­books, which are founded upon the feodal provisions, do not therefore often condescend to regulate this species of property. There is not a chapter in Britton or the mirroir, that can fairly be referred to this head; and the little that is to be found in Glanvil, Bracton, and Fleta, seems principally borrowed from the civilians. But of later years, since the introduction and extension of trade and commerce, which are entirely occupied in this species of property, and have greatly augmented its quantity and of course its value, we have learned to conceive different ideas of it. Our courts now regard a man’s personalty in a light nearly, if not quite, equal to his realty: and have adopted a more enlarged and less technical mode of considering the one than the other; frequently drawn from the rules which they found already established by the Roman law, wherever those rules appeared to be well­grounded and apposite to the case in question, but principally from reason and convenience, adapted to the circumstances of the times; preserving withal a due regard to antient usages, and a certain feodal tincture, which is still to be found in some branches of personal property.

But things personal, by our law, do not only include things moveable, but also

something more. The whole of which is comprehended under the general name of 〈1〉





chapter 24 261


chattels, catalla; which, sir Edward Coke saysa, is a French word signifying goods. And this is true, if understood of the Norman dialect; for in the grand coustumier b, we find the word chattels used and set in opposition to a fief or feud: so that not only goods, but whatever was not a feud, were accounted chattels. 〈2〉 And it is, I apprehend, in the same large, extended, negative sense, that our law adopts it; the idea of goods, or moveables only, being not sufficiently comprehensive to take in every thing that our law considers as a chattel interest. For since, as the commentator on the 〈3〉 coustumier 386

observes, there are two requisites to make a fief or heritage, duration as to time, and immobility with regard to place; whatever wants either of these qualities is not, according to the Normans, an heritage or fief c; or, according to us, is not a real estate: the consequence of which in both laws is, that it must be a personal estate, or chattel.

Chattels therefore are distributed by the law into two kinds; chattels real, and

chattels personal.

1. Chattels real, saith sir Edward Coked, are such as concern, or savour of, the

realty; as terms for years of land, wardships in chivalry (while the military tenures subsisted) the next presentation to a church, estates by statute­merchant, statute­ staple, elegit,1 or the like; of all which we have already spoken. And these are called real chattels, as being interests issuing out of, or annexed to real estates: of which they have one quality, viz. immobility, which denominates them real; but want the other, viz. a sufficient, legal, indeterminate duration: and this want it is, that constitutes them chattels. The utmost period for which they can last is fixed and determinate, either for such a space of time certain, or till such a particular sum of money be raised out of such a particular income; so that they are not equal in the eye of the law to the lowest estate of freehold, a lease for another’s life: their tenants were considered, upon feodal principles, as merely bailiffs or farmers; and the tenant of the freehold might at any time have destroyed their interest, till the reign of Henry VIIIe. A freehold, which alone is a real estate, and seems (as has been said) to answer to the fief in Normandy, is conveyed by corporal investiture and livery of seisin; which gives the tenant so strong a hold of the land, that it never after can be wrested from him 387

during his life, but by his own act, of voluntary transfer or of forfeiture; or else by the happening of some future contingency, as in estates pur auter vie, and the determi­ nable freeholds mentioned in a former chapter f. And even these, being of an uncertain

a 1 Inst. 118.

b c. 87.

c 〈4〉 Cateux sont meubles et immeubles: sicomme vrais meubles sont qui transporter se peuvent, et ensuivir le corps; immeubles sont choses qui ne peuvent ensuivir le corps, niestre transportees, et tout ce qui n’est point en heritage [Chattels are either movable or immovable. Truly movable are those which can be carried and follow the person. Immovables are things which cannot follow the person, or be transported, and everything that cannot be inherited]. LL. Will. Nothi, c. 4. apud Dufresne. II. 409. [Drawing on the Glossarium of Charles du Fresne, Blackstone mistakenly cites the laws of William the Conqueror (“Will. Nothi,” i.e. “William the Bastard”); this quotation (which appears in the entry on chattels: catallum) is actually from the next source du Fresne gives, Jean Boutillier’s Summa Ruralis (1503), a compilation of customary law from Northern France.]

d 1 Inst. 118.

e See pag. 141, 142 [II. 95, 96].

f pag. 121 [II. 81–2].

1 On the writ of elegit, see II. 108–9.

262 of the rights of things

duration, may by possibility last for the owner’s life; for the law will not presuppose the contingency to happen before it actually does, and till then the estate is to all intents and purposes a life estate, and therefore a freehold interest. On the other hand, a chattel interest in lands, which the Normans put in opposition to fief, and we to freehold, is conveyed by no seisin or corporal investiture, but the possession is gained by the mere entry of the tenant himself; and 〈5〉 it is sure to expire at a time prefixed and determined, if not sooner. Thus a lease for years must necessarily fail at the end and completion of the term; the next presentation to a church is satisfied and gone the instant it comes into possession, that is, by the first avoidance and pres­ entation to the living; the conditional estates by statutes and elegit are determined as soon as the debt is paid; and so guardianships in 〈6〉 chivalry were sure to expire the moment that the heir came of age. And if there be any other chattel real, it will be found to correspond with the rest in this essential quality, that its duration is limited to a time certain, beyond which it cannot subsist.

2. Chattels personal are, properly and strictly speaking, things moveable; which

may be annexed to or attendant on the person of the owner, and carried about with him from one part of the world to another. Such are animals, household­stuff, money, jewels, corn, garments, and every thing else that can properly be put in motion, and transferred from place to place. And of this kind of chattels it is, that we are principally to speak in the remainder of this book; having been unavoidably led to consider the nature of chattels real, and their incidents, in the former chapters which were

388 employed upon real estates: that kind of property being of a mongrel amphibious

nature, originally endowed with one only of the characteristics of each species of things; the immobility of things real, and the precarious duration of things personal.

Chattel interests being thus distinguished and distributed, it will be proper to

consider, first, the nature of that property, or dominion, to which they are liable; which must be principally, nay solely, referred to personal chattels: and, secondly, the title to that property, or how it may be lost and acquired. Of each of these in its order.





chapter the twenty fifth. 389




of property in things

personal.

Property, in chattels personal, may be either in possession; which is where a man hath not only the right to enjoy, but hath the actual enjoyment of, the thing: or else it is in action; where a man hath only a bare right, without any occupation or enjoyment. And of these the former, or property in possession, is divided into two sorts, an absolute and a qualified property.

I. First then of property in possession absolute; which is where a man hath, solely

and exclusively, the right, and also the occupation, of any moveable chattels; so that they cannot be transferred from him, or cease to be his, without his own act or default. Such may be all inanimate things, as goods, plate, money, jewels, implements of war, garments, and the like: such also may be all vegetable productions, as the fruit or other 〈1〉 parts, when severed from the plant, or the whole plant itself, when severed from the ground; none of which can be moved out of the owner’s possession without his own act or consent, or at least without doing him an injury, which it is the business of the law to prevent or remedy. Of these therefore there remains little to be said.

But with regard to animals, which have in themselves a principle and power of

motion, and (unless particularly confined) can convey themselves from one part of the world to another, there is a great difference made with respect to their several 390 classes, not only in our law, but in the law of nature and of all civilized nations. They are distinguished into such as are domitae [tame], and such as are ferae naturae [of a wild nature]; some being of a tame, and others of a wild disposition. In such as are of a nature tame and domestic, (as horses, kine, sheep, poultry, and the like) a man may have as absolute a property as in any inanimate beings; because these continue perpetually in his occupation, and will not stray from his house or person, unless by accident or fraudulent enticement, in either of which cases the owner does not lose his propertya: in which our law agrees with the laws of France and Hollandb. The stealing, or forcible abduction, of such property as this, is also felony; for these are things of intrinsic value, serving for the food of man, or else for the uses of husbandry c. But in animals ferae naturae a man can have no absolute property.

Of all tame and domestic animals, the brood belongs to the owner of the dam or

mother; the English law agreeing with the civil, that “partus sequitur ventrem [the issue follows the belly]” in the brute creation, though for the most part in the human



a [Putt v Roster] 2 Mod. 319.

b Vinn. in Inst. l. 2. tit. 1. §. 15.

c 1 Hal. P. C. 511, 512.

264 of the rights of things

species it disallows that maxim. And therefore in the laws of England d, as well as Romee, “si equam meam equus tuus praegnantem fecerit, non est tuum sed meum quod natum est [if your horse makes my mare pregnant, the offspring is mine and not yours].” And, for this, Puffendorf f gives a sensible reason: not only because the male is frequently unknown; but also because the dam, during the time of her pregnancy, is almost useless to the proprietor, and must be maintained with greater expence and care: wherefore as her owner is the loser by her pregnancy, he ought to be the gainer by her brood. An exception to this rule is in the case of young cygnets; which belong equally to the owner of the cock and hen, and shall be divided between themg. But

391 here the reasons of the general rule cease, and “cessante ratione cessat et ipsa lex [the

reason ceasing, the law itself ceases]:” for the male is well known, by his constant association with the female; and for the same reason the owner of the one doth not suffer more disadvantage, during the time of pregnancy and nurture, than the owner of the other.

II. Other animals, that are not of a tame and domestic nature, are either not the

objects of property at all, or else fall under our other division, namely, that of qualified, limited, or special property: which is such as is not in its nature permanent, but may sometimes subsist, and at other times not subsist. In discussing which subject, I shall in the first place shew, how this species of property may subsist in such animals, as are ferae naturae, or of a wild nature; and then, how it may subsist in any other things, when under particular circumstances.

First then, a man may be invested with a qualified, but not an absolute, property in

all creatures that are ferae naturae, either per industriam, propter impotentiam, or propter privilegium [through industry, because of their inability, or because of privilege].

1. A qualified property may subsist in animals ferae naturae, per industriam

hominis [by human industry]: by a man’s reclaiming and making them tame by art, industry, and education; or by so confining them within his own immediate power, that they cannot escape and use their natural liberty. And under this head some writers have ranked all the former species of animals we have mentioned, appre­ hending none to be originally and naturally tame, but only made so by art and custom: as, horses, swine, and other cattle; which, if originally left to themselves, would have chosen to rove up and down, seeking their food at large, and are only made domestic by use and familiarity, and are therefore, say they, called mansueta, quasi manui assueta [tame, as accustomed to the hand]. But however well this notion may be founded, abstractedly considered, our law apprehends the most obvious distinction to be, between such animals as we generally see tame, and are therefore seldom, if ever, found wandering at large, which it calls domitae naturae [domesticated]; and

392 such creatures as are usually found at liberty, which are therefore supposed to be

more emphatically ferae naturae, though it may happen that the latter shall be



d Bro. Abr. tit. Propertie. 29.

e Ff. 6. 1. 5.

f L. of N. 1. 4. c. 7.

g [Case of the Swans] 7 Rep. 17.





chapter 25 265


sometimes tamed and confined by the art and industry of man. Such as are deer in a park, hares or rabbets in an enclosed warren, doves in a dovehouse, pheasants or partridges in a mew, hawks that are fed and commanded by their owner, and fish in a private pond or in trunks.1 These are no longer the property of a man, than while they continue in his keeping or actual possession: but, if at any time they regain their natural liberty, his property instantly ceases; unless they have animum revertendi [the intention of returning], which is only to be known by their usual custom of returningh. A maxim which is borrowed from the civil law i ; “revertendi animum videntur desinere habere tunc, cum revertendi consuetudinem deseruerint.”2 The law therefore extends this possession farther than the mere manual occupation; for my tame hawk that is pursuing his quarry in my presence, though he is at liberty to go where he pleases, is nevertheless my property; for he hath animum revertendi. So are my pigeons, that are flying at a distance from their home 〈2〉 (especially those of the carrier kind) and likewise the deer that is chased out of my park or forest, and is instantly pursued by the keeper or forester: all which remain still in my possession, and I still preserve my qualified property in them. But if they stray without my knowlege, and do not return in the usual manner, it is then lawful for any stranger to take themk. But if a deer, or any wild animal reclaimed, hath a collar or other mark put upon him, and goes and returns at his pleasure; or if a wild swan is taken, and marked and turned loose in the river, the owner’s property in him still continues, and it is not lawful for any one else to take himl: but otherwise, if the deer has been long absent without returning, or the swan leaves the neighbourhood. Bees also are ferae naturae; but, when hived and reclaimed, a man may have a qualified property in them, by the law of nature, as well as by the civil law m. And to the same purpose, not to say in the same words, with the civil law, speaks Bractonn: occupation, that is, 393 hiving or including them, gives the property in bees; for, though a swarm lights upon my tree, I have no more property in them till I have hived them, than I have in the birds which make their 〈3〉 nests thereon; and therefore if another hives them, he shall be their proprietor: but a swarm, which fly from and out of my hive, are mine so long as I can keep them in sight, and have power to pursue them; and in these circumstances no one else is intitled to take them. But it hath been also saido, that with us the only ownership in bees is ratione soli [by reason of the soil]; and the charter of the forestp, which allows every freeman to be entitled to the honey found within his own woods, affords great countenance to this doctrine, that a qualified



h Bracton. l. 2. c. 1. [Case of the Swans] 7 Rep. 17.

i Inst 2. 1. 15.

k Finch. L. 177.

l Crompt. of courts. 167. [Case of the Swans] 7 Rep. 16.

m Puff. l. 4. c. 6. §. 5. Inst. 2. 1. 14.

n l. 2. c. 1. §. 3.

o Bro. Abr. tit. Propertie. 37 [cites YB 43 Edw. III. 24].

p 9 Hen. III. c. 13.

1 Perforated wooden boxes, used to hold and transport fish.

2 ‘They seem no longer to have the intention of returning, when they forsake the custom of returning.’ 266 of the rights of things

property may be had in bees, in consideration of the property of the soil whereon they are found.

In all these creatures, reclaimed from the wildness of their nature, the property is

not absolute, but defeasible: a property, that may be destroyed if they resume their antient wildness, and are found at large. For if the pheasants escape from the mew, or the fishes from the trunk, and are seen wandering at large in their proper element, they become ferae naturae again; and are free and open to the first occupant that has ability to 〈4〉 seise them. But while they thus continue my qualified or defeasible property, they are as much under the protection of the law, as if they were absolutely and indefeasibly mine: and an action will lie against any man that detains them from me, or unlawfully destroys them. It is also as much felony by common law to steal such of them as are fit for food, as it is to steal tame animalsq: but not so, if they are only kept for pleasure, curiosity, or whim, as dogs, bears, cats, apes, parrots, and singing birdsr; because their value is not intrinsic, but depending only on the caprice

394 of the owner s: though it is such an invasion of property as may amount to a civil

injury, and be redressed by a civil actiont. Yet to steal a reclaimed hawk is felony both by common law and statuteu; which seems to be a relic of the tyranny of our antient sportsmen. And, among our elder ancestors the antient Britons, another species of reclaimed animals, viz. cats, were looked upon as creatures of intrinsic value; and the killing or stealing one was a grievous crime, and subjected the offender to a fine; especially if it belonged to the king’s household, and 〈5〉 were the custos horrei regii [the guard of the royal granary], for which there was a very peculiar forfeiturew. And thus much of qualified property in wild animals, reclaimed per industriam.

2. A qualified property may also subsist with relation to animals ferae naturae,

ratione impotentiae, on account of their own inability. As when hawks, herons, or other birds build in my trees, or coneys3 or other creatures make their nests or burrows in my land, and have young ones there; I have a qualified property in those young ones, till such time as they can fly, or run away, and then my property expiresx: but, till then, it is in some cases trespass, and in others felony, for a stranger to take them away y. For here, as the owner of the land has it in his power to do what he pleases with them, the law therefore vests a property in him of the young ones, in the



q 1 Hal. P. C. 512.

r Lamb Eiren. 275.

s [Case of the Swans] 7 Rep. 18. 3 Inst. 109.

t Bro. Abr. tit. Trespass. 407.

u 1 Hal. P. C. 512. 1 Hawk. P. C. c. 33.

w “Si quis felem, horrei regii custodem, occiderit vel furto abstulerit, felis summa cauda suspendatur, capite aream attingente, et in eam grana tritici effundantur, usquedum summitas caudae tritico co-operiatur [If any one should kill or steal a cat (the guard of the royal granary), let the cat be suspended by the end of its tail, its head touching the floor, and grains of wheat be poured upon it, until the tip of the tail be covered].” Wotton. LL. Wall. l. 3. c. 5. §. 5 [no. 4; p. 248]. An amercement similar to which, sir Edward Coke tells us ([Case of the Swans] 7 Rep. 18.) there antiently was for stealing swans; only suspending them by the beak, instead of the tail.

x Carta de forest. 9 Hen. III. c. 13.

y [Case of the Swans] 7 Rep. 17. Lamb. Eiren. 274.

3 Adult rabbits.





chapter 25 267


same manner as it does of the old ones if reclaimed and confined: for these cannot through weakness, any more than the others through restraint, use their natural liberty and forsake him.

3. A man may, lastly, have a qualified property in animals ferae naturae, propter

privilegium: that is, he may have the privilege of hunting, taking, and killing them, in exclusion of other persons. Here he has a transient property in these animals, 395 usually called game, so long as they continue within his liberty z; and may restrain any stranger from taking them therein: but the instant they depart into another liberty, this qualified property ceases. The manner, in which this privilege is acquired, will be shewn in a subsequent chapter.

The qualified property which we have hitherto considered, extends only to animals

ferae naturae, when either reclaimed, impotent, or privileged. Many other things may also be the objects of qualified property. It may subsist in the very elements, of fire or light, of air, and of water. A man can have no absolute permanent property in these, as he may in the 〈6〉 earth or land; since these are of a vague and fugitive nature, and therefore can admit only of a precarious and qualified ownership, which lasts so long as they are in actual use and occupation, but no longer. If a man disturbs another, and deprives him of the lawful enjoyment of these; if one obstructs another’s antient windowsa, corrupts the air of his house or gardensb, fouls his water c, or unpens and lets it out, or if he diverts an antient watercourse that used to run to the other’s mill or meadow d; the law will animadvert hereon as an injury, and protect the party injured in his possession. But the property in them ceases the instant they are out of possession: for, when no man is engaged in their actual occupation, they become again common, and every man has an equal right to appropriate them to his own use.

These kinds of qualification in property depend upon the peculiar circumstances

of the subject matter, which is not capable of being under the absolute dominion of any proprietor. But property may also be of a qualified or special nature, on account of the peculiar circumstances of the owner, when the thing itself is very capable of absolute ownership. As in case of bailment, or delivery, of goods to another person 396

for a particular use; as to a carrier to convey to London, to an innkeeper to secure in his inn, or the like. Here there is no absolute property in either the bailor or the bailee, the person delivering, or him to whom it is delivered: for the bailor hath only the right, and not the immediate possession; the bailee hath the possession, and only a temporary right. But it is a qualified property in them both; and each of them is entitled to an action, in case the goods be damaged or taken away: the bailee on account of his immediate possession; the bailor, because the possession of the bailee is, mediately, his possession alsoe. So also in case of goods pledged or pawned upon

z [Child v Greenhill] Cro. Car. 554. [Childe v Greenhil] Mar. 48. [Sutton v Moody] 5 Mod. 376. [Sutton v Moody] 12 Mod. 144.

a [Aldred’s case] 9 Rep. 58.

b Ibid. 59. [Hewet v Copland] Lutw. 92.

c [Aldred’s case] 9 Rep. 59.

d [Russell and Handford’s case] 1 Leon. 273. [Prickman v Tripp] Skinn. 389.

e 1 Roll. Abr. 607.

268 of the rights of things

condition, either to repay money or otherwise; both the pledgor and pledgee have a qualified, but neither of them an absolute, 〈7〉 property therein: the pledgor’s property is conditional, and depends upon the performance of the condition of re­payment, &c; and so too is that of the pledgee, which depends upon its non­performancef. The same may be said of goods distreined for rent, or other cause of distress: which are in the nature of a pledge, and are not, at the first taking, the absolute property of either the distreinor, or party distreined; but may be redeemed, or else forfeited, by the subsequent conduct of the latter. But a servant, who hath the care of his master’s goods or chattels, as a butler of plate, a shepherd of sheep, and the like, hath not any property or possession either absolute or qualified, but only a mere charge or oversight g.

Having thus considered the several divisions of property in possession, which

subsists there only, where a man hath both the right and also the occupation of the thing; we will proceed next to take a short view of the nature of property in action, or such where a man hath not the occupation, but merely a bare right to occupy the thing in question; the possession whereof may however be recovered by a suit or

397 action at law: from whence the thing so recoverable is called a thing, or chose, in

actionh. Thus money due on a bond is a chose in action; for a property in the debt vests at the time of forfeiture mentioned in the obligation, but there is no possession till recovered by course of law. If a man promises, or covenants with me, to do any act, and fails in it, whereby I suffer damage; the recompense for this damage is a chose in action: for though a right to some recompense vests in me, at the time of the damage done, yet what and how large such recompense shall be, can only be ascertained by verdict; and the possession can only be given me by legal judgment and execution. In the former of these cases the student will observe, that the property, or right of action, depends upon an express contract or obligation to pay a stated sum: and in the latter it depends upon an implied contract, that if the covenantor does not perform the act he engaged to do, he shall pay me the damages I sustain 〈9〉 by his breach of covenant. And hence it may be collected, that all property in action depends entirely upon contracts, either express or implied; which are the only regular means of acquiring a chose in action, and of the nature of which we shall discourse at large in a subsequent chapter.

At present we have only to remark, that upon all contracts or promises, either

express or implied, and the infinite variety of cases into which they are and may be spun out, the law gives an action of some sort or other to the party injured in case of non­performance; to compel the wrongdoer to do justice to the party with whom he



f [Ratcliff v Davies] Cro. Jac. 245.

g 3 Inst. 108.

h The same idea, and the same denomination of property, prevailed in the civil law. “Rem in bonis nostris habere intelligimur, 〈8〉 quotiens ad reciperandam eam actionem habeamus [We are considered to have a property in our goods whenever we can have an action to recover them].” (Ff. 41. 1. 52.) And again; “aeque bonis adnumerabitur etiam, si quid est in actionibus, petitionibus, persecutionibus. Nam et haec in bonis esse videntur [Those goods are justly accounted as ours, which we may claim by action, petition, or prosecution. For these also appear to belong to us].” (Ff. 50. 16. 49.) [Blackstone omits part of the first passage but preserves its general sense.]





chapter 25 269


has contracted, and, on failure of performing the identical thing he engaged to do, to render a satisfaction equivalent to the damage sustained. But while the thing, or its equivalent, remains in suspense, and the injured party has only the right and not the occupation, it is called a chose in action; being a thing rather in potentia [in possibility] than in esse [in being]: though the owner may have as absolute a 〈10〉 property of such 398

things in action, as of things in possession.

And, having thus distinguished the different degree or quantity of dominion or

property to which things personal are subject, we may add a word or two concerning the time of their enjoyment, and the number of their owners; in conformity to the method before observed in treating of the property of things real.

First, as to the time of enjoyment. By the rules of the antient common law, there

could be no future property, to take place in expectancy, created in personal goods and chattels; because, being things transitory, and by many accidents subject to be lost, destroyed, or otherwise impaired, and the exigencies of trade requiring also a frequent circulation thereof, it would occasion perpetual suits and quarrels, and put a stop to the freedom of commerce, if such limitations in remainder were generally tolerated and allowed. But yet in last wills and testaments such limitations of personal goods and chattels, in remainder after a bequest for life, were permittedi: though originally that indulgence was only shewn, when merely the use of the goods, and not the goods themselves, was given to the first legateek; the property being supposed to continue all the time in the executor of the devisor. But now that distinction is disregarded l: and therefore if a man either by deed or will limits his books or furniture to A for life, with remainder over to B, this remainder is good. But, where an estate­ tail in things personal is given to the first or any subsequent possessor, it vests in him the total property, and no remainder over shall be permitted on such a limitationm. For this, if allowed, would tend to a perpetuity, as the devisee or grantee in tail of a chattel has no method of barring the entail; and therefore the law vests in him at once the entire dominion of the goods, being analogous to the fee­simple which a tenant in tail may acquire in a real estate.

Next, as to the number of owners. Things personal may belong to their owners, 399

not only in severalty, but also in joint­tenancy, and in common, as well as real estates. They cannot indeed be vested in coparcenary; because they do not descend from the ancestor to the heir, which is necessary to constitute coparceners. But if a horse, or other personal chattel, be given to two or more, absolutely, they are joint­tenants hereof; and, unless the jointure be severed, the same doctrine of survivorship shall take place as in estates of lands and tenementsn. And, in like manner, if the jointure be severed, as by either of them selling his share, the vendee and the remaining part­ owner shall be tenants in common, without any jus accrescendi or survivorshipo.

i 1 Equ. Cas. abr. 360.

k [Lawson and Cooke’s case] Mar. 106.

l [Anon. (1695)] 2 Freem. 206.

m ms [Seale v Seale] 1 P. W. 290.

n Litt. §. 282. [Lady Shore v Billingsley] 1 Vern. 482.

o Litt. §. 321.

270 of the rights of things

So also if 100l. be given by will to two or more, equally to be divided between them, this makes them tenants in commonp; as, we have formerly seenq, the same words would have done, in regard to real estates. But, for the encouragement of husbandry and trade, it is held that a stock on a farm, though occupied jointly, and also a stock used in a joint undertaking, by way of partnership in trade, shall always be considered as common and not as joint property; and there shall be no survivorship thereinr.

p [Stringer v Phillips] 1 Equ. Cas. abr. 292.

q pag. 193 [II. 129].

r [Jeffereys v Small] 1 Vern. 217. Co. Litt. 182.





chapter the twenty sixth. 400




of title to things

personal by occupancy.

We are next to consider the title to things personal, or the various means of acquiring, and of losing, such property as may be had therein: both which considerations of gain and loss shall be blended together in one and the same view, as was done in our observations upon real property; since it is for the most part impossible to contemplate the one, without contemplating the other also. And these methods of acquisition or loss are principally twelve: 1. By occupancy. 2. By prerogative. 3. By forfeiture. 4. By custom. 5. By succession. 6. By marriage. 7. By judgment. 8. 〈1〉 By gift. 9. By contract. 10. By bankruptcy. 11. By testament. 12. By administration.

And, first, a property in goods and chattels may be acquired by occupancy: which,

we have more than oncea remarked, was the original and only primitive method of acquiring any property at all; but which has since been restrained and abridged, by the positive laws of society, in order to maintain peace and harmony among mankind. For this purpose, by the laws of England, gifts, and contracts, testaments, legacies, and administrations have been introduced and countenanced, in order to transfer and continue that property and possession in things personal, which has once been 401 acquired by the owner. And, where such things are found without any other owner, they for the most part belong to the king by virtue of his prerogative; except in some few instances, wherein the original and natural right of occupancy is still permitted to subsist, and which we are now to consider.

1. Thus, in the first place, it hath been said, that any body may seise to his own use

such goods as belong to an alien enemy b. For such enemies, not being looked upon as members of our society, are not entitled during their state of enmity to the benefit or protection of the laws; and therefore every man that has opportunity is permitted to seise upon their chattels, without being compelled as in other cases to make restitution or satisfaction to the owner. But this, however generally laid down by some of our writers, must in reason and justice be restrained to such captors as are authorized by the public authority of the state, residing in the crownc; and to such goods as are brought into this country by an alien enemy, after a declaration of war, without a safe-conduct or passport. And therefore it hath been 〈2〉 heldd, that where a foreigner is resident in England, and afterwards a war breaks out between his country and ours, his goods are not liable to be seised. It hath also been adjudged,



a See pag. 3. 8. 258 [II. 2, 5, 175].

b Finch. L. 178.

c [R. v Williamson] Freem. 40.

d Bro. Abr. tit. propertie. 38. forfeiture. 57.

272 of the rights of things

that if an enemy take the goods of an Englishman, which are afterwards retaken by another subject of this kingdom, the former owner shall lose his property therein, and it shall be indefeasibly vested in the second taker; unless they were retaken the same day, and the owner before sun-set puts in his claim of property e. Which is agreeable to the law of nations, as understood in the time of Grotiusf, even with regard to captures made at sea; which were held to be the property of the captors after a possession of twenty four hours: though the modern authorities g require, that

402 before the property can be changed, the goods must have been brought into port, and

have continued a night intra praesidia, in a place of safe custody, so that all hope of recovering 〈3〉 them is lost.

And, as in the goods of an enemy, so also in his person, a man may acquire a sort

of qualified property, by taking him a prisoner in war h; at least till his ransom be paidj. And this doctrine seems to have been extended to negro-servantsi, who are purchased, when captives, of the nations with whom they are at war, 〈5〉 and continue therefore in some degree the property of their masters who buy them: though, accurately speaking, that 〈6〉 property consists rather in the perpetual service, than in the body or person, of the captivek.1

2. Thus again, whatever moveables are found upon the surface of the earth, or in

the sea, and are unclaimed by any owner, are supposed to be abandoned by the last proprietor; and, as such, are returned into the common stock and mass of things: and therefore they belong, as in a state of nature, to the first occupant or fortunate finder, unless they fall within the description of waifs, or estrays, or wreck, or hidden treasure; for these, we have formerly seenl, are vested by law in the king, and form a part of the ordinary revenue of the crown.

3. Thus too the benefit of the elements, the light, the air, and the water, can only

be appropriated by occupancy. If I have an antient window overlooking my neighbour’s ground, he may not erect any blind to obstruct the light: but if I build my house close to his wall, which darkens it, I cannot compel him to demolish his wall; for there the first occupancy is rather in him, than in me. If my neighbour makes a tan-yard, so as

e Ibid.

f de j. b. & p. l. 3. c 6. §. 3.

g Bynkersh. quaest. jur. publ. I. 4. Rocc. de. Assecur. not. 66.

h Bro. Abr. tit. propertie. 18.

j We meet with a curious writ of trespass in the register (102.) for breaking a man’s house, and 〈4〉 setting such a prisoner at large. “Quare domum ipsius A. apud W. (in qua idem A. quendam H. Scotum per ipsum A. de guerra captum tanquam prisonem suum, quousque sibi de centum libris, per quas idem H. redemptionem suam cum praefato A. pro vita sua salvanda fecerat, satisfactum foret, detinuit) fregit, et ipsum H. cepit et abduxit, vel quo voluit abire permisit, &c. [Wherefore he broke into the house of the said A. at W. (in which the said A. detained a certain H. the Scot, taken captive by him in war, as his prisoner, until he should satisfy him in the sum of one hundred pounds, which he had agreed upon as his ransom with the aforesaid A. for saving his life) and took the said H. and carried him away, or permitted him to go wherever he pleased.]”

i [Butts v Penny] 2 Lev. 201.

k [Chamberlain v Harvey] Carth. 396. [Chamberlain v Harvey] Ld Raym. 147. [Smith v Gould] Salk. 667.

l Book 1. ch. 8.

1 On 20 February 1769, Blackstone wrote to the anti-slavery campaigner Granville Sharp, observing that this paragraph ‘hint[s] at’ the discussion of slavery at I. 86, but refrains from either insisting on the illegality of slavery or justifying it under common law: Letters, ed. Prest, 138–9.





chapter 26 273


to annoy and render less salubrious the air of my house or gardens, the law will 403 furnish me with a remedy; but if he is first in possession of the air, and I fix my habitation near him, the nusance is of my own seeking, 〈7〉 and must continue. If a stream be unoccupied, I may erect a mill thereon, and detain the water; yet not so as to injure my neighbour’s prior mill, or his meadow: for he hath by the first occupancy acquired a property in the current.

4. With regard likewise to animals ferae naturae, all mankind had by the original

grant of the creator a right to pursue and take any fowl or insect of the air, any fish or inhabitant of the waters, and any beast or reptile of the field: and this natural right still continues in every individual, unless where it is restrained by the civil laws of the country. And when a man has once so seised them, they become while living his qualified property, or, if dead, are absolutely his own: so that to steal them, or otherwise invade this property, is, according to the respective values, sometimes a criminal offence, sometimes only a civil injury. The restrictions which are laid upon this right, by the laws of England, relate principally to royal fish, as whale and sturgeon, and such terrestrial, aërial, or aquatic animals as go under the denomination of game; the taking of which is made the exclusive right of the prince, and such of his subjects to whom he has granted the same royal privilege. But those animals, which are not expressly so reserved, are still liable to be taken and appropriated by any of the king’s subjects, upon their own territories; in the same manner as they might have taken even game itself, till these civil prohibitions were issued: there being in nature no distinction between one species of wild animals and another, between the right of acquiring property in a hare or a squirrel, in a partridge or a butterfly; but the difference, at present made, arises merely from the positive municipal law.

5. To this principle of occupancy also must also be referred the method of acquiring

a special personal property in corn growing on the ground, or other emblements, by any possessor of the land who hath sown or planted it, whether he be owner of the 404 inheritance in fee or in tail, or be tenant for life, for years, or at will: which emblements are distinct from the real estate in the land, and subject to many, though not all, the incidents attending personal chattels. They were devisable by testament before the statute of willsm, and at the death of the owner shall vest in his executor and not his heir: they are forfeitable by outlawry in a personal actionn: and by the statute 11 Geo. II. c. 19. though not by the common law o, they may be distreined for rent arrere. The reason for admitting the acquisition of this special property, by tenants who have temporary interests, was formerly given p; and it was extended to tenants in fee, principally for the benefit of their creditors: and therefore, though the emblements are assets in the hands of the executor, are forfeitable upon outlawry, and distreinable for rent, they are not in other respects considered as personal chattels; and, particularly, they are not the object of larciny, before they are severed from the groundq.

m Perk. §. 512.

n Bro. Abr. tit. emblements. 21. [Oland’s case] 5 Rep. 116.

o [YB Hil. 18 Edw. III] 1 Roll. Abr. 666.

p pag. 122. 146 [II. 82, 98–9].

q 3 Inst. 109.

274 of the rights of things

6. The doctrine of property arising from accession is also grounded on the right

of occupancy. By the Roman law, if any given corporeal substance received afterwards an accession by natural or by artificial means, as by the growth of vegetables, the pregnancy of animals, the embroidering of cloth, or the conversion of wood or metal into vessels and utensils, the original owner of the thing was intitled by his right of possession to the property of it under such its state of improvement r: but if the thing itself, by such operation, was changed into a different species, as by making wine, oil, or bread, out of another’s grapes, olives, or wheat, it belonged to the new operator; who was only to make a satisfaction to the former proprietor for the materials, which he had so converteds. And these doctrines are implicitly copied and adopted by our Bractont, in the reign of king Henry III; and have since been confirmed by many

405 resolutions of the courtsu. It hath even been held, that if one takes away another’s wife

or son, and cloaths them, and afterwards the husband or father retakes them back, the garments shall cease to be the property of him who provided them, being now annexed to the person of the child or womanw.

7. But in the case of confusion of goods, where those of two persons are so

intermixed, that the several portions can be no longer distinguished, the English law partly agrees with, and partly differs from, the civil. If the intermixture be by consent, I apprehend that in both laws the proprietors have an interest in common, in pro-portion to their respective sharesx. But, if one wilfully intermixes his money, corn, or hay, with that of another man, without his approbation or knowlege, or casts gold in like manner into another’s melting-pot or crucible, the civil law, though it gives the sole property of the whole to him who has not interfered in the mixture, yet allows a satisfaction to the other for what he has so improvidently losty. But our law, to guard against fraud, allows no remedy in such a case; but gives the intire property, without any account, to him, whose original dominion is invaded, and endeavoured to be rendered uncertain, without his own consent z.

8. There is still another species of property, 〈9〉 which, being grounded on labour

and invention, is more properly reducible to the head of occupancy than any other; since the right of occupancy itself is supposed by Mr Lockea, and many othersb, to be founded on the personal labour of the occupant. And this is the right, which an author may be supposed to have in his own original literary compositions: so that no

r Inst. 2. 1. 25, 26, 31. Ff. 6. 1. 5.

s Inst. 2. 1. 25, 34.

t l. 2. c. 2 & 3.

u Bro. Abr. tit. propertie. 23. [Anon. (1559)] Moor. 20. [Stock v Stock] Poph. 38.

w [Viscountess of Bindon’s case] Moor. 214.

x Inst. 2. 1. 27, 28. [Jeffereys v Small] 1 Vern. 217.

y Inst. 2. 1. 28.

z [Stock v Stock] Poph. 38. [Spanish Ambassador v Buntish] 2 Bulstr. 325. 〈8〉 [Fellows v Mitchell and Owen] 2 Vern. 516.

a on Gov. part 2. ch. 5. [Blackstone had already drawn on Locke for this argument when representing the plaintiff in Tonson v Collins, 1 Black. W. 321, 321–2 (1761), in a statement implying (misleadingly) that Locke himself develops the same analogy: ‘Locke on Government, part 2, c. 5. Same Right of Occupancy in Ideas, as in a Field, a Tree, or a Stone.’]

b See pag. 8 [II. 5].

OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 11/07/16, SPi





chapter 26 275


other person without his leave may publish or make profit of the copies. When a man by the exertion of his rational powers has produced an original work, 〈10〉 he has clearly a right to dispose of that identical work as he pleases, and any attempt to take 406

it from him, or vary the disposition he has made of 〈11〉 it, is an invasion of his right of property. Now the identity of a literary composition consists intirely in the sentiment and the language;2 the same conceptions, cloathed in the same words, must necessarily be the same composition: and whatever method be taken of conveying that composition to the ear or the eye of another, by recital, by writing, or by printing, in any number of copies or at any period of time, it is always the identical work of the author which 〈12〉 is so conveyed; and no other 〈13〉 man can have a 〈14〉 right to convey or transfer it without his consent, either tacitly or expressly given.3 This consent may perhaps be tacitly 〈15〉 given, when an author permits his work to be published, without any reserve of right, and without stamping on it any marks of ownership: it is then a present to the public, 〈16〉 like the building of a church, or the laying out a new highway: but, 〈17〉 in case of a bargain for a single impression, or a sale or gift of the copyright, the reversion is plainly continued in the original proprietor, or the whole property transferred to another.

The Roman law adjudged, that if one man wrote 〈18〉 any thing, though never so

elegantly, on the paper or parchment of another, the writing should belong to the original owner of the materials on which it was writtenc: meaning certainly nothing more thereby, than the mere mechanical operation of writing, for which it directed the scribe to receive a satisfaction; 〈20〉 especially as, in works of genius and invention, such as a picture painted on another man’s canvas, the same law d gave the canvas to the painter. We find no other mention in the civil law of any property in the works of the understanding, though the sale of literary copies, for the purposes of recital or multiplication, is certainly as antient as the times of Terence e, Martial f, and Statius g. Neither with us in England hath there been 〈21〉 any direct determination upon the right of authors at the 〈22〉 common law. But much may be gathered from the 407 frequent injunctions of the court of chancery, prohibiting the invasion of this

c Si in chartis membranisve tuis carmen vel historiam vel orationem Titius scripserit, hujus corporis non Titius sed

tu dominus esse videris [If Titius writes a poem, a history, or a speech on your paper or parchment, the manuscript belongs to you, not to him]. 〈19〉 Inst. 2. 1. 33.

d Ibid. §. 34.

e Prol. in Eunuch. 20.

f Epigr. i. 67. iv. 72. xiii. 3. xiv. 194. [Martial refers to the sale of his works in various epigrams: i. 67 (i. 66 in

modern editions) describes a plagiarist who buys a cheap copy of Martial’s poems and tries to pass them off as his own; in iv. 72, xiii. 3, and xiv. 194, Martial refers to ‘the bookseller’ (bybliopola) who sells his writings.]

g Juv. vii. 83. [In Charles Dryden’s translation (which Blackstone owned): ‘All Rome is pleased, when Statius will

rehearse, / And longing crowds expect the promised verse.’]

2 Blackstone may be drawing on Richard Hurd, A Letter to Mr. Mason; on the Marks of Imitation (Cambridge,

1757), 60–1: ‘ Sentiments may be strikingly similar, or even identical, without … a preceding original. But the identity of expression … in the same language, … [is] an almost impossible thing.’

3 This view evidently led Blackstone to regard abridgments as legally permissible. In Strahan v Newbery (1774),

Lofft 775, it was reported that the Lord Chancellor, after ‘consult[ing] Mr. Justice Blackstone’, concluded that ‘an edition by Mr. Newbery of an abridgment of Dr. Hawkesworth’s Voyages’ was ‘not an act of plagiarism upon the original work, nor against any property of the author in it, but an allowable and meritorious work’.

276 of the rights of things

property: especially where either the injunctions have been perpetualh, or have related to unpublished manuscriptsi, or to such antient books, as were not within the provisions of the statute of queen Annek. Much may also be collected from the several legislative recognitions of copyrightsl; and from those adjudged cases at common law, wherein the crown hath been considered as invested with certain prerogative copyrightsm; for, if the crown is capable of an exclusive right in any one book, the subject seems also capable of having the same right in another.

〈 23〉 But, exclusive of such copyright as may subsist by the rules of the common

law, the statute 8 Ann. c. 19. hath protected by additional penalties the property of authors and their assigns for the term of fourteen years; and hath directed that if, at the end of that term, the author himself be living, the right shall then return to him for another term of the same duration: and a similar privilege is extended to the inventors of prints and engravings, for the 〈24〉 term of fourteen years, by the statute 8 Geo. II. c. 13. Both which appear to have been copied from the exception in the statute of monopolies, 21 Jac. I. c. 3. which allows a royal patent of privilege to be granted for fourteen years to any inventor of a new manufacture, for the sole working or making of the same; by virtue 〈25〉 whereof a temporary property becomes vested in the 〈26〉 patenteen.

h Knaplock v. Curl. 9 Nov. 1722. Viner Abr. tit. Books. pl. 3.—Baller v. Watson. 6 Dec. 1737. [Blackstone probably knew of both cases—and the cases cited in the next two footnotes—through his research when preparing to argue Tonson v Collins; see Editor’s Introduction, II. xvii.]

i Webb v. Rose. 24 May 1732.—Pope v. Curl. 5 Jun. 1741.—Forrester v. Waller. 13 Jun. 1741.—Duke of Queensberry v. Shebbeare. 31 July 1758.

k Knaplock v. Curl. before cited.—Eyre v. Walker. 9 Jun. 1735.—Motte v. Faulkner. 28 Nov. 1735.—Walthoe v. Walker. 27 Jan. 1736.—Tonson v. Walker. 12 May 1739. and 30 Apr. 1752.

l a.d. 1649. c. 60. Scobell. [part 2] 92. 13 & 14 Car. II. c. 33. 10 Ann. c. 19. §. 112. 5 Geo. III. c. 12. §. 26.

m [Stationer’s Co. v Patentees of Roll’s Abridgement] Cart. 89. [Stationer’s Co. v Seymour] 1 Mod. 257. [Baskett v Cambridge University] 4 Burr. 661.

n [Jenks v Holford] 1 Vern. 62.





chapter the twenty seventh. 408




of title by prerogative,

and forfeiture.

A second method of acquiring property in personal chattels is by the king’s prerogative: whereby a right may accrue either to the crown itself, or to such as claim under the title of the crown, as 〈1〉 by grant or by prescription.

Such in the first place are all tributes, taxes, and customs; whether constitutionally

inherent in the crown, as flowers of the prerogative and branches of the census regalis or antient royal revenue, or whether they be occasionally created by authority of parliament; of both which species of revenue we treated largely in the former volume. In these the king acquires and the subject loses a property the instant they become due: if paid, they are a chose in possession; if unpaid, a chose in action. Hither also may be referred all forfeitures, fines, and amercements due to the king, which accrue by virtue of his antient prerogative, or by particular modern statutes: which revenues created by statute do always assimilate, or take the same nature, with the antient revenues; and may therefore be looked upon as arising from a kind of artificial or secondary prerogative. And, in either case, the owner of the thing forfeited, and the person fined or 〈2〉 amerced, do lose and part with the property of the forfeiture, fine, or amercement, the instant the king or his grantee acquires it.

In these several methods of acquiring property by prerogative there is also this 409

peculiar quality, that the king cannot have a joint property with any person in one entire chattel, or such a one as is not capable of division or separation; but where the titles of the king and a subject concur, the king shall have the whole: in like manner as the king 〈3〉 can, neither by grant nor contract, become a joint-tenant of a chattel real with another persona; but by such grant or contract shall become intitled to the whole in severalty. Thus, if a horse be given to the king and a private person, the king shall have the sole property: if a bond be made to the king and a subject, the king shall have the whole penalty; the debt or duty being one single chattelb: and so, if two persons have the property of a horse between them, or have a joint debt owing them on bond, and one of them assigns his part to the king, or is attainted, whereby his moiety is forfeited to the crown; the king shall have the entire horse, and entire debtc. For, as it is not consistent with the dignity of the crown to be partner with a subject, so neither does the king ever lose his right in any instance; but, where they interfere, his is always preferred to that of another persond: from which two principles it is a

a See pag. 184 [II. 123].

b Fitzh. Abr. t. dette. 38. [Willion v Berkley] [1] Plowd. 243.

c [R. v Fairclough] Cro. Eliz. 263 [recte 265]. [Case of Mines] [1] Plowd. 323. Finch. Law. 178. [Miles v Williams] 10 Mod. 245.

d Co. Litt. 30.

278 of the rights of things

necessary consequence, that the innocent, though unfortunate, partner must lose his share in both the debt and the horse, or in any other chattel in the same circumstances.

This doctrine has no opportunity to take place in certain other instances of title

by prerogative, that remain to be mentioned; as the chattels thereby vested are originally and solely vested in the crown, without any transfer or derivative assign-ment either by deed or law from any former proprietor. Such is the acquisition of property in wreck, in treasure-trove, in waifs, in estrays, in royal fish, in swans, and

410 the like; which are not transferred to the sovereign from any former owner, but are

originally inherent in him by the rules of law, and are derived to particular subjects, as royal franchises, by his bounty. These are ascribed to him, partly upon the particular reasons mentioned in the eighth chapter of the former book; and partly upon the general principle of their being bona vacantia [ownerless goods], and therefore vested in the king, as well to preserve the peace of the public, as in trust to employ them for the safety and ornament of the commonwealth.

〈 4〉 With regard to the prerogative copyrights, which were mentioned in the

preceding chapter, they are held to be vested in the crown upon different reasons. Thus, 1. The king, as the executive magistrate, has the right of promulging to the people all acts of state and government. This gives him the exclusive privilege of printing, at his own press, or that of his grantees, all acts of parliament, proclamations, and orders of council. 2. As supreme head of the church, he hath a right to the publication of all liturgies and books of divine service. 3. 〈5〉 He hath a right by pur-chase to the copies of such lawbooks, grammars, and other compositions, as were compiled or translated at the expense of the crown. And upon these two last 〈6〉 principles the exclusive right of printing the translation of the bible is founded. 4. Almanacks have been said to be prerogative-copies, either as things derelict, or else as being substantially nothing more than the calendar prefixed to our liturgye. And indeed the regulation of time has been often considered as a matter of state. The Roman fasti [calendars of official and religious events] were under the care of the pontifical college: and Romulus, Numa, and Julius Caesar, successively regulated the Roman calendar.

There still remains another species of prerogative property, founded upon a very

different principle from any that have been mentioned before; the property of such animals ferae naturae, as are known by the denomination of game, with the right of pursuing, taking, and destroying them: which is vested in the king alone, and from

411 him derived to such of his subjects as have received the grants of a chase, a park, a

free warren, or free fishery. This may lead us into an enquiry concerning the original of these franchises, or royalties, on which we touched a little in a former chapter f; the right itself being an incorporeal hereditament, though the fruits and profits of it are of a personal nature.

In the first place then we have already shewn, and indeed it cannot be denied, that

by the law of nature every man, from the prince to the peasant, has an equal right of

e [Stationer’s Co. v Seymour] 1 Mod. 257.

f pag. 38, 39 [II. 24–5].





chapter 27 279


pursuing, and taking to his own use, all such creatures as are ferae naturae, and therefore the property of nobody, but liable to be 〈7〉 seised by the first occupant. And so it was held by the imperial law, even so late as Justinian’s time: “ferae igitur bestiae, et volucres, et omnia animalia quae mari, coelo, et terra nascuntur, simul atque ab aliquo capta fuerint, jure gentium statim illius esse incipiunt. Quod enim nullius est, id naturali ratione occupanti concediturg.”1 But it follows from the very end and constitution of society, that this natural right, as well as many others belonging to man as an individual, may be restrained by positive laws enacted for reasons of state, or for the supposed benefit of the community. This restriction may be either with respect to the place in which this right may, or may not, be exercised; with respect to the animals that are the subject of this right; or with respect to the persons allowed or forbidden to exercise it. And, in consequence of this authority, we find that the municipal laws of many nations have exerted such power of restraint; have in general forbidden the entering on another man’s grounds, for any cause, without the owner’s leave; have extended their protection to such particular animals as are usually the objects of pursuit; and have invested the prerogative of hunting and taking such animals in the sovereign of the state only, and such as he shall authorizeh. Many reasons have concurred for making these constitutions: as, 1. For the encouragement of agriculture and improvement of lands, by giving every man an exclusive dominion over his own soil. 2. For preservation of the several species of these animals, which 412

would soon be extirpated by a general liberty. 3. For prevention of idleness and dissipation in husbandmen, artificers, and others of lower rank; which would be the unavoidable consequence of universal licence. 4. For 〈8〉 preventing of popular insur-rections and resistance to the government, by disarming the bulk of the peoplei: which last is a reason oftener meant, than avowed, by the makers of forest or game laws. Nor, certainly, in these prohibitions is there any natural injustice, as some have weakly enough supposed: since, as Puffendorf observes,2 the law does not hereby take from any man his present property, or what was already his own, but barely abridges him of one means of acquiring a future property, that of occupancy; which indeed the law of nature would allow him, but of which the laws of society have in most instances very justly and reasonably deprived him.

Yet, however defensible these provisions in general may be, on the footing of

reason, or justice, or civil policy, we must notwithstanding acknowlege that, in their present shape, they owe their immediate original to slavery. It is not till after the irruption of the northern nations into the Roman empire, that we read of any other

g Inst. 2. 1. 12.

h Puff. L. N. 1. 4. c. 6. §. 5.

i Warburton’s alliance. 324. [This pagination corresponds to the fourth edition of W. Warburton, The Alliance between Church and State, published Feb. 1766, when Blackstone had already received page proofs of the early chapters of this volume.]

1 ‘Therefore, wild beasts and birds, and all animals that are born on sea, in the air, or on land, when taken by anyone, immediately become that person’s property by the law of nations. For that which belongs to no one, belongs by natural reason to the taker.’

2 Pufendorf, De jure naturae et gentium, 4.6.5, 4.6.6.

280 of the rights of things

prohibitions, than that natural one of not sporting on any private grounds without the owner’s leave; and another of a more spiritual nature, which was rather a rule of ecclesiastical discipline, than a branch of municipal law. The Roman or civil law, though it knew no restriction as to persons or animals, so far regarded the article of place, that it allowed no man to hunt or sport upon another’s ground, but by consent of the owner of the soil. “Qui alienum fundum ingreditur, venandi aut aucupandi gratia, potest a domino prohiberi ne ingrediaturk.”3 For if there can, by the law of nature, be any inchoate imperfect property supposed in wild animals before they are taken, it seems most reasonable to fix it in him upon whose land they are found. And

413 as to the other restriction, which relates to persons and not to place, the pontificial or

canon lawl interdicts “venationes, et sylvaticas vagationes cum canibus, et accipitribus [hunting and excursions in the woods with hawks and hounds]” to all clergymen without distinction; grounded on a saying of St. Jeromm, that it never is recorded that these diversions were used by the saints, or primitive fathers. And the canons of our Saxon church, published in the reign of king Edgarn, concur in the same prohibition: though our secular laws, at least after the conquest, did even in the times of popery dispense with this canonical impediment; and spiritual persons were allowed by the common law to hunt for their recreation, in order to render them fitter for the performance of their duty: as a confirmation whereof we may observe, that it is to this day a branch of the king’s prerogative, at the death of every bishop, to have his kennel of hounds, or a composition in lieu thereof o.

But, with regard to the rise and original of our present civil prohibitions, it will be

found that all forest and game laws were introduced into Europe at the same time, and by the same policy, as gave birth to the feodal system; when those swarms of barbarians issued from their northern hive, and laid the foundation of most of the present kingdoms of Europe, on the ruins of the western empire. For when a conquering general came to settle the oeconomy of a vanquished country, and to part it out among his soldiers or feudatories, who were to render him military service for such donations; it behoved him, in order to secure his new acquisitions, to keep the rustici or natives of the country, and all who were not his military tenants, in as low a condition as possible, and especially to prohibit them the use of arms. Nothing could do this more effectually than a prohibition of hunting and sporting: and therefore it was the policy of the conqueror to reserve this right to himself, and such on whom he should bestow it; which were only his capital feudatories, or greater barons. And accordingly we find, in the feudal constitutionsp, one and the same law prohibiting

414 the rustici in general from carrying arms, and also proscribing the use of nets,



k Inst. 2. 1. §. 12.

l Decretal. l. 5. tit. 24. c. 2.

m [Gratian,] Decret. part. 1. dist. 34. l. 1.

n cap. 64 [Wilkins, 86].

o 4 Inst. 309.

p Feud. l. 2. tit. 27. §. 5.

3 ‘He who is entering on another’s ground for the purpose of hunting or fowling may be prohibited from entering.’





chapter 27 281


snares, or other engines for destroying the game. This exclusive privilege well suited the martial genius of the conquering troops, who delighted in a sportq which in its pursuit and slaughter bore some resemblance to war. Vita omnis, (says Caesar, speak ing of the antient Germans) in venationibus atque in studiis rei militaris consistit r [Their whole life consists in hunting, and the pursuit of military affairs]. And Tacitus in like manner observes, that quotiens bella non ineunt, multum venatibus, plus per otium transigunts [whenever not engaged in war, they spend much time in hunting, even more in idleness]. And indeed, like some of their modern successors, they had no other amusement to entertain their vacant 〈9〉 hours; they despising all arts as effeminate, and having no other learning, than was couched in such rude ditties, as were sung at the solemn carousals which succeeded these antient huntings. And it is remarkable that, in those nations where the feodal policy remains the most uncorrupted, the forest or game laws continue in their highest rigor. In France all game is properly the king’s; and in some parts of Germany it is death for a peasant to be found hunting in the woods of the nobilityt.

With us in England also, hunting has ever been esteemed a most princely diversion

and exercise. The whole island was replenished with all sorts of game in the times of the Britons; who lived in a wild and pastoral manner, without inclosing or improving their grounds, and derived much of their subsistence from the chase, which they all enjoyed in common. But when husbandry took place under the Saxon government, and lands began to be cultivated, improved, and enclosed, the beasts naturally fled into the woody and desart tracts; which were called the forests, and, having never been disposed of in the first distribution of lands, were therefore held to belong to the crown. These were filled with great plenty of game, which our royal sportsmen 415 reserved for their own diversion, on pain of a pecuniary forfeiture for such as interfered with their sovereign. But every freeholder had the full liberty of sporting upon his own territories, provided he abstained from the king’s forests: as is fully expressed in the laws of Canutev, and of Edward the confessoru; “sit quilibet homo dignus venatione sua, in sylva, et in agris, sibi propriis, et in dominio suo: et abstineat omnis homo a venariis regis, ubicunque pacem eis habere voluerit:”4 which indeed was the antient law of the Scandinavian continent, from whence Canute probably derived it. “Cuique enim in proprio fundo quamlibet feram quoquo modo venari permissumw.”5

q In the laws of Jenghiz Khan, founder of the Mogul and Tartarian empire, published a.d. 1205. there is one which prohibits the killing of all game from March to October; that the court and soldiery might find plenty enough in the winter, during their recess from war. (Mod. Univ. Hist. iv. 468.)

r De bell. Gall. l. 6. c. 20.

s [Germania] c. 15.

t Mattheus de Crimin. c. 3. tit. 1 [§ 5]. Carpzov. Practic. Saxonic. p. 2. c. 84.

v c. 77.

u c. 36 [recte 35].

w Stiernhook, de jure Sueon. l. 2. c. 8.

4 ‘let every man be entitled to hunt in his own wood, fields, and lordship: and let every man abstain from the royal forests, wherever [the king] wishes to have peace for them [i.e. the royal forests].’ As notes v and u suggest, the quoted language blends together two provisions—one from Canute and one from Edward. In the process, Blackstone alters both, but preserves their sense.

5 ‘For everyone is permitted to hunt any wild animal on his own grounds, in whatever manner he pleases.’ 282 of the rights of things

However, upon the Norman conquest, a new doctrine took place; and the right

of pursuing and taking all beasts of chase or venary, and such other animals as were accounted game, was then held to belong to the king, or to such only as were authorized under him. And this, as well upon the principles of the feodal law, that the king is the ultimate proprietor of all the lands in the kingdom, they being all held of him as the chief lord, or lord paramount of the fee; and that therefore he has the right of the universal soil, to enter thereon, and to chase and take such creatures at his pleasure: as also upon another maxim of the common law, which we have frequently cited and illustrated, that these animals are bona vacantia, and, having no other owner, belong to the king by his prerogative. As therefore the former reason was held to vest in the king a right to pursue and take them any where; the latter was supposed to give the king, and such as he should authorize, a sole and exclusive right.

This right, thus newly vested in the crown, was exerted with the utmost rigor, at

and after the time of the Norman establishment; not only in the antient forests, but

416 in the new ones which the conqueror made, by laying together vast tracts of country,

depopulated for that purpose, and reserved solely for the king’s royal diversion; in which were exercised the most horrid tyrannies and oppressions, under colour of forest law, for the sake of preserving the beasts of chase; to kill any of which, within the limits of the forest, was as penal as the death of a man. And, in pursuance of the same principle, king John laid a total interdict upon the winged as well as the four­ footed creation: “capturam avium per totam Angliam interdixitx [he forbade fowling throughout all England].” The cruel and insupportable hardships, which these forest laws created to the subject, occasioned our ancestors to be as zealous for their refor-mation, as for the relaxation of the feodal rigors and the other exactions introduced by the Norman family; and accordingly we find the immunities of carta de foresta [the charter of the forest] as warmly contended for, and extorted from the king with as much difficulty, as those of magna carta itself. By this charter, confirmed in parliamenty, many forests were disafforested, or stripped of their oppressive privileges, and regulations were made in the regimen of such as remained; particularlyz killing the king’s deer was made no longer a capital offence, but only punished 〈10〉 by fine, imprisonment, or abjuration of the realm. And by a variety of subsequent statutes, together with the long acquiescence of the crown without exerting the forest laws, this prerogative is now become no longer a grievance to the subject.

But, as the king reserved to himself the forests for his own exclusive diversion, so

he granted out from time to time other tracts of 〈11〉 land to his subjects under the names of chases or parksa; or gave them licence to make such in their own grounds; which indeed are smaller forests, in the hands of a subject, but not governed by the forest laws: and by the common law no person is at liberty to take or kill any beasts of chase, but such as hath an antient chase or park; unless they be also beasts of prey.



x M. Paris. 303.

y 9 Hen. III.

z cap. 10.

a See pag. 38 [II. 24].





chapter 27 283


As to all inferior species of game, called beasts and fowls of warren, the liberty 417

of taking or killing them is another franchise or royalty, derived likewise from the crown, and called free warren; a word, which signifies preservation or custody: as the exclusive liberty of taking and killing fish in a public stream or river is called a free fishery; of which however no new franchise can at present be granted, by the express provision of magna carta, c. 16b. The principal intention of 〈12〉 granting a man these franchises or liberties was in order to protect the game, by giving him a sole and exclusive power of killing it himself, provided he prevented other persons. And no man, but he who has a chase or free warren, by grant from the crown, or prescription which supposes one, can justify hunting or sporting upon another man’s soil; nor indeed, in thorough strictness of common law, either hunting or sporting at all.

However novel this doctrine may 〈13〉 seem, it is a regular consequence from

what has been before delivered; that the sole right of taking and destroying game belongs exclusively to the king. This appears, as well from the historical deduction here made, as because he may grant to his subjects an exclusive right of taking them; which he could not do, unless such a right was first inherent in himself. And hence it will follow, that no person whatever, but he who has such derivative right from the crown, is by common law entitled to take or kill any beasts of chase, or other game whatsoever. It is true, that by the acquiescence of the crown, the frequent grants of free warren in antient times, and the introduction of new penalties of late by certain statutes for preserving the game, this exclusive prerogative of the king is little known or considered; every man, that is exempted from these modern penalties, looking upon himself as at liberty to do what he pleases with the game: whereas the contrary is strictly true, that no man, however well qualified he may vulgarly be esteemed, has a right to encroach on the royal prerogative by the killing of game, unless he can 418 shew a particular grant of free warren; or a prescription, which presumes a grant; or some authority under an act of parliament. As for the latter, 〈14〉 I know but of two instances wherein an express permission to kill game was ever given by statute; the one by 1 Jac. I. c. 27. altered by 7 Jac. I. c. 11. and virtually repealed by 22 & 23 Car. II. c. 25. which gave authority, so long as they remained in force, to the owners of free warren, to lords of manors, and to all freeholders having 40l. per annum in lands of inheritance, or 80l. for life or lives, or 400l. personal estate, (and their servants) to take partridges and pheasants upon their own, or their master’s, free warren, inheritance, or freehold: the other by 5 Ann. c. 14. which empowers lords and ladies of manors to appoint gamekeepers to kill game for the use of such lord or lady; which with some 〈15〉 alterations still subsists, and plainly supposes such power not to have been in them before. The truth of the matter is, that these game laws (of which we shall have occasion to speak again in the fourth book of these commentaries) do indeed qualify nobody, except in the instance of a gamekeeper, to kill game: but only, to save the trouble and formal process of an action by the person injured, who perhaps too might remit the offence, these statutes inflict additional penalties, to be recovered either in a regular or summary way, by any of the king’s subjects, from

b Mirr. c. 5. §. 2. See pag. 39 [II. 25].

284 of the rights of things

certain persons of inferior rank who may be found offending in this particular. But it does not follow that persons, excused from these additional penalties, are therefore authorised to kill game. The 〈16〉 circumstances, of having 100l. per annum, and the rest, are not properly qualifications, but exemptions. And these persons, so exempted from the penalties of the game statutes, are not only liable to actions of trespass by the owners of the land; but also, if they kill game within the limits of any royal franchise, they are liable to the actions of such who may have the right of chase or free warren therein.

419 Upon the whole it appears, that the king, by his prerogative, and such persons as

have, under his authority, the royal franchises of chase, park, free warren, or free fishery, are the only persons, who may acquire any property, however fugitive and transitory, in these animals ferae naturae, while living; which is said to be vested in them, as was observed in a former chapter, propter privilegium [by privilege]. And it must also be remembered, that such persons as may thus lawfully hunt, fish, or fowl, ratione privilegii [because of their privilege], have (as has been said) only a qualified property in these animals; it not being absolute or permanent, but lasting only so long as the creatures remain within the limits of such respective franchise or liberty, and ceasing the instant they voluntarily pass out of it. It is held indeed, that if a man starts any game within his own grounds, and follows it into another’s, and kills it there, the property remains in himselfc. And this is grounded on reason and natural justiced: for the property consists in the possession; which possession commences by the finding it in his own liberty, and is continued by the immediate pursuit. And so, if a stranger starts game in one man’s chase or free warren, and hunts it into another liberty, the property continues in the owner of the chase or warren; this property arising from privilegee, and not being changed by the act of a mere stranger. Or if a man starts game on another’s private grounds and kills it there, the property belongs to him in whose ground it was killed, because it was also started theref; this property arising ratione soli [by reason of the soil]. Whereas if, after being started there, it is killed in the grounds of a third person, the property belongs not to the owner of the first ground, because the property is local; nor yet to the owner of the second, because it was not started in his soil; but it vests in the person who started and killed itg, though guilty of a trespass against both the owners.

420 III. I proceed now to a third method, whereby a title to goods and chattels may be

acquired and lost, viz. by forfeiture; as a punishment for some crime or misdemesnor in the party forfeiting, and as a compensation for the offence and injury committed against him to whom they are forfeited. Of forfeitures, considered as the means whereby real property might be lost and acquired, we treated in a former chapterh. It



c [Keble v Hickringill] 11 Mod. 75.

d Puff. L. N. 1. 4. c. 6.

e [Sutton v Moody] Lord Raym. 251.

f Ibid.

g [Keeble v Heckeringall] Farr. 18. [Sutton v Moody] Lord Raym. ibid.

h See pag. 267 [II. 182].





chapter 27 285


remains therefore in this place only to mention, by what means or for what offences goods and chattels become liable to forfeiture.

In the variety of penal laws with which the subject is at present incumbered, it

were a tedious and impracticable task to reckon up the various forfeitures, inflicted by special statutes, for particular crimes and misdemesnors: some of which are mala in se, or offences against the divine law, either natural or revealed; but by far the greatest part are mala prohibita, or such as derive their guilt merely from their prohibition by the laws of the land: such as is the forfeiture of 40s. per month by the statute 5 Eliz. c. 4. for exercising a trade without having served seven years as an apprentice thereto; and the forfeiture of 10l. by 9 Ann. c. 23. for printing an almanac without a stamp. I shall therefore confine myself to those offences only, by which all the goods and chattels of the offender are forfeited: referring the student for such, where pecuniary mulcts of different quantities are inflicted, to their several proper heads, under which very many of them have been or will be mentioned; or else to the collections of Hawkins and Burn, and other laborious compilers. Indeed, as most of these forfeitures belong to the crown, they may seem as if they ought to have been referred to the preceding method of acquiring personal property, namely, by pre-rogative. But as, in the instance of partial forfeitures, a moiety often goes to the informer, the poor, or sometimes to other persons; and as one total forfeiture, namely that by a bankrupt who is guilty of felony by concealing his effects, accrues entirely 421

to his creditors, I have therefore made it a distinct head of transferring property.

Goods and chattels then are totally forfeited by conviction of high treason, or

misprision of treason; of petit treason; of felony in general, and particularly of felony de se, and of manslaughter; nay even by conviction of excusable homicidei; by outlawry for treason or felony; by conviction of petit larceny; by flight in treason or felony, even though the party be acquitted of the fact; by standing mute, when arraigned of felony; by drawing a weapon on a judge, or striking any one in the presence of the king’s courts; by praemunire; by pretended prophecies, upon a second conviction; by owling;6 by the residing abroad of artificers; and by challenging to fight on account of money won at gaming. All these offences, as will more fully appear in the fourth book of these commentaries, induce a total forfeiture of goods and chattels.

And this forfeiture commences from the time of conviction, not the time of com-

mitting the fact, as in forfeitures of real property. For chattels are of so vague and fluctuating a nature, that to affect them, by any relation back, would be attended with more inconvenience than in the case of landed estates: and part, if not the whole of them, must be expended in maintaining the delinquent, between the time of com-mitting the fact and his conviction. Yet a fraudulent conveyance of them, to defeat the interest of the crown, is made void by statute 13 Eliz. c. 5.

i Co. Litt. 391. 2 Inst. 316. 3 Inst. 320.

6 See IV. 101.

422 chapter the twenty eighth.



of title by custom.

A fourth method of acquiring property in things personal, or chattels, is by custom: whereby a right vests in some particular persons, either by the local usage of some particular place, or by the almost general and universal usage of the kingdom. It were endless, should I attempt to enumerate all the several kinds of special customs, which may entitle a man to a chattel interest in different parts of the kingdom: I shall therefore content myself with making some observations on three sorts of customary interests, which obtain pretty generally throughout most parts of the nation, and are therefore of more universal concern; viz. heriots, mortuaries, and heir-looms.

1. Heriots, which were slightly touched upon in a former chaptera, are usually

divided into two sorts, heriot-service, and heriot-custom. The former are such as are due upon a special reservation in a grant or lease of lands, and therefore amount to little more than a mere rentb: the latter arise upon no special reservation whatsoever, but depend merely upon immemorial usage and customc. Of these therefore we are here principally to speak: and they are defined to be a customary tribute of goods and chattels, payable to the lord of the fee on the decease of the owner of the land.

423 The first establishment, if not introduction, of compulsory heriots into England,

was by the Danes: and we find in the laws of king Canuted the several heregeates or heriots specified, which were then exacted by the king on the death of divers of his subjects, according to their respective dignities; from the highest eorle down to the most inferior thegne or landholder. These, for the most part, consisted in arms, horses, and habiliments of war; which the word itself, according to sir Henry Spelmane, signifies. These were delivered up to the sovereign on the death of the vasal, who could no longer use them, to be put into other hands for the service and defence of the country. And upon the plan of this Danish establishment did William the conqueror fashion his law of reliefs, as was formerly observedf; when he ascertained the precise relief to be taken of every tenant in chivalry, and, contrary to the feodal custom and the usage of his own duchy of Normandy, required arms and implements of war to be paid instead of moneyg.

The Danish compulsive heriots, being thus transmuted into reliefs, underwent the

same several vicissitudes as the feodal tenures, and in socage estates do frequently remain to this day, in the shape of a double rent payable at the death of the tenant: the



a pag. 97 [II. 65].

b [Lanyon v Carne] 2 Saund. 166.

c Co. Cop. §. 24.

d c. 69 [Wilkins, 144].

e of feuds. c. 18.

f pag. 65 [II. 43].

g LL Guil. Conqu. c. 22, 23, 24 [Wilkins, 223].





chapter 28 287


heriots which now continue among us, and preserve that name, seeming rather to be of Saxon parentage, and at first to have been merely discretionaryh. These are now for the most part confined to copyhold tenures, and are due by custom only, which is the life of all estates by copy; and perhaps are the only instance where custom has favoured the lord. For this payment was originally a voluntary donation, or gratuitous legacy of the tenant; perhaps in acknowlegement of his having been raised a degree 424 above villenage, when all his goods and chattels were quite at the mercy of the lord: and custom, which has on the one hand confirmed the tenant’s interest in exclusion of the lord’s will, has on the other hand established this discretional piece of gratitude into a permanent duty. An heriot may also appertain to free land, that is held by service and suit of court; in which case it is most commonly a copyhold enfranchised, whereupon the heriot is still due by custom. Bractoni speaks of heriots as frequently due on the death of both species of tenants: “est quidem alia praestatio quae nominatur heriettum; ubi tenens, liber vel servus, in morte sua dominum suum, de quo tenuerit, respicit de meliori averio suo, vel de secundo meliori, secundum diversam locorum consuetudinem.”1 And this, he adds, “magis fit de gratia quam de jure [is done more out of favour than of right];” in which Fletak and Brittonl agree: thereby plainly intimating the original of this custom to have been merely voluntary, as a legacy from the tenant; though now the immemorial usage has established it as of right in the lord.

This heriot is sometimes the best live beast, or averium, which the tenant dies

possessed of, (which is particularly denominated the villein’s relief in the twenty ninth law of king William the conqueror) sometimes the best inanimate good, under which a jewel or piece of plate may be included: but it is always a personal chattel, which, immediately on the death of the tenant who was the owner of it, being ascertained by the option of the lordm, becomes vested in him as his property; and is no charge upon the lands, but merely on the goods and chattels. The tenant must be the owner of it, else it cannot be due; and therefore on the death of a feme-covert no heriot can be taken; for she can have no ownership in things personaln. In some places there is a customary composition in money, as ten or twenty shillings in lieu of a heriot, by which the lord and tenant are both bound, if it be an indisputably antient custom: but a new composition of this sort will not bind the representatives of either party; for that amounts to the creation of a new custom, which is now impossibleo.

2. Mortuaries are a sort of ecclesiastical heriots, being a customary gift claimed 425

by and due to the minister in very many parishes on the death of his parishioners.

h Lambard. Peramb. of Kent. 492.

i l. 2. c. 36. §. 9.

k c. 3. c. 18.

l c. 69.

m [Foster v Jackson] Hob. 60.

n [Anon. (1506)] Keilw. 84. [Anon. (1609)] 4 Leon. 239.

o Co. Cop. §. 31.

1 ‘There is indeed another service, called heriot; where a tenant at his death, whether a freeman or a serf, acknowledges the lord of whom he held, with his best beast or the second best, according to the differing customs of places.’

288 of the rights of things

They seem originally to have been, like lay heriots, only a voluntary bequest to the church; being intended, as Lyndewode informs us from a constitution of archbishop Langham, as a kind of expiation and amends to the clergy for the personal tithes, and other ecclesiastical duties, which the laity in their life-time might have neglected or forgotten to pay. For this purpose, afterp the lord’s heriot or best good was taken out, the second best chattel was reserved to the church as a mortuary: “si decedens plura habuerit animalia, optimo cui de jure fuerit debitum reservato, ecclesiae suae sine dolo, fraude, seu contradictione qualibet, pro recompensatione subtractionis decimarum personalium, necnon et oblationum, secundum melius animal reservetur, post obitum, pro salute animae suae q.”2 And therefore in the laws of king Canuter this mortuary is called soul-scot (ɼaρlɼceaτ) or symbolum animae. And, in pursuance of the same principle, by the laws of Venice, where no personal tithes have been paid during the life of the party, they are paid at his death out of his merchandize, jewels, and other moveabless. So also, by a similar policy, in France, every man that died without bequeathing a part of his estate to the church, which was called dying without confession, was formerly deprived of christian burial: or, if he died intestate, the relations of the deceased, jointly with the bishop, named proper arbitrators to determine what he ought to have given to the church, in case he had made a will. But the parliament, in 1409, redressed this grievancet.

It was antiently usual in this kingdom to bring the mortuary to church along with

the corpse when it came to be buried; and thenceu it is sometimes called a corse-

426 present: a term, which bespeaks it to have been once a voluntary donation. However

in Bracton’s time, so early as Henry III, we find it rivetted into an established custom: insomuch that the bequests of heriots and mortuaries were held to be necessary ingredients in every testament of chattels. “Imprimis autem debet quilibet, qui testamentum fecerit, dominum suum de meliori re quam habuerit recognoscere; et postea ecclesiam de alia meliori:”3 the lord must have the best good left him as an heriot; and the church the second best as a mortuary. But yet this custom was different in different places: “in quibusdam locis habet ecclesia melius animal de consuetudine; in quibusdam secundum, vel tertium melius; et in quibusdam nihil: et ideo consideranda est consuetudo lociw.”4 This custom still varies in different places, not only 〈1〉 as to the

p Co. Litt. 185.

q Provinc. l. 1. tit. 3.

r c. 13. [Wilkins, 130 (‘De pecunia qua dicitur symbolu anima, & de sepultura’).]

s Panormitan. ad Decretal. l. 3. t. 20 [recte 30]. c. 32 [no. 8]. [Blackstone refers to the commentary on the Decretals by Niccolò de’ Tedeschi (1386–1445), archbishop of Palermo (Lat. Panormo).]

t Sp. L. b. 28. c. 41.

u Selden. Hist. of tithes. c. 10.

w Bracton. l. 2. c. 26. Flet. l. 2. c. 57.

2 ‘If a dead man had several animals, after the best of them has been reserved for the one to whom it is owed, the second best animal is to be reserved after his death for his church without deceit, fraud, or objection, as amends for withholding personal tithes and oblations, for the good of his soul.’

3 ‘Whoever shall make a will, should in the first place acknowledge his lord by a bequest of the best chattel he may possess; and afterwards the church by the second best’: Bracton, ii. ch. 26.

4 ‘In some places the church has the best animal by custom; in others the second or third best; and in others again nothing: and therefore the custom of the locality is to be considered.’





chapter 28 289


mortuary to be paid, but the person to whom it is payable. In Wales, a mortuary or corse-present was due upon the death of every clergyman to the bishop of the diocese; till abolished, upon a recompense given to the bishop, by the statute 12 Ann. st. 2. c. 6. And in the archdeaconry of Chester a custom also prevailed, that the bishop, who is also archdeacon, should have at the death of every clergyman dying therein, his best horse or mare, bridle, saddle, and spurs, his best gown or cloak, hat, upper garment under his gown, and tippet, and also his best signet or ringx. But by statute 28 Geo. II. c. 6. this mortuary is directed to cease, and the act has settled upon the bishop an equivalent in its room. The king’s claim to many goods, on the death of all prelates in England, seems to be of the same nature; though sir Edward Cokey apprehends, that this is a duty due upon death and not a mortuary: a distinction which seems to be without a difference. For not only the king’s ecclesiastical character, as supreme ordinary, but also the species of the goods claimed, which bear so near a resemblance to those in the archdeaconry of Chester, which was an acknowleged mortuary, puts the matter out of dispute. The king, according to the record vouched by sir Edward Coke, is entitled to six things; the bishop’s best horse or palfrey, with his furniture: his cloak, or gown, and tippet: his cup, and cover: his bason, and ewer: 427

his gold ring: and, lastly, his muta canum, his mew or kennel of hounds; as was mentioned in the preceding chapterz.

This variety of customs, with regard to mortuaries, giving frequently a handle to

exactions on the one side, and frauds or expensive litigations on the other; it was thought proper by statute 21 Hen. VIII. c. 6. to reduce them to some kind of certainty. For this purpose it is enacted, that all mortuaries, or corse-presents to parsons of any parish, shall be taken in the following manner; unless where by custom less or none at all is due: viz. for every person who does not leave goods to the value of ten marks, nothing: for every person who leaves goods to the value of ten marks, and under thirty pounds, 3s. 4d. if above thirty pounds, and under forty pounds, 6s. 8d. if above forty pounds, of what value soever they may be, 10s. and no more. And no mortuary shall throughout the kingdom be paid for the death of any feme-covert; 〈2〉 nor any child; nor for any one of full age, that is not a housekeeper; nor for any wayfaring man; but such wayfaring man’s mortuary shall be paid in the parish to which he belongs. And upon this statute stands the law of mortuaries to this day.

3. Heir-looms are such goods and personal chattels, as, contrary to the nature of

chattels, shall go by special custom to the heir along with the inheritance, and not to the executor of the last proprietor. The termination, loom, is of Saxon original; in which language it signifies a limb or membera; so that an heir-loom is nothing else, but a limb or member of the inheritance. They are generally such things as cannot be taken away without damaging or dismembering the freehold; otherwise the general rule, is that no chattel interest whatsoever shall go to the heir, notwithstanding it be



x [Hinde v Bishop of Chester] Cro. Car. 237.

y 2 Inst. 491.

z pag. 413 [II. 280].

a Spelm. Gloss. 277.

290 of the rights of things

expressly limited to a man and his heirs, but shall vest in the executorb. But deer in

428 a real authorized park, fishes in a pond, doves in a dove-house, &c, though in

themselves personal chattels, yet they are so annexed to and so necessary to the well-being of the inheritance, that they shall accompany the land wherever it vests, by either descent or purchasec. For this reason also I apprehend it is, that the antient jewels of the crown are held to be heir-loomsd: for they are necessary to maintain the state, and support the dignity, of the sovereign for the time being. Charters likewise, and deeds, court-rolls, and other evidences of the land, together with the chests in which they are contained, shall pass together with the land to the heir, in the nature of heir-looms, and shall not go to the executore. By special custom also, in some places, carriages, utensils, and other household implements may be heir-loomsf; but such custom must be strictly proved. On the other hand, by almost general custom, whatever is strongly affixed to the freehold or inheritance, and cannot be severed from thence without violence or damage, “quod ab aedibus non facile revelliturg [what cannot be easily removed from the building],” is become a member of the inheritance, and shall thereupon pass to the heir; 〈3〉 as marble chimney-pieces, pumps, old fixed or dormant tables, benches, and the likeh. A very similar notion to which prevails in the duchy of Brabant; where they rank certain things moveable among those of the immoveable kind, calling them, by a very 〈4〉 peculiar appellation, praedia volantia, or volatile estates: such as beds, tables, and other heavy implements of furniture, which (as an author of their own observes) “dignitatem istam nacta sunt, ut villis, sylvis, et aedibus, aliisque praediis, comparentur; quod solidiora mobilia ipsis aedibus ex destinatione patrisfamilias cohaerere videantur, et pro parte ipsarum aedium aestimenturi.”5

Other personal chattels there are, which also descend to the heir in the nature

of heir-looms, as a monument or tombstone in a church, or the coat-armor of his

429 ancestor there hung up, with the pennons and other ensigns of honor, suited to his

degree. In this case, albeit the freehold of the church is in the parson, and these are annexed to that freehold, yet cannot the parson or any other take them away or deface them, but is liable to an action from the heirk. Pews in the church are somewhat of the same nature, which may descend by custom immemorial (without any ecclesi-astical concurrence) from the ancestor to the heirl. But though the heir has a property

b Co. Litt. 388.

c Co Litt. 8.

d Ibid. 18.

e Bro. Abr. tit. chatteles. 18.

f Co. Litt. 18. 185.

g Spelm. Gloss. 277.

h [Lord Petre v Heneage] 12 Mod. 520.

i Stockmans de jure devolutionis. c. 3. §. 16.

k [Corven’s case] 12 Rep. 105. Co. Litt. 18.

l 3 Inst. 202. [Corven’s case] 12 Rep. 105.

5 ‘[They] have obtained this estimation; that they are classed with villages, woods, houses, and other estates; because the more solid moveables seem to be fixed to the houses by the designation of the ancestor, and are considered as a part of the buildings themselves.’





chapter 28 291


in the monuments and escutcheons of his ancestors, yet he has none in their bodies or ashes; nor can he bring any civil action against such as indecently at least, if not impiously, violate and disturb their remains, when dead and buried. The parson indeed, who has the freehold of the soil, may bring an action of trespass against such as dig and disturb it: and, if any one in taking up a dead body steals the shrowd or other apparel, it will be felonym; for the property thereof remains in the executor, or whoever was at the charge of the funeral.

But to return to heir-looms: these, though they be mere chattels, yet cannot be

devised away from the heir by will; but such a devise is voidn, even by a tenant in fee-simple. For, though the owner might during his life have sold or disposed of them, as he might of the timber of the estate, since as the inheritance was his own, he might mangle or dismember it as he pleased; yet, they being at his death instantly vested in the heir, the devise (which is subsequent, and not to take effect till after his death) shall be postponed to the custom, whereby they have already descended.

m 3 Inst. 110. [Haynes’s case] 12 Rep. 113. 3 Hal. P. C. 515.

n Co. Litt. 185.



430 chapter the twenty ninth.



of title by succession,

marriage, and judgment.

In the present chapter we shall take into consideration three other species of title to goods and chattels.

V. The fifth method therefore of gaining a property in chattels, either personal or

real, is by succession: which is, in strictness of law, only applicable to corporations aggregate of many, as dean and chapter, mayor and commonalty, master and fellows, and the like; in which one set of men may, by succeeding another set, acquire a property in all the goods, moveables, and other chattels of the corporation. The true reason whereof is, because in judgment of law a corporation never dies; and therefore the predecessors, who lived a century ago, and their successors now in being, are one and the same body corporatea. Which identity is a property so inherent in the nature of a body politic, that, even when it is meant to give any thing to be taken in succession by such a body, that succession need not be expressed; but the law will of itself imply it. So that a gift to such a corporation, either of lands or of chattels, without naming their successors, vests an absolute property in them so long as the corporation

431 subsistsb. And thus a lease for years, an obligation, a jewel, a flock of sheep, or other

chattel interest, will vest in the successors, by succession, as well as in the identical members, to whom it was originally given.

But, with regard to sole corporations, a considerable distinction must be made.

For if such sole corporation be the representative of a number of persons; as the master of an hospital, who is a corporation for the benefit of the poor brethren; an abbot, or prior, by the old law before the reformation, who represented the whole convent; or the dean of some antient cathedral, who stands in the place of, and represents in his corporate capacity, the chapter; such sole corporations as these have in this respect the same powers, as corporations aggregate have, to take personal property or chattels in succession. And therefore a bond to such a master, abbot, or dean, and his successors, is good in law; and the successor shall have the advantage of it, for the benefit of the aggregate society, of which he is in law the representativec. Whereas in the case of sole corporations, which represent no others but themselves, as bishops, parsons, and the like, no chattel interest can regularly go in succession: and therefore, if a lease for years be made to the bishop of Oxford and his successors, in such case his executors or administrators, and not his successors, shall have itd.



a [Fulwood’s case] 4 Rep. 65.

b Bro. Abr. t. estates. 90. [Bird v Wilford] Cro. Eliz. 464.

c [Anon. (1541)] Dyer. 48. [Bird v Wilford] Cro. Eliz. 464.

d Co. Litt. 46.





chapter 29 293


For the word successors, when applied to a person in his political capacity, is equivalent to the word heirs in his natural: and as such a lease for years, if made to John and his heirs, would not vest in his heirs, but his executors; so, if it be made to John bishop of Oxford and his successors, who are the heirs of his body politic, it shall still vest in his executors and not in such his successors. The reason of this is obvious: for, besides that the law looks upon goods and chattels as of too low and perishable a nature to be limited either to heirs, or such successors as are equivalent to heirs; it would also follow, that if any such chattel interest (granted to a sole corporation and his successors) were allowed to descend to such successor, the property thereof must be in abeyance from the death of the present owner until the successor be appointed: 432 and this is contrary to the nature of a chattel interest, which can never be in abeyance or without an ownere; but a man’s right therein, when once suspended, is gone for ever. This is not the case in corporations aggregate, where the right is never in suspence; nor in the other sole corporations before-mentioned, who are rather to be considered as heads of an aggregate body, than subsisting merely in their own right: the chattel interest therefore, in such a case, is really and substantially vested in the hospital, convent, chapter, or other aggregate body; though the head is the visible person in whose name every act is carried on, and in whom every interest is therefore said (in point of form) to vest. But the general rule, with regard to corporations merely sole, is this, that no chattel can 〈1〉 go or be acquired by right of successionf.

Yet to this rule there are two exceptions. One in the case of the king, in whom a

chattel may vest by a grant of it formerly made to a preceding king and his successorsg. The other exception is, where, by a particular custom, some particular corporations sole have acquired a power of taking particular chattel interests in succession. And this custom, being against the general tenor of the common law, must be strictly interpreted, and not extended to any other chattel interests than such immemorial usage will strictly warrant. Thus the chamberlain of London, who is a corporation sole, may by the custom of London take bonds and recognizances to himself and his successors, for the benefit of the orphan’s fundh: but it will not follow from thence, that he has a capacity to take a lease for years to himself and his successors for the same purpose; for the custom extends not to that: nor that he may take a bond to himself and his successors, for any other purpose than the benefit of the orphan’s fund; for that also is not warranted by the custom. Wherefore, upon the whole, we may close this head with laying down this general rule; that such right of succession to chattels is universally inherent by the common law in all aggregate corporations, 433

in the king, and in such single corporations as represent a number of persons; and may, by special custom, belong to certain other sole corporations for some particular purposes: although, generally, in sole corporations no such right can exist.

VI. A sixth method of acquiring property in goods and chattels is by marriage;

whereby those chattels, which belonged formerly to the wife, are by act of law vested

e [Hellam v Ley] Brownl. 132.

f Co. Litt. 46.

g Ibid. 90.

h [Fulwood’s case] 4 Rep. 65. [Wilford’s case] Cro. Eliz. 682.

294 of the rights of things

in the husband, with the same degree of property and with the same powers, as the wife, when sole, had over them.

This depends entirely on the notion of an unity of person between the husband

and wife; it being held that they are one person in lawi, so that the very being and existence of the woman is suspended during the coverture, or entirely merged 〈2〉 and incorporated in that of the husband. And hence it follows, that whatever personal property belonged to the wife, before marriage, is by marriage absolutely vested in the husband. In a real estate he only gains a title to the rents and profits during coverture: for that, depending upon feodal principles, remains entire to the wife after the death of her husband, or to her heirs, if she dies before him; unless, by the birth of a child, he becomes tenant for life by the curtesy. But, in chattel interests, the sole and absolute property vests in the husband, to be disposed of at his pleasure, if he chuses to take possession of them: for, unless he reduces them to possession, by exercising some act of ownership upon them, no property vests in him, but they shall remain to the wife, or to her representatives, after the coverture is determined.

There is therefore a very considerable difference in the acquisition of this species

of property by the husband, according to the subject-matter; viz. whether it be a

434 chattel real, or a chattel personal; and, of chattels personal, whether it be in possession,

or in action only. A chattel real vests in the husband, not absolutely, but sub modo [to a certain degree]. As, in case of a lease for years; the husband shall receive all the rents and profits of it, and may, if he pleases, sell, surrender, or dispose of it during the coverturek: if he be outlawed or attainted, it shall be forfeited to the kingl: it is liable to execution for his debtsm: and, if he survives his wife, it is to all intents and purposes his ownn. Yet if he has made no disposition thereof in his lifetime, and dies before his wife, he cannot dispose of it by willo: for, the husband having made no alteration in the property during his life, it never was transferred from the wife; but after his death she shall remain in her antient possession, and it shall not go to his executors. So it is also of chattels personal (or choses) in action; as debts upon bond, contracts, and the like: these the husband may have if he pleases; that is, if he reduces them into possession by receiving or recovering them at law. And, upon such receipt or recovery, they are absolutely and entirely his own; and shall go to his executors or administrators, or as he shall bequeath them by will, and shall not revest in the wife. But, if he dies before he has recovered or reduced them into possession, so that at his death they still continue choses in action, they shall survive to the wife; for the husband never exerted the power he had of obtaining an exclusive property in themp. And so, if an estray comes into the wife’s franchise, and the husband seises it, it is absolutely his property: but, if he dies without seising it, his executors are not now at

i See Book I. c. 15.

k Co. Litt. 46.

l [Hales v Petit] [1] Plowd. 263.

m Co. Litt. 351.

n Ibid. 300.

o [Anon. (1592)] Poph. 5. Co. Litt. 351.

p Co. Litt. 351.





chapter 29 295


liberty to seise it, but the wife or her heirsq; for the husband never exerted the right he had, which right determined with the coverture. Thus in both these species of property the law is the same, in case the wife survives the husband; but, in case the husband survives the wife, the law is very different with respect to chattels real and choses in action: for he shall have the chattel real by survivorship, but not the chose in 435

actionr; except in the case of arrears of rent, due to the wife before her coverture, which in case of her death are given to the husband by statute 32 Hen. VIII. c. 37. And the reason for the general law is this: that the husband is in absolute possession of the chattel real during the coverture, by a kind of joint-tenancy with his wife; wherefore the law will not wrest it out of his hands, and give it to her representatives: though in case he had died first, it would have survived to the wife, unless he thought proper in his lifetime to alter the possession. But a chose in action shall not survive to him, because he never was in possession of it at all, during the coverture; and the only method he had to gain possession of it, was by suing in his wife’s right: but as, after her death, he cannot (as husband) bring an action in her right, because they are no longer one and the same person in law, therefore he can never (as such) recover the possession. But he still will be intitled to be her administrator; and may, in that capacity, recover such things in action as became due to her before or during the coverture.

Thus, and upon these reasons, stands the law between husband and wife, with

regard to chattels real, and choses in action: but, as to chattels personal (or choses) in possession, which the wife hath in her own right, as ready money, jewels, household goods, and the like, the husband hath therein an immediate and absolute property, devolved to him by the marriage, not only potentially but in fact, which never can again revest in the wife or her representatives.

And, as the husband may thus, generally, acquire a property in all the personal

substance of the wife, so in one particular instance the wife may acquire a property in some of her husband’s goods; which shall remain to her after his death, 〈3〉 and shall not go to his executors. These are called her paraphernalia; which is a term borrowed 436

from the civil lawt, and is derived from the Greek language, signifying something over and above her dower. Our law uses it to signify the apparel and ornaments of the wife, suitable to her rank and 〈4〉 degree; which she becomes entitled to at the death of her husband over and above her jointure or dower, and preferably to all other representativesu: and the jewels of a peeress, usually worn by her, have been held to be paraphernaliaw. Neither can the husband devise by his will such ornaments and jewels of his wife; though during his life perhaps he hath the power (if unkindly inclined to exert it) to sell them or give them awayx. But if she continues in the use of them till his

q Ibid.

r [Obrian v Ram] 3 Mod. 186.

s Co. Litt. 351.

t Ff. 23. 3. 9. §. 3.

u [Hastings v Douglas] Cro. Car. 343. 1 Roll. Abr. 911. [The Viscountess Bindon’s case] 2 Leon. 166.

w [The Viscountess Bindon’s case] Moor. 213.

x Noy’s Max. c. 49.—Grahme v. Lord Londonderry. 24 Nov. 1746. Canc.

296 of the rights of things

death, she shall afterwards retain them against his executors and administrators, and all other persons, except creditors where there is a deficiency of assetsy. And her necessary apparel is protected even against the claim of creditorsz.

VII. A judgment, in consequence of some suit or action in a court of justice, is

frequently the means of vesting the right and property of chattel interests in the prevailing party. And here we must be careful to distinguish between property, the right of which is before vested in the party, and of which only possession is recovered by suit or action; and property, to which a man before had no determinate title or certain claim, but he gains as well the right as the possession by the process and judgment of the law. Of the former sort are all debts and choses in action; as if a man gives bond for 20l., or agrees to buy a horse at a stated sum, or takes up goods of a tradesman upon an implied contract to pay as much as they are reasonably worth: in all these cases the right accrues to the creditor, and is completely vested in him at the time of the bond being 〈5〉 sealed, and the contract or agreement made; and the law

437 only gives him a remedy to recover the possession of that right, which already in

justice belongs to him. But there is also a species of property to which a man has not any claim or title whatsoever, till after suit commenced and judgment obtained in a court of law: where the right and the remedy do not follow each other, as in common cases, but accrue at one and the same time; and where, before judgment had, no man can say that he has any absolute property, either in possession or in action. Of this nature are,

1. Such penalties as are given by particular statutes, to be recovered on an action

popular; or, in other words, to be recovered by him or them that will sue for the same. Such as the penalty of 500l., which those persons are by several acts of parliament made liable to forfeit, that, being in particular offices or situations in life, neglect to take the oaths to the government; which penalty is given to him or them that will sue for the same. Now here it is clear that no particular person, A or B, has any right, claim, or demand, in or upon this penal sum, till after action broughta; for he that brings his action and can bona fide obtain judgment first, will undoubtedly secure a title to it, in exclusion of every body else. He obtains an inchoate imperfect degree of property, by commencing his suit; but it is not consummated till judgment, for if any collusion appears, he loses the priority he had gainedb. But, otherwise, the right so attaches in the first informer, that the king (who before action brought may grant a pardon which shall be a bar to all the world) cannot after suit commenced remit any thing but his own part of the penaltyc. For by commencing the suit the informer has made the popular action his own private action, and it is not in the power of the crown, or of any thing but parliament, to release the informer’s interest. This therefore

438 is one instance, where a suit and judgment at law are not only the means of recovering,

but also of acquiring, property. And what is said of this one penalty is equally true of

y ms [Tipping v Tipping] 1 P. W. 730.

z Noy. ibid.

a [Hutchinson v Thomas] 2 Lev. 141. [Jackson v Gisling] Stra. 1169. Combe v. Pitt. B. R. T. 3 Geo. III.

b Stat. 4 Hen. VII. c. 20.

c [Stretton v Tayler] Cro. Eliz. 138. [Dr Foster’s case] 11 Rep. 65.





chapter 29 297


all others, that are given thus at large to a common informer, or to any person that will sue for the same. They are placed as it were in a state of nature, accessible by all the king’s subjects, but the acquired right of none of them: open therefore to the first occupant, who declares his intention to possess them by bringing his action; and who carries that intention into execution, by obtaining judgment to recover them.

2. Another species of property, that is acquired and lost by suit and judgment at

law, is that of damages given to a man by a jury, as a compensation and satisfaction for some injury sustained; as for a battery, for imprisonment, for slander, or for trespass. Here the plaintiff has no certain demand till after verdict; but, when the jury has assessed his damages, and judgment is given thereupon, whether they amount to twenty pounds or twenty shillings, he instantly acquires, and the defendant loses at the same time, a right to that specific sum. It is true, that this is not an acquisition so perfectly original as in the former instance: for here the injured party has unques-tionably a vague and indeterminate right to some damages or other, the instant he receives the injury; and the verdict of the jurors, and judgment of the court thereupon, do not in this case so properly vest a new title in him, as fix and ascertain the old one; they do not give, but define, the right. But however, though strictly speaking the primary right to a satisfaction for injuries is given by the law of nature, and the suit is only the means of ascertaining and recovering that satisfaction; yet, as the legal proceedings are the only visible means of this acquisition of property, we may fairly enough rank such damages, or satisfaction assessed, under the head of property acquired by suit and judgment at law.

3. Hither also may be referred, upon the same principle, all title to costs and 439

expenses of suit; which are often arbitrary, and rest 〈6〉 entirely in the determination of the court, upon weighing all circumstances, both as to the quantum, and also (in the courts of equity especially, and upon motions in the courts of law) whether there shall be any costs at all. These costs therefore, when given by the court to either party, may be looked upon as an acquisition made by the judgment of law.



440 chapter the thirtieth.



of title by gift, grant,

and contract.

We are now to proceed, according to the order marked out, to the discussion of two of the remaining methods of acquiring a title to property in things personal, which are much connected together, and answer in some measure to the conveyances of real estates; being those by gift or grant, and by contract: whereof the former vests a property in possession, the latter a property in action.

VIII. Gifts then, or grants, which are the eighth method of transferring personal

property, are thus to be distinguished from each other, that gifts are always gratuitous, grants are upon some consideration or equivalent: and they may be divided, with regard to their subject-matter, into gifts or grants of chattels real, and gifts or grants of chattels personal. Under the head of gifts or grants of chattels real may be included all leases for years of land, assignments, and surrenders of those leases; and all the other methods of conveying an estate less than freehold, which were considered in the twentieth chapter of the present book, and therefore need not be here again repeated: though these very seldom carry the outward appearance of a gift, however freely bestowed; being usually expressed to be made in consideration of blood, or natural affection, or of five or ten shillings nominally paid to the grantor; and, in case of leases, always reserving a rent, though it be but a peppercorn: any of which considerations will, in the eye of the law, convert the gift, if executed, into a grant; if not executed, into a contract.

441 Grants or gifts, of chattels personal, are the act of transferring the right and the

possession of them; whereby one man renounces, and another man immediately acquires, all title and interest therein: which may be done either in writing, or by word of moutha attested by sufficient evidence, of which the delivery of possession is the strongest and most essential. But this conveyance, when merely voluntary, is somewhat suspicious: and is usually construed to be fraudulent, if creditors or others become sufferers thereby. And, particularly, by statute 3 Hen. VII. c. 4. all deeds of gift of goods, made in trust to the use of the donor, shall be void; because otherwise persons might be tempted to commit treason or felony, without danger of forfeiture; and the creditors of the donor might also be defrauded of their rights. And by statute 13 Eliz. c. 5. every grant or gift of chattels, as well as lands, with intent to defraud creditors or othersb, shall be void as against such persons to whom such fraud would be prejudicial; but, as against the grantor himself, shall stand good and effectual: and all persons partakers in, or privy to, such fraudulent grants, shall forfeit the whole value of the

a Perk. §. 57.

b See [Twyne’s case] 3 Rep. 82.





chapter 30 299


goods, one moiety to the king, and another moiety to the party grieved; and also on conviction shall suffer imprisonment for half a year.

A true and proper gift or grant is always accompanied with delivery of possession,

and takes effect immediately; as if A gives to B 100l., or a flock of sheep, and puts him in possession of them directly, it is then a gift executed in the donee; and it is not in the donor’s power to retract it; though he did it without any consideration or recompensec: unless it be prejudicial to creditors; or the donor were under any legal incapacity, as infancy, coverture, duress, or the like; or if he were drawn in, circumvented, or imposed upon, by false pretences, ebriety [intoxication], or surprize. But if the gift does not take effect, by delivery of immediate possession, it is then not properly a gift, but a contract: and this a man cannot be compelled to perform, but 442

upon good and sufficient consideration; as we shall see under our next division.

IX. A contract, which usually conveys an interest merely in action, is thus

defined: “an agreement, upon sufficient consideration, to do or not to do a particular thing.” From which definition there arise three points to be contemplated in all contracts; 1. The agreement: 2. The consideration: and 3. The thing to be done or omitted, or the different species of contracts.

First then it is an agreement, a mutual bargain or convention; and therefore there

must at least be two contracting parties, of sufficient ability to make a contract: as where A contracts with B to pay him 100l. and thereby transfers a property in such sum to B. Which property is however not in possession, but in action merely, and recoverable by suit at law; wherefore it could not be transferred to another person by the strict rules of the antient common law: for no chose in action could be assigned or granted overd, because it was thought to be a great encouragement to litigiousness, if a man were allowed to make over to a stranger his right of going to law. But this nicety is now disregarded: though, in compliance with the antient principle, the form of assigning a chose in action is in the nature of a declaration of trust, and an agreement to permit the assignee to make use of the name of the assignor, in order to recover the possession. And therefore, when in common acceptation a debt or bond is said to be assigned over, it must still be sued in the original creditor’s name; the person, to whom it is transferred, being rather an attorney than an assignee. But the king is an exception to this general rule; for he might always either grant or receive a chose in action by assignmente: and our courts of equity, considering that in a commercial country almost all personal property must necessarily lie in contract, will protect the assign-ment of a chose in action, as much as the law will that of a chose in possessionf.

This contract or agreement may be either express or implied. Express contracts are 443

where the terms of the agreement are openly uttered and avowed at the time of the making, as to deliver an ox, or ten load of timber, or to pay a stated price for certain goods. Implied are such as reason and justice dictate, and which therefore the law



c [YB Hil. 37 Hen. VI] Jenk. 109.

d Co. Litt. 214.

e [Breverton’s case] Dyer. 30. Bro. Abr. tit. chose in action. 1 & 4.

f ms [Lord Carteret v Paschal] 3 P. W. 199.

300 of the rights of things

presumes that every man undertakes to perform. As, if I employ a person to do any business for me, or perform any work; the law implies that I undertook, or contracted, to pay him as much as his labour deserves. If I take up wares from a tradesman, without any agreement of price, the law concludes that I contracted to pay their real value. And there is also one species of implied contracts, which runs through and is annexed to all other contracts, conditions, and covenants; viz. that if I fail in my part of the agreement, I shall pay the other party such damages as he has sustained by such my neglect or refusal. In short, almost all the rights of personal property (when not in actual possession) do in great measure depend upon contracts of one kind or other, or at least might be reduced under some of them: which indeed is the method taken by the civil law; it having referred the greatest part of the duties and rights, which it treats of, to the head of obligations ex contractu [by contract] and quasi ex contractug [as if by contract].

A contract may also be either executed, as if A agrees to change horses with B,

and they do it immediately; in which case the possession and the right are transferred together: or it may be executory, as if they agree to change next week; here the right only vests, and their reciprocal property in each other’s horse is not in possession but in action: for a contract executed (which differs nothing from a grant) conveys a chose in possession; a contract executory conveys only a chose in action.

Having thus shewn the general nature of a contract, we are, secondly, to proceed to

the consideration upon which it is founded; or the reason which moves the party

444 contracting to enter into the contract. “It is an agreement, upon sufficient con sideration.”

The civilians hold, that in all contracts, either express or implied, there must be something given in exchange, something that is mutual or reciprocalh. This thing, which is the price or motive of the contract, we call the consideration: and it must be a thing lawful in itself, or else the contract is void. A good consideration, we have before seeni, is that of blood or natural affection between near relations; the satisfaction accruing from which the law esteems an equivalent for whatever benefit may move from one relation to anotherj. This consideration may sometimes however be set aside, and the contract become void, when it tends in its consequences to defraud creditors or other third persons of their just rights. But a contract for any valuable consideration, as for marriage, for money, for work done, or for other reciprocal contracts, can never be impeached at law; and, if it be of a sufficient adequate value, is never set aside in equity: for the person contracted with has then given an equivalent in recompense, and is therefore as much an owner, or a creditor, as any other person.

These valuable considerations are divided by the civiliansk into four species. 1. Do,

ut des [I give, so that you may give]: as when I give money or goods, on a contract

g Inst. 3. 14. 2.

h In omnibus contractibus, sive nominatis sive innominatis, permutatio continetur [In all contracts, whether nominate or innominate, there is implied an exchange]. Gravin. l. 2. §. 12. [Blackstone omits the word fere (‘almost’); i.e. consideration is implied ‘in almost all contracts’: cf. J. Fonblanque, A Treatise of Equity (1793), i. 328–32.]

i pag. 297 [II. 203].

j [Twyne’s case] 3 Rep. 83.

k Ff. 19. 5. 5.





chapter 30 301


that I shall be repaid money or goods for them again. Of this kind are all loans of money upon bond, or promise of repayment; and all sales of goods, in which there is either an express contract to pay so much for them, or else the law implies a contract to pay so much as they are worth. 2. The second species is, facio, ut facias [I do, so that you may do]: as when I agree with a man to do his work for him, if he will do mine for me; or if two persons agree to marry together; or to do any other positive acts on both sides. Or, it may be to forbear on one 〈1〉 side in consideration of something done on the other; as, that in consideration A, the tenant, will repair his house, B, the landlord, will not sue him for waste. Or, it may be for mutual forbearance on both sides; as, that in consideration that A will not trade to Lisbon, B will not 445 trade to Marseilles; so as to avoid interfering with each other. 3. The third species of consid eration is, facio, ut des [I do, so that you may give]: when a man agrees to perform any thing for a price, either specifically mentioned, or left to the determination of the law to set a 〈2〉 value on it. 〈3〉 As when a servant hires himself to his master, for certain wages or an agreed sum of money: here the servant contracts to do his master’s service, in order to earn that specific sum. Otherwise, if he be hired generally; for then he is under an implied contract to perform this service for what it shall be reasonably worth. 4. The fourth species is, do, ut facias [I give, so that you may do]: which is the direct counterpart of 〈4〉 the other. As when I agree with a servant to give him such wages upon his performing such work: which, we see, is nothing else but the last species inverted; for servus facit, ut herus det [the servant does, so that the lord may give], and herus dat, ut servus faciat [the lord gives, so that the servant may do].

A consideration of some sort or other is so absolutely necessary to the forming

of a contract, that a nudum pactum or agreement to do or pay any thing on one side, without any compensation on the other, is totally void in law; and a man cannot be compelled to perform itl. As if one man promises to give another 100l. here there is nothing contracted for or given on the one side, and therefore there is nothing binding on the other. And, however a man may or may not be bound to perform it, in honor or conscience, which the municipal laws do not take upon them to decide; certainly those municipal laws will not compel the execution of what he had no visible inducement to engage for: and therefore our law has adoptedm the maxim of the civil lawn, that ex nudo pacto non oritur actio [no action can arise out of a bare agreement]. But any degree of reciprocity will prevent the pact from being nude: nay, even if the thing be founded on a prior moral obligation, (as a promise to pay a just debt, though barred by the statute of limitations) it is no longer nudum pactum. And as this rule was principally established, to avoid the inconvenience that would arise from setting up mere verbal promises, for which no good reason could be assignedo, 446

it therefore does not hold in some cases, where such promise is authentically proved by written documents. For if a man enters into a voluntary bond, or gives a promissory

l Dr. & stud. 2. c. 24.

m Bro. Abr. tit. dette. 79. [Potter v Pearson] Salk. 129.

n Cod. 2. 3. 10. & 5. 14. 1. [The phrase Blackstone quotes does not appear in either of these sections in Justinian’s Code, but they both carry the same general sense for which he cites them.]

o [Sharington v Strotton] [1] Plowd. 308, 309.

302 of the rights of things

note, he shall not be allowed to aver the want of a consideration in order to evade the payment: for every bond from the solemnity of the instrumentp, and every note from the subscription of the drawerq, carries with it an internal evidence of a good consideration. Courts of justice will therefore support them both, as against the contractor himself; but not to the prejudice of creditors, or strangers to the contract.

We are next to consider, thirdly, the thing agreed to be done or omitted. “A contract

is an agreement, upon sufficient consideration, to do or not to do a particular thing.” The most usual contracts, whereby the right of chattels personal may be acquired in the laws of England, are, 1. That of sale or exchange. 2. That of bailment. 3. That of hiring and borrowing. 4. That of debt.

1. Sale or exchange is a transmutation of property from one man to another, in

consideration of 〈5〉 some recompense in value: for there is no sale without a recompense; there must be quid pro quor. If it be a commutation of goods for goods, it is more properly an exchange; but, if it be a transferring of goods for money, it is called a sale: which is a method of exchange introduced for the convenience of mankind, by establishing an universal medium, which may be exchanged for all sorts of other property; whereas if goods were only to be exchanged for goods, by way of barter, it would be difficult to adjust the respective values, and the carriage would be intolerably cumbersome. All civilized nations adopted therefore very early the use of money; for we find Abraham giving “four hundred shekels of silver, current money with the merchant,” for the field of Machpelahs; though the practice of exchanges still subsists among several of the savage nations. But with regard to the law of sales and

447 exchanges, there is no difference. I shall therefore treat of them both under the

denomination of sales only; and shall consider their force and effect, in the first place where the vendor hath in himself, and secondly where he hath not, the property of the thing sold.

Where the vendor hath in himself the property of the goods sold, he hath the

liberty of disposing of them to whomever he pleases, at any time, and in any manner: unless judgment has been obtained against him for a debt or damages, and the writ of execution is actually delivered to the sheriff. For then, by the statute of fraudss,1 the sale shall be looked upon as fraudulent, and the property of the goods shall be bound to answer the debt, from the time of delivering the writ. Formerly it was bound from the teste, or issuing, of the writt, and any subsequent sale was fraudulent; but the law was thus altered in favour of purchasors, though it still remains the same between the parties: and therefore, if a defendant dies after the awarding and before the delivery of the writ, his goods are bound by it in the hands of his executorsv.

p [Turner v Binion] Hardr. 200. [Wright v Moor] 1 Ch. Rep. 157.

q [Meredith v Chute] Lord Raym. 760.

r Noy’s Max. c. 42.

s Gen. c. 23. v. 16.

s 29 Car. II. c. 3.

t [Fleetwood’s case] 8 Rep. 171. [Farrer v Brooks] 1 Mod. 188.

v [Horton v Ruesby] Comb. 33. [Dr Needham’s case] 12 Mod. 5. [Oades v Woodward] 7 Mod. 95.

1 Subsequent editions replace this duplicate cue letter ‘s’ with a letter ‘ſ’ (the ‘long s’).





chapter 30 303


If a man agrees with another for goods at a certain price, he may not carry them

away before he hath paid for them; for it is no sale without payment, unless the contrary be expressly agreed. And therefore, if the vendor says, the price of a beast is four pounds, and the vendee says he will give four pounds, the bargain is struck; and they neither of them are at liberty to be off, provided immediate possession be tendered by the other side. But if neither the money be paid, nor the goods delivered, nor tender made, nor any subsequent agreement be entered into, it is no contract, and the owner may dispose of the goods as he pleasesu. But if any part of the price is paid down, if it be but a penny, or any portion of the goods delivered by way of earnest (which the civil law calls arrha, and interprets to be “emptionis-venditionis 448 contractae argumentumw [a token of a contract for purchase and sale],” the property of the goods is absolutely bound by it: and the vendee may recover the goods by action, as well as the vendor may the price of themx. And such regard does the law pay to earnest as an evidence of a contract, that, by the same statute 29 Car. II. c. 3. no contract for the sale of goods, to the value of 10l. or more, shall be valid, unless the buyer actually receives part of the goods sold, by way of earnest on his part; or unless he gives part of the price to the vendor by way of earnest to bind the bargain, or in part of payment; or unless some note in writing be made and signed by the party, or his agent, who is to be charged with the contract. And, with regard to goods under the value of 10l., no contract or agreement for the sale of them shall be valid, unless the goods are to be delivered within one year, or unless the contract be made in writing, and signed by 〈6〉 the party who is to be charged therewith. Antiently, among all the northern nations, shaking of hands was held necessary to bind the bargain; a custom which we still retain in many verbal contracts. A sale thus made was called handsale, “venditio per mutuam manuum complexionem y [a sale by the mutual joining of hands],” till in process of time the same word was used to signify the price or earnest, which was given immediately after the shaking of hands, or instead thereof.

As soon as the bargain is struck, the property of the goods is transferred to the

vendee, and that of the price to the vendor; but the vendee cannot take the goods, until he tenders the price agreed onz. But if he tenders the money to the vendor, and he refuses it, the vendee may 〈7〉 seise the goods, or have an action against the vendor for detaining them. And by a regular sale, without delivery, the property is so absolutely vested in the vendee, that if A sells a horse to B for 10l., and B pays him earnest, or signs a note in writing of the bargain; and afterwards, before the delivery of the horse or money paid, the horse dies in the vendor’s custody; still he is entitled to the money, because by the contract, the property was in the vendeea. Thus may 449 property in goods be transferred by sale, where the vendor hath such property in himself.

u [Cowper v Andrews] Hob. 41. Noy’s Max. c. 42.

w Inst. 3. tit. 24.

x Noy, ibid.

y Stiernhook de jure Goth. l. 2. c. 5.

z [Cowper v Andrews] Hob. 41.

a Noy, c. 42.

304 of the rights of things

But property may also in some cases be transferred by sale, though the vendor

hath none at all in the goods: for it is expedient that the buyer, by taking proper precautions, may at all events be secure of his purchase; otherwise all commerce between man and man must soon be at an end. And therefore the general rule of law isb, that all sales and contracts of any thing vendible, in fairs or markets overt, (that is, open) shall not only be good between the parties, but also be binding on all those that have any right or property therein. And for this purpose, the mirroir informs usc, were tolls established in markets, viz. to testify the making of contracts; for every private contract was discountenanced by 〈8〉 law. Wherefore our Saxon ancestors prohibited the sale of any thing above the value of twenty pence, unless in open market, and directed every bargain and sale to be contracted in the presence of credible witnessesd. Market overt in the country is only held on the special days, provided for particular towns by charter or prescription; but in London every day, except Sunday, is market daye. The market place, or spot of ground set apart by custom for the sale of particular goods, is also in the country the only market overtf; but in London every shop in which goods are exposed publicly to sale, is market overt, for such things only as the owner professes to trade ing. But if my goods are stolen from me, and sold, out of market overt, my property is not altered, and I may take them wherever I find them. And it is expressly provided by statute 1 Jac. I. c. 21. that the sale of any goods wrongfully taken, to any pawnbroker in London or within two miles thereof, shall not alter the property. For this, being usually a clandestine

450 trade, is therefore made an exception to the general rule. And, even in market overt,

if the goods be the property of the king, such sale (though regular in all other respects) will in no case bind him; though it binds infants, feme coverts, ideots or lunatics, and men beyond sea or in prison: or if the goods be stolen from a common person, and then taken by the king’s officer from the felon, and sold in open market; still, if the owner has used due diligence in prosecuting the thief to conviction, he loses not his property in the goodsh. So likewise, if the buyer knoweth the property not to be in the seller; or there be any other fraud in the transaction; if he knoweth the seller to be an infant, or feme covert, not usually trading for herself; if the sale be not originally and wholly made in the fair or market, or not at the usual hours; the owner’s property is not bound therebyi. If a man buys his own goods in a fair or market, the contract of sale shall not bind him 〈9〉 so as that he shall render the price, unless the property had been previously altered by a former salek. And, notwithstanding any number of intervening sales, if the original vendor, who sold without having the property,



b 2 Inst. 713.

c c. 1. §. 3.

d LL. Ethel. 10, 12 [Wilkins, 58]. LL. Eadg. Wilk. 80.

e [Taylor v Chambers] Cro. Jac. 68.

f [Anon. (1587)] Godb. 131.

g [Case of Market-Overt] 5 Rep. 83. [Anon. (1701)] 12 Mod. 521.

h Bacon’s use of the law. 158.

i 2 Inst. 713, 714.

k Perk. §. 93.





chapter 30 305


comes again into possession of the goods, the original owner may take them, when found in his hands who was guilty of the first breach of justicel. By which wise regulations the common law has secured the right of the proprietor in personal chattels from being devested, so far as was consistent with that other necessary policy, that purchasors, bona fide, in a fair, open, and regular manner, should not be afterwards put to difficulties by reason of the previous knavery of the seller.

But there is one species of personal chattels, in which the property is not easily

altered by sale, without the express consent of the owner, and those are 〈10〉 horses; the sale of which, even in fairs or markets overt, is void in many instances, where that of other property is valid: because a horse is so fleet an animal, that the stealers of them may flee far off in a short spacem, and be out of the reach of the most 451 industrious owner. All persons therefore that have occasion to deal in horses, and are therefore liable sometimes to buy stolen ones, would do well to observe, that whatever price they may give, or how long soever they may keep possession before it be claimed, they gain no property in a horse that has been stolen, unless it be bought in a fair or market overt: nor even then, unless the directions be pursued that are laid down in the statutes 2 P. & M. c. 7. and 31 Eliz. c. 12. By which it is enacted, 〈11〉 that every horse, so to be sold, shall be openly exposed, in the time of such fair or market, for one whole hour together, between ten in the morning and sunset, in 〈12〉 the open and public place used for such sales, and not in any private yard or stable: that the horse shall be brought by both the vendor 〈13〉 and vendee 〈14〉 to the tollgatherer or bookkeeper of such fair or market: that toll be paid, if any be due; and if not, one penny to the bookkeeper, who shall enter down the price, colour, and marks of the horse, with the names, additions, and abode of the vendee 〈15〉 and the vendor; the latter either upon his own knowlege, or the testimony of some credible witness. 〈16〉 And, even if all these points be fully complied with, yet such sale shall not take away the property of the owner, if within six months after the horse is stolen he puts in his claim before the mayor, or some justice, of the district in which the horse shall be found; and within forty days after that, proves such his property by the oath of two witnesses before such mayor or justice; and also tenders to the person in possession such price as he bona fide paid for him in market overt. But in case any one of the points beforementioned 〈17〉 be omitted, or not observed in the sale, such sale is utterly void; and the owner shall not lose his property, but at any distance of time may seise or bring an action for his horse, wherever he happens to find 〈18〉 him. Wherefore sir Edward Coke observesn, that, both by the common law and these two statutes, the property of horses is so well preserved, that if the owner be of capacity to understand them, and be vigilant and industrious to pursue the same, it is almost impossible that the property of any horse, either stolen or not stolen, should be altered by any sale in 452 market overt by him that is malae fidei possessor [a possessor in bad faith].



l 2 Inst. 713.

m Ibid. 714.

n 2 Inst. 719.

306 of the rights of things

By the civil lawo an implied warranty was annexed to every sale, in respect to the

title of the vendor: and so too, in our law, a purchasor of goods and chattels may have a satisfaction from the seller, if he sells them as his own, and the title proves deficient, without any express warranty for that purposep. But, with regard to the goodness of the wares so purchased, the vendor is not bound to answer; unless he expressly warrants them to be sound and goodq, or unless he knew them to be otherwise and hath used any art to disguise themr, or unless they turn out to be different from what he represented to the buyer.

2. Bailment, from the French bailler, to deliver, is a delivery of goods in trust,

upon a contract expressed or implied, that the trust shall be faithfully executed on the part of the bailee. As if cloth be delivered, or (in our legal dialect) bailed, to a taylor to make a suit of cloaths, he has it upon an implied contract to render it again when made, and that in a workmanly manners. If money or goods be delivered to a common carrier, to convey from Oxford to London, he is under a contract in law to pay, or carry, them to the person appointedt. If a horse, or other goods, be delivered to an inn-keeper or his servants, he is bound to keep them safely, and restore them when his guest leaves the houseu. If a man takes in a horse, or other cattle, to graze and depasture in his grounds, which the law calls agistment, he takes them upon an implied contract to return 〈19〉 them safe to the ownerw. If a pawnbroker receives plate or jewels as a pledge, or security, for the repayment of money lent thereon at a day certain, he has them upon an express contract or condition to restore them, if the pledgor performs his part by redeeming them in due timex: for the due execution of

453 which contract many useful regulations are made by statute 30 Geo. II. c. 24. And so

if a landlord distreins goods for rent, or a parish officer for taxes, these for a time are only a pledge in the hands of the distreinors, and they are bound by an implied contract in law to restore them on payment of the debt, duty, and expenses, before the time of sale; or, when sold, to render back the overplus. If a friend delivers any thing to his friend to keep for him, the receiver is bound to restore it on demand: and it was formerly held that in the mean time he was answerable for any damage or loss it might sustain, whether by accident or otherwisey; unless he expressly undertookz to keep it only with the same care as his own goods, and then he should not be answerable for theft or other accidents. But now the law seems to be 〈20〉 settled upon a much more rational footinga; that such a general bailment will not charge the bailee with any loss, unless it happens by gross neglect, 〈21〉 which is construed to be an evidence

o Ff. 21. 2. 1.

p [Furnis v Leicester] Cro. Jac. 474. [Furnis v Leicester] 1 Roll. Abr. 90.

q F. N. B. 94.

r [Southerne v Howe] 2 Roll. Rep. 5.

s [Best v Yates] 1 Vern. 268.

t [Lane v Cotton] 12 Mod. 482.

u [Cross v Andrews] Cro. Eliz. 622.

w [Chapman v Allen] Cro. Car. 271.

x [Ratcliff v Davies] Cro. Jac. 245. [Ratcliff v Davies] Yelv. 178.

y Co. Litt. 89.

z [Southcote’s case] 4 Rep. 84.

a [Coggs v Bernard] Lord Raym. 909. [Lane v Cotton] 12 Mod. 487.





chapter 30 307


of fraud: but, if the bailee undertakes specially to keep the goods safely and securely, he is bound to answer all perils and damages, that may befal them for want of the same care with which a prudent man would keep his ownb.

In all these instances there is a special qualified property transferred from the

bailor to the bailee, together with the possession. It is not an absolute 〈22〉 property in the bailee, because of his contract for restitution; and the bailor hath nothing left in him but the right to a chose in action, grounded upon such contract, the possession being delivered to the bailee. And, on account of this qualified property of the bailee, he may (as well as the bailor) maintain an action against such as injure or take away these chattels. The taylor, the carrier, the innkeeper, the agisting farmer, the pawnbroker, the distreinor, and the general bailee, may all of them vindicate, in their 454

own right, this their possessory interest, against any stranger or third personc. 〈23〉 For, as such bailee is responsible to the bailor, if the goods are lost or damaged by his wilful default or gross negligence, or if he do not deliver up the chattels on lawful demand, it is therefore reasonable that he should have a 〈24〉 right to recover either the specific goods, or else a satisfaction in damages, against all other persons, who may have purloined or injured them; that he may always be ready to answer the call of the bailor.

3. Hiring and borrowing are also contracts by which a qualified property may be

transferred to the hirer or borrower: in which there is only this difference, that hiring is always for a price, a stipend, or additional recompense; borrowing is merely gratuitous. But the law in both cases is the same. They are both contracts, whereby the possession and a transient property is transferred for a particular time or use, on 〈25〉 condition and agreement to restore the goods so hired or borrowed, as soon as the time is expired or use performed; together with the price or stipend (in case of hiring) either expressly agreed on by the parties, or left to be implied by law according to the value of the service. By this mutual contract, the hirer or borrower gains a temporary property in the thing hired, accompanied with an implied condition to use it with moderation and not abuse it; and the owner or lender retains a reversionary interest in the same, and acquires a new property in the price or reward. Thus if a man hires or borrows a horse for a month, he has the possession and a qualified property therein during that period; on the expiration of which his qualified property determines, and the owner becomes (in case of hiring) 〈26〉 intitled to the premium or price, for which the horse was hiredd.

There is one species of this price or reward, the most usual of any, but concerning

which many good and learned men have in former times very much perplexed 455 themselves and other people, by raising doubts about its legality in foro conscientiae [in the court of conscience]. That is, when money is lent on a contract to receive not

b By the laws of Sweden, the depositary or bailee of goods is not bound to restitution, in case of accident by fire or theft: provided his own goods perished in the same manner: “jura enim nostra, says Stiernhook, dolum praesumunt, si una non pereant [for our laws presume it to be a fraud if they do not perish together].” (De jure Sueon. l. 2. c. 5.)

c [Heydon and Smith’s case] 13 Rep. 69.

d [Lee v Atkinson and Brooks] Yelv. 172. [Lee v Atkinson and Brooks] Cro. Jac. 236.

308 of the rights of things

only the principal sum again, but also an increase by way of compensation for the use; which is generally called interest by those who think it lawful, and usury by those who do not 〈27〉 so. It may not be amiss therefore to enter into a short enquiry, upon what footing this matter of interest or usury does really stand.

The enemies to interest in general make no distinction between that and usury,

holding any increase of money to be indefensibly usurious. And this they ground as well on the prohibition of it by the law of Moses among the Jews, as also upon what 〈28〉 is laid down by Aristotlee, that money is naturally barren, and to make it breed money is preposterous, and a perversion of the end of its institution, which was only to serve the purposes of exchange, and not of increase. Hence the school divines have branded the practice of taking interest, as being contrary to the divine law both natural and revealed; and the canon lawf, has proscribed the taking any, the least, increase for the loan of money as a mortal sin.

But, in answer to this, it 〈30〉 may be observed, that the mosaical precept was

clearly a political, and not a moral precept. It only prohibited the Jews from taking usury from their brethren the Jews; but in express words permitted them to take it of a strangerg: which proves that the taking of moderate usury, or a reward for the use, for so the word signifies, is not malum in se, since it was allowed where any but an Israelite was concerned. 〈32〉 And as to Aristotle’s reason, deduced from the natural barrenness of money, the same may with equal force be alleged of houses, which never breed houses; and twenty other things, which nobody doubts it is lawful to

456 make profit of, by letting them to hire. And though money was originally used only

for the purposes of exchange, yet the laws of any state may be well justified in permitting it to be turned to the purposes of profit, if the convenience of society (the great end for which money was invented) shall require it. And that the allowance of moderate interest tends greatly to the benefit of the public, especially in a trading country, will appear from that generally acknowleged principle, that commerce cannot subsist without mutual and extensive credit. Unless money therefore can be borrowed, trade cannot be carried on: and if no premium were allowed for the hire of money, few persons would care to lend it; or at least the ease of borrowing at a short warning (which is the life of commerce) would be entirely at an end. Thus, in the dark ages of monkish superstition and civil tyranny, when interest was laid under a total interdict, commerce was also at its lowest ebb, and fell entirely into the hands of the Jews and Lombards: but when men’s minds began to be more enlarged, when true religion and real liberty revived, commerce grew again into credit; and again introduced with itself its inseparable companion, the doctrine of loans upon interest.

〈33〉 And, really, considered abstractedly from this its use, since all other conveniences

of life may either be bought or hired, but money can only be hired, there 〈34〉 seems no greater impropriety in taking a recompense or price for the hire of this, than of



e 〈29〉 Polit. l. I. c. 10.

f Decretal. l. 5. tit. 19.

g 〈31〉 “Unto a stranger thou mayest lend upon usury, but unto thy brother thou shalt not lend upon usury.” Deut. xxiii. 20.





chapter 30 309


any other 〈35〉 convenience. If I borrow 100l. to employ in a beneficial trade, it is but equitable that the lender should have a proportion of my gains. To demand an exorbitant price is equally contrary to conscience, for the loan of a horse, or the loan of a sum of money: but a reasonable equivalent for the temporary 〈36〉 inconvenience the owner may feel by the want of it, and for the hazard of his losing it entirely, is not more immoral in one case than it is in the other. 〈37〉 And indeed the absolute prohibition of lending upon any, even moderate interest, introduces the very incon-venience which it seems meant to remedy. The necessity of individuals will make borrowing unavoidable. Without some profit allowed by law there will be but few 457 lenders: and those principally bad men, who will break through the law, and take a profit; and then will endeavour to indemnify themselves from the danger of the penalty, by making that profit 〈38〉 exorbitant. Thus, while all degrees of profit were discountenanced, we find more complaints of usury, and more flagrant instances of oppression, than in modern times, when money may be easily had at a low interest. A capital distinction must therefore be made between a moderate and exorbitant profit; to the former of which we usually give the name of interest, to the latter the truly odious appellation of usury: the former is necessary in every civil state, if it were but to exclude the latter, which ought never to be tolerated in any well-regulated society. For, as the whole of this matter is well summed up by Grotiush, “if the compensation allowed by law does not exceed the proportion of the hazard run, or the want felt, by the loan, its allowance is neither repugnant to the revealed nor the natural law: but if it exceeds those bounds, it is then oppressive usury; and though the municipal laws may give it impunity, they never can make it just.”

We see, that the exorbitance or moderation of interest, for money lent, depends

upon two circumstances; the inconvenience of parting with it for the present, and the hazard of losing it entirely. The inconvenience to individual lenders can never be estimated by laws; the rate therefore of general interest must depend upon the usual or general inconvenience. This results entirely from the quantity of specie or current money in the kingdom: for, the more specie there is circulating in any nation, the greater superfluity there will be, beyond what is necessary to carry on the business of exchange and the common concerns of life. In every nation or public community there is a certain quantity of money thus necessary; which a person well skilled in political arithmetic might perhaps calculate as exactly, as a private banker can the demand for running cash in his own shop: all above this necessary quantity may be 458 spared, or lent, without much inconvenience to the respective lenders; and the greater this national superfluity is, the more numerous will be the lenders, and the lower ought the rate of the national interest to be: but where there is not enough, or barely enough, circulating cash, to answer the ordinary uses of the public, interest will be proportionably high; for lenders will be but few, as few can submit to the inconvenience of lending.



h de j. b. & p. l. 2. c. 12. §. 22.

310 of the rights of things

So also the hazard of an entire loss has its weight in the regulation of interest:

hence, the better the security, the lower will the interest be; the rate of interest being generally in a compound ratio, formed out of the inconvenience and the hazard. And as, if there were no inconvenience, there should be no interest, but what is equivalent to the hazard; so, if there were no hazard, there ought to be no interest, save only what arises from the mere inconvenience of lending. Thus, if the quantity of specie in a nation be such, that the general inconvenience of lending for a year is computed to amount to three per cent: a man that has money by him will perhaps lend it upon good personal security at five per cent, allowing two for the hazard run; he will lend it upon landed security, or mortgage, at four per cent, the hazard being proportionably less; but he will lend it to the state, on the maintenance of which all his property depends, at three per cent, the hazard being none at all.

But sometimes the hazard may be greater, than the rate of interest allowed by law

will compensate. And this gives rise to the 〈39〉 practice, 1. Of bottomry, or respondentia. 2. Of policies of insurance.

And first, bottomry (which originally arose from permitting the master of a ship, in

a foreign country, to hypothecate the ship in order to raise money to refit) is in the nature of a mortgage of a ship; when the owner takes up money to enable him to carry

459 on his voyage, and pledges the keel or bottom of the ship 〈40〉 (pars pro toto [a part for

the whole]) as a security for the repayment. In which case it is understood, that, if the ship be lost, the lender loses also his whole money; but, if it returns in safety, then he shall receive back his principal, and also the premium or interest agreed upon, however it may exceed the legal rate of interest. And this is allowed to be a valid contract in all trading nations, for the benefit of commerce, and by reason of the extraordinary hazard run by the lenderi. And in this case the ship and tackle, if brought home, are answerable (as well as the person of the borrower) for the money lent. But if the loan is not upon the vessel, but upon the goods and merchandize, which must necessarily be sold or exchanged in the course of the voyage, then only the borrower, personally, is bound to answer the contract; who therefore in this case is said to take up money at respondentia. These terms are also applied to contracts for the repayment of money borrowed, not on the ship and goods only, but on the mere hazard of the voyage itself; when a man lends a merchant 1000l. to be employed in a beneficial trade, with condition to be repaid with extraordinary interest, in case such a voyage be safely performedk: which kind of agreement is sometimes called foenus nauticum [naval usury], and sometimes usura maritimal [maritime usury]. But, as this gave an opening for usurious and gaming contracts, especially upon long voyages, it was enacted by the statute 19 Geo. II. c. 37. that all monies lent on bottomry or at respondentia, on vessels bound to or from the East Indies, shall be expressly lent only upon the ship or upon the merchandize; that the lender shall have the benefit of 〈42〉 salvage; and that, if the borrower has not on board effects to the value of the sum borrowed, he shall be responsible to the lender for so

i Moll. de jur. mar. 361. 〈41〉 Malyne lex mercat. b. 1. c. 31. [Sharpley v Hurrel] Cro. Jac. 208. Bynkersh. quaest. jur.

privat. l. 3. c. 16.

k [Soome v Gleen] 1 Sid. 27.

l Molloy ibid. Malyne ibid.





chapter 30 311


much of the principal as hath not been laid out, with legal interest and all other charges, though the ship and merchandize be totally lost.

Secondly, a policy of insurance is a contract between A and B, that, upon A’s 460

paying a premium equivalent to the hazard run, B will indemnify or insure him against a particular event. This is founded upon one of the same principles as the doctrine of interest upon loans, that of hazard; but not that of inconvenience. For if I insure a ship to the levant, and back again, at five per cent; here I calculate the chance that she performs her voyage to be twenty to one against her being lost: and, if she be lost, I lose 100l. and get 5l. Now this is much the same as if I lend the merchant, whose whole fortunes are embarked in this vessel, 100l. at the rate of eight per cent. For by a loan I should be immediately out of my money, the inconvenience of which we have computed equal to three per cent: if therefore I had actually lent him 100l., I must have added 3l. on the score of inconvenience, to the 5l. allowed for the hazard; which together would have made 8l. But as, upon an insurance, I am never 〈43〉 out of my money till the loss actually happens, nothing is therein allowed upon the principle of inconvenience, but all upon the principle of hazard. Thus too, in a loan, if the chance of repayment depends upon the borrower’s life, it is frequent (besides the usual rate of interest) for the borrower to have his life insured till the time of repayment; for which he is loaded with an additional premium, suited to his age and constitution. Thus, if Sempronius has only an annuity for his life, and would borrow 100l. of Titius for a year; the inconvenience and general hazard of this loan, we have seen, are equivalent to 5l. which is therefore the legal interest: but there is also a special hazard in this case; for, if Sempronius dies within the year, Titius must lose the whole of his 100l. Suppose this chance to be as one to ten: it will follow that the extraordinary hazard is worth 10l. more; and therefore that the reasonable rate of interest in this case would be fifteen per cent. But this the law, to avoid abuses, will not permit to be taken: Sempronius therefore gives Titius the lender only 5l., the legal interest; but applies to Gaius an insurer, and gives him the other 10l. to indemnify Titius against the 461 extraordinary hazard. And in this manner may any extraordinary or particular hazard be provided against, which the established rate of interest will not reach; that being calculated by the state to answer only the ordinary and general hazard, together with the lender’s inconvenience in parting with his specie for the 〈44〉 time.

The learning relating to marine insurances hath of late years been greatly improved

by a series of judicial decisions, which have now established the law in such a variety of cases, that (if well and judiciously collected) they would form a very complete title in a code of commercial jurisprudence. But, being founded on equitable principles, which chiefly result from the special circumstances of the case, it is not easy to reduce them to any general heads in mere elementary institutes. Thus much may however be said; that, being contracts, the very essence of which consists in observing the purest good faith and integrity, they are vacated by any the least shadow of fraud or undue concealment: and, on the other hand, being much for the benefit and extension of trade, by distributing the loss or gain among a number of adventurers, they are greatly encouraged and protected both by common law and acts of parliament. But, as a practice had obtained of insuring large sums without having any property on board, 312 of the rights of things

which were called insurances, interest or no interest; and also of insuring the same goods several times over; both of which were a species of gaming, without any advantage to commerce, and were denominated wagering policies: it is therefore enacted by the statute 19 Geo. II. c. 37. that all insurances, interest or no interest, or without farther proof of interest than the policy itself, or by way of gaming or wagering, or without benefit of salvage to the insurer, (all which had the same pernicious tendency) shall be totally null and void, except upon privateers, 〈45〉 or ships in the Spanish and Portuguese trade, for reasons sufficiently obvious;2 and that no re-assurance shall be lawful, except the former insurer shall be insolvent, a bankrupt, or dead; and lastly that, in the East India trade, the lender of money on

462 bottomry, or at respondentia, shall alone have a right to be insured for the money

lent, and the borrower shall (in case of a loss) recover no more upon any insurance than the surplus of his property, above the value of his bottomry or respondentia 〈46〉 bond. But, to return to the doctrine of common interest on loans:

Upon the two principles of inconvenience and hazard, compared together,

different nations have at different times established different rates of interest. The Romans at one time allowed 〈47〉 centesimae, or twelve per cent, to be taken for common loans; but Justinianm reduced it to trientes, or one third of the as or centesimae, that is, four per cent; but allowed higher interest to be taken

463 of merchants, because there the hazard was greatern. So too Grotius informs



m Cod. 4. 32. 26. Nov. 33, 34, 35.

n A short explication of these terms, and of the division of the Roman as, will be useful to the student, not only for understanding the civilians, but also the more classical writers, who perpetually refer to this distribution. Thus Horace, ad Pisones. 325.

Romani pueri longis rationibus assem [The Roman youth, by long division, take an as

Discunt in partes centum diducere. Dicat And learn to divide it into hundredths. Tell me

Filius Albini, si de quincunce remota est Son of Albinus, if from a quincunx is taken

Uncia, quid superest? poterat dixisse, triens: eu, An uncia, what remains? he would say, triens: Good,

Rem poteris servare tuam! redit uncia, quid fit? You can look after yourself! add an uncia, what then?

Semis.—— Semis—Horace, The Art of Poetry: An Epistle to the Pisos,

lines 325–30.]

It is therefore to be observed, that, in calculating the rate of interest, the Romans divided the principal sum

into an hundred parts; one of which they allowed to be taken monthly: and this, which was the highest rate of

interest permitted, they called usurae centesimae, amounting yearly to twelve per cent. Now as the as, or

Roman pound, was commonly used to express any integral sum, and was divisible into twelve parts or unciae,

therefore these twelve monthly payments or unciae were held to amount annually to one pound, or as

usurarius; and so the usurae asses were synonymous to the usurae centesimae. And all lower rates of interest

were denominated according to the relation they bore to this centesimal usury, or usurae asses: for the several

multiples of the unciae, or duodecimal parts of the as, were known by different names according to their

different combinations; sextans, quadrans, triens, quincunx, semis, septunx, bes, dodrans, dextrans, deunx,

containing respectively 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 unciae or duodecimal parts of an as. (Ff. 28. 5. 50. §. 2. Gravin.

orig. jur. civ. l. 2. §. 47.) This being premised, the following table [see II. 213] will clearly exhibit at once the

subdivisions of the as, and the denominations of the rate of interest.

2 The statute required proof of interest with a view to preventing policies being taken out on ships which were then fraudulently destroyed; the privateering and Iberian trades’ exemptions may have been designed to promote these enterprises.





chapter 30 313


uso, that in Holland the rate of interest was then eight per cent in common loans, but twelve to merchants. 〈48〉 Our law establishes one standard for all alike, where the pledge or security itself is not put in jeopardy; lest, under the general pretence of vague and indeterminate hazards, a door should be opened to fraud and usury: leaving specific hazards to be provided against by specific 〈49〉 insurances, or by loans upon respondentia, or bottomry. But as to the rate of legal interest, it has varied and decreased for two hundred years past, according as the quantity of specie in the kingdom has encreased by accessions of trade, the introduction of paper credit, and other circumstances. The statute 37 Hen. VIII. c. 9. confined interest to ten per cent, and so did the statute 13 Eliz. c. 8. But as, through the encouragements given in her reign to commerce, the nation grew more wealthy, so under her successor the statute 21 Jac. I. c. 17. reduced it to eight per cent; as did the statute 12 Car. II. c. 13. to six: and lastly by the statute 12 Ann. st. 2. c. 16. it was brought down to five per cent yearly, which is now the extremity of legal interest that can be taken. But yet, if a contract, which carries interest, be made in a foreign country, our courts will direct the payment of interest according to the law of that country in which the contract was madep. Thus Irish, American, Turkish, and Indian interest, have been allowed in our 464 courts, to the amount of even twelve per cent. For the moderation or exorbitance of interest depends upon local circumstances; and the refusal to inforce such contracts would put a stop to all foreign 〈50〉 trade.

4. The last general species of contracts, which I have to mention, is that of debt;

whereby a chose in action, or right to a certain sum of money, is mutually acquired and lostq. This may be the counterpart of, and arise from, any of the other species of contracts. As, in case of a sale, where the price is not paid in ready money, the vendee becomes indebted to the vendor for the sum agreed on; and the vendor has a property in this price, as a chose in action, by means of this contract of debt. In bailment, if the bailee loses or detains a sum of money bailed to him for any special purpose, he becomes indebted to the bailor in the same numerical sum, upon his implied contract, that he 〈51〉 shall execute the trust reposed in him, or repay the money to the bailor. Upon hiring or borrowing, the hirer or borrower, at the same time that he

Usurae. Partes Assis. per annum. Asses, sive centesimae ------------- Integer ------------------------ 12 per cent. Deunces ----------------------------- 11/12 ------------------------- 11 Dextances, vel decunces ----------- 5/6 --------------------------- 10 Dodrantes -------------------------- 3/4 --------------------------- 9 Besses ------------------------------- 2/3 --------------------------- 8 Septunces --------------------------- 7/12 -------------------------- 7 Semisses ---------------------------- 1/2 --------------------------- 6 Quincunces ------------------------- 5/12 -------------------------- 5 Trientes ----------------------------- 1/3 --------------------------- 4 Quadrantes ------------------------- 1/4 --------------------------- 3 Sextances --------------------------- 1/6 --------------------------- 2 Unciae ------------------------------ 1/12 -------------------------- 1

o de jur. b. & p. 2. 12. 22.

p ms 1 Equ. Cas. abr. 289. [Ekins v East-India Company] 1 P. W. 395.

q F. N. B. 119.

314 of the rights of things

acquires a property in the thing lent, may also become indebted to the lender, upon his contract to restore the money borrowed, to pay the price or premium of the loan, the hire of the horse, or the like. Any contract in short whereby a determinate sum of money becomes due to any person, and is not paid but remains in action merely, is a contract of debt. And, taken in this light, it comprehends a great variety of acquisition; being usually divided into debts of record, debts by special, and debts by simple contract.

A debt of record is a sum of money, which appears to be due by the evidence of a

court of record. Thus, when any specific sum is adjudged to be due from the defendant to the plaintiff, on an action or suit at law; this is a contract of the highest nature, being established by the sentence of a court of judicature. 〈52〉 Recognizances also are

465 a sum of money, recognized or acknowleged to be due to the crown or a subject, in

the presence of some court or magistrate, with a condition that such acknowlegement shall be void upon the appearance of the party, his good behaviour, or the like: and these, together with statutes merchant and statutes staple, &c, if forfeited by non-performance of the condition, are also ranked among this first and principal class of debts, viz. debts of record; since the contract, on which they are founded, is witnessed by the highest kind of evidence, viz. by matter of record.

Debts by specialty, or special contract, are such whereby a sum of money becomes,

or is acknowleged to be, due by deed or instrument under seal. Such as by deed of covenant, by deed of sale, by lease reserving rent, or by bond or obligation: which last we took occasion to explain in the twentieth 〈53〉 lecture of the present book; and then shewed that it is an acknowlegement or creation of a debt from the obligor to the obligee, unless the obligor performs a condition thereunto usually annexed, as the payment of rent or money borrowed, the observance of a covenant, and the like; on failure of which the bond becomes forfeited and the debt becomes due in law. These are looked upon as the next class of debts after those of record, being confirmed by special evidence, under seal.

Debts by simple contract are such, where the contract upon which the obligation

arises is neither ascertained by matter of record, nor yet by deed or special instrument, but by mere oral evidence, the most simple of any; or by notes unsealed, which are capable of a more easy proof, and (therefore only) better, than a verbal promise. It is easy to see into what a vast variety of obligations this last class may be branched out, through the numerous contracts for money, which are not only expressed by the parties, but virtually implied in law. Some of these we have already occasionally hinted at; and the rest, to avoid repetition, must be referred to those particular heads

466 in the third book of these commentaries, where the breach of such contracts will be

considered. I shall only observe at present, that by the statute 29 Car. II. c. 3. no executor or administrator shall be charged upon any special promise to answer damages out of his own estate, and no person shall be charged upon any promise to answer for the debt or default of another, or upon any agreement in consideration of marriage, or upon any contract or sale of any real estate, or upon any agreement that is not to be performed within one year from the making, unless the agreement or some memorandum thereof be in writing, and signed by the party himself or by his authority.





chapter 30 315


But there is one species of debts upon simple contract, which, being a transaction

now introduced into all sorts of civil life, under the name of paper credit, deserves a more particular regard. These are debts by bills of exchange, and promissory notes.

A bill of exchange is a security, originally invented among merchants in different

countries, for the more easy remittance of money from the one to the other, which has since spread itself into almost all pecuniary transactions. It is an open letter of request from one man to another, desiring him to pay a sum named therein to a third person on his account; by which means a man at the most distant part of the world may have money remitted to him from any trading country. If A lives in Jamaica, and owes B who lives in England 1000l., now if C be going from England to Jamaica, he may pay B this 1000l., and take a bill of exchange drawn by B in England upon A in Jamaica, and receive it when he comes thither. Thus does B receive his debt, at any distance of place, by transferring it to C; who carries over his money in paper credit, without danger of robbery or loss. This method is said to have been brought into general use by the Jews and Lombards, when banished for their usury and other vices; in order the more easily to draw their effects out of France and England, into those countries in which they had chosen to reside. 〈54〉 The invention of them was a little earlier: for the Jews were banished out of Guienne in 1287, and out of England 467

in 1290r; and in 1236 the use of paper credit was introduced into the Mogul empire in Chinas. In common speech such a bill is frequently called a draught, but a bill of exchange is the more legal as well as mercantile expression. The person however, who writes this letter, is called in law the drawer, and he to whom it is written the drawee; and the third person, or negotiator, to whom it is payable (whether specially named, or the bearer generally) is called the payee.

These bills are either foreign, or inland: foreign, when drawn by a merchant

residing abroad upon his correspondent in England, or vice versa; and inland, when both the drawer and the drawee reside within the kingdom. Formerly foreign bills of exchange were much more regarded in the eye of the law than inland ones, as being thought of more public concern in the advancement of trade and commerce. But now by two statutes, the one 9 & 10 W. III. c. 17. the other 3 & 4 Ann. c. 9. inland bills of exchange are put upon the same footing as foreign ones; what was the law and custom of merchants with regard to the one, and taken notice of merely as sucht, being by those statutes expressly enacted with regard to the other. So that there is now in law no manner of difference between them.

Promissory notes, or notes of hand, are a plain and direct engagement in writing,

to pay a sum specified at the time therein limited to a person therein named, or sometimes to his order, or often to the bearer at large. These also by the same statute 3 & 4 Ann. c. 9. are made assignable and indorsable in like manner as bills of 〈55〉 exchange.



r 2 Carte. 203. 206.

s Mod. Un. Hist. iv. 499.

t [Oaste v Taylor] 1 Roll. Abr. 6.

316 of the rights of things

The payee, we may observe, either of a bill of exchange or promissory note, has

clearly a property vested in him (not indeed in possession but in action) by the express contract of the drawer in the case of a promissory note, and, in the case of a

468 bill of exchange, by his implied contract; viz. that, provided the drawee does not pay

the bill, the drawer will: for which reason it is usual, in bills of exchange, to express that the value, thereof hath been received by the draweru; in order to shew the consideration, upon which the implied contract of repayment arises. And this property, so vested, may be transferred and assigned from the payee to any other man; contrary to the general rule of the common law, that no chose in action is assignable: which assignment is the life of paper credit. It may therefore be of some use, to mention a few of the principal incidents attending this transfer or assignment, in order to make it regular, and thereby to charge the drawer with the payment of the debt to other persons, than those with whom he originally contracted.

In the first place then the payee, or person to whom or whose order such bill of

exchange or promissory note is payable, may by indorsement, or writing his name in dorso or on the back of it, assign over his whole property to the bearer, or else to another person by name, either of whom is then called the indorsee; and he may assign the same to another, and so on in infinitum. And a promissory note, payable to A or bearer, is negotiable without any indorsement, and payment thereof may be demanded by any bearer of itv. But, in case of a bill of exchange, the payee, or the indorsee, (whether it be a general or particular indorsement) is to go to the drawee, and offer his bill for acceptance; which acceptance (so as to charge the drawer with costs) must be in writing, under or on the back of the bill. If the drawee accepts the bill, either verbally or in writingw, he then makes himself liable to pay it; this being now a contract on his side, grounded on an acknowlegement that the drawer has effects in his hands, or at least credit sufficient to warrant the payment. If the drawee refuses to accept the bill, and it be of the value of 20l. or upwards, and expressed to be for value received, the payee or indorsee may protest it for non-acceptance: which

469 protest must be made in writing, under a copy of such bill of exchange, by some

notary public; or, if no such notary be resident in the place, then by any other substantial inhabitant in the presence of two credible witnesses; and notice of such protest must, within fourteen days after, be given to the drawer.

But, in case such bill be accepted by the drawee, and after acceptance he fails or

refuses to pay it within three days after it becomes due (which three days are called days of grace) the payee or indorsee is then to get it protested for non-payment, in the same manner and by the same persons who are to protest it in case of non-acceptance: and such protest must also be notified, within fourteen days after, to the drawer. And he, on producing such protest, either of non-acceptance or non-payment, is bound to make good to the payee, or indorsee, not only the amount of the said bills, (which he is bound to do within a reasonable time after non-payment, without any protest, by

u [Banbury v Lisset] Stra. 1212.

v [Hinton’s case] 2 Show. 235.—Grant v. Vaughan. T. 4 Geo. III. B. R.

w [Lumley v Palmer] Stra. 1000.





chapter 30 317


the rules of the common lawx) but also interest and all charges, to be computed from the time of making such protest. But if no protest be made or notified to the drawer, and any damage accrues by such neglect, it shall fall on the holder of the bill. The bill, when refused, must be demanded of the drawer as soon as conveniently may be: for though, when one draws a bill of exchange, he subjects himself to the payment, if the person on whom it is drawn refuses either to accept or pay, yet that is with this limitation, that if the bill be not paid, when due, the person to whom it is payable shall in convenient time give the drawer notice thereof; for otherwise the law will imply it paid: since it would be prejudicial to commerce, if a bill might rise up to charge the drawer at any distance of time; when in the mean time all reckonings and accounts may be adjusted between the drawer and the draweey.

If the bill be an indorsed bill, and the indorsee cannot get the drawee to discharge

it, he may call upon either the drawer or the indorsor, or if the bill has been negotiated through many hands, upon any of the indorsors; for each indorsor is a warrantor for 470

the payment of the bill, which is frequently taken in payment as much (or more) upon the credit of the indorsor, as of the drawer. And if such indorsor, so called upon, has the names of one or more indorsors prior to his own, to each of whom he is properly an indorsee, he is also at liberty to call upon any of them to make him satisfaction; and so upwards. But the first indorsor has nobody to resort to, but the drawer only.

What has been said of bills of exchange is applicable also to promissory notes, that

are indorsed over, and negotiated from one hand to another: only that, in this case, as there is no drawee, there can be no protest for non-acceptance; or rather, the law considers a promissory note in the light of a bill drawn by a man upon himself, and accepted at the time of drawing. And, in case of non-payment by the drawer, the several indorsees of a promissory note have the same remedy, as upon bills of exchange, against the prior indorsors.

x [Brough v Parkings] Lord Raym. 993.

y [Allen v Dockwra] Salk. 127.



471 chapter the thirty first.



of title by bankruptcy.

The preceding chapter having treated pretty largely of the acquisition of personal property by several commercial methods, we from thence shall be easily led to take into our present consideration a tenth method of transferring property, which is that of

X. Bankruptcy; a title which we before lightly touched upona, so far as it related

to the transfer of the real estate of the bankrupt. At present we are to treat of it more minutely, as it principally relates to the disposition of chattels, in which the property of persons concerned in trade more usually consists, than in lands or tenements. Let us therefore first of all consider, 1. Who may become a bankrupt: 2. What acts make a bankrupt: 3. The proceedings on a commission of bankrupt: and, 4. In what manner an estate in goods and chattels may be transferred by bankruptcy.

1. Who may become a bankrupt. A bankrupt was beforeb defined to be “a trader,

who secretes himself, or does certain other acts, tending to defraud his creditors.” He was formerly considered merely in the light of a criminal or offenderc; and in this spirit we are told by sir Edward Coked, that we have fetched as well the name, as the

472 wickedness, of bankrupts from foreign nationse. But at present the laws of bankruptcy

are considered as laws calculated for the benefit of trade, and founded on the principles of humanity as well as justice; and to that end they confer some privileges, not only on the creditors, but also on the bankrupt or debtor himself. On the creditors; by compelling the bankrupt to give up all his effects to their use, without any fraudulent concealment: on the debtor; by exempting him from the rigor of the general law, whereby his person might be confined at the discretion of his creditor, though in reality he has nothing to satisfy the debt; whereas the law of bankrupts, taking into consideration the sudden and unavoidable accidents to which men in trade are liable, has given them the liberty of their persons, and some pecuniary emoluments, upon condition they surrender up their whole estate to be divided among their creditors.

In this respect our legislature seems to have attended to the example of the Roman

law. I mean not the terrible law of the twelve tables; whereby the creditors might cut the debtor’s body into pieces, and each of them take his proportionable share: if indeed that law, de debitore in partes secando [of cutting the debtor into pieces], is to

a See pag. 285 [II. 194].

b Ibid.

c Stat. 1 Jac. I. c. 15. §. 17.

d 4 Inst. 277.

e The word itself is derived from the word bancus or banque, which signifies the table or counter of a tradesman (Dufresne. I. 969.) and ruptus, broken; denoting thereby one whose shop or place of trade is broken and gone; though others rather chuse to adopt the word route, which in French signifies a trace or track, and tell us that a bankrupt is one who hath removed his banque, leaving but a trace behind. (4 Inst. 277.) And it is observable that the title of the first English statute concerning this offence, 34 Hen. VIII. c. 4. “against such persons as do make bankrupt,” is a literal translation of the French idiom, qui font banque route.





chapter 31 319


be understood in so very butcherly a light; which many learned men have with reason doubtedf. Nor do I mean those less inhuman laws (if they may be called so, as their meaning is indisputably certain) of imprisoning the debtor’s person in chains; subjecting him to stripes and hard labour, at the mercy of his rigid creditor; and sometimes selling him, his wife, and children, to perpetual foreign slavery trans Tiberim g [beyond the Tiber]: an oppression, which produced so many popular 473 insurrections, and secessions to the mons sacer [the sacred mountain].1 But I mean the law of cession, introduced by the christian emperors; whereby if a debtor ceded, or yielded up, all his fortune to his creditors, he was secured from being dragged to a gaol, “omni quoque corporali cruciatu semotoh [all bodily torture being also removed].” For, as the emperor justly observesi, “inhumanum erat spoliatum fortunis suis in solidum damnari [it was inhuman for one deprived of all his fortune to be utterly ruined].” Thus far was just and reasonable: but, as the departing from one extreme is apt to produce its opposite, we find it afterwards enactedk, that if the debtor by any unforeseen accident was reduced to low circumstances, and would swear that he had not sufficient left to pay his debts, he should not be compelled to cede or give up even that which he had in his possession: a law, which under a false notion of humanity, seems to be fertile of perjury, injustice, and absurdity.

The laws of England, more wisely, have steered in the middle between both

extremes: providing at once against the inhumanity of the creditor, who is not suffered to confine an honest bankrupt after his effects are delivered up; and at the same time taking care that all his just debts shall be paid, so far as the effects will extend. But still they are cautious of encouraging prodigality and extravagance by this indulgence to debtors; and therefore they allow the benefit of the laws of bankruptcy to none but actual traders; since that set of men are, generally speaking, the only persons liable to accidental losses, and to an inability of paying their debts, without any fault of their own. If persons in other situations of life run in debt without the power of payment, they must take the consequences of their own indiscretion, even though they meet with sudden accidents that may reduce their fortunes: for the law holds it to be an unjustifiable practice, for any person but a trader to encumber himself with debts of any considerable value. If a gentleman, or one in a liberal 474 profession, at the time of contracting his debts, has a sufficient fund to pay them, the delay of payment is a species of dishonesty, and a temporary injustice to his creditor: and if, at such time, he has no sufficient fund, the dishonesty and injustice is the greater. He cannot therefore murmur, if he suffers the punishment which he has

f Taylor. Comment. in L. decemviral. Bynkersh. Observ. Jur. I. 1. Heinecc. Antiqu. III. 30. 4.

g In Pegu, and the adjacent countries in East India, the creditor is entitled to dispose of the debtor himself, and likewise of his wife and children; insomuch that he may even violate with impunity the chastity of the debtor’s wife: but then, by so doing, the debt is understood to be discharged. (Mod. Un. Hist. vii. 128.)

h Cod. 7. 71. per tot. [passim]

i Inst. 4. 6. 40.

k Nov. 135. c. 1.

1 Resistance to these laws led about four thousand Roman plebeians to secede, in 494 bc, to the Mons Sacer, a hill about three miles from Rome; the result was an agreement with the patricians to void some of the debts. A similar secession followed about forty-five years later.

320 of the rights of things

voluntarily drawn upon himself. But in mercantile transactions the case is far otherwise. Trade cannot be carried on without mutual credit on both sides: the contracting of debts is therefore here not only justifiable, but necessary. And if by accidental calamities, as by the loss of a ship in a tempest, the failure of brother traders, or by the non-payment of persons out of trade, a merchant or trader becomes incapable of discharging his own debts, it is his misfortune and not his fault. To the misfortunes therefore of debtors the law has given a compassionate remedy, but denied it to their faults: since, at the same time that it provides for the security of commerce, by enacting that every considerable trader may be declared a bankrupt, for the benefit of his creditors as well as himself, it has also to discourage extravagance declared, that no one shall be capable of being made a bankrupt, but only a trader; nor capable of receiving the full benefit of the statutes, but only an industrious trader.

The first statute made concerning any English bankrupts, was 34 Hen. VIII. c. 4.

when trade began first to be properly cultivated in England: which has been almost totally altered by statute 13 Eliz. c. 7. whereby bankruptcy is confined to such persons only as have used the trade of merchandize, in gross or by retail, by way of bargaining, exchange, rechange, bartering, chevisancel, or otherwise; or have sought their living by buying and selling. And by statute 21 Jac. I. c. 19. persons using the trade or profession of a scrivener, receiving other mens monies and estates into their trust and custody, are also made liable to the statutes of bankruptcy: and the benefits, as well

475 as the penal parts of the law, are extended as well to aliens and denizens as to natural

born subjects; being intended entirely for the protection of trade, in which aliens are often as deeply concerned as natives. By many subsequent statutes, but lastly by statute 5 Geo. II. c. 30m. bankers, brokers, and factors, are declared liable to the statutes of bankruptcy; and this upon the same reason that scriveners are included by the statute of James I. viz. for the relief of their creditors; whom they have otherwise more opportunities of defrauding than any other set of dealers: and they are properly to be looked upon as traders, since they make merchandize of money, in the same manner as other merchants do of goods and other moveable chattels. But by the same actn, no farmer, grazier, or drover, shall (as such) be liable to be deemed a bankrupt: for, though they buy and sell corn, and hay, and beasts, in the course of husbandry, yet trade is not their principal, but only a collateral, object; their chief concern being to manure and till the ground, and make the best advantage of its produce. And, besides, the subjecting them to the laws of bankruptcy might be a means of defeating their landlords of the security which the law has given them above all others, for the payment of their reserved rents: wherefore also, upon a similar reason, a receiver of the king’s taxes is not capableo, as such, of being a bankrupt; lest the king should be defeated of those extensive remedies against his debtors, which are put into his hands by the prerogative. By the same statutep, no person shall

l that is, making contracts. (Dufresne. II. 569.)

m §. 39.

n §. 40.

o §. eod. [i.e. eodem, in the same place]

p §. 23.





chapter 31 321


have a commission of bankrupt awarded against him, unless at the petition of some one creditor, to whom he owes 100l.; or of two, to whom he is indebted 150l.; or of more, to whom all together he is indebted 200l. For the law does not look upon persons, whose debts amount to less, to be traders considerable enough, either to enjoy the benefit of the statutes, themselves, or to entitle the creditors, for the benefit of public commerce, to demand the distribution of their effects.

In the interpretation of these several statutes, it hath been held, that buying only, 476

or selling only, will not qualify a man to be a bankrupt; but it must be both buying and selling, and also getting a livelyhood by it. As, by exercising the calling of a merchant, a grocer, a mercer, or, in one general word, a chapman, who is one that buys and sells any thing. But no handicraft occupation (where nothing is bought and sold, and therefore an extensive credit, for the stock in trade, is not necessary to be had) will make a man a regular bankrupt; as that of a husbandman, a gardener, and the like, who are paid for their work and labourq. Also an inn-keeper cannot, as such, be a bankruptr: for his gain or livelyhood does not arise from buying and selling in the way of merchandize, but greatly from the use of his rooms and furniture, his attendance, and the like: and though he may buy corn and victuals, to sell again at a profit, yet that no more makes him a trader, than a schoolmaster or other person is, that keeps a boarding house, and makes considerable gains by buying and selling what he spends in the house, and such a one is clearly not within the statutess. But where persons buy goods, and make them up into saleable commodities, as shoe-makers, smiths, and the like; here, though part of the gain is by bodily labour, and not by buying and selling, yet they are within the statutes of bankruptst; for the labour is only in melioration of the commodity, and rendering it more fit for sale.

One single act of buying and selling will not make a man a trader; but a repeated

practice, and profit by it. Buying and selling bank-stock, or other government securities, will not make a man a bankrupt; they not being goods, wares, or merchandize, within the intent of the statute, by which a profit may be fairly madeu. Neither will buying and selling under particular restraints, or for particular purposes; as if a commissioner of the navy uses to buy victuals for the fleet, and dispose of the 477

surplus and refuse, he is not thereby made a trader within the statutesw. An infant, though a trader, cannot be made a bankrupt: for an infant can owe nothing but for necessaries; and the statutes of bankruptcy create no new debts, but only give a speedier and more effectual remedy for recovering such as were before due: and no person can be made a bankrupt for debts, which he is not liable at law to payx. But a feme-covert in London, being a sole trader according to the custom, is liable to a commission of bankrupty.

q [Crumpe v Barne] Cro. Car. 31.

r [Crisp v Pratt] Cro. Car. 549. [Luton v Bigg] Skinn. 291.

s [Luton v Bigg] Skinn. 292. [Newton v Trigg] 3 Mod. 330.

t [Crumpe v Barne] Cro. Car. 31. [Luton v Bigg] Skinn. 292.

u ms [Colt v Nettervill] 2 P. W. 308.

w [Newton v Trigg] 1 Salk. 110. [Luton v Bigg] Skin. 292.

x [R. v Cole] Lord Raym. 443.

y La Vie v. Philips. M. 6 Geo. III. B. R.

322 of the rights of things

2. Having thus considered, who may, and who may not, be made a bankrupt, we

are to inquire, secondly, by what acts a man may become a bankrupt. A bankrupt is “a trader, who secretes himself, or does certain other acts, tending to defraud his creditors.” We have hitherto been employed in explaining the former part of this description, “a trader:” let us now attend to the latter, “who secretes himself, or does certain other acts, tending to defraud his creditors.” And, in general, whenever such a trader, as is before described, hath endeavoured to avoid his creditors or evade their just demands, this hath been declared by the legislature to be an act of bankruptcy, upon which a commission may be sued out. For in this extrajudicial method of proceeding, which is allowed merely for the benefit of commerce, the law is extremely watchful to detect a man, whose circumstances are declining, in the first instance, or at least as early as possible: that the creditors may receive as large a proportion of their debts as may be; and that a man may not go on wantonly wasting his substance, and then claim the benefit of the statutes, when he has nothing left to distribute.

To learn what the particular acts of bankruptcy are, which render a man a

bankrupt, we must consult the several statutes, and the resolutions formed by

478 the courts thereon. Among these may therefore be reckoned, 1. Departing from the

realm, whereby a man withdraws himself from the jurisdiction and coërcion of the law, with intent to defraud his creditorsz. 2. Departing from his own house, with intent to secrete himself, and avoid his creditorsa. 3. Keeping in his own house, privately, so as not to be seen or spoken with by his creditors, except for just and necessary cause; which is likewise construed to be an intention to defraud his creditors, by avoiding the process of the lawb. 4. Procuring or suffering himself willingly to be arrested, or outlawed, or imprisoned, without just and lawful cause; which is likewise deemed an attempt to defraud his creditorsc. 5. Procuring his money, goods, chattels, and effects to be attached or sequestered by any legal process; which is another plain and direct endeavour to disappoint his creditors of their securityd. 6. Making any fraudulent conveyance to a friend, or secret trustee, of his lands, tenements, goods, or chattels; which is an act of the same suspicious nature with the laste. 7. Procuring any protection, not being himself privileged by parliament, in order to screen his person from arrests; which also is an endeavour to elude the justice of the lawf. 8. Endeavouring or desiring, by any petition to the king, or bill exhibited in any of the king’s courts against any creditors, to compel them to take less than their just debts; or to procrastinate the time of payment, originally contracted for; which are an acknowlegement of either his poverty or his knaveryg. 9. Lying in prison for two months, or more, upon arrest or other detention for debt, without



z Stat. 13 Eliz. c. 7.

a Ibid. 1 Jac. I. c. 15.

b Stat. 13 Eliz. c. 7.

c Ibid. 1 Jac. I. c. 15.

d Stat. 1 Jac. I. c. 15.

e Ibid.

f Stat. 21 Jac. I. c. 19.

g Ibid.





chapter 31 323


finding bail, in order to obtain his libertyh. For the inability to procure bail argues a strong deficiency in his credit, owing either to his suspected poverty, or ill character; and his neglect to do it, if able, can arise only from a fraudulent intention: in either of which cases it is high time for his creditors to look to themselves, and compel a 479 distribution of his effects. 10. Escaping from prison after an arrest for a just debt of 100l. or upwardsi. For no man would break prison, that was able and desirous to procure bail; which brings it within the reason of the last case. 11. Neglecting to make satisfaction for any just debt to the amount of 100l. within two months after service of legal process, for such debt, upon any trader having privilege of parliamentk.

These are the several acts of bankruptcy, expressly defined by the statutes relating

to this title: which being so numerous, and the whole law of bankrupts being an innovation on the common law, our courts of justice have been tender of extending or multiplying acts of bankruptcy by any construction, or implication. And therefore sir John Holt heldl, that a man’s removing his goods privately, to prevent their being seised in execution, was no act of bankruptcy. For the statutes mention only fraudulent gifts to third persons, and procuring them to be seised by sham process, in order to defraud creditors: but this, though a palpable fraud, yet falling within neither of those cases, cannot be adjudged an act of bankruptcy. So also it has been determined expressly, that a banker’s stopping or refusing payment is no act of bankruptcy; for it is not within the description of any of the statutes, and there may be good reasons for his so doing, as, suspicion of forgery, and the like: and if, in consequence of such refusal, he is arrested, and puts in bail, still it is no act of bankruptcym: but if he goes to prison, and lies there two months, then, and not before, is he become a bankrupt.

We have seen who may be a bankrupt, and what acts will make him so: let us next

consider,

3. The proceedings on a commission of bankrupt; so far as they affect the bankrupt

himself. And these depend entirely on the several statutes of 〈1〉 bankruptcyn; all which 480

I shall endeavour to blend together, and digest into a concise methodical order.

And, first, there must be a petition to the lord chancellor by one creditor to the

amount of 100l., or by two to the amount of 150l., or by three or more to the amount of 〈2〉 200l.; upon which he grants a commission to such discreet persons as to him shall seem good, who are then stiled commissioners of 〈3〉 bankrupt. The petitioners, to prevent malicious applications, must be bound in a security of 200l., to make the party amends in case they do not prove him a bankrupt. And, if on the other hand they receive any money or effects from the bankrupt, as a recompense for suing out the commission, so as to receive more than their ratable dividends of the bankrupt’s estate, they forfeit not only what they shall have so received, but their whole debt. These provisions are made, as well to secure persons in good credit from being

h Ibid.

i Stat. 21 Jac. I. c. 19.

k Stat. 4 Geo. III. c. 33.

l [Cole v Davies] Lord Raym. 725.

m [Hopkins v Grey] 7 Mod. 139.

n 13 Eliz. c. 7. 1 Jac. I. c. 15 . 21 Jac. I. c. 19. 7 Geo. I. c. 31. 5 Geo. II. c. 30. 19 Geo. II. c. 32. & 24 Geo. II. c. 57. 324 of the rights of things

damnified by malicious petitions, as to prevent knavish combinations between the creditors and bankrupt, in order to obtain the benefit of a commission. When the commission is awarded and issued, the commissioners are to meet, at their own expense, and to take an oath for the due execution of their commission, and to be allowed a sum not exceeding 20s. per diem each, at every sitting. And no commission of bankrupt shall abate, or be void, upon any demise of the 〈4〉 crown.

When the commissioners have received their commission, they are first to receive

proof of the person’s being a trader, and having committed some act of bankruptcy; and then to declare him a bankrupt, if proved so; and to give notice thereof in the gazette,2 and at the same time to appoint three meetings. 〈5〉 At the first of these meetings an election must be made of assignees, or persons to whom the bankrupt’s estate shall be assigned, and in whom it shall be vested for the benefit of the creditors;

481 which assignees are 〈6〉 to be first named by the commissioners, and afterwards to be

approved or rejected at the said meeting by the major part, in value, of the creditors who shall then prove their debts: but no creditor shall be admitted to vote in the choice of assignees, whose debt on the ballance of accounts does not amount to 〈7〉 10l. At the second meeting any farther business relating to the commission may be proceeded on. And at the third meeting, at farthest, which must be on the forty second day after the advertisement in the 〈8〉 gazette, the bankrupt, upon notice also personally served upon him or left at his usual place of abode, must surrender himself personally to the 〈9〉 commissioners, and must thenceforth in all respects conform to the directions of the statutes of bankruptcy; or, 〈10〉 in default thereof, shall be guilty of felony without benefit of clergy,3 and shall suffer death, and his goods and estate shall be distributed among his 〈11〉 creditors.

In case the bankrupt absconds, or is likely to run away, between the time of the

commission issued, and the last day of surrender, he may by warrant from any judge or justice of the peace 〈12〉 be committed to the county gaol, in order to be forthcoming to the commissioners; who are also empowered immediately to grant a warrant for seising 〈13〉 his goods and papers.

When the bankrupt appears, the commissioners are to examine him touching all

matters relating to his trade and effects. They may also summon before them, and examine, the bankrupt’s 〈14〉 wife and any other person whatsoever, as to all matters relating to the bankrupt’s affairs. And in case any of them shall refuse to answer, or shall not answer fully, to any lawful question, or shall refuse to subscribe such their examination, the commissioners may commit them to prison without bail, till 〈15〉 they make and sign a full answer; the commissioners specifying in their warrant of commitment the question so refused to be answered. And any gaoler, permitt ing such 〈16〉 persons to escape, or go out of prison, shall forfeit 500l. to the 〈17〉 creditors.

482 The bankrupt, upon this examination, is bound upon pain of death to make a full

discovery of all his estate and effects, as well in expectancy as possession, and how he

2 The London Gazette, first published in 1665, was the semi-official newspaper of record, publishing details of government appointments and honours as well as notices of bankruptcies.

3 For benefit of clergy, see further IV, ch. 28.





chapter 31 325


has disposed of the same; together with all books and writings relating thereto: and is to deliver up all in his own power to the commissioners; (except the necessary apparel of himself, his wife, and his children) or, in case he conceals or embezzles any effects to the amount of 20l., or withholds any books or writings, with intent to defraud his creditors, he shall be guilty of felony without benefit of 〈18〉 clergyo.

After the time allowed to the bankrupt for such discovery is expired, any other

person voluntarily discovering any part of his estate, before unknown to the assignees, shall be entitled to five per cent. out of the effects so discovered, and such farther reward as the assignees and commissioners shall think proper. And any trustee wilfully concealing the estate of any bankrupt, after the expiration of the two and forty days, shall forfeit 100l., and double the value of the estate concealed, to the 〈19〉 creditors.

Hitherto every thing is in favour of the creditors; and the law seems to be pretty

rigid and severe against the bankrupt: but, in case he proves honest, it makes him full amends for all this rigor and severity. For if the bankrupt hath made an ingenuous 〈 20〉 discovery, hath conformed to the directions of the law, and hath acted in all points to the satisfaction of his creditors; and if they, or four parts in five of them in number and value, (but none of them creditors for less than 20l.) will sign a certificate to that purport; the commissioners are then to authenticate such certificate under their hands and seals, and to transmit it to the lord chancellor: and he, or two judges whom he shall appoint, on oath made by the bankrupt that such certificate was 483 obtained without fraud, may allow the same; or disallow it, upon cause shewn by any of the creditors of the 〈21〉 bankrupt.

If no cause be shewn to the contrary, the certificate is allowed of course; and then

the bankrupt is entitled to a decent and reasonable allowance out of his effects, for his future support and maintenance, and to put him in a way of honest industry. This allowance is also in proportion to his former good behaviour, in the early discovery of the decline of his affairs, and thereby giving his creditors a larger dividend. For, if his effects will not pay one half of his debts, or ten shillings in the pound, he is left to the discretion of the commissioners and assignees, to have a competent sum allowed him, not exceeding three per cent: but if they pay ten shillings in the pound, he is to be allowed five per cent; if twelve shillings and sixpence, then seven and a half per cent; and if fifteen shillings in the pound, then the bankrupt shall be allowed ten per cent: provided, that such allowance do not in the first case exceed 200l., in the second 250l., and in the third 300l.p



o By the laws of Naples all fraudulent bankrupts, particularly such as do not surrender themselves within four days, are punished with death: also all who conceal the effects of a bankrupt, or set up a pretended debt to defraud his creditors. (Mod. Un. Hist. xxviii. 320.)

p 〈22〉 By the Roman law of cession, if the debtor acquired any considerable property subsequent to the giving up of his all, it was liable to the demands of his creditors. (Ff. 42. 3. 4.) But this did not extend to such allowance as was left to him on the score of compassion, for the maintenance of himself and family. Si quid misericordiae causa ei fuerit relictum, puta menstruum vel annum, alimentorum nomine, non oportet propter hoc bona ejus iterato venundari: nec enim fraudandus est alimentis cottidianis [If anything shall have been left him through compassion— for instance, as a monthly or yearly allowance for provisions—he is not thereby obliged to sell his goods again; for he is not to be defrauded of his daily subsistence]. (Ibid. l. 6.). [Dig. 42.3.6.]

326 of the rights of things

Besides this allowance, he has also an indemnity granted him, of being free and

discharged for ever from all debts owing by him at the time he became a bankrupt; even though judgment shall have been obtained against him, and he lies in prison upon execution for such debts; and, for that among other purposes, all proceedings on commissions of bankrupt are, on petition, to be entered of record, as a perpetual bar against actions to be commenced on this account: though, in general, the pro-

484 duction of the certificate properly allowed shall be sufficient evidence of all previous

〈23〉 proceedings. Thus the bankrupt becomes a clear man again; and, by the assistance of his allowance and his own industry, may become a useful member of the commonwealth: which is the rather to be expected, as he cannot be entitled to these 〈24〉 benefits, but by the testimony of his creditors themselves of his honest and ingenuous disposition; and unless his failures have been owing to misfortunes, rather than to misconduct and extravagance.

For no allowance or indemnity shall be given to a bankrupt, unless his certificate

be signed and allowed, as before-mentioned; and also, if any creditor produces a fictitious debt, and the bankrupt does not make discovery of it, but suffers the fair creditors to be imposed upon, he loses all title to these 〈25〉 advantages. Neither can he claim them, if he has given with any of his children above 100l. for a marriage portion, unless he had at that time sufficient left to pay all his debts; or if he has lost at any one time 5l., or in the whole 100l., within a twelvemonth before he became bankrupt, by any manner of gaming or wagering whatsoever; or, within the same time, has lost to the value of 100l. by stockjobbing. Also, to prevent the too common practice of frequent and fraudulent or careless breaking, a mark is set upon such as have been once cleared by a commission of bankrupt, or have compounded with their creditors, or have been delivered by an act of insolvency: which is an occasional act, frequently passedq by the legislature; whereby all persons whatsoever, who are either in too low a way of dealing to become bankrupts, or not being in a mercantile state of life are not included within the laws of bankruptcy, are discharged from all suits and imprison-ment, upon delivering up all their estate and effects to their creditors upon oath, at the sessions or assises; in which case their perjury or fraud is usually, as in case of bankrupts, punished with death. Persons who have been once cleared 〈27〉 by this, or either of the other methods, (of composition with their creditors, or bankruptcy) and

485 afterwards become bankrupts again, unless they pay full fifteen shillings in the pound,

are only thereby indemnified as to the confinement of their bodies; but any future estate they shall acquire remains liable to their creditors, excepting their necessary apparel, household goods, and the tools and implements of their 〈28〉 trades.

Thus much for the proceedings on a commission of bankrupt, so far as they affect

the bankrupt himself personally. Let us next consider,

4. How such proceedings affect or transfer the estate and property of the bankrupt.

The method whereby a real estate, in lands, tenements, and hereditaments, may be transferred by bankruptcy, was shewn under its proper head, in a former chapterr.

q 〈26〉 Stat. 28 Geo. II. c. 13. 32 Geo. II. c. 28. 1 Geo. III. c. 17. 5 Geo. III. c. 41.

r pag. 285 [II. 194].





chapter 31 327


At present therefore we are only to consider the transfer of things personal by this operation of law.

By virtue of the statutes 〈29〉 before-mentioned all the personal estate and effects

of the bankrupt are considered as vested, by the act of bankruptcy, in the future assignees of his commissioners, whether they be goods in actual possession, or debts, contracts, and other choses in action; and the commissioners by their warrant may cause any house or tenement of the bankrupt to be 〈30〉 broken open, in order to enter upon and seize the same. And, when the assignees are chosen or approved by the creditors, the commissioners are to assign every thing over to them; and the property of every part of the estate is thereby as fully vested in them, as it was in the bankrupt himself, and they have the same remedies to recover its.

The property vested in the assignees is the whole that the bankrupt had in himself,

at the time he committed the first act of bankruptcy, or that has been vested in him since, before his debts are satisfied or agreed for. Therefore it is usually said, that once a bankrupt, and always a bankrupt: by which is meant, that a plain direct act of 486 bankruptcy once committed cannot be purged, or explained away, by any subsequent conduct, as a dubious equivocal act may bet; but that, if a commission is afterwards awarded, the commission and the property of the assignees shall have a relation, or reference, back to the first and original act of bankruptcyu. Insomuch that all transactions of the bankrupt are from that time absolutely null and void, either with regard to the alienation of his property, or the receipt of his debts from such as are privy to his bankruptcy; for they are no longer his property, or his debts, but those of the future assignees. And, if an execution be sued out, but not served and executed on the bankrupt’s effects till after the act of bankruptcy, it is void as against the assignees. But the king is not bound by this fictitious relation, nor is within the statutes of bankruptsw; for if, after the act of bankruptcy committed and before the assignment of his effects, an extent issues for the debt of the crown, the goods are bound therebyx. In France this doctrine of relation is carried to a very great length; for there every act of a merchant, for ten days precedent to the act of bankruptcy, is presumed to be fraudulent, and is therefore voidy. But with us the law stands upon a more reasonable footing: for, as these acts of bankruptcy may sometimes be secret to all but a few, and it would be prejudicial to trade to carry this notion to its utmost length, it is provided by statute 19 Geo. II. c. 32. that no money paid by a bankrupt to a bona fide or real creditor, in a course of trade, even after an act of bankruptcy done, shall be liable to be refunded. Nor, by statute 1 Jac. I. c. 15. shall any debtor of a bankrupt, that pays him his debt, without knowing of his bankruptcy, be liable to account for it again. The intention of this relative power being only to reach fraudulent transactions, and not to distress the fair trader.

s [Hussey v Fidall] 12 Mod. 324.

t [Hopkins v Ellis] Salk. 110.

u [Cooper v Chitty] 4 Burr. 32 .

w [Anon. (1745)] Atk. 262.

x Viner. Abr. t. creditor and bankr. 104.

y Sp. L. b. 29. c. 16.

328 of the rights of things

The assignees may pursue any legal method of recovering this property so vested

487 in them, by their own authority; but cannot commence a suit in equity, nor compound

any debts owing to the bankrupt, nor refer any matters to arbitration, without the consent of the creditors, or the major part of them in value, at a meeting to be held in pursuance of notice in the 〈31〉 gazette.

When they have got in all the effects they can reasonably hope for, and reduced

them to ready money, the assignees 〈32〉 must, within twelve months after the commission issued, give one and twenty days notice to the creditors of a meeting for a dividend or distribution; at which time they must produce their accounts, and verify them upon oath, if required. And then the commissioners shall direct a dividend to be made, at so much in the pound, to all creditors who have before proved, or shall then prove, their debts. This dividend must be made equally, and in a ratable proportion, to all the creditors, according to the quantity of their debts; no regard being had to the quality of them. Mortgages indeed, for which the creditor has a real security in his own hands, are entirely safe; for the commission of bankrupt reaches only the equity of redemptionz. So are also personal debts, where the creditor has a chattel in his hands, as a pledge or pawn for the payment, or has taken the debtor’s lands or goods in execution. And, upon the equity of the statute 8 Ann. c. 14. (which directs, that, upon all executions of goods being on any premises demised to a tenant, one year’s rent and no more shall, if due, be paid to the landlord) it hath also been held, that under a commission of bankrupt, which is in the nature of a statute-execution, the landlord shall be allowed his arrears of rent to the same amount, in preference to other creditors, even though he hath neglected to distrein, while the goods remained on the premises; which he is otherwise intitled to do for his intire rent, be the quantum what it maya. But, otherwise, judgments and recognizances, (both which are debts of record, and therefore at other times have a priority) and also bonds and obligations by deed or special instrument (which are called debts by

488 specialty, and are usually the next in order) these are all put on a level with debts by

mere simple contract, and all paid pari 〈33〉 passu [to an equal degree]. Nay, so far is this matter carried, that, by the express provision of the 〈34〉 statutes, debts not due at the time of the dividend made, as bonds or notes of hand payable at a future 〈35〉 day, shall be paid equally with the restb, allowing a discount or drawback in proportion. And insurances, and obligations upon bottomry or respondentia, bona fide made by the bankrupt, though forfeited after the commission is awarded, shall be looked upon in the same light as debts contracted before any act of 〈37〉 bankruptcy.

Within eighteen months after the commission issued, a second and final dividend

shall be made, unless all the effects were exhausted by the 〈38〉 first. And if any surplus remains, 〈39〉 after paying every creditor his full debt, it shall be restored to the 〈40〉 bankrupt. This is a case which sometimes happens to men in trade, who involuntarily, or at least unwarily, commit acts of bankruptcy, by absconding and the like, while their effects are more than sufficient to pay their creditors. And, if any suspicious or

z [Tanner v Chapman] Finch. Rep. 466.

a [ex parte Plummer] Atk. 103, 104.

b 〈36〉 [Tully v Sparkes] Lord Raym. 1549.





chapter 31 329


malevolent creditor will take the advantage of such acts, and sue out a commission, the bankrupt has no remedy, but must quietly submit to the effects of his own imprudence; except that, upon satisfaction made to all the creditors, the commission may be supersededc. This case may also happen, when a knave is desirous of defraud-ing his creditors, and is compelled by a commission to do them that justice, which otherwise he wanted to evade. And therefore, though the usual rule is, that all interest on debts carrying interest shall cease from the time of issuing the commission, yet, in case of a surplus left after payment of every debt, such interest shall again revive, and be chargeable on the bankruptd, or his representatives.

c [Alderman Backwel’s case] 2 Ch. Cas. 144.

d [ex parte Rooke] Atk. 244.



489 chapter the thirty second.



of title by testament, and

administration.

There yet remain to be examined, in the present chapter, two other methods of acquiring personal estates, viz. by testament and administration. And these I propose to consider in one and the same view; they being in their nature so connected and blended together, as makes it impossible to treat of them distinctly, without manifest tautology and repetition.

XI. XII. In the pursuit then of this joint subject, I shall, first, enquire into the

original and antiquity of testaments and administrations; shall, secondly, shew who is capable of making a last will and testament; shall, thirdly, consider the nature of a testament and incidents; shall, fourthly, shew what an executor and administrator are, and how they are to be appointed; and, lastly, shall select some few of the general heads of the office and duty of executors and administrators.

First, as to the original of testaments and administrations. We have more than

once observed, that, when property came to be vested in individuals by the right of

490 occupancy, it became necessary for the peace of society, that this occupancy should

be continued, not only in the present possessor, but in those persons to whom he should think proper to transfer it; which introduced the doctrine and practice of alienations, gifts, and contracts. But these precautions would be very short and imperfect, if they were confined to the life only of the occupier; for then upon his death all his goods would again become common, and create an infinite variety of strife and confusion. The law of very many societies has therefore given to the proprietor a right of continuing his property after his death, in such persons as he shall name; and, in defect of such appointment or 〈1〉 nomination, the law of every society has directed the goods to be vested in certain particular individuals, exclusive of all other personsa. The former method of acquiring personal property, according to the express directions of the deceased, we call a testament: the latter, which is also according to the will of the deceased, not expressed indeed but presumed by the lawb, we call in England an administration; being the same which the civil lawyers term a succession ab intestato, and which answers to the descent or inheritance of real estates.

Testaments are of very high antiquity. We find them in use among the antient

Hebrews; though I hardly think the example usually givenc, of Abraham’s complainingd



a Puff. L. of N. b. 4. c. 10.

b Ibid. b 4. c. 11.

c Barbeyr. Puff. 4. 10. 4. Godolph. Orph. Leg. 1. 1.

d Gen. c. 15.





chapter 32 331


that, unless he had some children of his body, his steward Eliezer of Damascus would be his heir, is quite conclusive to shew that he had made him so by will. And indeed a learned writere has adduced this very passage to prove, that in the patriarchal age, on failure of children or kindred, the servants born under their master’s roof succeeded to the inheritance as heirs at lawf. But, (to omit what Eusebius and others have related of Noah’s testament, made in writing and witnessed under his seal, whereby he disposed of the whole worldg) I apprehend that a much more authentic instance of the early use of testaments may be found in the sacred writingsh, wherein Jacob bequeaths to his son Joseph a portion of his inheritance double to that of his brethren: which will 491

we find carried into execution many hundred years afterwards, when the posterity of Joseph were divided into two distinct tribes, those of Ephraim and Manasseh, and had two several inheritances assigned them; whereas the descendents of each of the other patriarchs formed only one single tribe, and had only one lot of inheritance. Solon was the first legislator that introduced wills into Athensi; but in many other parts of Greece they were totally discountenancedk. In Rome they were unknown, till the laws of the twelve tables were compiled, which first gave the right of bequeathingl: and, among the northern nations, particularly among the Germansm, testaments were not received into use. And this variety may serve to evince, that the right of making wills, and disposing of property after death, is merely a creature of the civil staten; which has permitted it in some countries, and denied it in others: and, even where it is permitted by law, it is subjected to different formalities and restrictions in almost every nation under heaveno.

With us in England this power of bequeathing is co-eval with the first rudiments

of the law: for we have no traces or memorials of any time when it did not exist. Mention is made of intestacy, in the old law before the conquest, as being merely accidental; and the distribution of the intestate’s estate, after payment of the lord’s heriot, is then directed to go according to the established law. “Sive quis incuria, sive morte repentina, fuerit intestatus mortuus, dominus tamen nullam rerum suarum partem (praeter eam quae jure debetur hereoti nomine) sibi assumito. Verum possessiones uxori, liberis, et cognatione proximis, pro suo cuique jure, distribuantur p.”1 But we are not to imagine, that 〈2〉 the power of bequeathing extended originally to all a man’s personal estate. On the contrary, Glanvil will inform usq, that by the common law, as 492

e Taylor’s elem. civ. law. 517.

f See pag. 12 [II. 7].

g Selden. de succ. Ebr. c. 24.

h Gen. c. 48.

i Plutarch. in vita Solon.

k Pott. Antiq. 1. 4. c. 15.

l Inst. 2. 22. 1.

m Tacit. de mor. Germ. 21.

n See pag. 13 [II. 8].

o Sp. L. b. 27. c. 1. Vinnius in Inst. l. 2. tit. 10.

p LL. Canut. c. 68.

q l. 2. c. 5.

1 ‘If anyone through negligence or sudden death should die intestate, let not the lord take any part of his effects, except what is due to him of right as a heriot. But let his possessions be distributed among his wife, children, and next of kin, to everyone according to their right.’ Though Blackstone usually draws on Wilkins for the texts of ancient English laws, here he uses the version quoted in Hale, History of the Common Law, 219.

332 of the rights of things

it stood in the reign of Henry the second, a man’s goods were to be divided into three equal parts; of which one went to his heirs or lineal descendants, another to his wife, and the third was at his own disposal: or if he died without a wife, he might then dispose of one moiety, and the other went to his children; and so e converso, if he had no children, the wife was entitled to one moiety, and he might bequeath the other: but, if he died without either wife or issue, the whole was at his own disposalr. The shares of the wife and children 〈3〉 was called their reasonable part; and the writ de rationabili parte bonorum was given to 〈4〉 recover its.

This continued to be the law of the land at the time of magna carta, which provides,

that the king’s debts shall first of all be levied, and then the residue of the goods shall go to the executor to perform the will of the deceased: and, if nothing be owing to the crown, “omnia catalla cedant defuncto; salvis uxori ipsius et pueris suis rationabilibus partibus suist [all the chattels are to go to the deceased; reserving to his wife and children their reasonable shares].” In the reign of king Edward the third this right of the wife and children was still held to be the universal or common lawu; though frequently pleaded as the local custom of Berks, Devon, and other countiesw: and sir Henry Finch lays it down expresslyx, in the reign of Charles the first, to be the general

493 law of the land. But this law is at present altered by imperceptible degrees, and the

deceased may now by will bequeath the whole of his goods and chattels; though we cannot trace out when first this alteration began. Indeed sir Edward Cokey is of opinion, that this never was the general law, but only obtained in particular places by special custom: and to establish that doctrine he relies on a passage in Bracton, which in truth, when compared with the context, makes directly against his opinion. For Bractonz lays down the doctrine of the reasonable part to be the common law; but mentions that as a particular exception, which sir Edward Coke has hastily cited for the general rule. And Glanvil, magna carta, Fleta, the year-books, Fitzherbert, and Finch, do all agree with Bracton, that this right to the pars rationabilis [reasonable part] was by the common law: which also continues to this day to be the general law of our sister kingdom of Scotlanda. To which we may add, that, whatever may have been the

r Bracton. l. 2. c. 26. Flet. l. 2. c. 57.

s F. N. B. 122.

t 9 Hen. III. c. 18.

u A widow brought an action of detinue against her husband’s executors, quod cum per consuetudinem totius regni Angliae hactenus usitatam et approbatam, uxores debent et solent a tempore &c, habere suam rationabilem partem bonorum maritorum suorum: ita videlicet, quod si nullos habuerint liberos, tunc medietatem; et, si habuerint, tunc tertiam partem, &c [by the custom of the whole of the kingdom of England, hitherto used and approved, wives have a right and are accustomed from time [immemorial] to have a reasonable share of their husbands’ goods, in the following proportion: that if they have no children, they shall take the half; and if they have children, then the third part, etc.]; and that her husband died worth 200,000 marks, without issue had between them; and thereupon she claimed the moiety. Some exceptions were taken to the pleadings, and the fact of the husband’s dying without issue was denied; but the rule of law, as stated in the writ, seems to have been universally allowed. [YB] (M. 30 Edw. III. 25.) And a similar case occurs in [Warde v Wullesthorpe] [YB] H. 17 Edw. III. 9. [Blackstone vastly inflates the husband’s wealth; the report much more plausibly puts it at 2,000 marks.]

w Reg. Brev. 142. Co. Litt. 176.

x Law. 175.

y 2 Inst. 33.

z l. 2. c. 26. §. 2.

a Dalrymp. of feud. property. 145.





chapter 32 333


custom of later years in many parts of the kingdom, or however it was introduced in derogation of the old common law, the antient method continued in use in the province of York, the principality of Wales, 〈5〉 and the city of London, till very modern times: when, in order to favour the power of bequeathing, and to reduce the whole kingdom to the same standard, three statutes have been provided; the one 4 & 5 W. & M. c. 2. explained by 2 & 3 Ann. c. 5. for the province of York; another 7 & 8 W. III. c. 38. for Wales; and a third, 11 Geo. I. c. 18. for London: whereby it is enacted, that persons within those districts, and liable to those customs, may (if they think proper) dispose of all their personal estates by will; and the claims of the widow, children, and other relations, to the contrary, are totally barred. Thus is the old common law now utterly abolished throughout all the kingdom of England, and a man may devise the whole of his chattels as freely, as he formerly could his third part or moiety. In disposing of which, he was bound by the custom of many places (as was stated in a former chapterb) to remember his lord and the church, by leaving them his two best chattels, which was the original of heriots and mortuaries; and afterwards he was left at his own liberty, to bequeath the remainder as he pleased.

In case a person made no disposition of such of his goods as were testable, whether 494

that were only part or the whole of them, he was, and is, said to die intestate; and in such cases it is said, that by the old law the king was entitled to seise upon his goods, as the parens patriae [parent of the country], and general trustee of the kingdomc. This prerogative the king continued to exercise for some time by his own ministers of justice; and probably in the county court, where matters of all kinds were determined: and it was granted as a franchise to many lords of manors, and others, who have to this day a prescriptive right to grant administration to their intestate tenants and suitors, in their own courts baron and other courts, or to have their wills there proved, in case they made any dispositiond. Afterwards the crown, in favour of the church, invested the prelates with this branch of the prerogative; which was done, saith Perkinse, because it was intended by the law, that spiritual men are of better conscience than laymen, and that they had more knowlege what things would conduce to the benefit of the soul of the deceased. The goods therefore of intestates were given to the ordinary by the crown; and he might seise them, and keep them without wasting, and also might give, alien, or sell them at his will, and dispose of the money in pios usus [to pious uses]: and, if he did otherwise, he broke the confidence which the law reposed in himf. So that properly the whole interest and power, which were granted to the ordinary, were only those of being the king’s almoner within his diocese; in trust to distribute the intestate’s goods in charity to the poor, or in such superstitious uses as the mistaken zeal of the times had denominated piousg. And, as he had thus the disposition of intestates’ effects, the probate of wills of course followed:



b pag. 426 [II. 288–9].

c [Hensloe’s case] 9 Rep. 38.

d Ibid. 37.

e §. 486.

f Finch, Law. 173, 174.

g [Graysbrook v Fox] [1] Plowd. 277.

334 of the rights of things

for it was thought just and natural, that the will of the deceased should be proved to the satisfaction of the prelate, whose right of distributing his chattels for the good of his soul was effectually superseded thereby.

495 The goods of the intestate being thus vested in the ordinary upon the most solemn

and conscientious trust, the reverend prelates were therefore not accountable to any, but to God and themselves, for their conducth. But even in Fleta’s time it was complainedi, “quod ordinarii, hujusmodi bona nomine ecclesiae occupantes, nullam vel saltem indebitam faciunt distributionem.”2 And to what a length of iniquity this abuse was carried, most evidently appears from a gloss of pope Innocent IVk, written about the year 1250; wherein he lays it down for established canon law, that “in Britannia tertia pars bonorum decedentium ab intestato in opus ecclesiae et pauperum dispensanda est.”3 Thus the popish clergy took to themselvesl (under the name of the church and poor) the whole residue of the deceased’s estate, after the partes rationabiles, or two thirds, of the wife and children were deducted; without paying even his lawful debts, or other charges thereon. For which reason it was enacted by the statute of Westm. 2.m that the ordinary shall be bound to pay the debts of the intestate so far as his goods will extend, in the same manner that executors were bound in case the deceased had left a will: a use more truly pious, than any requiem, or mass for his soul. This was the first check given to that exorbitant power, which the law had entrusted with ordinaries. But, though they were now made liable to the creditors of the intestate for their just and lawful demands, yet the residuum, after payment of debts, remained still in their hands, to be applied to whatever purposes the conscience of the ordinary should approve. The flagrant abuses of which power occasioned the legislature again to interpose, in order to prevent the ordinaries from

496 keeping any longer the administration in their own hands, or those of their immediate

dependents: and therefore the statute 31 Edw. III. c. 11. provides, that, in case of intestacy, the ordinary shall depute the nearest and most lawful friends of the deceased to administer his goods; which administrators are put upon the same footing, with regard to suits and to accounting, as executors appointed by will. This is the original of administrators, as they at present stand; who are only the officers of the ordinary, appointed by him in pursuance of this statute, which singles out the next and most lawful friend of the intestate; who is interpretedn to be the next of blood



h [Graysbrook v Fox] [1] Plowd. 277.

i l. 2. c. 57. §. 10.

k in Decretal. l. 5. t. 3. c. 42.

l The proportion given to the priest, and to other pious uses, was different in different countries. In the archdeaconry of Richmond in Yorkshire, this proportion was settled by a papal bulle a.d. 1254. (Regist. honoris de Richm. 101.) and was observed till abolished by the statute 26 Hen. VIII. c. 15.

m 13 Edw. I. c. 19.

n [Hensloe’s case] 9 Rep. 39.

2 ‘that the ordinaries, who take possession of goods of this kind in the name of the church, make no distribution, or least no proper distribution.’

3 ‘In Britain one third of the goods left by an intestate is to be distributed for the benefit of the church and the poor.’ Blackstone slightly misquotes Innocent IV’s Commentaria on the Decretals, but preserves its sense.





chapter 32 335


that is under no legal disabilities. The statute 21 Hen. VIII. c. 5. enlarges a little more the power of the ecclesiastical judge; and permits him to grant administration either to the widow, or the next of kin, or to both of them, at his own discretion; and, where two or more persons are in the same degree of kindred, gives the ordinary his election to accept whichever he pleases.

Upon this footing stands the general law of administrations at this day. I shall, in

the farther progress of this chapter, mention a few more particulars, with regard to who may, and who may not, be administrator; and what he is bound to do when he has taken this charge upon him: what has been hitherto remarked only serving to shew the original and gradual progress of testaments and administrations; in what manner the latter was first of all vested in the bishops by the royal indulgence; and how it was afterwards, by authority of parliament, taken from them in effect, by obliging them to commit all their power to particular persons nominated expressly by the law.

I proceed now, secondly, to enquire who may, or may not make a testament;

or what persons are absolutely obliged by law to die intestate. And this lawo is entirely prohibitory; for, regularly, every person hath full power and liberty to make a will, that is not under some special prohibition by law or custom: which prohibitions are principally upon three accounts; for want of sufficient discretion; 497

for want of sufficient liberty and free will; and on account of their criminal conduct.

1. In the first species are to be reckoned infants under the age of fourteen if males,

and twelve if females; which is the rule of the civil lawp. For, though some of our common lawyers have held that an infant of any age (even four years old) might make a testamentq, and others have denied that under eighteen he is capabler, yet as the ecclesiastical court is the judge of every testator’s capacity, this case must be governed by the rules of the ecclesiastical law. So that no objection can be admitted to the will of an infant of fourteen, merely for want of age: but, if the testator was not of sufficient discretion, whether at the age of fourteen or four and twenty, that will overthrow his testament. Madmen, or otherwise non compotes, idiots or natural fools, persons grown childish by reason of old age or distemper, such as have their senses besotted with drunkenness,—all these are incapable, by reason of mental disability, to make any will so long as such disability lasts. To this class also may be referred such persons as are born deaf, blind, and dumb; who, as 〈6〉 they want the common inlets of understanding, are incapable of having animum testandi [capacity to make a will], and their testaments are therefore void.



o Godolph. Orph. Leg. p. 1. c. 7.

p Godolph. p. 1. c. 8. Wentw. 212. 2 Vern. 104. [Bishop v Sharp] 469. [Hyde v Hyde] Gilb. Rep. 74. [While the second citation to Vernon (i.e. Bishop v Sharp) is apposite, the first is not, and it is unclear what source Blackstone had in mind. Possibly ‘104’ was inserted in the wrong place, and the citation is to Co. Litt. § 104, which gives these ages in connection with the male and female ‘age of discretion’ for marriage (see note r to this page)].

q Perkins. §. 503. [‘Four’ here may be an error for ‘fourteen’.]

r Co. Litt. 89.

336 of the rights of things

2. Such persons, as are intestable for want of liberty or freedom of will, are by the

civil law of various kinds; as prisoners, captives, and the likes. But the law of England does not make such persons absolutely intestable; but only leaves it to the discretion of the court to judge, upon the consideration of 〈7〉 the particular circumstances of duress, whether or no such persons could be supposed to have liberum animum testandi [free will in making their testament]. And, with regard to feme-coverts, our laws differ still more materially from the civil. Among the Romans there was no distinction; a married woman was as capable of bequeathing as a feme-solet. But with

498 us a married woman is not only utterly incapable of devising lands, being excepted

out of the statute of wills, 34 & 35 Hen. VIII. c. 5. but also she is incapable of making a testament of chattels, without the licence of her husband. For all her personal chattels are absolutely 〈8〉 his own; and he may dispose of her chattels real, or shall have them to himself if he survives her: it would be therefore extremely inconsistent, to give her a power of defeating that provision of the law, by bequeathing those chattels to anotherv. Yet by her husband’s licence she may make a testamentu; and the husband, upon marriage, frequently covenants with her friends to allow her that licence: but such licence is more properly his assent; for, unless it be given to the particular will in question, it will not be a complete testament, even though the husband beforehand hath given her permission to make a willw. Yet it shall be sufficient to repel the husband from his general right of administering his wife’s effects; and administration shall be granted to her appointee, with such testamentary paper annexedx. So that in reality the woman makes no will at all, but only something like a willy; operating in the nature of an appointment, the execution of which the husband by his bond, agreement, or covenant, is bound to allow. A distinction similar to which, we meet with in the civil law. For, though a son who was in potestate parentis [in the parent’s power] could not by any means make a formal and legal testament, even though his father permitted itz, yet he might, with the like permission of his father, make what was called a donatio mortis causaa [a grant by reason of death]. The queen consort is an exception to this general rule, for she may dispose of her chattels by will, without the consent of her lordb: and any feme-covert may make her will of goods, which are in her possession in auter droit [in right of another], as executrix or administratrix; for these can never be the property of the husbandc: and, if she has any pinmoney or separate maintenance, it is said she may dispose of her savings

499 thereout by testament, without the control of her husbandd. But, if a feme-sole makes

s Godolph. p. 1. c. 9.

t Ff. 31. 1. 77.

v [Ognel’s case] 4 Rep. 51.

u Dr & St. d. 1. c. 7.

w Bro. Abr. tit. devise. 34. [R. v Bettesworth] Stra. 891.

x The king v. dr Bettesworth. T. 13 Geo. II. B. R.

y [Tylle v Peirce] Cro. Car. 376. [Brook v Turner] 1 Mod. 211.

z Ff. 28. 1. 6.

a Ff. 39. 6. 25.

b Co. Litt. 133.

c Godolph. 1. 10.

d [Herbert v Herbert] Prec. Chan. 44.





chapter 32 337


her will, and afterwards marries, such subsequent marriage is esteemed a revocation in law, and intirely vacates the wille.

3. Persons incapable of making testaments, on account of their criminal conduct,

are in the first place all traitors and felons, from the time of conviction; for then their goods and chattels are no longer at their own disposal, but forfeited to the king. Neither can a felo de se [suicide] make a will of goods and chattels, for they are forfeited by the act and manner of his death; but he may make a devise of his lands, for they are not subjected to any forfeituref. Outlaws also, though it be but for debt, are incapable of making a will, so long as the outlawry subsists, for their goods and chattels are forfeited during that timeg. As for persons guilty of other crimes, short of felony, who are by the civil law precluded from making testaments, (as usurers, libellers, and others of a worse 〈9〉 stamp) at the common law their testaments may be goodh. And in general the rule is, and has been so at least ever since Glanvil’s timej, quod libera sit cujuscunque ultima voluntas [that the last will of everyone should be free].

Let us next, thirdly, consider what this last will and testament is, which almost

every one is thus at liberty to make; 〈10〉 or the nature and incidents of a testament. Testaments both Justiniani and sir Edward Cokek agree to be so called, because they are testatio mentis; an etymon, which seems to savour too much of the conceit; it being plainly a substantive derived from the verb testari [attest], in like manner as juramentum [oath], incrementum [growth], and others, from other verbs. The definition of the old Roman lawyers is much better than their etymology; “voluntatis nostrae justa sententia de eo, quod quis post mortem suam fieri velitl:” which may be thus rendered into English, “the legal declaration of a man’s intentions, which he wills to be performed after his death.” It is called sententia to denote the circumspection and 500

prudence with which it is supposed to be made: it is voluntatis nostrae sententia, because efficacy depends on declaring the testator’s intention, whence in England it is emphatically stiled his will: it is justa sententia; that is, drawn, attested, and published with all due solemnities and forms of law: It is de eo, quod quis post mortem suam fieri velit, because a testament is of no force till after the death of the testator.

These testaments are divided into two sorts; written, and verbal or nuncupative; of

which the former is committed to writing, the latter depends merely upon oral evidence, being declared by the testator in extremis before a sufficient number of witnesses, and afterwards reduced to writing. A codicil, codicillus, a little book or writing, is a supplement to a will; or an addition made by the testator, and annexed to, and to be taken as part of, a testament: being for explanation, or alteration, or to



e ms [Forse and Hembling’s case] 4 Rep. 60. [Cotter v Layer] 2 P. W. 624.

f [Hales v Petit] [1] Plowd. 261.

g Fitzh. Abr. t. descent. 16.

h Godolph. p. 1. c. 12.

j l. 7. c. 5.

i Inst. 2. 10.

k 1 Inst. 111. 322.

l Ff. 28. 1. 1.

338 of the rights of things

make some addition to, or else some subtraction from, the former dispositions of the testatorm. This may also be either written or nuncupative.

But, as nuncupative wills and codicils, (which were formerly more in use than

at present, when the art of writing is become more universal) are liable to great impositions, and may occasion many perjuries, the statute of frauds, 〈11〉 29 Car. II. c. 3. enacts; 1. That no written will shall be revoked or altered by a subsequent nuncupative one, except the same be in the lifetime of the testator reduced to writing, and read over to him, and approved; and unless the same be proved to have been so done by the oaths of three witnesses at the least; who, by statute 4 & 5 Ann. c. 16. must be such as are admissible upon trials at common law. 2. That no nuncupative will shall in any wise be good, where the estate bequeathed exceeds 30l., unless proved by three such witnesses, present at the making thereof (the Roman law requiring sevenn)

501 and unless they or some of them were specially required to bear witness thereto by

the testator himself, and unless it was made in his last sickness, in his own habitation or dwelling-house, or where he had been previously resident ten days at the least, except he be surprized with sickness on a journey, or from home, and dies without returning to his dwelling. 3. That no nuncupative will shall be proved by the witnesses after six months from the making, unless it were put in writing within six days. Nor shall it be proved till fourteen days after the death of the testator, nor till process hath first issued to call in the widow, or next of kin, to contest it if they think proper. Thus has the legislature provided against any frauds in setting up nuncupative wills, by so numerous a train of requisites, that the thing itself is fallen into disuse; 〈12〉 and hardly ever heard of, but in the only instance where favour ought to be shewn to it, when the testator is surprized by sudden and violent sickness. The testamentary words must be spoken with an intent to bequeath, not any loose idle discourse in his illness; for he must require the by-standers to bear witness of such his intention: the will must be made at home, or among his family or friends, unless by unavoidable accident; to prevent impositions from strangers: it must be in his last sickness; for, if he recovers, he may alter his dispositions, and has time to make a written will: it must not be proved at too long a distance from the testator’s death, lest the words should escape the memory of the witnesses; nor yet too hastily and without notice, lest the family of the testator should be put to inconvenience, or surprized.

As to written wills, they need not any witness of their publication. I speak not here

of devises of lands, which 〈13〉 are entirely another thing, a conveyance by statute, unknown to the feodal or common law, and not under the same jurisdiction as personal testaments. But a testament of chattels, written in the testator’s own hand, though it has neither his name nor seal to it, nor witnesses present at publication, is good; provided sufficient proof can be had that it is his hand-writingo. And though

502 written in another man’s hand, and never signed by the testator, yet if proved to be



m Godolph. p. 1. c. 1. §. 3.

n Inst. 2. 10. 14.

o Godolph p. 1. c. 21. [Lodge v Jennings] Gilb. Rep. 260.





chapter 32 339


according to his instructions and approved by him, it hath been held a good testament of the personal estatep. Yet it is the safer, and more prudent way, and leaves less in the breast of the ecclesiastical judge, if it be signed or sealed by the testator, and published in the presence of witnesses; which last was always required in the time of Bractonq; or, rather, he in this respect has implicitly copied the rule of the civil law.

No testament is of any effect till after the death of the testator. “Nam omne

testamentum morte consummatum est; et voluntas testatoris est ambulatoria usque ad mortem r.”4 And therefore, if there be many testaments, the last overthrows all the formers: but the republication of a former will revokes one of a later date, and establishes the first againt.

Hence it follows, that testaments may be avoided three ways: 1. If made by a

person labouring under any of the incapacities before-mentioned: 2. By making another testament of a later date: and, 3. By cancelling or revoking it. For, though I make a last will and testament irrevocable in the strongest words, yet I am at liberty to revoke it: because my own act or words cannot alter the disposition of law, so as to make that irrevocable, which is in its own nature revocableu. For this, saith lord Baconw, would be for a man to deprive himself of that, which of all other things is most incident to human condition; and that is, alteration or repentance. It hath also been held, that, without an express revocation, if a man, who hath made his will, afterwards marries and hath a child, this is a presumptive or implied revocation of his former will, which he made in his state of celibacyx. The Romans were also wont to set aside testaments as being inofficiosa, deficient in natural duty, if they disinherited or totally passed by (without assigning a true and sufficient reasony) any of the 503 children of the testatorz. But if the child had any legacy, though ever so small, it was a proof that the testator had not lost his memory or his reason, which otherwise the law presumed; but was then supposed to have acted thus for some substantial cause: and in such case no querela inofficiosi testamenti [complaint of a deficient testament] was allowed. Hence probably has arisen that groundless vulgar error, of the necessity of leaving the heir a shilling or some other express legacy, in order to disinherit him effectually: whereas the law of England makes no 〈14〉 such wild suppositions of forgetfulness or insanity; and therefore, though the heir or next of kin be totally omitted, it admits no querela inofficiosi, to set aside such a testament.



p [Limbery v Mason] Comyns. 452, 3, 4.

q l. 2. c. 26.

r Co. Litt. 112 [and 322].

s Litt. §. 168. Perk. 478.

t Perk. 479.

u [Vynior’s case] 8 Rep. 82.

w Elem. c. 19.

x ms [Lugg v Lugg] Lord Raym. 441. [Cook v Oakley] 1 P. W. 304.

y See Book I. ch. 16.

z Inst. 2. 18. 1.

4 ‘For every testament becomes effective upon death, and the testator’s will is revocable until his death.’ Blackstone’s quotation combines lines from two sections of Coke on Littleton concerning testaments. 340 of the rights of things

We are next to consider, fourthly, what is an executor, and 〈15〉 what is an

administrator; and how they are both to be appointed.

An executor is he to whom another man commits by will the execution of that his

last will and testament. And all persons are capable of being executors, that are capable of making wills, and many others besides; as feme-coverts, and infants: nay, even infants unborn, or in ventre sa mere, may be made executorsa. But no infant can act as such till the age of seventeen years; till which time administration must be granted to some other, durante minore aetate b [during minority]. In like manner as it may be granted durante absentia [during absence], or pendente lite [while a suit is pending]; when the executor is out of the realmc, or when a suit is commenced in the ecclesiastical court touching the validity of the willd. This appointment of an executor is essential to the making of a wille: and it may be performed either by express words, or such as strongly imply the same. But if the testator 〈16〉 makes his will, without naming any executors, or if he names incapable persons, or if the executors named

504 refuse to act; in any of these cases, the ordinary must grant administration cum

testamento annexof [with the will annexed] to some other person; and then the duty of the administrator, as also when he is constituted only durante minore aetate, &c, of another, is very little different from that of an executor. And this was law so early as the reign of Henry II, when Glanvilg informs us, that “testamenti executores esse debent ii, quos testator ad hoc elegerit, 〈17〉 et curam ipse commiserit: si vero testator nullos ad hoc nominaverit, possunt propinqui et consanguinei ipsius defuncti ad id faciendum se ingerere.”5

But if the deceased 〈18〉 died totally intestate, without making either will or executors,

then general letters of administration must be granted by the ordinary to such administrator as the statutes of Edward the third, and Henry the eighth, before-mentioned, direct. In consequence of which we may observe; 1. That the ordinary is compellable to grant administration of the goods and chattels of the wife, to the husband, or his representativesh: and, of the husband’s effects, to the widow, or next of kin; but he may grant it to either, or both, at his discretioni. 2. That, among the kindred, those are to be preferred that are the nearest in degree to the intestate; but, of persons in equal degree, the ordinary may take which he pleasesk. 3. That this nearness or propinquity of degree shall be reckoned according to the computation of the



a West. Symb. p. 1. §. 635.

b Went. Off. Ex. c. 18.

c [Major v Peck] 1 Lutw. 342.

d ms [Walker v Woollaston] 2 P. W. 589, 590.

e Wentw. c. 1. [Graysbrook v Fox] [1] Plowd. 281.

f 1 Roll. Abr. 907. [Hilliard v Smith] Comb. 20.

g l. 7. c. 6.

h ms [Johns v Rowe] Cro. Car. 106. Stat. 29 Car. II. c. 3. [Squib v Wyn] 1 P. W. 381.

i [Fawtry v Fawtry] Salk. 36. [Anon. (1723)] Stra. 532.

k 〈19〉 Stat. 28 Hen. VIII. c. 5. See pag. 496 [II. 334].

5 ‘The executors of a will should be those whom the testator has chosen, and to whom he himself has committed the trust; but if the testator has not named anyone, his relations may take this duty upon themselves.’





chapter 32 341


civiliansl; and not of the canonists, which the law of England adopts in the descent of real estatesm: because in the civil computation the intestate himself is the terminus, a quo [limit from which] the several degrees are numbered; and not the common ancestor, according to the rule of the canonists. And therefore in the first place the children, or (on failure of children) the parents of the deceased, are intitled to the administration: both which are indeed in the first degree; but with usn the children are 505

allowed the preferenceo. Then follow brothersp, grandfathersq, uncles or nephewsr, (and the females of each class respectively) and lastly cousins. 4. The half blood is admitted to the administration as well as the whole: for they are of the kindred of the intestate, and only excluded from inheritances of land upon feodal reasons. Therefore the brother of the half blood shall exclude the uncle of the whole bloods: and the ordinary may grant administration to the sister of the half, or the brother of the whole blood, at his own discretiont. 5. If none of the kindred will take out administration, a creditor may, by custom, do itu. 6. If the executor refuses, or dies intestate, the administration may be granted to the residuary legatee, in exclusion of the next of kinw. 〈20〉 And, lastly, the ordinary may, in defect of all these, commit administration (as he might have donex before the statute Edw. III.) to such discreet person as he approves of: or may grant him letters ad colligendum bona defuncti [for collecting the goods of the deceased], which neither 〈21〉 make him executor nor administrator; his only business being to keep the goods in his safe custodyy, and to do other acts for the benefit of such as are entitled to the property of the deceasedz. If a bastard, who has no kindred, being nullius filius [the child of nobody], or any one else that has no kindred, dies intestate and without wife or child, it hath formerly been helda that the ordinary might seise his goods, and dispose of them in pios usus. But the usual course now is for some one to procure letters patent, or other authority, from the king; and then the 506

ordinary of course grants administration to such appointee of the crownb.



l [Mentney v Petty] Prec. Chanc. 593.

m See pag. 203. 207. 224 [II. 135–7, 139–40, 151].

n Godolph. p. 2. c. 34. §. 1. [Crooke v Watt] 2 Vern. 125.

o In Germany there was long a dispute, whether a man’s children should inherit his effects during the life of their grandfather; which depends (as we shall see hereafter) on the same principles as the granting of administrations. At last it was agreed at the diet of Arensberg, about the middle of the tenth century, that the point should be decided by combat. Accordingly, an equal number of champions being chosen on both sides, those of the children obtained the victory; and so the law was established in their favour, that the issue of a person deceased shall be intitled to his goods and chattels in preference to his parents. (Mod. Un. Hist. xxix. 28 [recte 29].)

p Harris in Nov. 118. c. 2.

q ms [Woodroff v Wickworth] Prec. Chanc. 527. [Blackborough v Davis] 1 P. W. 41.

r [Durant v Prestwood] Atk. 455.

s [Collingwood and Pace’s case] 1 Ventr. 425.

t [Brown v Wood] Aleyn. 36. [Brown v Wood] Styl. 74.

u [Blackborough v Davis] Salk. 38.

w [Pierce v Perks] 1 Sid. 281. [Thomas v Butler] 1 Ventr. 219.

x [Graysbrook v Fox] [1] Plowd. 278.

y Went. ch. 14.

z 2 Inst. 398.

a [Manning v Napp] Salk. 37.

b ms [Jones v Goodchild] 3 P. W. 33.

342 of the rights of things

The interest, vested 〈22〉 in an executor by the will of the deceased, may be

continued and kept alive by the will of the same executor: so that the executor of A’s executor is to all intents and purposes the executor and representative of A himselfc: but the executor of A’s administrator, or the administrator of A’s executor, is not the representative of Ad. For the power of an executor is founded upon the special confidence and actual appointment of the deceased; and such executor is therefore allowed to transmit that power to another, in whom he has equal confidence: but the administrator of A is merely the officer of the ordinary, prescribed to him by act of parliament, in whom the deceased has reposed no trust at all; and therefore, on the death of that officer, it results back to the ordinary to appoint another. And, with regard to the administrator of A’s executor, he has clearly no privity or relation to A; being only commissioned to administer the effects of the intestate executor, and not of the original testator. Wherefore, in both these cases, and whenever the course of representation from executor to executor is interrupted by any one administration, it is necessary for the ordinary to commit administration afresh, of the goods of the deceased not administered by the former executor or administrator. And this administrator, de bonis non [of the goods not administered], is the only legal representative of the deceased in matters of personal propertye. But he may, as well as an original administrator, have only a limited or special administration committed to his care, viz. of certain specific effects, such as a term of years and the like; the rest being committed to othersf.

507 Having thus shewn what is, and who may be, an executor or administrator, I

proceed now, fifthly and lastly, to enquire into some few of the principal points of their office and duty. These in general are very much the same in both executors and administrators; excepting, first, that the executor is bound to perform a will, which an administrator is not, unless where a testament is annexed to his administration, and then he differs still less from an executor: and, secondly, that an executor may do many acts before he proves the willg, but an administrator may do nothing till letters of administration are issued; for the former derives his power from the will and not from the probateh, the latter owes his entirely to the appointment of the ordinary. If a stranger takes upon him to act as executor, without any just authority (as by intermeddling with the goods of the deceasedi, and many other transactionsk) he is called in law an executor of his own wrong, de son tort, and is liable to all the trouble of an executorship, without any of the profits or advantages: but merely doing acts of necessity or humanity, as locking up the goods, or burying the corpse of the deceased, will not amount to such an intermeddling, as will charge a man as executor of his

c Stat. 25 Edw. III. st. 5. c. 5. [Powley v Siers] 1 Leon. 275.

d Bro. Abr. tit. administrator. 7.

e [Ley v Anderton] Styl. 225.

f 1 Roll. Abr. 908. Godolph. p. 2. c. 30. [Fawtry v Fawtry] Salk. 36.

g Wentw. ch. 3.

h [Harding v Harding] Comyns. 151.

i [Read’s case] 5 Rep. 33, 34.

k Wentw. ch. 14. Stat. 43 Eliz. c. 8.





chapter 32 343


own wrongl. Such a one cannot bring an action himself in right of the deceasedm, but actions may be brought against him. And, in all actions by creditors against such an officious intruder, he shall be named an executor, generallyn; for the most obvious conclusion, which strangers can form from his conduct, is that he hath a will of the deceased, wherein he is named executor, but hath not yet taken probate thereofo. He is chargeable with the debts of the deceased, so far as assets come to his handsp: and, as against creditors in general, shall be allowed all payments made to any other creditor in the same or a superior degreeq, himself only exceptedr. And though, as 508 against the rightful executor or administrator, he cannot plead such payment, yet it shall be allowed him in mitigation of damagess; unless perhaps upon a deficiency of assets, whereby the rightful executor may be prevented from satisfying his own debtt. But let us now see what are the power and duty of a rightful executor or administrator.

1. He must bury the deceased in a manner suitable to the estate which he leaves

behind him. Necessary funeral expences are allowed, previous to all other debts and charges; but if the executor or administrator be extravagant, it is a species of devastation or waste of the substance of the deceased, and shall only be prejudicial to himself, and not to the creditors or legatees of the deceasedu.

2. The executor, or the administrator durante minore aetate, or durante absentia,

or cum testamento annexo, must prove the will of the deceased: which is done either in common form, which is only upon his own oath before the ordinary, or his surrogate; or per testes [by witnesses], in more solemn form of law, in case the validity of the will be disputedw. When the will is so proved, the original must be deposited in the registry of the ordinary; and a copy thereof in parchment is made out under the seal of the ordinary, and delivered to the executor or administrator, together with a certificate of having been proved before him: all which together is usually stiled the probate. In defect of any will, the person entitled to be administrator must also at this period take out letters of administration under the seal of the ordinary; whereby an executorial power to collect and administer, that is, dispose of the goods of the deceased, is vested in him: and he must, by statute 22 & 23 Car. II. c. 10. enter into a bond with sureties, faithfully to execute his trust. If all the goods of the deceased lie within the same jurisdiction, a probate before the 509

ordinary, or an administration granted by him, are the only proper ones: but if the deceased had bona notabilia [noteworthy goods], or chattels to the value of a hundred shillings, in two distinct dioceses or jurisdictions, then the will must be proved, or administration taken out, before the metropolitan of the province, by way of special

l [Stokes v Porter] Dyer. 166.

m Bro. Abr. t. administrator. 8.

n [Hargrave’s case] 5 Rep. 31.

o [Parker v Kett] 12 Mod. 471.

p [Stokes v Porter] Dyer. 166.

q [Ayre v Ayre] 1 Chan. Cas. 33.

r [Coulter’s case] 5 Rep. 30. [Colter v Ireland] Moor. 527.

s [Anon. (1700)] 12 Mod. 441, [Parker v Kett] 471.

t Wentw. ch. 14.

u [Whitehall v Squire] Salk. 196 [recte 296]. Godolph. p. 2. c. 26. §. 2.

w Godolph. p. 1. c. 20. §. 4.

344 of the rights of things

prerogativex; whence the court where the validity of such wills is tried, and 〈23〉 the office where they are registered, are called the prerogative court, and the prerogative office, of the provinces of Canterbury and York. Lyndewode, who flourished in the beginning of the fifteenth century, and was official to arch-bishop Chichele, interprets these hundred shillings to signify solidos legales [lawful shillings]; of which he tells us seventy two amounted to a pound of gold, which in his time was valued at fifty nobles or 16l. 13s. 4d. He therefore computesy that the hundred shillings, which constituted bona notabilia, were then equal in current money to 23 l. 3s. 0¼d. This will account for what is said in our antient books, that bona notabilia in the diocese of Londonz, and indeed every where elsea, were of the value of ten pounds by composition: for, if we pursue the calculations of Lyndewode to their full extent, and consider that a pound of gold is now almost equal in value to an hundred and fifty nobles, we shall extend the present amount of bona notabilia to nearly 70l. But the makers of the canons of 1603 understood this antient rule to be meant of the shillings current in the reign of James I, and have therefore directedb that five pounds shall for the future be the standard of bona notabilia, so as to make the probate fall within the archiepiscopal prerogative. Which prerogative (properly understood) is grounded upon this reasonable foundation: that, as the bishops were themselves originally the administrators to all intestates in their own diocese, and as the present administrators are in effect no other than their officers or substitutes, it was impossible for the bishops, or those who acted under them, to collect any goods of the deceased, other than such as

510 lay within their own dioceses, beyond which their episcopal authority extends not. But it

would be extremely troublesome, if as many administrations were to be granted, as there are dioceses within which the deceased had bona notabilia; besides the uncertainty which creditors and legatees would be at, in case different administrators were appointed, to ascertain the fund out of which their demands are to be paid. A prerogative is therefore very prudently vested in the metropolitan of each province, to make in such cases one administration serve for all. This accounts very satisfactorily for the reason of taking out administration to intestates, that have large and diffusive property, in the prerogative court: and the probate of wills naturally follows, as was before observed, the power of granting administrations; in order to satisfy the ordinary that the deceased has, in a legal manner, by appointing his own executor, excluded him and his officers from the privilege of administering the effects.

3. The executor or administrator is to make an inventoryc of all the goods and

chattels, whether in possession or action, of the deceased; which he is to deliver in to the ordinary upon oath, if thereunto lawfully required.

4. He is to collect all the goods and chattels so inventoried; and to that end he has

very large powers and interests conferred on him by law; being the representative of



x 4 Inst. 335.

y Provinc. l. 3. t. 13. c. item. v. centum. &c. statutum. v. laicis.

z 4 Inst. 335. Godolph. p. 2. c. 22.

a [Graysbrook v Fox] [1] Plowd. 281.

b can. 92.

c Stat. 21 Hen. VIII. c. 5.





chapter 32 345


the deceasedd, and having the same property in his goods as the principal had when living, and the same remedies to recover them. And, if there be two or more executors, a sale or release by one of them shall be good against all the reste; but in case of administrators it is otherwisef. Whatever is so recovered, that is of a saleable nature and may be converted into ready money, is called assets in the hands of the executor or administratorg; that is, sufficient or enough (from the French assez) to make him chargeable to a creditor or legatee, so far as such goods and chattels extend. Whatever 511

assets so come to his hands he may convert into ready money, to answer the demands that may be made upon him: 〈24〉 which are the next thing to be considered; for,

5. The executor or administrator must pay the debts of the deceased. In payment

of debts he must observe the rules of priority; otherwise, on deficiency of assets, if he pays those of a lower degree first, he must answer those of a higher out of his own estate. And, first, he may pay all funeral charges, and the expense of proving the will, and the like. Secondly, debts due to the king on record or specialtyh. Thirdly, such debts as are by particular statutes to be preferred to all others; as the forfeitures for not burying in woolleni, money due 〈25〉 on poors ratesk, for letters to the post-officel, and some others. Fourthly, debts of record; as judgments (docketted according to the statute 4 & 5 W. & M. c. 20.) statutes, and recognizancesm. Fifthly, debts due on special contracts; as for rent, (for which the lessor has often a better remedy in his own hands, by distraining) or upon bonds, covenants, and the like, under sealn. Lastly, debts on simple contracts, viz. upon notes unsealed, and verbal promises. Among these simple contracts, servants wages are by someo with reason preferred to any other: and so stood the antient law, according to Bractonp and Fletaq, who reckon, among the first debts to be paid, servitia servientium et stipendia famulorum [the services of the servants and the wages of the labourers]. Among debts of equal degree, the executor or administrator is allowed to pay himself first; by retaining in his hands so much as his debt amounts tor. But an executor of his own wrong is not allowed to retain: for that would tend to encourage creditors to strive who should first take possession of the goods of the deceased; and would besides be taking advantage 〈27〉 of their own wrong, which is contrary to the rule of laws. If a creditor constitutes his debtor his executor, 512

this is a release or discharge of the debt, whether the executor acts or not; provided there

d Co. Litt. 209.

e [Anon. (1536)] Dyer. 23.

f [Hudson v Hudson] 1 Atk. 460.

g See pag. 244 [II. 166].

h [Skrogs v Gresham] 1 And. 129.

i Stat. 30 Car. II. c. 3.

k Stat. 17 Geo. II. c. 38.

l Stat. 9 Ann. c. 10.

m [Sadler’s case] 4 Rep. 60. [Goldsmith v Sydnor] Cro. Car. 363.

n Wentw. ch. 12.

o 1 Roll. Abr. 927.

p l. 2. c. 26.

q l. 2. c. 57. §. 10.

r 〈26〉 [Cock v Goodfellow] 10 Mod. 496.

s [Coulter’s case] 5 Rep. 30.

t [Woodward v Lord Darcy] [1] Plowd. 184. [Wankford v Wankford] Salk. 299.

346 of the rights of things

be assets sufficient to pay the testator’s debts: for, though this discharge of the debt shall take place of all legacies, yet it were unfair to defraud the testator’s creditors of their just debts by a release which is absolutely voluntaryu. Also, if no suit is commenced against him, the executor may pay any one creditor in equal degree his whole debt, though he has nothing left for the rest: for, without a suit commenced, the executor has no legal notice of the debtw.

6. When the debts are all discharged, the legacies claim the next regard; which are

to be paid by the executor so far as his assets will extend: but he may not give himself the preference herein, as in the case of debtsx.

A legacy is a bequest, or gift, of goods and chattels by testament; and the person

to whom 〈28〉 it is given is stiled the legatee: which every person is capable of being, unless particularly disabled by the common law or statutes, as traitors, papists, and some others. This bequest transfers an inchoate property to the legatee; but the legacy is not perfect without the assent of the executor: for if I have a general or pecuniary legacy of 100l., or a specific one of a piece of plate, I cannot in either case take it without the consent of the executory. For in him all the chattels are vested; and it is his business first of all to see whether there is a sufficient fund left to pay the debts of the testator: the rule of equity being, that a man must be just, before he is permitted to be generous; or, as Bracton expresses the sense of our antient lawz, “de bonis defuncti primo deducenda sunt ea quae sunt necessitatis, et postea quae sunt utilitatis, et ultimo quae sunt voluntatis.”6 And in case of a deficiency of assets, all the general

513 legacies must abate proportionably, in order to pay the debts; but a specific legacy (of

a piece of plate, a horse, or the like) is not to abate at all, or allow any thing by way of abatement, unless there be not sufficient without ita. Upon the same principle, if the legatees have been paid their legacies, they are afterwards bound to refund a ratable part, in case debts come in, more than sufficient to exhaust the residuum after the legacies paidb. And this law is as old as Bracton and Fleta, who tell usc, “si plura sint debita, vel plus legatum fuerit, ad quae catalla defuncti non sufficiant, fiat ubique defalcatio, excepto regis privilegio.”7

If the legatee dies before the testator, the legacy is a lost or lapsed legacy, and shall

sink into the residuum. And if a contingent legacy be left to any one; as, when he attains, or if he attains, the age of twenty one; and he dies before that time; it is a



u [Wankford v Wankford] Salk. 303. [Holliday v Boas] 1 Roll. Abr. 921.

w [Anon. (1537)] Dyer. 32. [Corbet’s case] 2 Leon. 60.

x ms [Fretwell v Stacy] 2 Vern 434. [Attorney General v Robins] 2 P. W. 25.

y Co. Litt. 111. [Eeles v Lambert] Aleyn. 39.

z l. 2. c. 26 [§ 2].

a [Hide v Cooth] 2 Vern. 111.

b [Newman v Barton] Ibid. 205.

c Bract. l. 2. c. 26 [§ 2]. Flet. l. 2. c. 57. §. 11.

6 ‘From the goods of the deceased, the first to be deducted are those of necessity, then those of utility, and last, those given by will.’

7 ‘If there are more debts or more legacies than the deceased’s chattels can satisfy, all the debts and legacies should refund an equal share, except debts to the king.’





chapter 32 347


lapsed legacyd. But a legacy to one, to be paid when he attains the age of twenty one years, is a vested legacy; an interest which commences in praesenti, although it be solvendum in futuro [to be paid in the future]: and, if the legatee dies before that age, his representatives shall receive it out of the testator’s personal estate, at the same time that it would have become payable, in case the legatee had lived. This distinction is borrowed from the civil lawe; and adoption in our courts is not so much owing to intrinsic equity, as to having been before adopted by the ecclesiastical courts. For, since the chancery has a concurrent jurisdiction with them, in regard to the recovery of legacies, it was reasonable that there should be a conformity in their determinations; and that the subject should have the same measure of justice in whatever court he suedf. But if such legacies be charged upon a real estate, in both cases 〈29〉 they shall lapse for the benefit of the heirg; for, with regard to devises affecting lands, the ecclesiastical court hath no concurrent jurisdiction. And, in case of a vested legacy, due immediately, and charged on land or money in the funds, which yield an 514 immediate profit, interest shall be payable thereon from the testator’s death; but if charged only on the personal estate, which cannot be immediately got in, it shall carry interest only from the end of the year after the death of the testatorh.

Besides these formal legacies, contained in a man’s will and testament, there is

also permitted another death-bed disposition of property; which is called a donation causa mortis. And that is, when a person in his last sickness, apprehending his dissolution near, delivers or causes to be delivered to another the possession of any personal goods, (under which have been included bonds, and bills drawn by the deceased upon his banker) to keep in case of his decease. This gift, if the donor dies, needs not the assent of his executor: yet it shall not prevail against creditors; and is accompanied with this implied trust, that, if the donor lives, the property thereof shall revert to himself, being only given in contemplation of death, or mortis causai. This method of donation might have subsisted in a state of nature, being always accompanied with delivery of actual possessionk; and so far differs from a testamentary disposition: but seems to have been handed to us from the civil lawyersl, who themselves borrowed it from the Greeksm.

7. When all the debts and particular legacies are discharged, the surplus or residuum

must be paid to the residuary legatee, if any be appointed by the will; and, if there be none, it was long a settled notion that it devolved to the executor’s own use, by virtue



d [Dame Latimer’s case] Dyer. 59. 1 Equ. Cas. abr. 295.

e Ff. 35. 1. 1 & 2.

f 1 Equ. Cas. abr. 295.

g ms [Duke of Chandos v Talbot] 2 P. W. 601.

h ms [Maxwell v Wettenhall] 2 P. W. 26, 27.

i ms [Hedges v Hedges] Prec. Chan. 269. [Drury v Smith] 1 P. W. 406. [Lawson v Lawson] 441. [Miller v Miller] 3 P. Wms. 357.

k Law of forfeit. 16.

l Inst. 2. 7. 1. Ff. l. 39. t. 6.

m There is a very complete donatio mortis causa, in the Odyssey b. 17. v. 78, made by Telemachus to his friend Piraeus; and another by Hercules, in the Alcestes of Euripides, v. 1020.

348 of the rights of things

of his executorshipn. But, whatever ground there might have been formerly for this opinion, it seems now to be understoodo with this restriction; that, although where

515 the executor has no legacy at all the residuum shall in general be his own, yet wherever

there is sufficient on the face of a will, (by means of a competent legacy or otherwise) to imply that the testator intended his executor should not have the residue, the undevised surplus of the estate shall go to the next of kin, the executor then standing upon exactly the same footing as an administrator: concerning whom indeed there formerly was much debatep, whether or no he could be compelled to make any distribution of the intestate’s estate. For, though (after the administration was taken in effect from the ordinary, and transferred to the relations of the deceased) the spiritual court endeavoured to compel a distribution, and took bonds of the administrator for that purpose, they were prohibited by the temporal courts, and the bonds declared void at lawq. And the right of the husband not only to administer, but also to enjoy exclusively, the effects of his deceased wife, depends still on this doctrine of the common law: 〈31〉 the statute 29 Car. II. declaring only that the statute of distributions does not extend to this case. But now these controversies are quite at an end; for by the 〈32〉 statute 22 & 23 Car. II. c. 10. it is enacted, that the surplusage of intestates’ estates, except of femes covertr, shall (after the expiration of one full year from the death of the intestate) be distributed in the following manner. One third shall go to the widow of the intestate, and the residue in equal proportions to his children, or, if dead, to their representatives; that is, their lineal descendants: if there are no children or legal representatives subsisting, then a moiety shall go to the widow, and a moiety to the next of kindred in equal degree and their representatives: if no widow, the whole shall go to the children: if neither widow nor children, the whole shall be distributed among the next of kin in equal degree, and their representatives: but no representatives are admitted, among collaterals, farther than the children of the intestate’s brothers and sisterss. The next of kindred, here referred to, are to be investigated by the same rules of consanguinity, as those who are intitled to letters of

516 administration; of whom we have sufficiently spokent. And therefore by this statute

the mother, as well as the father, succeeded to all the personal effects of their children, who died intestate and without wife or issue: in exclusion of the other sons and daughters, the brothers and sisters of the deceased. And so the law still remains with respect to the father; but by statute 1 Jac. II. c. 17. if the father be dead, and any of the children die intestate without wife or issue, in the lifetime of the mother, she and each of the remaining children, or their representatives, shall divide his effects in equal portions.

n Perkins. 525.

o ms [Colesworth v Brangwin] Prec. Chanc. 323. [Petit v Smith] 1 P. W. 7. [Farrington v Knightly] 544. [Attorney General v Hooker] 2 P. Wms. 338. [Davers v Dewes] 3 P. Wms. 43. [Rogers v Rogers] 194. 〈30〉 [Lock v Wright] Stra. 559 [recte 569].

p Godolph. p. 2. c. 32.

q ms [Hughes v Hughes] 1 Lev. 233. [Hughes v Hughes] Cart. 125. [Edwards v Freeman] 2 P. W. 447.

r Stat. 29 Car. II. c. 3. §. 25.

s [Carter v Crawley] Raym. 496. [R. v Raines] Lord Raym. 571.

t pag. 504 [II. 340].





chapter 32 349


It is obvious to observe, how near a resemblance this statute of distributions bears

to our antient English law, de rationabili parte bonorum, spoken of at the beginning of this chapteru; and which sir Edward Cokew himself, though he doubted the generality of restraint on the power of devising by will, held to be universally 〈34〉 binding upon the administrator or executor, in the case of either a total or partial intestacy. It also bears some resemblance to the Roman law of 〈35〉 successions ab intestatox: which, and because the act was also penned by an eminent civiliany, has occasioned a notion that the parliament of England copied it from the Roman praetor: though indeed it is little more than a restoration, with some refinements and regulations, of our old constitutional law; which prevailed as an established right and custom from the time of king Canute downwards, many centuries before Justinian’s laws were known or heard of in the western parts of Europe. So likewise there is another part of the statute of distributions, where directions are given, that no child of the intestate, (except his heir at law) on whom he settled in his lifetime any estate in lands, or pecuniary portion, equal to the distributive shares of the other children, shall have any part of the surplusage with their brothers and sisters; but if the estates so given them, by way of advancement, are not quite equivalent to the other shares, 517

the children so advanced shall now have so much as will make them equal. This just and equitable provision hath been also said to be derived from the collatio bonorum [equalizing the goods] of the imperial lawz: which it certainly resembles in some points, though it differs widely in others. But it may not be amiss to observe, that, with regard to goods and chattels, this is part of the antient custom of London, of the province of York, and of our sister kingdom of Scotland: and, with regard to lands descending in coparcenary, that it hath always been, and still is, the common law of England, under the name of hotchpota.

Before I quit this subject, I must however acknowlege, that the doctrine and

limits of representation, laid down in the statute of 〈36〉 distributions, seem to have been principally borrowed from the civil law: whereby it will sometimes happen, that personal estates are divided per capita, and sometimes per stirpes; whereas the common law knows no other rule of succession but that per stirpes onlyb. They are divided per capita, to every man an equal share, when all the claimants claim in their own rights, as in equal degree of kindred, and not jure repraesentationis [by right of representation], in the right of another person. As if the next of kin be the intestate’s three brothers, A, B, and C; here 〈37〉 his estate is divided into three equal portions,

u pag. 492 [II. 332].

w 〈33〉 2 Inst. 33.

x The general rule of such successions was this: 1. The children or lineal descendants in equal portions. 2. On failure of these, the parents or lineal ascendants, and with them the brethren or sisters of the whole blood; or, if the parents were dead, all the brethren and sisters, together with the representatives of a brother or sister deceased. 3. The next collateral relations in equal degree. 4. The husband or wife of the deceased. (Ff. 38. 15. 1. Nov. 118. c. 1, 2, 3. 127. c. 1.)

y Sir Walter Walker. [R. v Raines] Lord Raym. 574.

z Ff. 37. 6. 1.

a See ch. 12. pag. 191 [II. 127–8].

b See ch. 14. pag. 217 [II. 146].

350 of the rights of things

and distributed per capita, one to each: but if one of these brothers, A, had been dead leaving three children, and another, B, leaving two; then the distribution must have been per stirpes; viz. one third to A’s three children, another third to B’s two children, and the remaining third to C the surviving brother: yet if C had also been dead, without issue, then A’s and B’s five children, being all in equal degree to the intestate, would take in their own rights per capita, viz. each of them one fifth partc.

The statute of distributions expressly excepts and reserves the customs of the city

518 of London, of the province of York, and of all other places having peculiar customs

of distributing intestates’ effects. So that, though in those places the restraint of devising is removed by the statutes formerly mentionedd, their antient customs remain in full force, with respect to the estates of intestates. I shall therefore conclude this chapter, and with it the present book, with a few remarks on those customs.

In the first place we may observe, that in the city of Londone, and province of

Yorkf, as well as in the kingdom of Scotlandg, 〈38〉 and therefore probably also in Wales, (concerning which there is little to be gathered, but from the statute 7 & 8 W. III. c. 38.) the effects of the intestate, after payment of his debts, are in general divided according to the antient universal doctrine of the pars rationabilis [reasonable part]. If the deceased leaves a widow and children, his substance 〈39〉 (deducting the widow’s apparel and furniture of her bed-chamber, which in London is called the widow’s chamber) is divided into three parts; one of which belongs to the widow, another to the children, and the third to the administrator: if only a widow, or only children, they shall respectively, in either case, take one moiety, and the administrator the otherh: if neither widow nor child, the administrator shall have the wholei. And this portion, or dead man’s part, the administrator was wont to apply to his own usek, till the statute 1 Jac. II. c. 17. declared that the same should be subject to the 〈40〉 statutes of distribution. So that if a man dies 〈41〉 worth 1800l. leaving a widow and two children, the estate shall be divided into eighteen parts; whereof the widow shall have eight, six by the custom and two by the statute; and each of the children five, three by the custom and two by the statute: if he leaves a widow and one 〈42〉 child, they shall each have a moiety of the whole, or nine such eighteenth parts, six by the custom and three by the statute: if he leaves a widow and no child, the widow shall

519 have three fourths of the whole, two by the custom and one by the statute; and the

remaining fourth shall go by the statute to the next of kin. It is also to be observed, that if the wife be provided for by a jointure before marriage, in bar of her customary part, it puts her in a state of non-entity, with regard to the custom onlyl; but she shall

c [Walsh v Walsh] Prec. Chanc. 54.

d pag. 493 [II. 333].

e [Redshaw v Brasier] Lord Raym. 1329.

f 2 Burn. eccl. law. 746.

g Ibid. 782.

h ms [Northey v Strange] 1 P. W. 341. [Custom of London Concerning Orphans and Freemen’s Estates] [2] Salk. 246.

i [Percivall v Crispe] 2 Show. 175.

k [Anon. (1682)] 2 Freem. 85. [Matthews v Newby] 1 Vern. 133.

l ms [Hancock v Hancock] 2 Vern. 665. [Lewin v Lewin] 3 P. W. 16.





chapter 32 351


be intitled to her share of the dead man’s part under the statute of distributions, unless barred by special agreementm. And if any of the children are advanced by the father in his lifetime with any sum of money (not amounting to their full propor-tionable part) they shall bring that portion into hotchpot with the rest of the brothers and sisters, but not with the widow, before they are intitled to any benefit under the customn: but, if they are fully advanced, the custom intitles them to no farther dividendo.

Thus far in the main the customs of London and of York agree: but, besides certain

other less material variations, there are two principal points in which they considerably differ. One is, that in London the share of the children (or orphanage part) is not fully vested in them till the age of twenty one, before which they cannot dispose of it by testamentp: and, if they die under that age, whether sole or married, their share shall survive to the other children; but, after the age of twenty one, it is free from any orphanage custom, and, in case of intestacy, shall fall under the statute of distributionsq. The other, that in the province of York, the heir at common law, who inherits any 〈43〉 lands either in fee or in tail, is excluded from any filial portion or reasonable partr. But, notwithstanding these provincial variations, the customs appear to be substantially one and the same. And, as a similar policy formerly prevailed in every part of the island, we may fairly conclude the whole to be of British original; or, if derived from the Roman law of successions, to have been drawn from that fountain much earlier than the time of Justinian, from whose constitutions in many points (particularly in 520

the advantages given to the widow) it very considerably differs: though it is not improbable that the resemblances which yet remain may be owing to the Roman usages; introduced in the time of Claudius Caesar, (who established a colony in Britain to instruct the natives in legal knowleges) inculcated and diffused by Papinian (who presided at York as praefectus praetorio [judge of the court] under the emperors Severus and Caracallat) and continued by his successors till the final departure of the Romans in the beginning of the fifth century after Christ.



The End of the Second Book.



m [Benson v Bellasis] 1 Vern. 15. [Benson v Bellasis] 2 Chan. Rep. 252.

n ms [Bright v Smith] 2 Freem. 279. 1 Equ. Cas. abr. 155. [Cleaver v Spurling] 2 P. W. 526.

o ms [Cleaver v Spurling] 2 P. W. 527.

p [Wilcocks v Wilcocks] 2 Vern. 558.

q [Anon. (1720)] Prec. Chan. 537.

r 2 Burn. 754.

s Tacit. Annal. l. 12. c. 32.

t Selden in Fletam. cap. 4. §. 3.



OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 12/07/16, SPi



Appendix . i



No. I.

Vetus Carta Feoffamenti.

Sciant presentes et futuri, quod ego Willielmus, filius Willielmi de Segenho, Premises dedi, concessi, et hac presenti carta mea confirmavi, Johanni quondam filio Johannis de Saleford, pro quadam summa pecunie quam michi dedit pre manibus, unam acram terre mee arabilis, jacentem in campo de Saleford, juxta terram quondam Richardi de la Mare: Habendam et Tenendam totam Habendum, predictam acram terre, cum omnibus ejus pertinentiis, prefato Johanni, et and Tenendum. heredibus suis, et suis assignatis, de capitalibus dominis feodi: Reddendo et faciendo annuatim eisdem dominis capitalibus servitia inde debita et Reddendum. consueta: Et ego predictus Willielmus, et heredes mei, et mei assignati, Warranty. totam predictam acram terre, cum omnibus suis pertinentiis, predicto Johanni de Saleford, et heredibus suis, et suis assignatis, contra omnes gentes warrantizabimus in perpetuum.1 In cvjus rei testimo nium huic Conclusion. presenti carte sigillum meum apposui: Hijs testibus, Nigello de Saleford, Johanne de Seybroke, Radulpho clerico de Saleford, Johanne molendario de eadem villa, et aliis. Data apud Saleford die Veneris proximo ante festum sancte Margarete virginis, anno regni regis Edwardi filii regis Edwardi sexto.2

(L. S.)3

Memorandum, quod die et anno infrascriptis plena et pacifica Livery of seisin

seisina acre infraspecificate, cum pertinentiis, data et delib­ endorsed.

erata fuit per infranominatum Willielmum de Segenho infranominato Johanni de Saleford, in propriis personis suis,



1 All five of the documents in the Appendix first appeared in Blackstone’s Analysis of the Law (1756),

139–57.

2 Ancient charter of feoffment. Let all people present and future know that I, William, son of

William of Segenho [i.e. the manor of Segenho in Woburn, Beds], have given, granted, and by this present deed of mine confirmed to John, sometime son of John of Saleford [i.e. Salford (Beds)], for a certain sum of money which he has given into my hands, one acre of my arable land, lying in the field of Saleford, next to the land formerly of Richard de la Mare; to have and to hold all the said acre of land, with all its appurtenances, unto the said John, and his heirs and assigns, of the chief lords of the fee: rendering and doing annually to the same chief lords the service thence owed and accustomed: And I the said William and my heirs and assigns, will warrant against all people in perpetuity all the said acre of land, with all its appurtenances, to the aforesaid John of Salford, and his heirs and assigns. In testimony whereof I have placed my seal to this present charter. Witnessed by Nigel of Saleford, John of Seybroke, Ralph clerk of Saleford, John miller of the same village, and others. Given at Saleford the Friday next before the feast of the blessed virgin Margaret, in the sixth year of the reign of king Edward son of king Edward [14 July 1312].

3 locus sigilli (‘the place of the seal’).

OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 12/07/16, SPi



354 of the rights of things

secundum tenorem et effectum carte infrascripte, in presentia Nigelli de Saleford, Johannis de Seybroke, et aliorum.4



ii No. II.

A modern Conveyance by Lease and Release.

§. 1. Lease, or Bargain and Sale, for a year.

Premises. THIS Indenture, made the third day of September, in the twenty first

year of the reign of our sovereign lord George the second by the grace of God king of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, defender of the faith, and so forth, and in the year of our Lord one thousand, seven hundred, and forty

Parties. seven, between Abraham Barker of Dale Hall in the county of Norfolk,

esquire, and Cecilia his wife, of the one part, and David Edwards of Lincoln’s Inn in the county of Middlesex, esquire, and Francis Golding of the city of Norwich, clerk, of the other part, witnesseth; that the said Abraham Barker

Consideration. and Cecilia his wife, in consideration of five shillings of lawful money of

Great Britain to them in hand paid by the said David Edwards and Francis Golding at or before the ensealing and delivery of these presents, (the receipt whereof is hereby acknowleged,) and for other good causes and considerations them the said Abraham Barker and Cecilia his wife hereunto specially

Bargain and sale. moving, Have bargained and sold, and by these presents do, and each of

Parcels. them doth, bargain and sell, unto the said David Edwards and Francis

Golding, their executors, administrators, and assigns, All that the capital messuage, called Dale Hall in the parish of Dale in the said county of Norfolk, wherein the said Abraham Barker and Cecilia his wife now dwell, and all those their lands in the said parish of Dale called or known by the name of Wilson’s farm, containing by estimation five hundred and forty acres, be the same more or less, together with all and singular houses, dovehouses, barns, buildings, stables, yards, gardens, orchards, lands, tenements, meadows, pastures, feedings, commons, woods, underwoods, ways, waters, water­ courses, fishings, privileges, profits, easements, commodities, advantages, emoluments, hereditaments, and appurtenances whatsoever to the said capital messuage and farm belonging or appertaining, or with the same used or enjoyed, or accepted, reputed, taken, or known, as part, parcel, or member thereof, or as belonging to the same or any part thereof; and the reversion and reversions, remainder and remainders, yearly and other rents, issues,

Habendum. and profits thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof: To have and to hold

the said capital messuage, lands, tenements, hereditaments, and all and

4 Be it known that the day and year before written full and peaceful seisin of the acre there specified,

with appurtenances, was given and delivered by the said William of Segenho to the said John of Salford, in their own persons, following the tenor and effect of the afore written deed, in the presence of Nigel of Saleford, John of Seybroke, and others.

OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 12/07/16, SPi



appendix 355

singular other the premises herein before mentioned or intended to be iii

bargained and sold, and every part and parcel thereof, with their and every of their rights, members, and appurtenances, unto the said David Edwards and Francis Golding, their executors, administrators, and assigns, from the day next before the day of the date of these presents, for and during, and unto the full end and term of, one whole year from thence next ensuing and fully to be complete and ended: Yielding and paying therefore unto the Reddendum. said Abraham Barker, and Cecilia his wife, and their heirs or assigns, the yearly rent of one peppercorn at the expiration of the said term, if the same shall be lawfully demanded: To the intent and purpose, that by virtue of Intent. these presents, and of the statute for transferring uses into possession, the said David Edwards and Francis Golding may be in the actual possession of the premises, and be thereby enabled to take and accept a grant and release of the freehold, reversion, and inheritance of the same premises, and of every part and parcel thereof, to them, their heirs, and assigns; to the uses, and upon the trusts, thereof to be declared by another indenture, intended to bear date the day next after the day of the date hereof. In witness whereof Conclusion. the parties to these presents their hands and seals have subscribed and set, the day and year first abovewritten.

Sealed, and delivered, being Abraham Barker. (L. S.) first duly stamped, in the Cecilia Barker. (L. S.) presence of David Edwards. (L. S.) George Carter. Francis Golding. (L. S.) William Browne.

§. 2. Deed of Release.

This Indenture of five parts, made the fourth day of September, in the Premises. twenty­first year of the reign of our sovereign lord George the second by the grace of God king of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, defender of the faith, and so forth, and in the year of our Lord one thousand, seven hundred, and forty­seven, between Abraham Barker, of Dale Hall in the county of Norfolk, Parties. esquire, and Cecilia his wife, of the first part; David Edwards of Lincoln’s Inn in the county of Middlesex, esquire, executor of the last will and testament of Lewis Edwards, of Cowbridge in the county of Glamorgan, gentleman, his late father, deceased, and Francis Golding of the city of Norwich, clerk, of the second part; Charles Browne of Enstone in the county of Oxford, gentleman, and Richard More of the city of Bristol, merchant, of the third part; John Barker, esquire, son and heir apparent of the said Abraham Barker, of the fourth part; and Katherine Edwards, spinster, one of the sisters of the said David Edwards, of the fifth part. Whereas a marriage is intended, Recital. iv

by the permission of God, to be shortly had and solemnized between the said John Barker and Katherine Edwards: Now this Indenture Witnesseth, Consideration.

356 of the rights of things

that in consideration of the said intended marriage, and of the sum of five thousand pounds, of good and lawful money of Great Britain, to the said Abraham Barker, (by and with the consent and agreement of the said John Barker, and Katherine Edwards, testified by their being parties to, and their sealing and delivery of, these presents,) by the said David Edwards in hand paid at or before the ensealing and delivery hereof, being the marriage portion of the said Katherine Edwards, bequeathed to her by the last will and testament of the said Lewis Edwards, her late father, deceased; the receipt and payment whereof the said Abraham Barker doth hereby acknowlege, and thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, they the said Abraham Barker, John Barker, and Katherine Edwards, do, and each of them doth, release, acquit, and discharge the said David Edwards, his executors, and administrators, for ever by these presents: and for providing a competent jointure and provision of maintenance for the said Katherine Edwards, in case she shall, after the said intended marriage had, survive and overlive the said John Barker her intended husband: and for settling and assuring the capital messuage, lands, tenements, and hereditaments, hereinafter mentioned, unto such uses, and upon such trusts, as are hereinafter expressed and declared: and for and in consideration of the sum of five shillings of lawful money of Great Britain to the said Abraham Barker and Cecilia his wife in hand paid by the said David Edwards and Francis Golding, and of ten shillings of like lawful money to them also in hand paid by the said Charles Browne and Richard More, at or before the ensealing and delivery hereof, (the several receipts whereof are hereby respectively acknowleged,)

Release. they the said Abraham Barker and Cecilia his Wife, Have, and each of them

hath, granted, bargained, sold, released, and confirmed, and by these presents do, and each of them doth, grant, bargain, sell, release, and confirm unto the

Parcels. said David Edwards and Francis Golding, their heirs and assigns, All that

the capital messuage called Dale Hall, in the parish of Dale in the said county of Norfolk, wherein the said Abraham Barker and Cecilia his wife now dwell, and all those their lands in the said parish of Dale called or known by the name of Wilson’s farm, containing by estimation five hundred and forty acres, be the same more or less, together with all and singular houses, dovehouses, barns, buildings, stables, yards, gardens, orchards, lands, tene­ ments, meadows, pastures, feedings, commons, woods, underwoods, ways, waters, water­courses, fishings, privileges, profits, ease ments, commodities, advantages, emoluments, hereditaments, and appurtenances whatsoever to the said capital messuage and farm belonging or appertaining, or with the

v same used or enjoyed, or accepted, reputed, taken, or known, as part, parcel,

or member thereof, or as belonging to the same or any part thereof; (all which said premises are now in the actual possession of the said David

Mention of Edwards and Francis Golding, by virtue of a bargain and sale to them thereof

bargain made by the said Abraham Barker and Cecilia his wife for one whole year,

and sale. in consideration of five shillings to them paid by the said David Edwards appendix. 357

and Francis Golding, in and by one indenture bearing date the day next before the day of the date hereof, and by force of the statute for transferring uses into possession;) and the reversion and reversions, remainder and remainders, yearly and other rents, issues, and profits thereof, and every part and parcel thereof, and also all the estate, right, title, interest, trust, property, claim, and demand whatsoever, both at law and in equity, of them the said Abraham Barker and Cecilia his wife, in, to, or out of, the said capital messuage, lands, tenements, hereditaments, and premises: To have and to hold Habendum,

the said capital messuage, lands, tenements, hereditaments, and all and singular other the premises herein before mentioned to be hereby granted and released, with their and every of their appurtenances, unto the said David Edwards and Francis Golding, their heirs and assigns, to such uses, upon such trusts, and to and for such intents and purposes as are hereinafter mentioned, expressed, and declared, of and concerning the same: that is to say, to the use and behoof of the said Abraham Barker, and Cecilia his To the use of the wife, according to their several and respective estates and interests therein, grantors till at the time of, or immediately before, the execution of these presents, until marriage: the solemnization of the said intended marriage: and from and after the Then of the solemnization thereof, to the use and behoof of the said John Barker, for and husband for life, during the term of his natural life; without impeachment of or for any sans waste:



manner of waste: and from and after the determination of that estate, then Remainder to trustees to to the use of the said David Edwards and Francis Golding, and their heirs, preserve during the life of the said John Barker, upon trust to support and preserve contingent remainders: the contingent uses and estates hereinafter limited from being defeated and destroyed, and for that purpose to make entries, or bring actions, as the case shall require; but nevertheless to permit and suffer the said John Barker, and his assigns, during his life, to receive and take the rents and profits thereof, and of every part thereof, to and for his and their own use and benefit: and from and after the decease of the said John Barker, then to the use and Remainder to behoof of the said Katherine Edwards, his intended wife, for and during the the wife for life, term of her natural life, for her jointure, and in lieu, bar, and satisfaction of for her jointure, in bar of dower:

her dower and thirds at common law, which she can or may have or claim, of, in, to, or out of, all, and every, or any, of the lands, tenements, and her­ editaments, whereof or wherein the said John Barker now is, or at any time or times hereafter during the coverture between them shall be, seised of any estate of freehold or inheritance: and from and after the decease of the said vi

Katherine Edwards, or other sooner determination of the said estate, then to Remainder to the use and behoof of the said Charles Browne and Richard More, their other trustees executors, administrators, and assigns, for and during, and unto the full end for a term, upon trusts after

and term of, five hundred years from thence next ensuing and fully to be mentioned: complete and ended, without impeachment of waste: upon such trusts nevertheless, and to and for such intents and purposes, and under and Remainder to subject to such provisoes and agreements, as are hereinafter mentioned, the first and expressed, and declared of and concerning the same: and from and after the other sons of the marriage in tail:

358 of the rights of things

end, expiration, or other sooner determination of the said term of five hundred years, and subject thereunto, to the use and behoof of the first son of the said John Barker on the body of the said Katherine Edwards his intended wife to be begotten, and of the heirs of the body of such first son lawfully issuing; and for default of such issue, then to the use and behoof of the second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth, and of all and every other the son and sons of the said John Barker on the body of the said Katherine Edwards his intended wife to be begotten, severally, successively, and in remainder, one after another, as they and every of them shall be in seniority of age and priority of birth, and of the several and respective heirs of the body and bodies of all and every such son and sons lawfully issuing; the elder of such sons, and the heirs of his body issuing, being always to be preferred and to take before the younger of such sons, and the heirs of his or their body or bodies issuing: and for default of such

Remainder to the issue, then to the use and behoof of all and every the daughter and daughters

daughters, of the said John Barker on the body of the said Katherine Edwards his

as tenants in intended wife to be begotten, to be equally divided between them, (if more

common, in tail: than one,) share and share alike, as tenants in common and not as jointenants,

and of the several and respective heirs of the body and bodies of all and every such daughter and daughters lawfully issuing: and for default of such

Remainder to the issue, then to the use and behoof of the heirs of the body of him the said

husband in tail: John Barker lawfully issuing: and for default of such heirs, then to the use

husband’s mother and behoof of the said Cecilia, the wife of the said Abraham Barker, and of Remainder to the

The trust of the in fee. her heirs and assigns for ever. And as to, for, and concerning the term of five hundred years herein before limited to the said Charles Browne and Richard term declared;

More, their executors, administrators and assigns, as aforesaid, it is hereby declared and agreed by and between all the said parties to these presents, that the same is so limited to them upon the trusts, and to and for the intents and purposes, and under and subject to the provisoes and agreements, hereinafter mentioned, expressed, and declared, of and concerning the same: that is to say, in case there shall be an eldest or only son and one more

vii or other child or children of the said John Barker, on the body of the said

to raise portions Katherine, his intended wife to be begotten, then upon trust that they the

for younger said Charles Browne and Richard More, their executors, administrators, and

children, assigns, by sale or mortgage of the said term of five hundred years, or by

such other ways and means as they or the survivor of them, or the executors or administrators of such survivor shall think fit, shall and do raise and levy, or borrow and take up at interest, the sum of four thousand pounds of lawful money of Great Britain, for the portion or portions of such other child and children (besides the eldest or only son) as aforesaid, to be equally divided

payable at between them (if more than one) share and share alike; the portion or

certain times, portions of such of them as shall be a son or sons to be paid at his or their

respective age or ages of twenty­one years; and the portion or portions of such of them as shall be a daughter or daughters to be paid at her or their appendix. 359

respective age or ages of twenty one years, or day or days of marriage, which shall first happen. And upon this further trust, that in the mean time and with maintenance until the same portions shall become payable as aforesaid, the said Charles at the rate of Browne and Richard More, their executors, administrators, and assigns, 4 per cent. shall and do, by and out of the rents, issues, and profits of the premises aforesaid, raise and levy such competent yearly sum and sums of money for the maintenance and education of such child or children, as shall not exceed in the whole the interest of their respective portions after the rate of four pounds in the hundred yearly. Provided always, that in case any of the and benefit of same children shall happen to die before his, her, or their portions shall survivorship. become payable as aforesaid, then the portion or portions of such of them so dying shall go and be paid unto and be equally divided among the survivor or survivors of them, when and at such time as the original portion or portions of such surviving child or children shall become payable as aforesaid. Provided also, that in case there shall be no such child or children If no such child, of the said John Barker on the body of the said Katherine his intended wife begotten, besides an eldest or only son; or in case all and every such child or or if all die, children shall happen to die before all or any of their said portions shall become due and payable as aforesaid; or in case the said portions, and also or if the portions such maintenance as aforesaid, shall by the said Charles Browne and Richard be raised, More, their executors, administrators, or assigns, be raised and levied by any of the ways and means in that behalf aforementioned; or in case the same by or paid, such person or persons as shall for the time being be next in reversion or remainder of the same premises expectant upon the said term of five hundred years, shall be paid, or well and duly secured to be paid, according or secured by to the true intent and meaning of these presents; then and in any of the said the person next cases, and at all times thenceforth, the said term of five hundred years, or so in remainder; the residue of

much thereof as shall remain unsold or undisposed of for the purposes the term to aforesaid, shall cease, determine, and be utterly void to all intents and cease. purposes, any thing herein contained to the contrary thereof in any wise viii

notwithstanding. Provided also, and it is hereby further declared and Condition, that agreed by and between all the said parties to these presents, that in case the the uses and said Abraham Barker or Cecilia his wife, at any time during their lives, or estates hereby granted shall

the life of the survivor of them, with the approbation of the said David be void, Edwards and Francis Golding, or the survivor of them, or the executors and on settling other lands of equal

administrators of such survivor, shall settle, convey, and assure other lands value in and tenements of an estate of inheritance in fee simple, in possession, in recompense. some convenient place or places within the realm of England, of equal or better value than the said capital messuage, lands, tenements, hereditaments and premises, hereby granted and released, and in lieu, and recompense thereof, unto and for such and the like uses, intents, and purposes, and upon such and the like trusts, as the said capital messuage, lands, tenements, hereditaments, and premises are hereby settled and assured unto and upon, then and in such case, and at all times from thenceforth, all and every the

360 of the rights of things

use and uses, trust and trusts, estate and estates herein before limited, expressed, and declared of or concerning the same, shall cease, determine, and be utterly void to all intents and purposes; and the same capital messuage, lands, tenements, hereditaments, and premises, shall from thenceforth remain and be to and for the only proper use and behoof of the said Abraham Barker or Cecilia his wife, or the survivor of them, so settling, conveying, and assuring such other lands and tenements as aforesaid, and of his or her heirs and assigns for ever: and to and for no other use, intent, or purpose whatsoever; any thing herein contained to the contrary thereof in any wise

Covenant to notwithstanding. And, for the considerations aforesaid, and for barring all

levy a fine. estates tail, and all remainders or reversions thereupon expectant and

depending, if any be now subsisting and unbarred or otherwise undetermined, of and in the said capital messuage, lands, tenements, here­ ditaments, and premises, hereby granted and released, or mentioned to be hereby granted and released, or any of them, or any part thereof, the said Abraham Barker for himself and the said Cecilia his wife, his and her heirs, executors, and administrators, and the said John Barker for himself, his heirs, executors, and administrators, do, and each of them doth, respectively covenant, promise, and grant, to and with the said David Edwards and Francis Golding, their heirs, executors, and administrators, by these presents, that they the said Abraham Barker and Cecilia his wife, and John Barker, shall and will, at the costs and charges of the said Abraham Barker, before the end of Michaelmas term next ensuing the date hereof, acknowlege and levy, before his Majesty’s justices of the court of common pleas at Westmin­ ster, one or more fine or fines, sur cognizance de droit, come ceo, &c. with

ix proclamations according to the form of the statutes in that case made and

provided, and the usual course of fines in such cases accustomed, unto the said David Edwards, and his heirs, of the said capital messuage, lands, tenements, hereditaments, and premises, by such apt and convenient names, quantities, qualities, number of acres, and other descriptions to ascertain the same, as shall be thought meet: which said fine or fines, so as aforesaid or in any other manner levied and acknowleged, or to be levied and acknowleged, shall be and enure, and shall be adjudged, deemed, construed, and taken, and so are and were meant and intended, to be and enure, and are hereby declared by all the said parties to these presents to be and enure, to the use and behoof of the said David Edwards, and his heirs and assigns; to the intent and purpose that the said David Edwards may, by virtue of the said

in order to make fine or fines so covenanted and agreed to be levied as aforesaid, be and

a tenant to the become perfect tenant of the freehold of the said capital messuage, lands, praecipe, that a recovery may tenements, hereditaments, and all other the premises, to the end that one or

be suffered; more good and perfect common recovery or recoveries may be thereof had

and suffered, in such manner as is hereinafter for that purpose mentioned. And it is hereby declared and agreed by and between all the said parties to these presents, that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Francis Golding, at the costs and charges of the said Abraham Barker, before the end appendix. 361

of Michaelmas term next ensuing the date hereof, to sue forth and prosecute out of his majesty’s high court of chancery one more writ or writs of entry sur disseisin en le post, returnable before his majesty’s justices of the court of common pleas at Westminster, thereby demanding by apt and convenient names, quantities, qualities, number of acres, and other descriptions, the said capital messuage, lands, tenements, hereditaments, and premises, against the said David Edwards; to which said writ, or writs, of entry he the said David Edwards shall appear gratis, either in his own proper person, or by his attorney thereto lawfully authorized, and vouch over to warranty the said Abraham Barker, and Cecilia his wife, and John Barker; who shall also gratis appear in their proper persons, or by their attorney, or attorneys, thereto lawfully authorized, and enter into the warranty, and vouch over to warranty the common vouchee of the same court; who shall also appear, and after imparlance shall make default; so as judgment shall and may be thereupon had and given for the said Francis Golding, to recover the said capital messuage, lands, tenements, hereditaments, and premises, against the said David Edwards, and for him to recover in value against the said Abraham Barker, and Cecilia his wife, and John Barker, and for them to recover in value against the said common vouchee, and that execution shall and may be thereupon awarded and had accordingly, and all and every other act and thing be done and executed, needful and requisite for the suffering and perfecting of such common recovery or recoveries, with vouchers as x

aforesaid. And it is hereby further declared and agreed by and between all the said parties to these presents, that immediately from and after the to enure suffering and perfecting of the said recovery or recoveries, so as aforesaid, or in any other manner, or at any other time or times, suffered or to be suffered, as well these presents and the assurance hereby made, and the said fine or fines so covenanted to be levied as aforesaid, as also the said recovery or recoveries, and also all and every other fine and fines, recovery and recoveries, conveyances, and assurances in the law whatsoever heretofore had, made, levied, suffered, or executed, or hereafter to be had, made, levied, suffered, or executed, of the said capital messuage, lands, tenements, hereditaments, and premises, or any of them, or any part thereof, by and between the said parties to these presents or any of them, or whereunto they or any of them are or shall be parties or privies, shall be and enure, and shall be adjudged, deemed, construed, and taken, and so are and were meant and intended, to be and enure, and the recoveror or recoverors in the said recovery or recoveries named or to be named, and his or their heirs, shall stand and be seised of the said capital messuage, lands, tenements, hereditaments, and premises, and of every part and parcel thereof, to the uses, upon the trusts, to the preceding and to and for the intents and purposes, and under and subject to the uses in this deed. provisoes, limitations, and agreements, herein before mentioned, expressed, and declared, of and concerning the same. And the said Abraham Barker, Other covenants; party hereunto, doth hereby for himself, his heirs, executors, and administrators, further covenant, promise, grant, and agree, to and with the

362 of the rights of things

said David Edwards and Francis Golding, their heirs, executors, and

for quiet administrators, in manner and form following; that is to say, that the said enjoyment, capital messuage, lands, tenements, hereditaments, and premises, shall and

may at all times hereafter remain, continue, and be, to and for the uses and purposes, upon the trusts, and under and subject to the provisoes, limitations, and agreements, hereinbefore mentioned, expressed, and declared, of and concerning the same; and shall and may be peaceably and quietly had, held, and enjoyed accordingly, without any lawful let or interruption of or by the said Abraham Barker or Cecilia his wife, parties hereunto, his or her heirs or assigns, or of or by any other person or persons lawfully claiming or to claim from, by, or under, or in trust for him, her, them, or any of them, or from, by,

free from or under his or her ancestors, or any of them; and shall so remain, continue,

incumbrances; and be, free and clear, and freely and clearly acquitted, exonerated, and dis­

charged, or otherwise by the said Abraham Barker, or Cecilia his wife, parties hereunto, his or her heirs, executors, or administrators, well and sufficiently saved, defended, kept harmless, and indemnified of, from, and against all

xi former and other gifts, grants, bargains, sales, leases, mortgages, estates, titles,

troubles, charges, and incumbrances whatsoever, had, made, done, committed, occasioned, or suffered, or to be had, made, done, committed, occasioned, or suffered, by the said Abraham Barker, or Cecilia his wife, or by his or her ancestors, or any of them, or by his, her, their, or any of their act, means,

and for further assent, consent, or procurement: And Moreover that he the said Abraham

assurance Barker, and Cecilia his wife, parties hereunto, and his and her heirs, and all

other persons having or lawfully claiming, or which shall or may have or lawfully claim, any estate, right, title, trust, or interest, at law or in equity, of, in, to, or out of, the said capital messuage, lands, tenements, hereditaments, and premises, or any of them, or any part thereof, by or under or in trust for him, her, them, or any of them, or by or under his or her ancestors or any of them, shall and will from time to time, and at all times hereafter, upon every reasonable request, and at the costs and charges, of the said David Edwards and Francis Golding, or either of them, their or either of their heirs, executors, or administrators, make, do, and execute, or cause to be made, done, and executed, all such further and other lawful and reasonable acts, deeds, con­ veyances, and assurances in the law whatsoever, for the further, better, more perfect, and absolute granting, conveying, settling, and assuring of the same capital messuage, lands, tenements, hereditaments, and premises, to and for the uses and purposes, upon the trusts, and under and subject to the provi­ soes, limitations, and agreements, herein before mentioned, expressed, and declared, of and concerning the same, as by the said David Edwards and Francis Golding or either of them, their or either of their heirs, executors, or administrators, or their or any of their counsel learned in the law shall be reasonably advised, devised, or required: so as such further assurances contain in them no further or other warranty or covenants than against the person or persons, his, her, or their heirs, who shall make or do the same; and so as the party or parties, who shall be requested to make such further appendix. 363

assurances, be not compelled or compellable, for making or doing thereof, to go and travel above five miles from his, her, or their then respective dwellings, Power of or places of abode. Provided lastly, and it is hereby further declared and revocation. agreed by and between all the parties to these presents, that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Abraham Barker and Cecilia his wife, John Barker and Katherine his intended wife, and David Edwards, at any time or times hereafter, during their joint lives, by any writing or writings under their respective hands and seals and attested by two or more credible witnesses, to revoke, make void, alter, or change all and every or any the use and uses, estate and estates, herein and hereby before limited and declared, or mentioned or intended to be limited and declared, of and in the capital messuage, lands, tenements, hereditaments, and premises aforesaid, or of and in any part or xii

parcel thereof, and to declare new and other uses of the same, or of any part or parcel thereof, any thing herein contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding. In Witness whereof the parties to these presents their Conclusion. hands and seals have subscribed and set, the day and year first above written.



Sealed, and delivered, being Abraham Barker. (L. S.) first duly stamped, in the Cecilia Barker. (L. S.) presence of David Edwards. (L. S.) George Carter. Francis Golding. (L. S.) William Browne. Charles Browne. (L. S.)

Richard More. (L. S.)

John Barker. (L. S.)

Katherine Edwards. (L. S.)

No. III. xiii

An Obligation, or Bond, with Condition for the

Payment of Money.

KNOW all men by these presents, that I David Edwards, of Lincoln’s Inn in the county of Middlesex, esquire, am held and firmly bound to Abraham Barker of Dale­ Hall in the county of Norfolk, esquire, in ten thousand pounds of lawful money of Great Britain, to be paid to the said Abraham Barker, or his certain attorney, executors, administrators, or assigns; for which payment well and truly to be made, I bind myself, my heirs, executors, and administrators, firmly by these presents, sealed with my seal. Dated the fourth day of September in the twenty first year of the reign of our sovereign lord George the second by the grace of God king of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, defender of the faith, and so forth, and in the year of our Lord one thousand, seven hundred, and forty seven.

The condition of this obligation is such, that if the above bounden David Edwards,

his heirs, executors, or administrators, do and shall well and truly pay, or cause to be paid, unto the above named Abraham Barker, his executors, administrators, or assigns,

364 of the rights of things

the full sum of five thousand pounds of lawful British money, with lawful interest for the same, on the fourth day of March next ensuing the date of the above written obligation, then this obligation shall be void and of none effect, or else shall be and remain in full force and virtue.

Sealed, and delivered, being David Edwards. (L. S.) first duly stamped, in the

presence of

George Carter.

William Browne.



xiv No. IV.

A Fine of Lands, sur Cognizance

de Droit, come ceo, &c.

§. 1. Writ of Covenant; or Praecipe.

EEORGE the second by the grace of God of Great Britain, France, and Ireland king, defender of the faith, and so forth; to the sheriff of Norfolk, greeting. Command Abraham Barker, esquire, and Cecilia his wife, and John Barker, esquire, that justly and without delay they perform to David Edwards, esquire, the covenant made between them of two messuages, two gardens, three hundred acres of land, one hundred acres of meadow, two hundred acres of pasture, and fifty acres of wood, with the appurtenances, in Dale; and unless they shall so do, and if the said David shall give you security of prosecuting his claim, then summon by good summoners the said Abraham, Cecilia, and John, that they appear before our justices, at Westminster, from the day of saint Michael in one month, to shew wherefore they have not done it: and have you there the summoners, and this writ. Witness ourself at Westminster, the ninth day of October, in the twenty first year of our reign.



Sheriff’s return. Pledges of John Doe. Summoners of the within John Den. { { prosecution, Richard Roe. named Abraham, Cecilia, Richard Fen.

and John.



§. 2. The Licence to agree.

Norfolk, David Edwards, esquire, gives to the lord the king ten marks, for }

to wit. licence to agree with Abraham Barker, esquire, of a plea of covenant

of two messuages, two gardens, three hundred acres of land, one hundred acres of meadow, two hun dred acres of pasture, and fifty acres of wood, with the appurtenances, in Dale.

appendix. 365

§. 3. The Concord.

And the agreement is such, to wit, that the aforesaid Abraham, Cecilia, and John, have acknowleged the aforesaid tenements, with the appurtenances, xv

to be the right of him the said David, as those which the said David hath of the gift of the aforesaid Abraham, Cecilia, and John; and those they have remised and quitted claim, from them and their heirs, to the aforesaid David and his heirs for ever. And further, the same Abraham, Cecilia, and John, have granted, for themselves and their heirs, that they will warrant to the aforesaid David, and his heirs, the aforesaid tenements, with the appurtenances, against all men for ever. And for this recognition, remise, quit­claim, warranty, fine, and agreement, the said David hath given to the said Abraham, Cecilia, and John, two hundred pounds sterling.

§. 4. The Note, or Abstract.

Norfolk, Between David Edwards, esquire, complainant, and Abraham }

to wit. Barker, esquire, and Cecilia his wife, and John Barker, esquire, deforciants, of two messuages, two gardens, three hundred acres of land, one hundred acres of meadow, two hundred acres of pasture, and fifty acres of wood, with the appurtenances, in Dale, whereupon a plea of covenant was summoned between them; to wit, that the said Abraham, Cecilia, and John, have acknowleged the aforesaid tenements, with the appurtenances, to be the right of him the said David, as those which the said David hath of the gift of the aforesaid Abraham, Cecilia, and John; and those they have remised and quitted claim, from them and their heirs, to the aforesaid David and his heirs for ever. And further, the same Abraham, Cecilia, and John, have granted for themselves, and their heirs, that they will warrant to the aforesaid David, and his heirs, the aforesaid tenements, with the appurtenances, against all men for ever. And for this recognition, remise, quit­claim, warranty, fine, and agreement, the said David hath given to the said Abraham, Cecilia, and John, two hundred pounds sterling.

§. 5. The Foot, Chirograph, or Indentures, of the Fine.



Norfolk, This is the final agreement, made in the court of the lord the }

to wit. king at Westminster, from the day of saint Michael in one month, in the twenty first year of the reign of the lord George the second by the grace of God of Great Britain, France, and Ireland king, defender of the faith, and so forth, before John Willes, Thomas Abney, Thomas Burnet, and Thomas Birch, justices, and other faithful subjects of the lord the king then there present, between David Edwards, esquire, complainant, and Abraham Barker, esquire, and Cecilia his wife, and John Barker, esquire, deforciants, of two xvi

messuages, two gardens, three hundred acres of land, one hundred acres of meadow, two hundred acres of pasture, and fifty acres of wood, with the

366 of the rights of things

appurtenances, in Dale, whereupon a plea of covenant was summoned between them in the same court; to wit, that the aforesaid Abraham, Cecilia, and John, have acknowleged the aforesaid tenements, with the appurtenances, to be the right of him the said David, as those which the said David hath of the gift of the aforesaid Abraham, Cecilia, and John; and those they have remised and quitted claim, from them and their heirs, to the aforesaid David and his heirs for ever. And further, the same Abraham, Cecilia, and John, have granted for themselves and their heirs, that they will warrant to the aforesaid David and his heirs, the aforesaid tenements, with the appurtenances, against all men for ever. And for this recognition, remise, quit­claim, warranty, fine, and agreement, the said David hath given to the said Abraham, Cecilia, and John, two hundred pounds sterling.



§. 6. Proclamations, endorsed upon the Fine,

according to the Statutes.

The first proclamation was made the sixteenth day of November, in the term of saint Michael, in the twenty first year of the king withinwritten.

The second proclamation was made the fourth day of February, in the

term of saint Hilary, in the twenty first year of the king withinwritten.

The third proclamation was made the thirteenth day of May, in the term

of Easter, in the twenty first year of the king withinwritten.

The fourth proclamation was made the twenty eighth day of June, in

the term of the holy Trinity, in the twenty second year of the king withinwritten.



xvii No. V.

A common Recovery of Lands, with

*double Voucher.

§. 1. Writ of Entry sur Disseisin in the Post; or, Praecipe.

EEORGE the second by the grace of God of Great Britain, France, and Ireland king, defender of the faith, and so forth; to the sheriff of Norfolk, greeting. Command David Edwards, esquire, that justly and without delay he render to Francis Golding, clerk, two messuages, two gardens, three hundred acres of land, one hundred acres of meadow, two hundred acres of pasture, and fifty acres of wood, with the appurtenances, in Dale, which he claims to be his right and inheritance, and into which the said David hath

* Note, that if the recovery be had with single voucher, the parts marked “thus” in §. 2. are omitted. appendix. 367

not entry, unless after the disseisin, which Hugh Hunt thereof unjustly, and without judgment, hath made to the aforesaid Francis, within thirty years now last past, as he saith, and whereupon he complains that the aforesaid David deforceth him. And unless he shall so do, and if the said Francis shall give you security of prosecuting his claim, then summon by good summoners the said David, that he appear before our justices at Westminster, on the octave of saint Martin, to shew wherefore he hath not done it: and have you there the summoners, and this writ. Witness ourself at Westminster, the twenty ninth day of October, in the twenty first year of our reign.



Pledges of Summoners of the John Doe. John Den. Sheriff’s return. { { prosecution, Richard Roe. withinnamed David, Richard Fen.

§. 2. Exemplification of the Recovery Roll.

EEORGE the second by the grace of God of Great Britain, France, and Ireland king, defender of the faith, and so forth; to all to whom these our present letters shall come, greeting. Know me, that among the pleas of land, enrolled at Westminster, before Sir John Willes, knight, and his fellows, our justices of the bench, of the term of saint Michael, in the twenty first year of our reign, upon the fifty second roll it is thus contained. entry returnable Return. on the octave of saint Martin. Norfolk to wit: Francis Golding, clerk, in his xviii

proper person demandeth against David Edwards, esquire, two messuages, Demand against two gardens, three hundred acres of land, one hundred acres of meadow, the tenant. two hundred acres of pasture, and fifty acres of wood, with the appurtenances, in Dale, as his right and inheritance, and into which the said David hath not entry, unless after the disseisin, which Hugh Hunt thereof unjustly, and without judgment, hath made to the aforesaid Francis, within thirty years now last past. And whereupon he saith, that he himself was seised of the tenements Count. aforesaid, with the appurtenances, in his demesne as of fee and right, in time of peace, in the time of the lord the king that now is, by taking the profits thereof to the value [* of six shillings and eight pence, and more, in rents, Esplees. corn, and grass:] and into which [the said David hath not entry, unless as aforesaid:] and thereupon he bringeth suit, [and good proof.] And the said Defence of the David in his proper person comes and defendeth his right, when [and where tenant. the court shall award,] and thereupon voucheth to warranty “John Barker, Voucher. esquire; who is present here in court in his proper person, and the tenements Warranty. aforesaid with the appurtenances to him freely warranteth, [and prays that the said Francis may count against him.] And hereupon the said Francis Demand against demandeth against the said John, tenant by his own warranty, the tenements the vouchee. aforesaid with the appurtenances, in form aforesaid, &c. And whereupon he Count.

* The clauses, between hooks, are no otherwise expressed in the record than by an &c.

368 of the rights of things

saith, that he himself was seised of the tenements aforesaid, with the appur­ tenances, in his demesne as of fee and right, in time of peace, in the time of the lord the king that now is, by taking the profits thereof to the value, &c.

Defence of the And into which, &c. And thereupon he bringeth suit, &c. And the aforesaid

vouchee. John, tenant by his own warranty, defends his right, when, &c. and thereupon Second voucher. he further voucheth to warranty” Jacob Morland; who is present here

Warranty. in court in his proper person, and the tenements aforesaid, with the



Demand against appurtenances, to him freely warranteth, &c. And hereupon the said Francis the common demandeth against the said Jacob, tenant by his own warranty, the tenements vouchee. aforesaid, with the appurtenances, in form aforesaid, & c . And whereupon he

Count. saith, that he himself was seised of the tenements aforesaid, with the appur­

tenances, in his demesne as of fee and right, in time of peace, in the time of the lord the king that now is, by taking the profits thereof to the value, &c. And into

the common Defence of And which, & c . And thereupon he bringeth suit, & c . the aforesaid Jacob, tenant by vouchee. his own warranty, defends his right, when, & c . And saith that the aforesaid Hugh

xix Plea, nul did not disseise the aforesaid Francis of the tenements aforesaid, as the aforesaid

desseisin. Francis by his writ and count aforesaid above doth suppose: and of this he puts

Imparlance. himself upon the country. And the aforesaid Francis thereupon craveth leave to

imparl; and he hath it. And afterwards the aforesaid Francis cometh again here

Default of the into court in this same term in his proper person, and the aforesaid Jacob, though

common vouchee. solemnly called, cometh not again, but hath departed in contempt of the court,

Judgment for the and maketh default. Therefore it is considered, that the aforesaid Francis do recover demandant. his seisin against the aforesaid David of the tenements aforesaid, with the

Recovery in appurtenances; and that the said David have of the land of the aforesaid “John, to

value. the value [of the tenements aforesaid;] and further, that the said John, have of the

land of the said” Jacob to the value [of the tenements aforesaid.] And the said

Amercement Jacob in mercy. And hereupon the said Francis prays a writ of the lord the king, to Award of the be directed to the sheriff of the county aforesaid, to cause him to have full seisin writ of seisin, of the tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances: and it is granted unto him,

and return. returnable here without delay. Afterwards, that is to say, the twenty eighth day of

November in this same term, here cometh the said Francis in his proper person; and the sheriff, namely sir Charles Thompson, knight, now sendeth, that he by virtue of the writ aforesaid to him directed, on the twenty fourth day of the same month, did cause the said Francis to have full seisin of the tenements aforesaid

Exempification with the appurtenances, as he was commanded. All and singular which premises,

continued. at the request of the said Francis, by the tenor of these presents we have held good

to be exemplified. In testimony whereof we have caused our seal, appointed for

Teste . sealing writs in the bench aforesaid, to be affixed to these presents. Witness sir

John Willes, knight, at Westminster, the twenty eighth day of November, in the twenty first year of our reign.

Cooke.5

THE END

5 Sir George Cooke (c. 1705–68), chief prothonotary in Common Pleas from 1732 until his death.





Varia





Chapter 1


〈1〉 [ed. 3] could be | could it be

〈2〉 [ed. 8] upon | on

〈3〉 [ed. 8] such case | such a case

〈4〉 [ed. 8] another’s | another

〈5〉 [ed. 3] This mutual | Thus mutual 〈6〉 [ed. 3] my having abandoned | my intending to abandon 〈7〉 [ed. 8] of a | for a





Chapter 2


〈1〉 [ed. 5] it is | is

〈2〉 [ed. 3] I cannot | therefore I cannot





Chapter 3


〈1〉 [ed. 9] contingent right, | contingent springing right, 〈2〉 [ed. 9] they are neither capable | that casual share of the annual increase is not,

till severed, capable

〈3〉 [ed. 3] the empire. | the Roman empire. 〈4〉 [ed. 3] more | more [Footnote: Co. Litt. 344. [Fairchild v Gayre] Cro. Jac. 63.]

〈5〉 [ed. 5] thereupon | therefore

〈6〉 [ed. 3] those of | the laws of

〈7〉 [ed. 5] pag. 110. | p. 113. 284. [I. 78–9, 182–3.] 〈8〉 [ed. 9] which in law is | which is 〈9〉 [ed. 9] be good; | be established; 〈10〉 [ed. 9] For | Indeed, properly speaking, the doctrine of rankness in a modus, is

a mere rule of evidence, drawn from the improbability of the fact, and not a rule of law. [Footnote: Pyke v. Dowling. Hil. 19 Geo. III. C. B.] For

〈11〉 [ed. 9] the law supposes an original real composition to have been regularly

made; | it is supposed that an original real composition was antiently made;

〈12〉 [ed. 9] the reign | the beginning of the reign 〈13〉 [ed. 9] This rule | 2 Inst. 238, 239. This rule 〈14〉 [ed. 9] See 2 Roll. | See Litt. §. 170. 34 Hen. VI. 37. 2 Roll. 〈15〉 [ed. 9] from his days to | from that time to 370 varia: chapter 3

〈16〉 [ed. 9] is felo de se | is (in point of evidence) felo de se 〈17〉 [ed. 7] Ibid. 479. | [Blinco v Marston] Cro. Eliz. 479. [Wright v Wright] 511.

[Vicar of Sturton v Greisley] Sav. 3. [Blincoe’s case] Moor. 910. [Besides adding new references, this change to the seventh edition reverses and corrects the order of the note accompanying ecclesiae and the note in 〈19〉, added in the fifth edition.]

〈18〉 [ed. 5] privileges are personal to both the king and the clergy; for their tenant

or lessee shall pay tithes of the same land, | personal privileges (not arising from or being annexed to the land) are personally confined to both the king and the clergy; for their tenant or lessee shall pay tithes,

〈19〉 [ed. 5] it is not tithable | their lands are not generally tithable [Footnote:

[Blinco v Marston] Cro. Eliz. 479. [Wright v Wright] 511. [Vicar of Sturton v Greisley] Sav. 3. [Blincoe’s case] Moor. 910.]

[ed. 7] their lands are not generally tithable [Footnote: Ibid. 479.]

〈 20〉 [ed. 5] appurtenant is where the owner of land has a right to put in other

beasts, | appurtenant ariseth from no connection of tenure, nor from any absolute necessity: but may be annexed to lands in other lordships [Footnote: [Sacheverill v Porter] Cro. Car. 482. [Sacheverell v Porter] 1 Jon. 397.] or extend to other beasts,

〈 21〉 [ed. 8] goats, and the like, | goats, or the like, 〈 22〉 [ed. 5] from the necessity of the thing, like | from any natural propriety or

necessity, like

〈 23〉 [ed. 5] of common right; | of general right; 〈 24〉 [ed. 5] Co. Litt. 122. | Co. Litt. 121, 122. 〈 25〉 [ed. 3] by parson | by a parson 〈 26〉 [ed. 4] waters; | water;

〈 27〉 [ed. 9] the rest, are | those aftermentioned, are 〈 28〉 [ed. 8] estovers (from estoffer, | estovers or estouviers, that is, necessaries (from

estoffer,

〈 29〉 [ed. 8] of the same signification with the | used by us as synonymous to the 〈 30〉 [ed. 9] all the owners | all the inhabitants of such a hamlet, or all the owners 〈 31〉 [ed. 9] cross another’s ground: for this | cross such a ground, for such a

particular purpose: for this

〈 32〉 [ed. 9] land may | land or houses may 〈 33〉 [ed. 3] and the fees | and to take the fees 〈 34〉 [ed. 9] office shall | office (a few only excepted) shall 〈 35〉 [ed. 5] and the like; | or the like; 〈 36〉 [ed. 5] any enclosure; | an enclosure 〈 37〉 [ed. 9] also be the owner | also be (or at least derive his right from) the owner 〈 38〉 [ed. 5] soil, | soil [Footnote: [Sir William Calthrop’s case] [YB] M. 17 Edw. IV.

6. [Sir William Calthorp’s case] [YB] P. 18 Edw. IV. 4. [YB] T. 10 Hen. VII. 24. 26. [Smith v Kemp] Salk. 637.],

varia: chapter 4 371

〈39〉 [ed. 9] the considering such | to consider such 〈40〉 [ed. 9] may remove | and to distinguish it (as we have done) from a several and

a common of fishery, may remove

〈41〉 [ed. 9] embarassed. | embarrassed. For it must be acknowleged, that the rights

and distinctions of the three species of fishery are very much confounded in our law-books; and that there are not wanting respectable authorities [Footnote: See them well digested in Hargrave’s notes on Co. Litt. 122.] which maintain, that a several fishery may exist distinct from the property of the soil, and that a free fishery implies no exclusive right, but is synonymous with common of piscary.

〈42〉 [ed. 5] and enjoy | or enjoy

〈43〉 [ed. 7] blench-holding | blanch-holding 〈44〉 [ed. 8] &c. which | or baser money, which 〈45〉 [ed. 8] Anders. 253 | Co. Litt. 302. 1. Anders. 253. 〈46〉 [ed. 8] some have thought it not | perhaps not 〈47〉 [ed. 8] 1 Chan. Prec. 555. | Prec. Chanc. 555. [Lord Rockingham v Oxenden]

Salk. 578.





Chapter 4


〈1〉 [ed. 9] hence too | thence too

〈2〉 [ed. 9] were always | was always 〈3〉 [ed. 5] hence it | hence too it

〈4〉 [ed. 9] on condition | duly stocked with cattle and bondmen, on condition

〈5〉 [ed. 5] obligation | obligations

〈6〉 [ed. 3] consented to | gradually established by the Norman barons, and others,

in such forfeited lands as they received from the gift of the conqueror, and afterwards universally consented to

〈7〉 [ed. 3] here. | here by law.

〈8〉 [ed. 3] perhaps we may be able to ascertain the time | though the time 〈9〉 [ed. 3] with a tolerable degree of exactness. | cannot be ascertained with

exactness, yet there are some circumstances that may lead us to a probable conjecture concerning it.

〈10〉 [ed. 3] seems to have | may possibly have 〈11〉 [ed. 3] probably the | perhaps the 〈12〉 [ed. 3] puts the matter out of dispute is | clearly evinces the legal establishment

of this system, is

〈13〉 [ed. 8] of France | in France

〈14〉 [ed. 3] kingdom | kingdom. [Footnote: Tout fuit in luy, et vient de luy al

commencement [All was his, and all proceeded originally from him]. [YB] (M. 24 Edw. III. 65.)]

372 varia: chapter 5

〈15〉 [ed. 3] broke | broken

〈16〉 [ed. 9] Perhaps it may be thought puerile to observe (in confirmation of this

remark) that in one of our antient pastimes | It will not, I hope, be thought puerile to remark (in confirmation of this observation) that in one of our antient juvenile pastimes

〈17〉 [ed. 3] the basilinda | the king I am or basilinda 〈18〉 [ed. 3] the sole | then the sole 〈19〉 [ed. 7] their new-acquired | the new-acquired 〈20〉 [ed. 9] re-established | raised up and re-established 〈21〉 [ed. 9] a feudatory | the feudatory 〈22〉 [ed. 3] his posterity | from his posterity 〈23〉 [ed. 8] being then all | which were all 〈24〉 [ed. 8] this means | these means 〈25〉 [ed. 8] came to be | began to be 〈26〉 [ed. 9] all other respects | all respects





Chapter 5


〈1〉 [ed. 3] superior or lord, | superior lord, 〈2〉 [ed. 4] who is supposed | who supposed

[ed. 5] who was supposed

〈3〉 [ed. 4] such as were | were such as were 〈4〉 [ed. 9] the value of which, not only in the reign of Edward II, but also of

Henry II, and therefore probably at its original in the reign of the conqueror, was stated at 20l. per annum; and a certain number of these knight’s fees were requisite to make up a barony. | the measure of which in 3 Edw. I. was estimated at twelve ploughlands [Footnote: Pasch. 3 Edw. I. Co. Litt. 69.] and its value (though it varied with the times [Footnote: 2 Inst. 596.]) in the reigns of Edward I. and Edward II [Footnote: Stat. Westm. 1. c. 36. Stat. de milit. 1 Edw. II. Co. Litt. 69.] was stated at 20l. per annum.

〈5〉 [ed. 5] upon | upon [Footnote: See writs for this purpose in Memorand.

Scacch. 36. prefixed to Maynard’s yearbook. Edw. II.]

〈6〉 [ed. 9] With regard | For, with regard 〈7〉 [ed. 9] every knight’s | the annual value of every knight’s 〈8〉 [ed. 9] and, for the time the lord so held it, he was entitled | during which

interval the lord was entitled

〈9〉 [ed. 8] tenures | tenure

〈10〉 [ed. 9] this prima | the prima 〈11〉 [ed. 9] And the king | The king 〈12〉 [ed. 9] within a year | made within a year

varia: chapter 6 373

〈13〉 [ed. 9] therefore | in pursuance of the strict feodal rule, therefore 〈14〉 [ed. 8] consider a feud | consider the feud 〈15〉 [ed. 8] stipendiary | a stipendiary 〈16〉 [ed. 9] fee, he | fee in capite under the crown, he 〈17〉 [ed. 9] the vasals | the king’s vasals 〈18〉 [ed. 7] of raising money | for raising money 〈19〉 [ed. 7] his crown, | the crown,

〈20〉 [ed. 3] these clauses | these provisions 〈21〉 [ed. 5] marriage | marriage [Footnote: The words maritare and maritagium

seem ex vi termini [from the strict sense of the words] to denote the providing of an husband.]

〈22〉 [ed. 8] or in any | or any

〈23〉 [ed. 8] tenants | tenant

〈24〉 [ed. 4] lands | land

〈25〉 [ed. 8] of money: | for money:

〈26〉 [ed. 9] realm. Hence it is held | realm: hence it was held 〈27〉 [ed. 9] to make amends he | to reduce him still farther, he 〈28〉 [ed. 8] of her freedom. | of its freedom. 〈29〉 [ed. 9] for a proper equivalent to abolish them all; though the plan then

proceeded | in consideration of a proper equivalent, to abolish them all; though the plan proceeded

〈30〉 [ed. 9] rent should be settled | rent was to have been settled 〈31〉 [ed. 9] appendages, were destroyed | appendages (having during the usurp-

ation been discontinued) were destroyed





Chapter 6


〈1〉 [ed. 9] escuage itself, which | escuage, which, 〈2〉 [ed. 9] describes socage | describes lands in socage 〈3〉 [ed. 9] respects it in this light, when it enacts, that no wardship of the lands or

body shall be | respected it in this light, when it enacted, that no wardship of the lands or body should be

〈4〉 [ed. 8] is distinguished | is usually distinguished 〈5〉 [ed. 3] yet is impossible ever to have been | yet could not possibly ever have been

〈6〉 [ed. 3] these | many of these

〈7〉 [ed. 5] the youngest | the younger 〈8〉 [ed. 9] right to break the seventh commandment with | right of concubinage

with

〈9〉 [ed. 3] in burgage tenures; as that the | in different burgage tenures; as that, in

some, the

374 varia: chapter 6

〈10〉 [ed. 3] that a man | that in others, a man 〈11〉 [ed. 3] held to be only a species of a socage tenure, modified by the custom of

the country; being holden | said to be only a species of a socage tenure, modified by the custom of the country; the lands being holden

〈12〉 [ed. 8] ploughmen, or peasants: | ploughmen, and peasants: 〈13〉 [ed. 9] of the king as lord paramount, and sometimes of | one of the king,

either immediately, or as lord paramount, and (in the latter case) of

〈14〉 [ed. 9] has) | hath done)

〈15〉 [ed. 9] are also, among | are among 〈16〉 [ed. 3] him shall not belong | him does not, nor ever did, belong 〈17〉 [ed. 3] is no occasion | was no occasion 〈18〉 [ed. 9] they might | might

〈19〉 [ed. 8] lands of the kingdom | lands in the kingdom 〈20〉 [ed. 3] interpose, to prevent | interpose, and name a guardian, to prevent 〈21〉 [ed. 3] course is ceased | course hath ceased 〈22〉 [ed. 9] though now | but now 〈23〉 [ed. 3] other tenemental | other, or tenemental, 〈24〉 [ed. 9] were called and distinguished | were distinguished 〈25〉 [ed. 7] arisen all the | arisen, most of the 〈26〉 [ed. 5] Before the statute of quia emptores, 18 Edw. I. the king’s | In the early

times of our legal constitution, the king’s

〈 27〉 [ed. 9] held | holden

〈28〉 [ed. 5] land. This occasioned the statute of Westm. 3. or quia emptores, 18 Edw. I.

to be made; which directs, | land; and also that the mesne lords themselves were so impoverished thereby, that they were disabled from performing their services to their own superiors. This occasioned, first, that provision in the thirty-second chapter of magna carta, 9 Hen. III. (which is not to be found in the first charter granted by that prince, nor in the great charter of king John [Footnote: See the Oxford editions of the charters.]) that no man should either give or sell his land, without reserving sufficient to answer the demands of his lord; and, afterwards, the statute of Westm. 3. or quia emptores, 18 Edw. I. c. 1. which directs,

〈29〉 [ed. 5] And from hence it is held, that all manors existing at this day, must

have existed by immemorial prescription; or at least ever since the 18 Edw. I. when the statute of quia emptores was made. For no new manor can have been created since that statute: because it is essential to a manor, that there be tenants who hold of the lord, and that statute enacts, that for the future no subject shall create | But, these provisions not extending to the king’s own tenants in capite, the like law concerning them is declared by the statutes of praerogativa regis, 17 Edw. II. c. 6. and of 34 Edw. III. c. 15. by which last all subinfeudations, previous to the reign of king Edward I, were confirmed; but all subsequent to that period were left open to the king’s prerogative. And from hence it is clear, that all manors existing at this day, must have existed as

varia: chapter 7 375

early as king Edward the first: for it is essential to a manor, that there be tenants who hold of the lord; and, by the operation of these statutes, no tenant in capite since the accession of that prince, and no tenant of a common lord since the statute of quia emptores, could create

〈30〉 [ed. 9] like the Spartan | resembling the Spartan 〈31〉 [ed. 3] these services | their services 〈32〉 [ed. 9] by this and | by these and 〈33〉 [ed. 8] to reap his corn | and reap his corn 〈34〉 [ed. 8] of a copyhold | of the copyhold 〈35〉 [ed. 9] hereafter, | hereafter [Footnote: See ch. 28.], 〈36〉 [ed. 9] interposes in an equitable method, and | interposes, with an equitable

moderation, and

〈37〉 [ed. 7] land, to supply his court with provisions, and the like; all | land for so

many days, to supply his court with such a quantity of provisions, and the like; all [ed. 9] land for so many days, to supply his court with such a quantity of provisions, or other stated services; all

〈38〉 [ed. 9] for, though their | for not withstanding their 〈39〉 [ed. 7] especially in this, that | especially for that 〈40〉 [ed. 3] held | holden

〈41〉 [ed. 9] this difference, | this distinction, 〈42〉 [ed. 3] in these surrenders of lands in antient demesne of frank tenure, it is |

in the surrenders [ed. 8: surrender] of these lands in antient demesne, it is

〈43〉 [ed. 3] materially differed | materially differs





Chapter 7


〈1〉 [ed. 3] estate to another and his heirs, | estate in Dale to A and his heirs, 〈2〉 [ed. 9] freehold then are divisible into estates of inheritance, and estates |

freehold (thus understood) are either estates of inheritance, or estates

〈3〉 [ed. 3] therefore it is said | therefore is said 〈4〉 [ed. 9] way going over | way leading over 〈5〉 [ed. 3] contemplation of law; | contemplation in law; 〈6〉 [ed. 8] for they are implied | for heirship is implied 〈7〉 [ed. 5] of both “heirs” and “successors,” ex vi | of “successors” (as the word

“successors” supplies the place of “heirs”) ex vi

〈8〉 [ed. 9] Lastly, | 5. Lastly,

〈9〉 [ed. 5] words | word

〈10〉 [ed. 8] finesse, (for | finesse of construction, (for 〈11〉 [ed. 3] pays | paid

〈12〉 [ed. 3] revives | revived

〈13〉 [ed. 5] in them, if | in these last, if 376 varia: chapter 8

〈14〉 [ed. 9] alienation may bar | alienation (after issue born) may bar 〈15〉 [ed. 9] clandestinely begun, are | clandestinely introduced, are 〈16〉 [ed. 9] force or effect. | force and effect.





Chapter 8


〈1〉 [ed. 8] the act | the acts

〈2〉 [ed. 5] feodal rites | feodal rights 〈3〉 [ed. 8] such determination | such a determination 〈4〉 [ed. 9] For even when | For when 〈5〉 [ed. 9] useful to future | useful to himself in future, and to future 〈6〉 [ed. 4] seised of lands or tenements in fee-simple or fee-tail; that is, of any

estate of inheritance; | seised of lands and tenements in fee-simple or fee-tail; that is, of any [ed. 5: an] estate of inheritance;

[ed. 9] seised of an estate of inheritance, that is, of lands and tenements in fee-simple or fee-tail;

〈7〉 [ed. 4] alone. | alone: whereas, before issue had, they must both have done it

together.

〈8〉 [ed. 9] and therefore the | for which reason the 〈9〉 [ed. 9] and was | did homage to the lord, and was 〈10〉 [ed. 9] to be determined | to determine 〈11〉 [ed. 9] to have had actual | ever to have actual 〈12〉 [ed. 7] these lands, | the lands, 〈13〉 [ed. 9] issue must also be capable | issue as is also capable 〈14〉 [ed. 9] the true reason, | the principal reason, 〈15〉 [ed. 9] woman elopes from | woman voluntarily leaves (which the law calls

eloping from)

〈16〉 [ed. 5] dower, but not | dower, (except in the case of certain modern treasons

relating to the coin [Footnote: Stat. 5 Eliz. c. 11. 18 Eliz. c. 1. 8 & 9 W. III. c. 26. 15 & 16 Geo. II. c. 28.]) but not

〈17〉 [ed. 9] l. 2. c. 9. §. 3. | l. 2. c. 39. §. 3. 〈18〉 [ed. 9] husband. | husband; the grant and render being one continued act. 〈19〉 [ed. 9] for a single | for the interval of but a single 〈20〉 [ed. 9] estate by survivorship, | estate in fee by survivorship, 〈21〉 [ed. 7] wife shall have | wife should have 〈22〉 [ed. 9] translation adds) | translation of Littleton adds) 〈23〉 [ed. 4] held. | holden.

〈24〉 [ed. 4] If the | Or if the heir (being under age) or his guardian, assign more

than she ought to have, it may be afterwards remedied by writ of admeasurement of dower [Footnote: F. N. B. 148. Finch. L. 314. Stat. Westm. 2. 13 Edw. I. c. 7.]. If the

varia: chapter 10 377





Chapter 9


〈1〉 [ed. 8] it happens where | it takes place where 〈2〉 [ed. 9] short explanation of the | short digression, concerning the 〈3〉 [ed. 3] if be | if it be

〈4〉 [ed. 5] years at least, were | years or a thousand, were 〈5〉 [ed. 5] 32 Ass. pl. 6. | 32 Ass. pl. 6. Bro. abr. t. mordauncester. 42. spoliation. 6. 〈 6〉 [ed. 8] he shall so long | he should so long 〈 7〉 [ed. 3] even it be | even if it be

〈 8〉 [ed. 8] for that the lessor | because the lessor 〈 9〉 [ed. 3] impounding them thereon, | impounding it thereon, 〈 10〉 [ed. 8] leant | leaned

〈 11〉 [ed. 3] other. | other [Footnote: This kind of lease was in use as long ago as the

reign of Hen. VIII. when half a year’s notice seems to have been required to determine it. [Harecourt v Spycer] ([YB] T. 13 Hen. VIII. 15, 16.)]. [ed. 9] other, which is generally understood to be six months [Footnote: This kind … 15, 16.)].

〈 12〉 [ed. 9] to hold | and hold

〈 13〉 [ed. 9] entirely; and | entirely, might probably scruple to grant them any

absolute freehold; and

〈 14〉 [ed. 7] supposes | supposed

〈 15〉 [ed. 5] performing the usual | performing their usual 〈 16〉 [ed. 9] and still continues | and now continues 〈17〉 [ed. 3] are allowed | are sometimes called customary freeholders, being allowed 〈 18〉 [ed. 8] made in writing for recovering the possession of the premises, by him

to whom the remainder or reversion thereof shall belong; such person, so holding over, shall pay, for the time he continues, at the rate of double the yearly value of the lands so detained. This has almost | made and notice in writing given, by him to whom the remainder or reversion of the premises shall belong, for delivering the possession thereof; such person, so holding over or keeping the other out of possession, shall pay for the time he detains the lands, at the rate of double their yearly value. And, by statute 11 Geo. II. c. 19. in case any tenant, having power to determine his lease, shall give notice of his intention to quit the premises, and shall not deliver up the possession at the time contained in such notice, he shall thenceforth pay double the former rent, for such time as he continues in possession. These statutes have almost





Chapter 10


〈1〉 [ed. 5] such cases | such case

〈2〉 [ed. 9] estate, yet if | estate, if 378 varia: chapter 11

〈3〉 [ed. 9] commences, the instant | commences, and he may enter on the lands,

the instant

〈4〉 [ed. 3] and the survivor | or the survivor 〈5〉 [ed. 9] fee; then | fee; that then 〈6〉 [ed. 9] that the mortgagee | that then the mortgagee 〈7〉 [ed. 9] since continued | since pretty generally continued, 〈8〉 [ed. 3] not therefore usual | not however usual 〈9〉 [ed. 9] into pursuant to | into before the chief magistrate of some trading

town, pursuant to

〈10〉 [ed. 9] towns, and thence this security is called a statute staple. They are both,

I say, securities for debts, originally permitted only among traders, for the benefit of commerce; whereby the lands of the debtor are conveyed to the creditor, | towns, from whence this security is called a statute staple. They are both, I say, securities for debts acknowleged to be due; and originally permitted only among traders, for the benefit of commerce; whereby not only the body of the debtor may be imprisoned, and his goods seised in satisfaction of the debt, but also his lands may be delivered to the creditor,

〈11〉 [ed. 9] staple, which extends the benefit of this mercantile transaction to all

the king’s subjects in general, by virtue of the statute 23 Hen. VIII. c. 6. | staple acknowleged before either of the chief justices, or (out of term) before their substitutes, the mayor of the staple at Westminster and the recorder of London; whereby the benefit of this mercantile transaction is extended to all the king’s subjects in general, by virtue of the statute 23 Hen. VIII. c. 6. amended by 8 Geo. I. c. 25. which direct such recognizances to be enrolled and certified into chancery. But these, by the statute of frauds, 29 Car. II. c. 3. are only binding upon the lands in the hands of bona fide purchasors, from the day of their enrolment, which is ordered to be marked on the record.

〈12〉 [ed. 5] debt at law, | debt of law, 〈13〉 [ed. 9] have | have [Footnote: The words of the statute de mercatoribus are,

“puisse porter bref de novele disseisine, auxi sicum de franktenement [A writ of novel disseisin may likewise carry with it the freehold].”]

〈14〉 [ed. 8] debts owing to | debts due to 〈15〉 [ed. 9] them, to whom the debts if recovered would belong. And, upon | those,

to whom the debts if recovered would belong. For, upon





Chapter 11


〈1〉 [ed. 3] grounded on mathematical | grounded in mathematical 〈2〉 [ed. 3] Plowd. 29. | Plowd. 29. [Gardner v Sheldon] Vaugh. 269. 〈3〉 [ed. 9] that no estate of freehold can be | that an estate of freehold cannot be

〈4〉 [ed. 9] if it be a chattel interest, though perhaps it might operate as a future

contract, if the tenant for years be a party to the deed of creation, yet | if the

varia: chapter 13 379

remainder be a chattel interest, though perhaps the deed of creation might operate as a future contract, if the tenant for years be a party to it, yet

〈5〉 [ed. 9] death, their estate, for | death, the estate of the trustees, for 〈6〉 [ed. 9] rest: or, that such remainder may be limited to take effect upon | rest:

and it was also settled, that such remainder may not be limited to take effect, unless upon





Chapter 12


〈1〉 [ed. 8] grants the estate | grants an estate 〈2〉 [ed. 9] moiety. | moiety. And therefore, if an estate in fee be given to a man and

his wife, they are neither properly joint-tenants, nor tenants in common: for husband and wife being considered as one person in law, they cannot take the estate by moieties, but both are seised of the entirety, per tout et non per my; the consequence of which is, that neither the husband nor the wife can dispose of any part without the assent of the other, but the whole must remain to the survivor. [Footnote: Litt. §. 665. Co. Litt. 187. Bro. Abr. t. cui in vita. 8. [Back v Andrews] 2 Vern. 120. [Purefoy v Rogers] 2 Lev. 39.]

〈3〉 [ed. 5] be the reason | be one reason 〈4〉 [ed. 7] others | other

〈5〉 [ed. 5] an undivided | and undivided 〈6〉 [ed. 3] Ibid. 188. | Ibid. 188. 243. 〈7〉 [ed. 7] by a writ | by writ

〈8〉 [ed. 5] tenants thereof, | tenants therein, 〈9〉 [ed. 3] But this privilege of seniority is then personal; | The privilege of

seniority is in this case personal;

〈10〉 [ed. 3] This general division | This mode of division 〈11〉 [ed. 9] in hotchpot, | into hotchpot, 〈12〉 [ed. 3] law, so properly as per formam | law, but by the designation of the giver,

per formam

〈13〉 [ed. 3] give | gives

〈14〉 [ed. 5] is a joint-tenancy; | is a joint-tenancy [Footnote: [Morgan’s case] Poph. 52.];

[ed. 9] is a joint-tenancy; | is said to be a joint-tenancy;

〈15〉 [ed. 5] is implied in the word “jointly,” even though the word “severally” seems

to imply the direct reverse: and | is necessarily implied in the word “jointly,” the word “severally” perhaps only implying the power of partition: and

〈16〉 [ed. 8] account to his | account with his





Chapter 13


〈1〉 [ed. 7] is either in himself or in | is not in himself but in 〈2〉 [ed. 3] now the heir | now, by the common law, the heir 380 varia: chapter 14

〈3〉 [ed. 3] Litt. §. 386. | Litt. §. 385. 〈4〉 [ed. 8] on the spot | upon the spot





Chapter 14


〈1〉 [ed. 8] abandoned the estate | abandoned his estate 〈2〉 [ed. 7] idea | ideas

〈3〉 [ed. 3] into those | in those

〈4〉 [ed. 3] fee-tail | fees-tail

〈5〉 [ed. 5] consanguinity, in the first volume of law tracts. Oxon. 1762. 8º. |

consanguinity. (Law tracts, Oxon. 1762. 8º, or 1771. 4º.)

〈6〉 [ed. 5] descend from each other. | descend one from the other. 〈7〉 [ed. 3] kinsman as such | kinsman are such 〈8〉 [ed. 9] encrease in a duplicate ratio: therefore the descendants must encrease

in | encrease upwards in a duplicate ratio: therefore the descendants must encrease downwards in

〈9〉 [ed. 9] person last actually | person who last died actually 〈10〉 [ed. 8]inheritance in lands | inheritance of lands 〈11〉 [ed. 9] our subsequent Danish predecessors seem | our Danish predecessors

(who succeeded them) seem

〈12〉 [ed. 5] called a succession | called succession 〈13〉 [ed. 3] persons | person

〈14〉 [ed. 8] rights | right

〈15〉 [ed. 9] descendants, or issue, of the person last seised, the inheritance shall

descend to the blood | descendants, of issue, of the person last seised, the inheritance shall descend to his collateral relations, being of the blood

〈16〉 [ed. 9] died possessed of | died seised of 〈17〉 [ed. 9] other purchasing ancestor) “shall also be heir to the son.” | other real or

supposed purchasing ancestor) “shall also be heir to the son;” a maxim, that will hold universally, except in the case of a brother or sister of the half blood, which exception (as we shall see hereafter) depends upon very special grounds.

〈18〉 [ed. 9] The remaining rules are only rules of evidence, calculated to investigate

who that purchasing | The rules of inheritance that remain are only rules of evidence, calculated to investigate who the purchasing

〈19〉 [ed. 9] ancestor, and therefore deriving only one fourth of his blood from the

same fountain with the propositus; the latter, and also the propositus, being each of them distant only two degrees from the common ancestor, and therefore | ancestor (the father of the propositus) and therefore deriving only one fourth of his blood from the same fountain; the latter, and also the propositus himself, being each of them distant only two degrees from the common ancestor (the grandfather of each) and therefore

varia: chapter 14 381

〈20〉 [ed. 9] representation (of the father by the son, &c.) is | representation, of the

parent by the issue, is

〈21〉 [ed. 9] no inconvenience | no material inconvenience 〈22〉 [ed. 9] inheritances, as their father also, when living, was; those of his uncle in

the second; and so on; and | inheritances, those of his uncle in the second, and those of his great uncle in the third; as their respective ancestors, if living, would have been; and

〈23〉 [ed. 9] to the issue of | to the other subsisting issue of 〈24〉 [ed. 9] brother, who is lineally descended from Geoffrey Stiles his next |

brother, or his representatives; he being lineally descended from Geoffrey Stiles, John’s next

〈25〉 [ed. 3] the sons of | the offspring of 〈26〉 [ed. 9] it is in the first place necessary | it is first necessary 〈27〉 [ed. 9] some ancestors | some couple of ancestors 〈28〉 [ed. 3] have just been laid | have before been laid 〈29〉 [ed. 9] excluded. | excluded: nay, the estate shall escheat to the lord, sooner

than the half-blood shall inherit.

〈30〉 [ed. 8] but of that | but that

〈31〉 [ed. 9] seised: but, had A | seised; but it shall descend to a sister (if any) of the

whole blood to A: for in such cases the maxim is, that the seisin or possessio fratris facit sororem esse haeredem [the seisin of the brother makes the sister heir]. Yet, had A

〈32〉 [ed. 9] that an heir | that the heir 〈33〉 [ed. 3] is neither an injustice nor a hardship; | is not an injustice, nor always a

hardship;

〈34〉 [ed. 7] of whole blood | of the whole blood 〈35〉 [ed. 9] that may belong | that belong 〈36〉 [ed. 3] Particularly, when | Particularly, when a kinsman of the whole blood in

a remoter degree, as the uncle or great uncle, is preferred to one of the half blood in a nearer degree, as the brother: for the half-brother hath the same chance of being descended from the purchasing ancestor, as the uncle; and a thrice better chance than the great uncle, or kinsman in the third degree. It is also more especially overstrained, when

〈37〉 [ed. 3] now the younger son cannot inherit this estate, because he is not of the

whole blood to the last proprietor | in which case the younger son cannot inherit this estate, because he is not of the whole blood to the last proprietor [ed. 5: Footnote: A still harder case than this happened [YB] M. 10 Edw. III. On the death of a man, who had three daughters by a first wife, and a fourth by another, his lands descended equally to all four as coparceners. Afterwards the two eldest died without issue: and it was held, that the third daughter alone should inherit their shares, as being their heir of the whole blood; and that the youngest daughter should retain only her original fourth 382 varia: chapter 15

part of their common father’s lands ([YB 10 Edw. III] 10 Ass. 27.) And yet it was clear law in [YB] M. 19 Edw. II. that, where lands had descended to two sisters of the half blood, as coparceners, each might be heir of these [ed. 8: those] lands to the other. (Mayn. Edw. II. 628. Fitzb. abr. t. quare impedit. 177.)]

〈 38〉 [ed. 9] if the custom | if originally the custom 〈 39〉 [ed. 3] as even | and possibly in England also; as even 〈 40〉 [ed. 3] in this single instance, and ordaining that the half blood might inherit,

where the estate notoriously descended from its own proper ancestor, but not otherwise; or how | in one or two instances, and ordaining that the half blood might always inherit, where the estate notoriously descended from its own proper ancestor, and, in cases of new-purchased lands or uncertain descents, should never be excluded by the whole blood in a remoter degree; or how

〈 41〉 [ed. 9] be submitted to | be still submitted to 〈 42〉 [ed. 9] from two. | from both. 〈 43〉 [ed. 3] and to avoid the confusion and uncertainty that must arise | and to

avoid the confusion and uncertainty that might arise [ed. 9] and likewise to avoid all other confusion and uncertainty that might arise

〈44〉 [ed. 9] sought for, VII. | sought for, another qualification is requisite, besides the

proximity and entirety, which is that of dignity or worthiness, of blood. For, VII.

〈 45〉 [ed. 9] male ancestors shall be admitted before those from the blood of the

female) | male ancestors, however remote, shall be admitted before those from the blood of the female, however near,)

〈 46〉 [ed. 3] our law | our English law 〈 47〉 [ed. 9] or canon before | or principal canon of collateral inheritance, before 〈 48〉 [ed. 5] than the father’s | than from the father’s 〈 49〉 [ed. 9] Hale. And yet, | Hale: because, it is said, that all the female ancestors on

the part of the father are equally worthy of blood; and, in that case, proximity shall prevail. And yet,

〈 50〉 [ed. 9] ventured to give | ventured (in point of theory, for the case never yet

occurred in practice) to give

〈 51〉 [ed. 9] Manwoode. 4. | Manwoode; since the blood of n° 10 was derived to the

purchasor through a greater number of males than the blood of n° 11, and was therefore in their opinion the more worthy of the two. 4.

〈52〉 [ed. 9] table; and destroys | table; wherein n° 16, which is analogous in the maternal

line to n° 10 in the paternal, is preferred to n° 18, which is analogous to n° 11, upon the authority of the eighth rule laid down by Hale himself: and it destroys





Chapter 15


〈1〉 [ed. 8] he is born, | he was born, 〈2〉 [ed. 5] Co. Litt. 23. | Co. Litt. 22. 〈3〉 [ed. 5] land | lands

varia: chapter 16 383

〈4〉 [ed. 7] call | called

〈5〉 [ed. 5] who first brought | who brought 〈6〉 [ed. 9: Footnote deleted]

〈7〉 [ed. 9] he had any estate of inheritance vested in him (or in some other in

trust for him) by descent from that ancestor, | he (or any other in trust for him) had any estate of inheritance vested in him by descent from (or any estate pur auter vie coming to him by special occupancy, as heir to [Footnote: Ibid. §. 12.]) that ancestor,

〈8〉 [ed. 9] Stat. 29 Car. II. c. 3. | Stat. 29 Car. II. c. 3. §. 10. 〈9〉 [ed. 9] distribution by our legal writers seems in this respect rather inaccurate:

for, | distribution of titles by our legal writers, into those by descent and by purchase, seems in this respect rather inaccurate, and not marked with sufficient precision: for,

〈10〉 [ed. 8] to lands, | to the lands,

〈11〉 [ed. 8] 1 Ventr. 473. | 1 Ventr. 413. 〈12〉 [ed. 9] each other. | each other; the descent from one brother to another being

an immediate descent. [Footnote: See pag. 226.] [II. 152.]

〈13〉 [ed. 7] Francis hath a child, it was feared | Francis hath [ed. 8: has] a child

born in England, it was feared

〈14〉 [ed. 7] which daughter shall resign such inheritance to her after-born brother,

or divide it with her after-born sisters, | which descent shall be divested in favour of an after-born brother, or the inheritance shall be divided with an after-born sister or sisters,

〈15〉 [ed. 5] seem | seems

〈16〉 [ed. 5] all he now has should escheat | all he now has shall escheat

[ed. 8] all that he now has shall escheat

〈17〉 [ed. 7] should be | shall be

〈18〉 [ed. 9] king so long as | king for a year and a day, and so long after as 〈19〉 [ed. 9] the same principles, | the principles beforementioned, 〈20〉 [ed. 3] the pretender, | the late pretender, 〈21〉 [ed. 9] properly reducible | strictly reducible





Chapter 16


〈1〉 [ed. 8] grantor; who had parted | grantor; though formerly [Footnote: Bract.

l. 2. c. 9. l. 4. tr. 3. c. 9. §. 4. Flet. l. 3. c. 12. §. 6. l. 5. c. 5. §. 15.] held so to do; for he had parted

[ed. 9] grantor; though it formerly [Footnote: as above] was supposed so to do; for he had parted

〈2〉 [ed. 8] enacts, that where | enacts (according to the antient rule of law)

[Footnote: Bract. ibid. Flet. ibid.] that where 384 varia: chapter 18

〈3〉 [ed. 5] executors and | executors or administrators and 〈4〉 [ed. 5] that it shall vest not only in the executors, but, in case the tenant dies

intestate, in the administrators also; and go in | that the surplus of such estate pur auter vie, after payment of debts, shall go in

〈5〉 [ed. 8] grant. The doctrine of common occupancy may however be usefully

remembered on the following account, among others: that, as by the common law no occupancy could be of incorporeal hereditaments, | grant. But, as before the statutes there could no common occupancy be had of incorporeal hereditaments,

〈6〉 [ed. 8] Co. Litt. 41. | Co. Litt. 41. Vaugh. 201. 〈7〉 [ed. 8: Footnote omitted]

〈8〉 [ed. 7] For the statutes must not be construed so as to create any new estate,

or to keep | For these statutes must not be construed so as to create any new estate, or to keep [ed 8: or keep]

〈9〉 [ed. 3] executors, &c, instead of the first occupant; but they will not create a

residue, on purpose to give it the executors. | executors and administrators, instead of the first occupant; but they will not create a residue, on purpose to give it to either.

[ed. 7] either [Footnote: But see now the statute 5 Geo. III. c. 17. which makes leases for one, two or three lives by ecclesiastical persons or any eleemosynary corporation, of tithes or other incorporeal hereditaments, as good and effectual to all intents and purposes as leases of corporeal possessions.].

〈10〉 [ed. 9] in a river, or by the alluvion or dereliction of the sea; | in the sea or in

a river, or by the alluvion or dereliction of the waters

〈11〉 [ed. 9] as it must be whenever a several fishery is claimed, there it seems just

(and so is the usual practice) | as it usually is whenever a several fishery is claimed, there it seems just (and so is the constant practice)

〈12〉 [ed. 9] Salk. 637. | Salk. 637. See pag. 39 [II. 25]. 〈13〉 [ed. 3] adjoining | adjoining. [Footnote: 2 Roll. Abr. 170. [Huntley’s case] Dyer.

326.]

〈14〉 [ed. 9] ground, he | ground, it is said that he





Chapter 17


〈1〉 [ed. 9] For no man can be | For a man shall not be 〈2〉 [ed. 9] prescribe, whose | prescribe for any thing, whose 〈3〉 [ed. 8] Thus a lord | Thus the lord





Chapter 18


〈1〉 [ed. 8] licence of mortmain | licence in mortmain 〈2〉 [ed. 9] orders. And so careful was | orders. So careful indeed was

varia: chapter 19 385

〈3〉 [ed. 5] of the next | of their next 〈4〉 [ed. 8] land | lands

〈5〉 [ed. 3] consequences | consequence 〈6〉 [ed. 5] Bro. Abr. tit. Quar. Imped. 131. Cro. Jac. 518. | Bro. Abr. tit. Quar. Imped.

3 Cro. Jac. 518.

〈7〉 [ed. 5] clerk; but | clerk; or, after induction, may remove him by quare

impedit: but

〈8〉 [ed. 3] it is not | it was not

〈9〉 [ed. 8] only. Also by | only. But if the presentee dies, without being convicted

of such simony in his life-time, it is enacted by stat. 1 W. & M. c. 16. that the simoniacal contract shall not prejudice any other innocent patron, on pretence of lapse to the crown or otherwise. Also by

〈10〉 [ed. 3] book IV. | book IV. ch. 4. 〈11〉 [ed. 3] wantonly and without | wantonly or without 〈12〉 [ed. 3] 6 Ann. c. 3. no action will lie against a tenant for an accident of this

kind, lest misfortune be added to misfortune. | 6 Ann. c. 31. no action will lie against a tenant for an accident of this kind.

〈13〉 [ed. 8] are thereupon considered | are for that reason considered 〈14〉 [ed. 5] whatever tends | whatever else tends 〈15〉 [ed. 3] 52 Hen. III. c. 24. | 52 Hen. III. c. 23. 〈16〉 [ed. 5] tenants for life or for any less estate, have been | tenants merely for life,

or for any less estate (except tenants by statute merchant, statute staple, recognizance, or elegit, against whom the debtor may set off the damages in account [Footnote: Co. Litt. 54.]) have been

[ed. 9] tenants merely for life, or for any less estate, have been

〈17〉 [ed. 9] committed. | committed. But tenant in tail after possibility of issue extinct

is not impeachable for waste; because his estate was at its creation an estate of inheritance, and so not within the statutes [Footnote: Co. Litt. 27. 2 Roll. Abr. 826, 828.]. Neither does an action of waste lie for the debtor against tenant by statute, recognizance, or elegit; because against them the debtor may set off the damages in account [Footnote: Co. Litt. 54.]: but it seems reasonable that it should lie for the reversioner, expectant on the determination of the debtor’s own estate, or of these estates derived from the debtor [Footnote: F. N. B. 58.].

〈 18〉 [ed. 3] The statute expressly includes | This statute expressly included 〈 19〉 [ed. 8] but copyhold, | but customary and copyhold,





Chapter 19


〈1〉 [ed. 5] See pag. 72. | See pag. 72. 91 [II. 48, 61]. 〈2〉 [ed. 9] necessary, by statutes 4 & 5 Ann. c. 16. and 11 Geo. II. c. 19. | necessary

to complete the grant or conveyance, by statutes 4 & 5 Ann. c. 16. nor shall, by 386 varia: chapter 20

statute 11 Geo. II. c. 19. the attornment of any tenant affect the possession of any lands, unless made with consent of the landlord, or to a mortgagee after the mortgage is forfeited, or by direction of a court of justice.

〈3〉 [ed. 5] fol. 228. | fol. 228. See also Memorand. Scacch. 22 Edw. I. (prefixed to

Maynard’s yearbook Edw. II.) fol. 23.

〈 4〉 [ed. 9] 4 Rep. 123. | 4 Rep. 123. [YB 35 Edw. III] Jenk. 40. 〈 5〉 [ed. 5] ceases. | ceases. Yet the guardians or committees of a lunatic, by the

statute 11 Geo. III. c. 20. are impowered to renew in his right under the directions of the court of chancery, any lease for lives or years, and apply the profits of such renewal for the benefit of such lunatic, his heirs, or executors.

〈 6〉 [ed. 9] religion, are | religion, and neglecting to take the oath prescribed by

statute 18 Geo. III. c. 60. within the time limited for that purpose, are

〈 7〉 [ed. 9] void. But this statute is construed to extend only to papists above the

age of eighteen; such only being absolutely disabled to purchase: yet the next protestant heir of a papist under eighteen shall have the profits, during his life; unless he renounces his errors within the time limited by law. II. | void. II.





Chapter 20


〈1〉 [ed. 8] which was divided | which is divided 〈2〉 [ed. 5] and is therefore | and therefore 〈3〉 [ed. 8] deed. | deed, and subject such persons, as put the same in ure, to

forfeitures, and often to imprisonment.

〈4〉 [ed. 9] hereditaments, (except | hereditaments, made by livery of seisin, or by

parol only, (except

〈5〉 [ed. 9] will; unless put in writing, | will; nor shall any assignment, grant, or

surrender of any interest in any freehold hereditaments be valid; unless in both cases the same be put in writing,

〈6〉 [ed. 3] the habendum cannot lessen, but it may enlarge, the estate granted in the

premises; as if | the habendum may lessen, enlarge, explain, or qualify, but not totally contradict or be repugnant to, the estate granted in the premises. As if

〈7〉 [ed. 3] ever,” here | ever,” or vice versa; here 〈8〉 [ed. 3] Co. Litt. 21. | Co. Litt. 21. [Thurman & Cooper’s case] 2 Roll. Rep. 19.

[Thurman v Cooper] 23. [Turnman v Cooper] Cro. Jac. 476.

〈9〉 [ed. 3] “to him and the heirs of his body,” the habendum would be utterly void;

for the larger and more beneficial estate is vested in him before the habendum comes, and shall not afterwards be narrowed, or devested, | “to him for life,” the habendum would be utterly void; for an estate of inheritance is vested in him before the habendum comes, and shall not afterwards be taken away, or devested,

〈10〉 [ed. 3] 8 Rep. 154. | [Baldwin’s case] 2 Rep. 23. [Earl of Rutland’s case] 8 Rep. 56.

varia: chapter 20 387

〈11〉 [ed. 8] terms or stipulations, | terms of stipulation, 〈12〉 [ed. 3] This render, reditus, return, or rent, under the pure feodal system

consisted, | Under the pure feodal system, this render, reditus, return, or rent, consisted

〈13〉 [ed. 9] tail, descending | tail, in possession, descending 〈14〉 [ed. 3] rent, to repair the premises, &c. | rent, or keep the premises in repair,

&c.

〈15〉 [ed. 9] warranty, and it has therefore in modern | warranty. It is also in some

respects a less security, and therefore more beneficial to the grantor; who usually covenants only for the acts of himself and his ancestors, whereas a general warranty extends to all mankind. For which reasons the covenant has in modern

〈16〉 [ed. 3] use here. | use in England. 〈17〉 [ed. 9] cross. | cross. And in the reign of Edward I. every freeman, and even

such of the more substantial villeins as were fit to be put upon juries, had their distinct particular seals [Footnote: Stat. Exon. 14 Edw. 1.].

〈18〉 [ed. 5] devises: | devices:

〈19〉 [ed. 9] 2 Inst. 78. | 2 Inst. 78. See pag. 378 [II. 256]. 〈20〉 [ed. 9] in many cases | in most cases 〈21〉 [ed. 9] like. 6. | like. 5.

〈22〉 [ed. 5] of a feodal grant, | of the feodal grant, 〈23〉 [ed. 3] estate he meant | estate which he meant 〈24〉 [ed. 3] hath both | had both

〈25〉 [ed. 3] cannot be made | cannot (at the common law) be made 〈26〉 [ed. 5] restrictions, | restriction, 〈27〉 [ed. 5] churches, except parsons | churches, which extends not to parsons 〈28〉 [ed. 9] bishop or ecclesiastical | bishop or any such ecclesiastical 〈29〉 [ed. 8] have been | had been

〈30〉 [ed. 5] and 18 Eliz. c. 11. which direct, | 18 Eliz. c. 11. and 43 Eliz. c. 9. which

direct,

〈31〉 [ed. 9] tortious. | tortious or wrongful. 〈32〉 [ed. 5] 1 Ric. II. c. 9. | 1 Ric. II. c. 9. [Chudleigh’s case] 1 Rep. 139. 〈33〉 [ed. 8] wife who was assigned her dower, | wife to whom dower was assigned, 〈34〉 [ed. 3] performed | performed [Footnote: 1 Hal. P. C. 248.] 〈35〉 [ed. 9] intolerable. They now consider a trust-estate (either when expressly

declared or resulting by necessary implication) | intolerable. The statute of frauds, 29 Car. II. c. 3. having required that every declaration, assignment, or grant of any trust in lands or hereditaments, (except such as arise from implication or construction of law) shall be made in writing signed by the party, or by his written will; the courts now consider a trust-estate (either when expressly declared or resulting by such implication)

388 varia: chapter 21

〈36〉 [ed. 9] debts, to forfeiture, | debts, to executions on judgements, statutes and

recognizances, (by the express provision of the statute of frauds) to forfeiture,

〈37〉 [ed. 5] to the | of the

〈38〉 [ed. 8] impossible is it | impossible it is 〈39〉 [ed. 9] Noy) | Noy, attorney general to Charles I.) 〈40〉 [ed. 8] was recoverable | was formerly recoverable 〈41〉 [ed. 8] And the statute 4 & 5 Ann. c. 16. hath also enacted, | And the like

practice having gained some footing in the courts of law [Footnote: [Stern v Vanburgh] 2 Keb. 553. [Stern v Vanburgh] 555. [Gregg’s case] Salk. 596, 597. [Anon. (1703)] 6 Mod. 11. [Burridge v Fortescue] 60. [Ireland’s case] 101.], the statute 4 & 5 Ann. c. 16. at length enacted,

〈42〉 [ed. 9] Stat. 29 Car. II. c. 3. §. 18. | Stat. 29 Car. II. c. 3. See pag. 161 [II. 108 〈11〉]. 〈43〉 [ed. 3] for mortgages made | for the starrs or mortgages made





Chapter 21


〈1〉 [ed. 8] thought ought to prevail | thought was intitled to prevail 〈2〉 [ed. 9] named. | named: though it hath been holden, that, even if such saving

be omitted, the act shall bind none but the parties [Footnote: Co. 138. [Anon. (1610)] Godb. 171.].

〈3〉 [ed. 3] session; and no judge | session; it hath been relieved against, when

obtained upon fraudulent suggestions [ed. 8: Footnote: Richardson v. Hamilton. Canc. 8 Jan. 1733. McKenzie v. Stuart. Dom. Proc. 13 Mar. 1754.]; and no judge

[ed. 9] session; it hath been relieved against, when obtained upon fraudulent suggestions [Footnote as in ed. 8]; it hath been holden to be void, if contrary to law and reason [Footnote: [The Lord Cromwell’s case] 4 Rep. 1]; and no judge

〈4〉 [ed. 3] land; and the | land or other hereditaments; and the 〈5〉 [ed. 9] even before the | even prior to the 〈6〉 [ed. 3] covenant | covenant [Footnote: A fine may also be levied on a writ of

mesne, of warrantia chartae, or de consuetudinibus et servitiis. (Finch. L. 278.)]

〈7〉 [ed. 3] Append. No. IV. §. 2. | Append. No. IV. §. 2. In the times of strict feodal

jurisdiction, if a vasal had commenced a suit in the lord’s court, he could not abandon it without leave; lest the lord should be deprived of his perquisites for deciding the cause. (Robertson. Cha. V. i.31.)

〈8〉 [ed. 3] 2 Inst. 511. | 2 Inst. 511. Stat. 32 Geo. II. c. 14. 〈9〉 [ed. 9] before one of the judges of that court, or else before commissioners |

before the lord chief justice of that court; or else before one of the judges of that court, or two or more commissioners

〈10〉 [ed. 9] in court sixteen times; viz. four times in the term in which it is made,

and four times in each of the three succeeding terms; during which time all pleas shall cease: but this is reduced | in court (during which all pleas shall

varia: chapter 21 389

cease) sixteen times; viz. four times in the term in which it is made, and four times in each of the three succeeding terms, which is reduced

〈11〉 [ed. 8] claim within a year | claim on the foot [Footnote: Sur la pie [on the

foot] as it is in the Cotton MS, and not pur la [ed. 9 le] pais [by the country] as printed by Berthelet and in 2 Inst. 511. There were then four methods of claiming, so as to avoid being concluded by a fine: 1. By action. 2. By entring such claim on the record at the foot of the fine. 3. By entry on the lands. 4. By continual claim. 2 Inst. 518. The second is not now in force under the statute of Henry VII.] of the fine within a year

〈12〉 [ed. 8] made in 34 Edw. I. c. 16. | made in 34 Edw. III. c. 16. 〈13〉 [ed. 9] 4 Hen. VII. c. 24. | 4 Hen. VII. c. 24. See pag. 118 [II. 79 and note q]. 〈14〉 [ed. 8] claim, not within | claim, by way of action or lawful entry, not within 〈15〉 [ed. 5] life or years levies | life levies 〈16〉 [ed. 5] habuerunt.” And thus | habuerunt.” And, even if a tenant for years,

who hath only a chattel interest, and no freehold in the land, levies a fine, it operates nothing, but is liable to be defeated by the same plea [Footnote: [Saffyn’s case] 5 Rep. 123. [Focus v Salisbury] Hardr. 401.]. Wherefore, when a lessee for years is disposed to levy a fine, it is usual for him to make a feoffment first, to displace the estate of the reversioner [Footnote: [Focus v Salisbury] Hardr. 402. [Whaley v Tankard] 2 Lev. 52.], and create a new freehold by disseisin. And thus

〈 17〉 [ed. 5] should ever obtain | should obtain 〈 18〉 [ed. 9] colonies, but by the precedent | colonies, and the decisions of our own

courts of justice, which allow a tenant in tail (without fine or recovery) to appoint his estate to any charitable use [Footnote: See pag. 376.] [II. 254–5], but also by the precedent

〈 19〉 [ed. 3] settled on her in tail by way of jointure by her husband or any | settled

on her by her husband or settled on her husband and her by any

〈 20〉 [ed. 9] had, it is as effectual | had against the tenant to the praecipe, it is as

effectual

〈 21〉 [ed. 9] praecipe: and that, | praecipe;—that, 〈 22〉 [ed. 3] with remainder to himself | with reversion to himself 〈 23〉 [ed. 3] usually covenants to levy a fine (or, if there be any remainders over, to

suffer a recovery) to E, and that the same | usually covenants to levy a fine (or, if there be any intermediate remainders, to suffer a recovery) to E, and that the same

[ed. 9] usually, after making the settlement proposed, covenants to levy a fine (or, if there be any intermediate remainders, to suffer a recovery) to E, and directs that the same

〈 24〉 [ed. 5] the conusee or recoveree, hath | the cognizee or recoveror, hath 〈 25〉 [ed. 5] of Abraham | to Abraham 〈 26〉 [ed. 9] marriage; remainder to John Barker for life; remainder to trustees to

preserve the contingent remainders; remainder to his widow for life, for her 390 varia: chapter 23

jointure; remainder to other trustees, for a term of five hundred years; remainder to their first and other sons in tail; remainder to their daughters | marriage of John Barker with Katherine Edwards, and then to John Barker for life; remainder to trustees to preserve the contingent remainders; remainder to his wife Katharine for life, for her jointure; remainder to other trustees, for a term of five hundred years; remainder to the first and other sons; of the marriage in tail; remainder to the daughters

〈27〉 [ed. 3] and it is agreed that | and that 〈28〉 [ed. 3] are declared to be | are to be 〈29〉 [ed. 9] notwithstanding the statute of frauds 29 Car. II. c. 3. enacts, that all

trusts shall be declared in writing, at (and not after) the time when such trusts are created. | notwithstanding any doubts that had arisen on the statute of frauds 29 Car. II. c. 3. to the contrary.





Chapter 22


〈1〉 [ed. 8] provided that also have a custom to warrant it; | provided there be also

a custom to warrant it;

〈2〉 [ed. 8] solenniter | solemniter 〈3〉 [ed. 9] fealty annexed, | fealty is annexed, 〈4〉 [ed. 9] possibly be | properly be 〈5〉 [ed. 9] No feoffment, fine, or recovery (in the king’s courts) has any operation

thereupon. | No feoffment, or grant has any operation thereupon.

〈6〉 [ed. 9] admission. | admission. A fine or recovery had of copyhold lands in the

king’s court may indeed, if not duly reversed, alter the tenure of the lands, and convert them into frank fee [Footnote: Old Nat. Brev. t. briefe de recto clauso. F. N. B. 13.], which is defined in the old book of tenures [Footnote: t. tenir en franke fee.] to be “land pleadable at the common law:” but upon an action on the case, in the nature of a writ of deceit, brought by the lord in the king’s court, such fine or recovery will be reversed, the lord will recover his jurisdiction, and the lands will be restored to their former state of copyhold [Footnote: See Vol. III. p. 166* [see III. 112; two additional pages, numbered 165* and 166*, were inserted in the ninth ed.]].

〈7〉 [ed. 8] act; except in the case of a surrender to the use of his will, which is

always revocable. | act.

〈8〉 [ed. 9] then presented | then to be presented





Chapter 23


〈1〉 [ed. 3] suspicious | suspicious [Footnote: Glanv. l. 7. c. 1.] 〈2〉 [ed. 7] 27 Hen. VIII. c. 10. | 27 Hen. VIII. c. 10. See [Anon. (1557)] Dyer. 143.

varia: chapter 24 391

〈3〉 [ed. 9] person, but not to | person, except to 〈4〉 [ed. 7] And a similar solemnity is | And a solemnity nearly similar is 〈5〉 [ed. 9] devise. | devise by writing; though the same may be also revoked by

burning, cancelling, tearing, or obliterating thereof by the devisor, or in his presence and with his consent: as likewise impliedly, by such a great and intire alteration in the circumstances and situation of the devisor, as arises from marriage and the birth of a child [Footnote: Christopher v. Christopher. Scacch. 6 Jul. 1771. Spragge v. Stone, at the Cockpit, 27 Mar. 1773. by Wilmot, de Grey, and Parker. See pag. 502 [II. 339].

〈6〉 [ed. 3] in a case determined about twenty years ago, the judges | in one case

determined by the court of king’s-bench, the judges

〈7〉 [ed. 3] credit (as well as that | credit (like that 〈8〉 [ed. 5] reasons of the former determination were adjudged to be insufficient.

| reasons given on the former determination were said to be insufficient.

〈9〉 [ed. 7] 1 P. Wms. 575. | 1 P. W ms. 575. [Arthur v Bokenham] 11 Mod. 148. 〈10〉 [ed. 5] proferentem.” | proferentem.” As, if tenant in fee-simple grants to any

one an estate for life, generally, it shall be construed an estate for the life of the grantee [Footnote: Co. Litt. 42.].

〈11〉 [ed. 9] but the other | because the other 〈12〉 [ed. 5] him. However, this, being a rule | him. And, in general, this rule being

a rule

〈13〉 [ed. 9] lease for life generally, it shall be construed for | lease to have and to

hold during life generally, it shall be construed to be a lease for

〈14〉 [ed. 8] legal and proper | legal or proper 〈15〉 [ed. 5] 1 Ventr. 376. | [YB] H. 13 Hen. VII. 17. 1 Ventr. 376. 〈16〉 [ed. 5] no cross | no such cross

〈17〉 [ed. 7] to uses, | of uses,

〈18〉 [ed. 3] cases have | causes have





Chapter 24


〈1〉 [ed. 8] chattels, catalla; which, sir Edward Coke says, is a French word

signifying goods. And this is true, if understood of the Norman dialect; for in the grand coustumier, we find the word chattels used and set in opposition | chattels; which, sir Edward Coke says, is a French word signifying goods. The appellation is in truth derived from the technical Latin word, catalla; which primarily signified only beasts of husbandry, or (as we still call them) cattle, but in its secondary sense was applied to all moveables in general [Footnote: Dufresne. II. 409.]. In the grand coustumier of Normandy a chattel is described as a mere moveable, but at the same time it is set in opposition

〈2〉 [ed. 8] And it is, I apprehend, in the same large, extended, | And it is in this

latter, more extended, 392 varia: chapter 26

〈3〉 [ed. 8] coustumier | coustumier [Footnote: Il conviendroit quil fust non

mouuable, et de duree a tousiours [It must be immovable, and last forever]. fol. 107. a.] [Blackstone refers to the second (1539) edition of Guillaume Le Rouillé’s commentary on Le Grand Coustumier.]

〈4〉 [ed. 8] Cateux sont | So too, in the Norman law, Cateux sont 〈5〉 [ed. 8] it is sure to expire | it will certainly expire 〈6〉 [ed. 8] chivalry were sure to expire the | chivalry expired of course the





Chapter 25


〈1〉 [ed. 3] parts, when severed from the plant, or | parts of a plant, when severed

from the body of it; or

〈2〉 [ed. 3] (especially those of | (especially of 〈3〉 [ed. 7] nests | nest

〈4〉 [ed. 8] seise | seize

〈5〉 [ed. 3] were the | was the

〈6〉 [ed. 3] earth or land; | earth and land; 〈7〉 [ed. 9] property therein: the | property in them: the 〈8〉 [ed. 9] quotiens ad reciperandam | quotiens ad recuperandam 〈9〉 [ed. 3] by his breach | by this breach 〈10〉 [ed. 3] property of such things in action, as of things in possession. | property

in, and be as well intitled to, such things in action, as to things in possession.





Chapter 26


〈1〉 [ed. 5] By gift. | By gift, or grant. 〈2〉 [ed. 4] held | holden

〈3〉 [ed. 4] them is lost | them was lost 〈4〉 [ed. 8] setting such a prisoner | setting such his prisoner 〈5〉 [ed. 5] and continue therefore in | and are therefore supposed to continue in

〈6〉 [ed. 5] property consists | property (if it indeed continues) consists 〈7〉 [ed. 4] and must continue. | and may continue. 〈8〉 [ed. 4] 2 Vern. 516. | 1 Hal. P. C. 513. 2 Vern. 516. 〈9〉 [ed. 7] which, being | which (if it subsists [ed. 9: by the common law]) being

〈10〉 [ed. 9] he has clearly | he seems to have clearly 〈11〉 [ed. 9] it, is an invasion of his right of property. | it, appears to be an invasion

of that right.

〈12〉 [ed. 9] is so conveyed; | is so exhibited; 〈13〉 [ed. 7] man can | man (it hath been thought) can 〈14〉 [ed. 9] right to convey or transfer it without his consent, either tacitly or expressly

given. | right to exhibit it, especially for profit, without the author’s consent.

varia: chapter 26 393

〈15〉 [ed. 9] given, when an author permits his work to be published, without any

reserve | given to all mankind, when an author suffers his work to be published by another hand, without any claim or reserve

〈16〉 [ed. 9] like the building of a church, or the laying | like building a church or

bridge, or laying

〈17〉 [ed. 7] in case of a bargain for a single impression, or a sale or gift of the

copyright, the reversion is plainly continued in the original proprietor, or the whole property transferred to another. | in case of a bargain for a single impression, or a total sale or gift of the copyright, in the one case the reversion hath been supposed to continue in the original proprietor; in the other the whole property, with all its exclusive rights, to be perpetually transferred to the grantee. On the other hand, it is urged, that though the exclusive property of the manuscript, and all which it contains, undoubtedly belongs to the author, before it is printed or published; yet from the instant of publication, the exclusive right of an author or his assigns to the sole communication of his ideas immediately vanishes and evaporates; as being a right of too subtile and unsubstantial a nature to become the subject of property at the common law, and only capable of being guarded by positive statutes and special provisions of the magistrate.

[ed. 9] in case the author sells a single book, or totally grants the copyright, it hath been supposed, in the one case, that the buyer hath no more right to multiply copies of that book for sale, than he hath to imitate for the like purpose the ticket which is bought for admission to an opera or concert; and that, in the other, the whole property, with its exclusive rights, is perpetually transferred […] provisions of the magistrate.

〈18〉 [ed. 9] any thing, though never so elegantly, on the paper or parchment of

another, the writing should belong to the original owner of the materials on which it was writtenc: meaning certainly nothing more thereby, than the mere mechanical | any thing on the paper or parchment of another, the writing should belong to the owner of the blank materialsc: meaning thereby the mechanical

〈19〉 [ed. 9] Inst. 2. 1. 33. | Inst. 2. 1. 33. See pag. 404 [II. 274]. 〈20〉 [ed. 9] especially as, in works of genius and invention, such as a picture

painted on another man’s canvas, the same law gave the canvas to the painter. We find no other mention in the civil law of any property in the works of the understanding, though | for, in works of genius and invention, as in painting on another man’s canvas, the same law gave the canvas to the painter. As to any other property in the works of the understanding, the law is silent; though

〈21〉 [ed. 4] any direct determination | any final [Footnote: In the case of Millar and

Taylor in B.R. Pasch. 9 Geo. III. it was determined (upon solemn argument and great consideration) by the opinion of three judges against one, that an exclusive copyright in authors subsists by the common law. But a writ of error hath been since brought in the exchequer-chamber, to take the sense of the rest of the judges upon this nice and important question.] determination 394 varia: chapter 26

[ed. 5] any final [Footnote: Since this was written, it hath been determined in the case of Millar and Taylor in B.R. Pasch. 9 Geo. III. (upon solemn argument and great consideration) by the opinion of three judges against one, that an exclusive copyright in authors subsists by the common law.] determination [ed. 7] (till very lately) any final [Footnote: Since this was written, it was determined in the case of Millar v. Taylor in B.R. Pasch. 9 Geo. III. 1769, that an exclusive copyright in authors subsisted by the common law. But afterwards, in the case of Donaldson v. Becket, before the house of lords, which was finally determined 22 Febr. 1774, it was held that no copyright subsists in authors, after the expiration of the several terms created by the statute of queen Anne.] determination

[ed. 9] (till very lately) any final [Footnote: Since this was first written, it was determined in the case of Millar v. Taylor in B.R. Pasch. 9 Geo. III. 1769, that an exclusive and permanent copyright in authors subsisted by the common law. But afterwards, in the case of Donaldson v. Becket, before the house of lords, 22 Febr. 1774, it was held that no copyright now subsists in authors, after the expiration of the several terms created by the statute of queen Anne.] determination

〈 22〉 [ed. 7] common law. But much may be gathered from the frequent injunctions

of the court of chancery, prohibiting the invasion of this property: especially where either the injunctions have been perpetual, or have related to unpublished manuscripts, or to such antient books, as were not within the provisions of the statute of queen Anne . Much may also be collected from the several legislative recognitions [ed. 5: recognizations] of copyrights; and from those adjudged cases at common law, wherein the crown hath been considered as invested with certain prerogative copyrights; for, if the crown is capable of an exclusive right in any one book, the subject seems also capable of having the same right in another. But, | common law. But

〈 23〉 [ed. 7] But, exclusive of such copyright as may subsist by the rules of the

common law, the statute 8 Ann. c. 19. hath protected by additional penalties the property of authors and their assigns for the term of fourteen years; and hath directed that | But whatever inherent copyright might have been supposed to subsist by the common law, the statute 8 Ann. c. 19. [ed. 8: (amended by statute 15 Geo. III. c. 53)] hath now declared that the author and his assigns shall have the sole liberty of printing and reprinting his works for the term of fourteen years, and no longer [ed. 9: and no longer] [ed. 8: Footnote: By statute 15 Geo. III. c. 53. some additional privileges in this respect are granted to the universities, and certain other learned societies.]; and hath also protected that property by additional penalties and forfeitures: directing farther, that

〈 24〉 [ed. 4] term of fourteen years, by the statute 8 Geo. II. c. 13. Both which appear

to have been copied from the | term of eight and twenty years, by the statutes 8 Geo. II. c. 13 and 7 Geo. III. c. 38 [ed. 9: besides an action for damages, with

varia: chapter 27 395

double costs, by statute 17 Geo. III. c. 57]. All which [ed. 7: parliamentary protections] appear to have been suggested by the

〈25〉 [ed. 7] whereof a temporary property becomes vested in the patentee. |

whereof it is held, that a temporary property therein becomes vested in the king’s patentee.

〈26〉 [ed. 3] patentee. | patentee. And the statute 12 Geo. II. c. 36. hath also

su peradded other penalties and forfeitures, in case any book first composed or written, and printed in Great Britain, shall be reprinted abroad, and imported for sale into this kingdom.

[ed. 4] patentee.





Chapter 27


〈1〉 [ed. 9] by grant or by prescription. | by the king’s grant, or by prescription,

which supposes an antient grant.

〈2〉 [ed. 8] amerced, do lose | amerced, lose 〈3〉 [ed. 9] can, neither by grant nor contract, | cannot, either by grant or contract,

〈4〉 [ed. 8] With regard to the prerogative copyrights, which were mentioned in

the preceding chapter, they are held to be vested in the crown upon different reasons. | There is also a kind of prerogative copyright subsisting in certain books, which is held to be vested in the crown upon different reasons.

〈5〉 [ed. 8] He hath a right | He is also said to have a right 〈6〉 [ed. 8] principles the exclusive right of printing the translation of the bible is

founded. 4. Almanacks have been said to be prerogative-copies, either as things derelict, or else as being substantially nothing more than the calendar prefixed to our liturgy. And indeed the regulation of time has been often considered as a matter of state. The Roman fasti were under the care of the pontifical college: and Romulus, Numa, and Julius Caesar, successively regulated the Roman calendar. There still remains | principles, combined, the exclusive right of printing the translation of the bible is founded. There still remains

〈7〉 [ed. 8] seised | seized

〈8〉 [ed. 3] preventing | prevention

〈9〉 [ed. 8] hours; they despising | hours; despising 〈10〉 [ed. 7] by fine, | by a fine,

〈11〉 [ed. 3] land | lands

〈12〉 [ed. 8] granting a man these franchises or liberties was in order to protect the

game, by giving him a sole | granting to any one these franchises or liberties was in order to protect the game, by giving the grantee a sole

〈13〉 [ed. 9] seem, it is a regular | seem, to such as call themselves qualified sportsmen,

it is a regular

〈14〉 [ed. 9] I know but of two | I recollect but two 396 varia: chapter 30

〈15〉 [ed. 5] alterations | alteration 〈16〉 [ed. 5] circumstances, | circumstance,





Chapter 28


〈1〉 [ed. 8] as to the mortuary | as the mortuary 〈2〉 [ed. 4] nor any | nor for any

〈3〉 [ed. 4] as marble chimney-pieces, | as chimney-pieces, 〈4〉 [ed. 8] peculiar appellation, | particular appellation,





Chapter 29


〈1〉 [ed. 9] go or be acquired by right | go to or be acquired by them in right 〈2〉 [ed. 7] and incorporated | or incorporated 〈3〉 [ed. 5] and shall not go | and not go 〈4〉 [ed. 9] degree; which she becomes entitled to at the death of her husband over

and above her jointure or dower, and preferably to all other representatives: and the jewels of a peeress, usually worn by her, have been held to be paraphernalia. | degree; and therefore even the jewels of a peeress, usually worn by her, have been held to be paraphernalia [Footnote: Moor. 213]. These she becomes entitled to at the death of her husband, over and above her jointure or dower, and preferably to all other representatives.

〈5〉 [ed. 3] sealed, and the contract | sealed, or the contract 〈6〉 [ed. 7] entirely in the determination | entirely on the determination





Chapter 30


〈1〉 [ed. 7] side in consideration | side on consideration 〈2〉 [ed. 7] value on it. | value to it. 〈3〉 [ed. 3] As when | And when

〈4〉 [ed. 9] the other. | the preceding. 〈5〉 [ed. 4] some recompense | some price or recompense 〈6〉 [ed. 9] the party who | the party, or his agent, who 〈7〉 [ed. 8] seise | seize

〈8〉 [ed. 8] law. Wherefore our | law: insomuch, that our 〈9〉 [ed. 9] so as that | so that

〈10〉 [ed. 8] horses; the sale of which, even in fairs or markets overt, is void in many

instances, where that of other property is valid: because a horse is so fleet an animal, that the stealers of them may flee far off in a short space, and be out of

varia: chapter 30 397

the reach of the most industrious owner. All persons therefore that have occasion to deal in horses, and are therefore liable sometimes to buy stolen ones, would do well to observe, that whatever price they may give, or how long soever they may keep possession before it be claimed, they gain no property in a horse that has been stolen, unless it be bought in a fair or market overt: nor even then, unless the directions be pursued that are laid down in the statutes | horses. For a purchaser gains no property in a horse that has been stolen, unless it be bought in a fair or market overt, according to the directions of the statutes

〈11〉 [ed. 8] that every horse, so to be sold, shall | that the horse shall 〈12〉 [ed. 8] the open and public place used for such sales, and not in any private

yard or stable: that the horse shall be brought | the public place used for such sales, and not in any private yard or stable; and afterwards brought

〈13〉 [ed. 5] and vendee | and the vendee 〈14〉 [ed. 8] to the tollgatherer or bookkeeper | to the book-keeper 〈15〉 [ed. 8] and the vendor; the latter either upon his own knowlege, or the

testimony of some credible witness. | and vendor; the latter being properly attested.

〈16〉 [ed. 8] And, even if all these points be fully complied with, yet such sale shall

not take away the property of the owner, if within six months after the horse is stolen he puts in his claim before the mayor, or some justice, of the district in which the horse shall be found; and within forty days after that, proves such his property by the oath of two witnesses before such mayor or justice; and also tenders | Nor shall such sale take away the property of the owner, if within six months after the horse is stolen he puts in his claim before some magistrate, where the horse shall be found; and, within forty days more, proves such his property by the oath of two witnesses, and tenders

〈17〉 [ed. 8] be omitted, or not observed in the sale, such | be not observed, such 〈18〉 [ed. 8] him. Wherefore sir Edward Coke observes, that, both by the common

law and these two statutes, the property of horses is so well preserved, that if the owner be of capacity to understand them, and be vigilant and industrious to pursue the same, it is almost impossible that the property of any horse, either stolen or not stolen, should be altered by any sale in market overt by him that is malae fidei possessor. By the civil | him. By the civil

〈19〉 [ed. 4] them safe to | them on demand to 〈20〉 [ed. 8] settled upon a much more rational footing; that | settled, that 〈 21〉 [ed. 8] which is construed to be an evidence of fraud: but, if the bailee

undertakes specially to keep the goods safely and securely, he is bound to answer all perils and damages, that may befal them for want of the same care with which a prudent man would keep his own. | which is an evidence of fraud: but, if he undertakes specially to keep the goods safely and securely, he is bound to take the same care of them, as a prudent man would take of his own.

398 varia: chapter 30

〈22〉 [ed. 8] property in the bailee, because of his contract for restitution; and the

bailor hath nothing left in him but the right to a chose in action, grounded upon such contract, the possession being delivered to the bailee. | property, because of his contract for restitution; the bailor having still left in him the right to a chose in action, grounded upon such contract.

〈23〉 [ed. 8] For, as such bailee is responsible | For, being responsible 〈24〉 [ed. 8] right to recover either the specific goods, or else a satisfaction in

damages, against | right of action against

〈25〉 [ed. 8] condition and agreement to | condition to 〈26〉 [ed. 4] intitled to the premium or price | intitled also to the premium or price

[ed. 8] entitled also to the price

〈27〉 [ed. 8] so. It may not be amiss therefore to enter into a short enquiry, upon

what footing this matter of interest or usury does really stand. The enemies | so. For the enemies

〈28〉 [ed. 8] is laid down | is said to be laid down 〈29〉 [ed. 8] Polit. l. I. c. 10. | Polit. l. I. c. 10. This passage hath been suspected to be

spurious.

〈30〉 [ed. 9] may be observed, | hath been observed, 〈31〉 [ed. 8] “Unto a stranger thou mayest lend upon usury, but unto thy brother

thou shalt not lend upon usury.” Deut. xxiii. 20. | Deut. xxiii. 20.

〈32〉 [ed. 8] And as to Aristotle’s reason, deduced | And as to the reason supposed

to be given by Aristotle, and deduced

〈33〉 [ed. 8] And, really, considered abstractedly from this its use, since | And, as to

any scruples of conscience, since

〈34〉 [ed. 8] seems no greater impropriety in | seems to be no greater oppression in 〈35〉 [ed. 8] convenience. If I borrow 100l. to employ in a beneficial trade, it is but

equitable that the lender should have a proportion of my gains. To demand | convenience. To demand

〈36〉 [ed. 4] inconvenience the owner | inconvenience, which the owner 〈37〉 [ed. 8] And indeed | Indeed

〈38〉 [ed. 8] exorbitant. Thus, while all degrees of profit were discountenanced, we

find more complaints of usury, and more flagrant instances of oppression, than in modern times, when money may be easily had at a low interest. A capital | exorbitant. A capital

〈39〉 [ed. 8] practice, 1. Of bottomry, or respondentia. 2. Of policies of insurance. |

practice of, 1. Bottomry, or respondentia. 2. Policies of insurance. 3. Annuities upon lives.

〈40〉 [ed. 9] (pars pro toto) | (partem pro toto) 〈41〉 [ed. 9] Malyne. lex mercat. b. 1. c. 31. | Malyne. lex mercat. b. 1. c. 31. Bacon’s

essays. c. 41.

〈42〉 [ed. 9] salvage; and that, if the borrower has not on board effects to the value

| salvage [Footnote: See Vol. I. pag. 294 [I. 189].]; and that, if the borrower hath not an interest in the ship, or in the effects on board, equal to the value

varia: chapter 30 399

〈43〉 [ed. 8] out of my money, | out of possession of my money, 〈44〉 [ed. 7] time. The learning relating to marine insurances hath of late years |

time. But, in order to prevent these insurances from being turned into a mischievous kind of gaming, it is enacted by statute 14 Geo. III. c. 48. that no insurance shall be made on lives, or on any other event, wherein the party insured hath no interest; that in all policies the name of such interested party shall be inserted; and nothing more shall be recovered thereon than the amount of the interest of the insured. This doth not however extend to marine insurances, which were provided for by a prior law of their own, and the learning relating to which hath of late years

[ed. 9] their own. The learning relating to these insurances hath of late years

〈45〉 [ed. 5] or ships in the Spanish and Portuguese trade | or ships on the Spanish

and Portuguese trade

[ed. 9] or upon ships or merchandize from the Spanish and Portuguese dominions

〈46〉 [ed. 8] bond. But, to return to the doctrine of common interest on loans: |

bond. Thirdly, the practice of purchasing annuities for lives at a certain price or premium, instead of advancing the same sum on an ordinary loan, arises usually from the inability of the borrower to give the lender a permanent security for the return of the money borrowed, at any one period of time. He therefore stipulates [ed. 9: stipulates in effect] to repay annually, during his life, some part of the money borrowed; together with legal interest for so much of the principal as annually remains unpaid, and an additional compen-sation for the extraordinary hazard run, of losing that principal entirely by the contingency of the borrower’s death: all which considerations, being calculated and blended together, will constitute the just proportion or quantum of the annuity granted [ed. 9: annuity which ought to be granted]. The real value of that contingency must depend on the age, constitution, situation, and conduct of the borrower; and therefore the price of such annuities cannot without the utmost difficulty be reduced to any general rules. So that if, by the terms of the contract, the lender’s principal is bona fide (and not colourably [Footnote: [Mason v Abdy] Carth. 67.]) put in jeopardy, no inequality of price will make it an usurious bargain; though, under some circumstances of imposition, it may be relieved against in equity. To throw however some check upon improvident transactions of this kind, which are usually carried on with great privacy, the statute 17 Geo. III. c. 26. has directed, that upon the sale of any life annuity of more than the value of ten pounds per annum (unless on a sufficient pledge of lands in fee simple or stock in the public funds) the true consideration, which shall be in money only, shall be set forth and described in the security itself; and a memorial of the date of the security, of the names of the parties, cestuy que trusts [the beneficiary], cestuy que vies [the person for whose life the trust is held], and witnesses, and of the consideration money, shall within twenty days after its execution be inrolled in the court of chancery; else the security shall be null and void. And, in case of collusive practices respecting the consideration, the court, in which any action is brought or judgment 400 varia: chapter 31

obtained upon such collusive security, may order the same to be cancelled, and the judgment (if any) to be vacated; And all contracts [ed. 9: vacated: and also all contracts] for the purchase of annuities from infants shall remain utterly void, and incapable of confirmation after such infants arrive to the age of maturity. But, to return to the doctrine of common interest on loans:

〈47〉 [ed. 4] centesimae, or twelve per cent, to be | centesimae, one per cent monthly

or twelve per cent per annum, to be

〈48〉 [ed. 9] Our law | And lord Bacon was desirous of introducing a similar policy

in England [Footnote: Essays. c. 41.]: but our law

〈49〉 [ed. 8] insurances, or | insurances, by annuities for lives, or 〈50〉 [ed. 7] trade. | trade. And, by statute 14 Geo. III. c. 79. all mortgages and other

securities upon estates or other property in Ireland or the plantations, bearing interest not exceeding six per cent. shall be legal; though executed in the kingdom of Great Britain: unless the money lent shall be known at the time to exceed the value of the thing in pledge; in which case also, to prevent usurious contracts at home under colour of such foreign securities, the borrower shall forfeit treble the sum so borrowed.

〈51〉 [ed. 7] shall execute | should execute 〈52〉 [ed. 8] Recognizances also are a sum | Debts upon recognizance are also a sum 〈53〉 [ed. 4] lecture of | chapter of 〈54〉 [ed. 4] The invention of them was | But the invention of it was 〈55〉 [ed. 8] exchange. The payee | exchange. But, by statute 15 Geo. III. c. 51. all

promissory or other notes, bills of exchange, draughts, and undertakings in writing, being negotiable or transferable, for the payment of less than twenty shillings, are declared to be null and void: and it is made penal to utter or publish any such; they being deemed prejudicial to trade and public credit. And by 17 Geo. III. c. 30. all such notes, bills, draughts, and undertakings, to the amount of twenty shillings and less than five pounds, are subjected to many other regulations and formalities; the omission of any one of which vacates the security, and is penal to him that utters it. The payee





Chapter 31


〈1〉 [ed. 9] bankruptcyn | bankruptcy [Footnote omitted] 〈2〉 [ed. 9] 200l.; upon which | 200l.; which debts must be proved by affidavit

[Footnote: Stat. 5 Geo. 2. c. 30.]: upon which

〈3〉 [ed. 9] bankrupt. | bankrupt [Footnote: Stat. 13 Eliz. c. 7.]. 〈4〉 [ed. 9] crown. | crown [Footnote: Stat. 5 Geo. 2. c. 30.]. 〈5〉 [ed. 3] At the first of these | At one of these 〈6〉 [ed. 3] to be first named by the commissioners, and afterwards to be approved

or rejected at the said meeting by the major part, in value, of the creditors who shall then prove their debts: but | to be chosen by the major part, in value, of

varia: chapter 31 401

the creditors who shall then have proved their debts; but may be originally appointed by the commissioners, and afterwards approved or rejected by the creditors: but

〈7〉 [ed. 3] 10l. At the second meeting any farther business relating to the

commission may be proceeded on. And at | 10l. And at

〈8〉 [ed. 9] gazette, the bankrupt, | gazette, (unless the time be enlarged by the lord

chancellor) the bankrupt,

〈9〉 [ed. 9] commissioners, and must | commissioners; which surrender (if

voluntary) protects him from all arrests till his final examination is past: and he must

〈10〉 [ed. 9] in default thereof, shall | in default of either surrender or conformity,

shall

〈11〉 [ed. 9] creditors | creditors [Footnote: Ibid. [i.e.: Stat. 5 Geo. 2. c. 30.] ] 〈 12〉 [ed. 3] be committed | be apprehended and committed 〈 13〉 [ed. 9] his goods and papers. | his goods and papers. [Footnote: Ibid. [i.e.: Stat.

5 Geo. 2. c. 30.]]

〈 14〉 [ed. 9] wife | wife [Footnote: Stat. 21 Jac. I. c. 19.] 〈 15〉 [ed. 9] they make | they submit themselves and make 〈 16〉 [ed. 5] persons | person

〈 17〉 [ed. 9] creditors. | creditors [Footnote: Stat. 5 Geo. II. c. 30.]. 〈 18〉 [ed. 9] clergy. | clergy; and his goods and estate shall be divided among his

creditors [Footnote: Stat. 5 Geo. II. c. 30. By the laws of Naples all fraudulent bankrupts, particularly such as do not surrender themselves within four days, are punished with death: also all who conceal the effects of a bankrupt, or set up a pretended debt to defraud his creditors. (Mod. Un. Hist. xxviii. 320)]. And unless it shall appear, that his inability to pay his debts arose from some casual loss, he may, upon conviction by indictment of such gross misconduct and negligence, be set upon the pillory for two hours, and have one of his ears nailed to the same and cut off [Footnote: Stat. 21 Jac. I. c. 19.].

〈 19〉 [ed. 9] creditors. | creditors [Footnote: Stat. 5 Geo. II. c. 30.]. 〈 20〉 [ed. 9] discovery, hath conformed to the directions of the law, and hath acted

in all points to the satisfaction of his creditors; and if they, or four parts | discovery, (of the truth and sufficiency of which there remains no reason to doubt) and hath conformed in all points to the directions of the law; and if, in consequence thereof, the creditors, or four parts

〈 21〉 [ed. 9] bankrupt. | bankrupt [Footnote: Stat. 5 Geo. II. c. 30.]. 〈 22〉 [ed. 9] By the Roman law | Ibid. [i.e. Stat. 5 Geo. II. c. 30.] By the Roman law 〈 23〉 [ed. 9] proceedings | proceedings [Footnote: Stat. 5 Geo. II. c. 30.] 〈 24〉 [ed. 9] benefits, but by the testimony of his creditors themselves of his honest

and ingenuous disposition; and unless | benefits, unless

〈 25〉 [ed. 9] advantages. | advantages [Footnote: Stat. 24 Geo. II. c. 57.]. 〈 26〉 [ed. 3] Stat. 28 Geo. II. c. 13. 32 Geo. II. c. 28. 1 Geo. III. c. 17. 5 Geo. III. c. 41.

| Stat. 32 Geo. II. c. 28. 1 Geo. III. c. 17. 5 Geo. III. c. 41. 9 Geo. III. c. 26.

402 varia: chapter 32

[ed. 7] Stat. 1 Geo. III. c. 17. 5 Geo. III. c. 41. 9 Geo. III. c. 26. 14 Geo. III. c. 77. [ed. 9: Footnote deleted]

〈27〉 [ed. 9] by this, or either of the other methods, (of composition with their

creditors, or bankruptcy) and afterwards | by any of these methods, and afterwards

〈28〉 [ed. 9] trades. | trades [Footnote: Stat. 5 Geo. II. c. 30.]. 〈29〉 [ed. 9] before-mentioned | before-mentioned [Footnote: Stat. 1 Jac. I. c. 15. 21

Jac. I. c. 19.]

〈30〉 [ed. 7] broken | broke

〈31〉 [ed. 9] gazette. | gazette [Footnote: Stat. 5 Geo. II. c. 30.]. 〈32〉 [ed. 9] must, within | must, after four and within 〈33〉 [ed. 9] passu. | passu [Footnote: Stat. 21 Jac. c. 19.]. 〈34〉 [ed. 9] statutes, | statutes [Footnote: Stat. 7 Geo. I. c. 31.], 〈35〉 [ed. 8] day, shall be paid | day certain, shall be proved and paid 〈36〉 [ed. 8] Lord Raym. 1549. | Lord Raym. 1549. [Banbury v Lisset] Stra. 1211. 〈37〉 [ed. 9] bankruptcy. | bankruptcy [Footnote: Stat. 7 Geo. I. c. 32.]. 〈38〉 [ed. 9] first. | first [Footnote: Stat. 19 Geo. II. c. 32.]. 〈39〉 [ed. 9] after paying | after selling his estates and paying 〈40〉 [ed. 9] bankrupt. | bankrupt [Footnote: Stat. 13 Eliz. c. 7.].





Chapter 32


〈1〉 [ed. 8] nomination, the law | nomination, or where no nomination is

permitted, the law

〈2〉 [ed. 9] the power | this power 〈3〉 [ed. 3] was called their reasonable part | were called their reasonable parts 〈4〉 [ed. 9] recover it. | recover them. 〈5〉 [ed. 5] and the city | and in the city 〈6〉 [ed. 3] they want the | they have always wanted the 〈7〉 [ed. 5] the particular | their particular 〈8〉 [ed. 9] his own; and | his; and 〈9〉 [ed. 8] stamp) at the | stamp) by the 〈10〉 [ed. 8] or the nature | or, what are the nature 〈11〉 [ed. 9] 29 Car. II. c. 3. enacts; | 29 Car. II. c. 3. hath laid them under many

restrictions; except when made by mariners at sea, and soldiers in actual service. As to all other persons, it enacts;

〈12〉 [ed. 9] and hardly | and is hardly 〈13〉 [ed. 8] are entirely another thing, a conveyance by statute, | are quite of a

different nature; being conveyances by statute,

〈14〉 [ed. 8] such wild suppositions | such constrained suppositions 〈15〉 [ed. 8] what is an administrator; | what an administrator;

varia: chapter 32 403

〈16〉 [ed. 9] makes his will, | makes an incomplete will, 〈17〉 [ed. 8] et curam | et quibus curam 〈18〉 [ed. 3] died totally intestate, | died wholly intestate, 〈19〉 [ed. 9] Stat. 28 Hen. VIII. c. 5. See pag. 496. | See pag. 496. 〈20〉 [ed. 9] And, lastly, | 7. And, lastly, 〈21〉 [ed. 8] make | makes

〈22〉 [ed. 5] in an executor | in the executor 〈23〉 [ed. 9] the office where they are registered, are called the prerogative court,

and the prerogative office, | the offices where they are registered, are called the prerogative courts, and the prerogative offices,

〈24〉 [ed. 7] which are the next | which is the next 〈25〉 [ed. 8] on poors | upon poors

〈26〉 [ed. 9] 10 Mod. 496. | 10 Mod. 496. See vol. III. p. 18 [III. 12]. 〈27〉 [ed. 9] of their own | of his own 〈28〉 [ed. 5] it is given | it was given

〈29〉 [ed. 7] they shall lapse | they should lapse 〈30〉 [ed. 9] Stra. 559. | Stra. 559. Lawson v. Lawson. Dom. Proc. 28. Apr. 1777. 〈31〉 [ed. 9] the statute 29 Car. II. declaring | the statute of frauds declaring 〈32〉 [ed. 9] statute 22 & 23 Car. II. c. 10. it is enacted, that the surplusage of

intestates’ estates, except of femes covert, shall, | statute 22 & 23 Car. II. c. 10. explained by 29 Car. II. c. 30. it is enacted, that the surplusage of intestates’ estates, (except of femes covert, which are left as at common law) shall,

〈33〉 [ed. 9] 2 Inst. 33. | 2 Inst. 33. See [Petit v Smith] 1 P. Wms. 8. 〈34〉 [ed. 9] binding upon | binding (in point of conscience at least) upon 〈35〉 [ed. 8] successions | succession 〈36〉 [ed. 8] distributions, | distribution, 〈37〉 [ed. 8] his estate is divided | his effects are divided 〈38〉 [ed. 9] and therefore probably | and probably 〈39〉 [ed. 9] (deducting the widow’s apparel and furniture | (deducting for the

widow’s her apparel and the furniture

〈40〉 [ed. 8] statutes | statute

〈41〉 [ed. 8] worth 1800l. leaving a widow and two children, the estate | worth

1800l. personal estate, leaving a widow and two children, this estate

〈42〉 [ed. 5] child, they shall each have a moiety of the whole, or nine such eighteenth

parts, six by the custom and three by | child, she shall still have eight parts, as before; and the child shall have ten, six by the custom and four by

〈43〉 [ed. 7] lands | land



OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 11/07/16, SPi



Table of Cases



a. Yearbook Cases

(Seipp numbers from www.bu.edu/law/seipp)

Case name Page

Mich. 19 Edw. II, f. 628, pl. [21]; Seipp 1325.122 382

Mich. 5 Edw. III, f. 70, pl. 131; Seipp 1331.247 199

Mich. 10 Edw. III, f. 53, pl. 39; Seipp 1336.184 381

10 Edw. III, Lib. Ass. pl. 28; Seipp 1336.239ass 382

Warde v Wullesthorpe (1343) Hil. 17 Edw. III, f. 9, pl. 29; Seipp 1343.029 332

Trin. 17 Edw. III, pl. 46; 3 Dyer 270a, n. 22; 73 ER 600; Seipp 1343.139rs 236

Hil. 18 Edw. III, pl. 14, Seipp 1344.015rs 273

Mich. 24 Edw. III, f. 65, pl. 70; Seipp 1350.183 371

Mich. 30 Edw. III, f. 25, pl. [51]; Seipp 1356.097 332

32 Edw. III, Lib. Ass. pl. 6, Seipp 1358.006ass 96

35 Edw. III, Lib. Ass., pl. 10; Jenk. 40 (1st century, case 77); 145 ER 30; Seipp 1361.010ass 199, 386

Mich. 43 Edw. III, f. 24, pl. 2; Seipp 1369.075 265

Pasch. 7 Hen. IV, f. 13, pl. 10; Seipp 1406.037 91

Trin. 9 Hen. VI, f. 23, pl. 19; Seipp 1431.075 112 Hil. 37 Hen. VI, f. 13, pl. 3; Jenk. 108 (third century, case 9); 145 ER 76; Seipp 1459.003 299

Hil. 39 Hen. VI, f. 12, pl. 5; Seipp 1461.005 199

Mich. 12 Edw. IV, f. 14, pl. 12; Seipp 1472.050 78, 150, 160

Taltarum’s Case (1472) Mich. 12 Edw. IV, f. 19, pl. 25; Seipp 1472.063 78, 242

Sir William Calthrop’s Case (1477) Mich. 18 Edw IV, f. 6, pl. 5; Seipp 1477.026 370

Sir William Calthorp’s Case (1478) Pasch. 18 Edw IV, f. 4, pl. 24; Seipp 1478.030 370

Pasch. 22 Edw. IV, f. 6, pl. 18; Seipp 1482.006 224

Trin. 10 Hen. VII, f. 24, pl. 1; Seipp 1495.051 370

Trin. 10 Hen. VII, f. 26, pl. 5; Seipp 1495.055 370

Hil. 13 Hen. VII, f. 17, pl. 22; Seipp 1498.022 391

Harecourt v Spycer (1521) Trin. 13 Hen. VIII, f. 15, pl. 1; Seipp 1521.003 377



b. Other Cases

Case name Source reference Page Abbot v Weekly (1665) 83 ER 357 179 Absor v French (1678) 89 ER 772 22 Aldred’s Case (1610) 77 ER 816 267 Allen v Dockwra (1698) 91 ER 119 317 Altham’s Case (1610) 77 ER 698 204 Amcotts v Catherich (1621) 79 ER 525 89 Anon. (1502) 72 ER 199 224 Anon. (1502) 72 ER 204 224 Anon. (1506) 72 ER 246 287 Anon. (1506) 145 ER 127 225 Anon. (1517) 72 ER 372 23 Anon. (1535) 123 ER 340 225 Anon. (1536) 73 ER 38 246 Anon. (1536) 73 ER 38 112, 215

OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 11/07/16, SPi



406 table of cases

Case name Source reference Page

Anon. (1536) 73 ER 49 345 Anon. (1537) 73 ER 62 208 Anon. (1537) 73 ER 70 346 Anon. (1541) 73 ER 105 173, 292 Anon. (1552) 73 ER 158 117 Anon. (1557) 73 ER 312 390 Anon. (1559) 72 ER 411 274 Anon. (1580) 145 ER 172 229 Anon. (1580) 73 ER 827 229 Anon. (1587) 78 ER 80 304 Anon. (1587) 72 ER 563 256 Anon. (1592) 79 ER 1128 294 Anon. (1607) 74 ER 843 125 Anon. (1609) 74 ER 845 287 Anon. (1610) 78 ER 104 388 Anon. (1680) 89 ER 365 255 Anon. (1682) 22 ER 870 255 Anon. (1682) 22 ER 1074 350 Anon. (1695) 22 ER 1162 269 Anon. (1700) 88 ER 1437 343 Anon. (1701) 88 ER 1492 304 Anon. (1703) 87 ER 776 388 Anon. (1720) 24 ER 241 351 Anon. (1723) 93 ER 694 340 Anon. (1745) 26 ER 167 327 Archer’s Case (Baldwin v Smith) (1597) 76 ER 146 113 Arthur v Bockenham (or Bokenham) (1708) 94 ER 734, 88 ER 957 198, 258, 391 Atkinson v Hutchinson (1734) 24 ER 1053 117 Attorney General ex rel. Sidney College v Bains (1708) 24 ER 131 254 Attorney General ex rel. Pettifer v Rye (1703) 23 ER 890 79, 255 Attorney General v Hooker (1725) 24 ER 756 348 Attorney General v Porter (Porter’s Case) (1592) 76 ER 50 186 Attorney General v Robins (1722) 24 ER 627 346 Attorney General v Sands (1668) 145 ER 561 229 Ayre v Ayre (1663) 22 ER 680 343 Babington v Wood (1630) 79 ER 757 190, 191 Back v Andrews (1690) 23 ER 687 379 Backwel’s (Alderman) Case (1683) 22 ER 886 329 Baker v Bayley (1691) 23 ER 746 75 Baker v Rogers (1600) 2 ER 993, 78 ER 1018 190 Baldwin’s Case (1589) 76 ER 436 386 Baller v Watson (1737) TNA C33 369/315 276 Banbury v Lisset (1744) 93 ER 1134 316, 402 Barker v Keat (1677) 86 ER 1054 230 Barret v Barret (1627) 124 ER 321 191 Barwick’s Case (1597) 77 ER 200 97, 111 Baskerville’s Case (1585) 77 ER 452 189 Baskett v Cambridge University (1758) 97 ER 499 x, 276 Basset and Morgan v Manxel (1564) 75 ER 835 244 Bath (Bishop) Case (1605) 77 ER 304 97 Baudink v Bushel (1663) 83 ER 1136 18 Benson v Bellasis (1681) 23 ER 271 351 Benson v Bellasis (1682) 21 ER 671 351 Best v Yates (1675) 86 ER 180 306 Beverley v Cornewall (1585) 78 ER 308 189 Beverley’s Case (1603) 76 ER 1118 199 Bindon’s (Vicountess) Case (1584) 74 ER 447 295

OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 11/07/16, SPi



table of cases 407

Case name Source reference Page

Bindon’s (Viscountess) Case (1585) 72 ER 538 274, 295 Bird v Wilford (1593) 78 ER 717 292 Bishop v Sharp (1704) 23 ER 902 335 Blackborough v Davis (1701) 24 ER 285, 88 ER 1558, 91 ER 39 152, 341

Blinco v Marston (1596) 78 ER 730 19, 370 Blincoe’s Case (1596) 72 ER 990 370 Blodwell v Edwards (1596) 78 ER 758 114 Boroughe’s Case (1596) 76 ER 1043 27 Bowles v Berrie (1615) 81 ER 413 84 Bracebridge v Cook (1572) 75 ER 626 119 Brent’s Case (1575) 73 ER 766 121 Breverton’s Case (1537) 73 ER 67 299 Bright v Smith (1704) 22 ER 120 351 Brikhead v Wilson (1536) 73 ER 52 86 Britton v Wade (1618) 79 ER 440 188 Brook v Turner (1676) 86 ER 834 336 Brough v Parkings (1703) 92 ER 161 317 Broughton v Randall (1596) 78 ER 752 89 Brown v Sackville (1552) 73 ER 152 255 Brown v Wood (1647) 82 ER 541, 902 341 Browning v Beston (1552) 75 ER 202 258 Brunker v Cook (1707) 88 ER 940 256 Bullock v Dibley (1593) 7 ER 921 252 Bunter v Coke (1707) 91 ER 210 256 Burgess v Wheate (1759) 96 ER 67 229 Burridge v Fortescue (1703) 87 ER 821 388 Bury v Pope (1588) 78 ER 375 11 Butler v Duncomb (1718) 24 ER 466 257 Butts v Penny (1677) 83 ER 518 272 Canterbury (Archbishop) Case (1596) 76 ER 519 82 Carleton v Brightwell (1728) 24 ER 815 19 Carpenter v Smith (1670) 86 ER 515 228 Carter v Crawley (1683) 83 ER 259 348 Carter v Tash (1693) 91 ER 213 164 Carteret (Lord) v Paschal (1733) 24 ER 1028 299 Catesby’s Case (1606) 77 ER 346 188 Challenor v Thomas (1608) 123 ER 718 11 Chamberlain v Harvey (1696) 90 ER 830 272 Chamberlain v Harvey (1696) 91 ER 994 272 Chandos (Duke) v Talbot (1731) 24 ER 877 347 Chapman v Allen (1632) 79 ER 836 306 Child v Greenhill (1638) 79 ER 1077 267 Childe v Greenhil (1639) 82 ER 406 267 Childs v Wescot (1596) 78 ER 722 (cf. Giles v Wiscot) 124 Cholmley’s Case (1597) 76 ER 527 114 Christ’s Hospital v Hawes (1620) Chancery Reports ... 599–1674,

ed. W. H. Bryson (2002), 48 255

Christopher v Christopher (1771) 21 ER 343 391 Chudleigh’s Case (Dillon v Freine) (1589–95) 76 ER 270 77, 78, 115, 224, 227, 387

Church v Wyat (1595) 72 ER 808 248 Cleaver v Spurling (1729) 24 ER 846 351 Cleer v Brook (1572) 73 ER 711 160 Clere v Brook (1573) 75 ER 663 159, 160 Clison v Proctor (1612) 79 ER 262 19 Clun’s (William) Case (1613) 77 ER 1117 83 Cock v Goodfellow (1722) 88 ER 822 345 Coggs v Bernard (1703) 92 ER 107 306

OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 11/07/16, SPi



408 table of cases

Case name Source reference Page

Cole v Davies (1698) 91 ER 1383 323 Cole v Greene (1671) 83 ER 422 192 Cole v Levingston (1672) 86 ER 151 258 Coleman v Winch (1721) 24 ER 609 166 Colesworth v Brangwin (1711) 24 ER 153 348 Collingwood v Pace (1662) 83 ER 296 152, 169, 170 Collingwood v Pays (1664) 82 ER 1052, 86 ER 262 152, 170, 341

Colt v Colt (1664) 21 ER 565 229 Colt v Nettervill (1725) 24 ER 741 321 Colter v Ireland (1598) 72 ER 736 343 Colthirst v Bejushin (1550) 75 ER 33 111, 112, 113 Combe v Pitt (1763) 96 ER 250 296 Combes’s Case (1613) 77 ER 843 101 Cook v Oakley (1715) 24 ER 399 339 Cook v Parsons (1701) 24 ER 89 255 Cooper v Chitty (1756) 97 ER 166 327 Corbet v Stone (1653) 83 ER 75 111, 112 Corbet’s Case (1589) 74 ER 357 346 Corbet’s Case (1599) 123 ER 585 228 Cornwallis’s (Lord) Case (1683) 86 ER 295 193 Corven’s Case (1604) 77 ER 1380 290 Cotter v Layer (1731) 24 ER 887 337 Coulter’s Case (1598) 77 ER 98 343, 345 Counden v Clerke (1612) 80 ER 180 114, 164 Cowper v Andrews (1612) 80 ER 189 303 Crisp v Pratt (1639) 79 ER 1072 321 Cromwell v Andrews (1597) 23 ER 550 225 Cromwell’s (Lord) Case (1578) 76 ER 877 388 Crooke v Watt (1690) 23 ER 689 341 Cross v Andrews (1598) 78 ER 863 306 Crowther v Oldfield (1705) 92 ER 308 101 Crumpe v Barne (1626) 79 ER 630 321 Curle’s (Auditor) Case (1610) 77 ER 1147 23 Dalamere v Barnard (1568) 75 ER 525 223 Danvers’s (Sir Charles) Case (1602) 72 ER 802 239 Darcy v Askwith (1618) 80 ER 380 192 Davers v Dewes (1730) 24 ER 961 348 Davie v Beardsham (1663) 22 ER 683 256 Davies v Warner (1620) 79 ER 507 116 Dennis v Bosden (1590) 123 ER 458 27 Dillon v Fraine (1589) 79 ER 1184

(cf. Chudleigh’s Case) 113, 229, 251

Dinsdale v Iles (1673) 83 ER 463 99 Dixies v Harrison (1670) 124 ER 958 229 Donaldson v Beckett (1774) 1 ER 837 xviii, 394 Drury v Smith (1717) 24 ER 446 347 Duncomb v Duncomb (1695) 83 ER 770 119 Duppa v Mayo (1669) 85 ER 366 27 Durant v Prestwood (1738) 26 ER 289 341 East v Harding (1596) 78 ER 749 193 Edwards v Freeman (1727) 24 ER 803 348 Eeles v Lambert (1648) 82 ER 904 346 Ekins v East-India Company (1717) 24 ER 441 313 Emerson v Inchbird (1701) 91 ER 1386 164 Eton College Case (1557) 123 ER 333 118 Eustace v Scawen (1624) 79 ER 604 230 Eustace v Scowen (1624) 82 ER 29 125 Eyre v Walker (1735) 96 ER 184 276

OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 11/07/16, SPi



table of cases 409

Case name Source reference Page

Fairchild v Gayre (1605) 79 ER 53 369 Fane v Fane (1681) 23 ER 284 258 Farrer v Brooks (1674) 86 ER 819 302 Farrington v Knightly (1719) 24 ER 509 348 Fawtry v Fawtry (1690) 91 ER 38 340, 342 Fellows v Mitchell and Owen (1705) 23 ER 929 274 Fernes (Dean and Chapter), Case of (1607) 80 ER 529 236 Fines, Case of (1602) 76 ER 824 241 Fisher v Wigg (1700) 24 ER 274, 91 ER 339 129 Fitch v Stuckley (1594) 76 ER 923 250 Fleetwood’s Case (1610) 77 ER 731 302 Focus v Salisbury (1665) 145 ER 517 389 Foiston v Crachroode (1587) 76 ER 962 179, 180 Ford v Hoskins (1615) 79 ER 315 249 Forrester v Waller (1741) unreported; cited in Millar v Taylor (1769) 98 ER 216 276 Forse and Hembling’s Case (1588) 76 ER 1022 337 Foster v Jackson (1615) 80 ER 201 287 Foster’s (Dr) Case (1614) 77 ER 1222 296 Fountain v Guavers (1683) 89 ER 971 257 Fowell v Forrest (1669) 85 ER 624 232 Foy v Hyrde (1624) 82 ER 30 112 Freeman v Booth (1683) 83 ER 621 58 Fretwell v Stacy (1702) 23 ER 878 346 Fry’s (Lady Anne) Case (1672) 86 ER 135 105 Fulwood’s Case (1591) 76 ER 1031 292, 293 Furnis v Leicester (1618) 79 ER 404 306 Gage and Smith’s Case (1613) 78 ER 127 192 Gale v Noble (1697) 90 ER 850 101 Gardner v Sheldon (1671) 124 ER 1064 258, 378 Gateward’s Case (1606) 77 ER 344 95 Gerard v Gerard (1693) 83 ER 751 89 Gilbert v Whitty (1623) 79 ER 566 258 Giles v Wiscot (Wiscot’s Case) (1599) 76 ER 555 (cf. Childs v Wescot) 119, 124

Godbold v Freestone (1693) 83 ER 753 118 Goldsmith v Sydnor (1634) 79 ER 916 345 Goslin v Harden (1616) 81 ER 578 14 Graham v Londonderry (1746) 26 ER 1026 295 Grant v Vaughan (1764) 96 ER 281 316 Graysbrook v Fox (1565) 75 ER 419 333, 334, 340, 341, 344 Green v Rooke (1679) 21 ER 648 115 Gregg’s Case (1706) 91 ER 504 388 Grey v Ulisses (1562) 73 ER 467 193 Grysman v Lewes (1595) 78 ER 686 18 Haddon v Arrowsmith (1596) 78 ER 699 83 Hales v Petit (1562) 75 ER 387 86, 294, 337 Hall’s Case (1604) 77 ER 132 114 Hambleden v Hambleden (1590) 74 ER 673 122 Hamsworth v Pretty (1599) 72 ER 813 105 Hancock v Hancock (1710) 23 ER 1033 350 Harding v Harding (1706) 92 ER 1007 342 Hargrave’s Case (1599) 77 ER 100 343 Hastings (Lord) v Douglas (1634) 79 ER 901 295 Haynes’s Case (1613) 77 ER 1389 291 Hedges v Hedges (1708) 24 ER 130 347 Hellam v Ley (1609) 123 ER 711 293 Henn’s Case (1632) 82 ER 157 22 Hensloe’s Case (1600) 77 ER 785 333, 334 Henstead’s Case (1594) 77 ER 63 122

OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 11/07/16, SPi



410 table of cases

Case name Source reference Page

Herbert v Herbert (1691) 24 ER 23 336 Herlakenden’s Case (1589) 76 ER 1025 191 Hewet v Copland (1689) 124 ER 48 267 Hewet v Painter (1611) 80 ER 864 257 Heydon and Smith’s Case (1610) 77 ER 1476 307 Heydon’s Case (1584) 76 ER 637 76 Heyns v Villars (1659) 82 ER 1309 115 Hide v Cooth (1689) 23 ER 680 346 Hilliard v Smith (1686) 90 ER 317 340 Hilliard v Stapleton (1701) 21 ER 898 191 Hinchman v Iles (1673) 86 ER 165 99 Hinde v Bishop of Chester (1631) 79 ER 808 289 Hinton’s Case (1682) 89 ER 911 316 Holbech v Bennet (1671) 83 ER 429 123 Holden v Smallbrooke (1668) 124 ER 1030 176 Holdfast v Dowsing (1746) 93 ER 1164 255 Holland’s Case (1597) 76 ER 1047 189 Holliday v Boas (1609) 1 Rolle Abr. 920, pl. 13 346 Holmes v Willet (1680) 89 ER 36 258 Hopkins v Ellis (1703) 91 ER 101 327 Hopkins v Grey (1702) 87 ER 1149 323 Hopkins v Hopkins (1738) 26 ER 365 229 Horn v Widlake (1608) 123 ER 761 22 Horton v Ruesby (1686) 90 ER 326 302 Hudson v Hudson (1737) 26 ER 292 345 Hughes v Hughes (1666) 124 ER 867 348 Hughes v Hughes (1668) 83 ER 384 348 Hughes v Robotham (1593) 78 ER 554 119 Hughs v Harrys (1631) 79 ER 800 101 Hunt v Bourne (1703) 91 ER 297 240 Hunt v Gately (1581) 72 ER 501 78 Huntley’s Case (1573) 73 ER 736 384 Hussey v Fidall (1699) 88 ER 1353 327 Hutchinson v Thomas (1675) 83 ER 488 296 Hyde v Hyde (1710) 25 ER 51 335 Hyde v Seymour (1678) 22 ER 1047 229 Hynde v Ambrye (Boraston’s Case) (1587) 76 ER 664 82, 113 Ireland’s Case (1704) 87 ER 858 388 Jackson v Gisling (1742) 93 ER 1105 296 James v Blunck (1656) 145 ER 395 258 James v Richardson (1679) 83 ER 172 164 Jeffereys v Small (1683) 23 ER 424 270, 274 Jenks v Holford (1682) 23 ER 311 276 Jenner v Harper (1714) 24 ER 374 255 Jennor v Harper (1713) 25 ER 31 255 Johns v Lawrence (1610) 79 ER 213 191 Johns v Rowe (1628) 79 ER 694 340 Jones v Goodchild (1729) 24 ER 958 341 Jones v Lord Say and Seal (1728) 21 ER 1119 229 Keble v Hickringill (Keeble v Heckeringall) (1706) 88 ER 898, 90 ER 907 284 Kighly v Bulkly (1667) 82 ER 1143 99 King v Melling (1672) 83 ER 448 164 Knaplock v Curl (1722) 96 ER 183 276 Lamb v Archer (1692) 90 ER 151 117 Lancaster v Lucas (1590) 74 ER 214 122 Lane v Cotton (1701) 88 ER 1463 306 Lanyon v Carne (1668) 85 ER 912 257, 286

OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 11/07/16, SPi



table of cases 411

Case name Source reference Page

Latimer’s (Dame) Case (1545) 73 ER 131 347 Launder v Brooks (1639) 79 ER 1089 56 La Vie v Phillips (1765) 96 ER 329 321 Lawrence v Johns (1611) 79 ER 235 191 Lawson and Cooke’s Case (1641) 82 ER 431 269 Lawson v Lawson (1718) 24 ER 463 347 Lawson v Lawson (1777) 2 ER 15 403 Lechford’s (Sir Richard) Case (1610) 77 ER 627 194 Lee v Atkinson and Brooks (1609–10) 79 ER 204, 80 ER 114 307 Legat’s (Arthur) Case (1612) 77 ER 1093 236 Leighton v Theed (1701) 91 ER 359 99 Lemayne v Stanley (1681) 63 ER 545 209, 255 Lewin v Lewin (1727) 24 ER 950 350 Ley v Anderton (1650) 82 ER 665 342 Limbery v Mason (1734) 92 ER 1155 339 Lock v Wright (1723) 93 ER 706 348 Lodge v Jennings (c. 1714–27) 25 ER 176 338 London (Alderman) v Hasting (1657) 82 ER 1226 25 London v Southwell Collegiate Church (1618) 80 ER 447 257 Longford v Eyre (1721) 24 ER 593 255 Longley v Meredine (1595) 1 Roll. Abr 649 18 Love v Windham (1670) 82 ER 1211 117 Lovell’s (Sir Salathiel) Case (1710) 91 ER 80 171 Lucey (Sir Thomas) v Oldson (1614) 81 ER 362 250 Lugg v Lugg (1699) 91 ER 1193 339 Lumley v Palmer (1734) 93 ER 994 316 Luton v Bigg (1690) 90 ER 131 321 Mackenzie v Stewart (1754) 1 Pat. App. 578 388 Mackwilliams’s Case (1621) 80 ER 473 242 Magdalen College Case (1615) 77 ER 1235 218 Major v Peck (1690) 125 ER 178 340 Manby v Scott (1663) 82 ER 1000 200 Manning v Napp (1691) 91 ER 38 341 Manning’s Case (1609) 77 ER 618 117 Market-Overt, Case of (1596) 7 ER 180 304 Marks v Marks (1718) 88 ER 789, 93 ER 429 198, 228 Marys’s (Robert) Case (1612) 77 ER 895 21 Mason v Abdy (1688) 90 ER 643 399 Mathewson’s Case (1597) 77 ER 84 211 Matthews v Newby (1682) 23 ER 368 350 Maxwell v Wettenhall (1722) 24 ER 628 347 Mentney v Petty (1722) 24 ER 266 341 Meredith v Chute (1702) 92 ER 7 302 Mildmay’s (Sir Anthony) Case (1605) 77 ER 311 78 Miles v Williams (1714) 88 ER 711 277 Millar v Taylor (1769) 98 ER 201 xvii, xviii, 394 Miller v Miller (1735) 24 ER 1099 347 Milner v Colmer (1731) 24 ER 894 229 Mines, Case of (1568) 75 ER 472 277 Modo Decimandi, Case of (1609) 77 ER 1448 17 Monopolies, Case of (1602) 77 ER 1260 24 More’s Case (1674) 89 ER 124 236 Morgan v Scudamore (1677) 21 ER 638 65 Morgan’s Case (1594) 79 ER 1168 129, 379 Motte v Faulkner (1735) unreported; cited in Tonson v Collins 96 ER 184 276 Nash v Edmunds (1587) 78 ER 358 255 Nash v Preston (1630) 79 ER 767 107

OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 11/07/16, SPi



412 table of cases

Case name Source reference Page

Needham’s (Dr) Case (1690) 88 ER 1127 302 Nevil’s Case (1604) 77 ER 460 75 Newis v Lark & Hunt (1571) 75 ER 609 254 Newman v Barton (1690) 23 ER 733 346 Newton v Trigg (1689) 87 ER 217 321 Newton v Trigg (1690) 91 ER 100 321 Norfolk (Duke) v Howard (1683) 23 ER 388 117 Northey v Strange (1716) 24 ER 416 350 Oades v Woodward (1702) 87 ER 1116 302 Oaste v Taylor (1612) 79 ER 262 315 Obrian v Ram (1687) 87 ER 119 295 Ognel’s Case (1587) 76 ER 1000 336 Oland v Burdwick (1595) 72 ER 650 83 Oland’s Case (1602) 77 ER 235 83, 99, 273 Oldbury v Gregory (1598) 72 ER 761 190 Osborn’s Case (1613) 77 ER 1123 257 Oxford Earldom Case (1626) 82 ER 53 225 Page v Hayward (1704) 91 ER 481 245 Paine’s Case (1587) 77 ER 524 86 Painter v Manser (Manser’s Case) (1584) 76 ER 392 208 Palmer v Smith (1605) 2 Roll. Abr 369 189 Parker v Kett (1701) 88 ER 1454 343 Pawlett v Attorney General (1667) 145 ER 550 107 Peele v Capel (1722) 93 ER 683 190, 191 Peele v Earl of Carlisle (1719) 93 ER 487 191 Percivall v Crispe (1682) 89 ER 871 350 Petit v Smith (1695) 24 ER 272 348, 403 Petre (Lord) v Heneage (1701) 88 ER 1491 290 Pibus v Mitford (1674) 86 ER 239 129, 258 Pierce v Perks (1666) 82 ER 1105 341 Pigot v Heron (1597) 72 ER 710 115 Pigot’s Case (1614) 77 ER 1177 208, 211 Platt v Sleap (1611) 79 ER 236 119 Plucknet v Kirk (1686) 23 ER 551 191 Plummer, ex parte (1739) 26 ER 68 328 Pope v Curl (1741) 26 ER 608 276 Portington’s (Mary) Case (1613) 77 ER 976 78, 105 Potter v North (1669) 86 ER 245 180 Potter v Pearson (1702) 91 ER 122 301 Powley v Siers (1583) 74 ER 250 342 Price v Davies (1688) 90 ER 350 238 Prickman v Tripp (1693) 90 ER 173 267 Priddle and Napper’s Case (1612) 77 ER 1155 84 Prideux v Gibben (1683) 22 ER 887 256 The Prince’s Case (1606) 77 ER 481 235 Purefoy v Rogers (1672) 83 ER 443 379 Putt v Roster (1682) 86 ER 1098 263 Pyke v Dowling (1779) 96 ER 740 xii, 369 Queensberry (Duke) v Shebbeare (1758) 28 ER 924 276 R. v Archbishop of Canterbury (1628) 79 ER 910 189 R. v Bettesworth (1731) 93 ER 921 336 R. v Bettesworth (1740) 93 ER 1065 336 R. v Bishop of Norwich (1615) 79 ER 329 190 R. v Cole (1699) 91 ER 1194 321 R. v Fairclough (1596) 78 ER 521 277 R. v Raines (1700) 91 ER 1281 348, 349 R. v Williamson (1672) 89 ER 31 271

OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 11/07/16, SPi



table of cases 413

Case name Source reference Page

Ratcliff v Davies (1610) 79 ER 210, 80 ER 118 258, 306 Ratcliff’s Case (1592) 76 ER 713 129 Read’s Case (1604) 77 ER 103 342 Redman v Redman (1685) 23 ER 514 211 Redshaw v Brasier (1715) 92 ER 367 350 Reeve v Long (1693) 87 ER 395, 91 ER 202 114 Reniger v Fogossa (1550) 75 ER 1 26, 205 Reynel’s (Sir George) Case (1612) 77 ER 871 23 Richardson v Hamilton (1733) unreported; cited in Penn v Lord Baltimore 27 ER 1132 388

Ridler v Ridler (1729) 21 ER 1045 199 Rivet’s Case (1582) 76 ER 919 89 Rivet’s Case (1618) 72 ER 977 255 Robinson v Comyns (1736) 25 ER 718 247 Rockingham (Lord) v Oxenden (1711) 91 ER 487 371 Rogers v Bradly (1689) 86 ER 358 101 Rogers v Rogers (1733) 24 ER 1026 348 Roll v Osborn (1611) 80 ER 171 257 Rooke, ex parte (1753) 26 ER 156 329 Rowles v Mason (1611) 123 ER 829 101 Russell and Handford’s Case (1583) 74 ER 248 267 Rutland’s (Earl) Case (1608) 77 ER 555 386 Sacheverill v Porter (1637) 79 ER 1016, 82 ER 208 370 Sadlers’ Case (1588) 76 ER 1012 345 Saffyn’s Case (1605) 77 ER 248 389 Salforde’s Case (1577) 73 ER 802 117 Saunders’s Case (1599) 77 ER 66 192 Scattergood v Edge (1699) 88 ER 1320, 91 ER 203 117 Seale v Seale (1715) 24 ER 393 269 Sharington v Strotton (1566) 75 ER 454 301 Sharpley v Hurrel (1608) 79 ER 182 310 Sharplus v Hankinson (1595) 78 ER 661 258 Shelley’s Case (1581) 76 ER 206 121, 164, 165 Sheppard v Penrose (1666) 83 ER 357 18 Shore (Lady) v Billingsey (1687) 23 ER 607 269 Shrewsbury’s (Earl) Case (1610) 77 ER 798 103 Skrogs v Gresham (1584) 123 ER 391 345 Slade v Drake (1617) 80 ER 439 16, 17 Smith v Gould (1705) 91 ER 567 272 Smith v Kemp (1691) 91 ER 537 24, 25, 177, 370 Smith v Shelbourn (1599) 78 ER 922 190 Smith v Sherbone (1599) 76 ER 392 190 Smith v Stapleton (1573) 75 ER 642 202 Snow v Tucker (1663) 82 ER 1027 116 Soome v Gleen (1661) 82 ER 949 310 Southcote’s Case (1601) 76 ER 1061 306 Southerne v Howe (1618) 81 ER 621 306 Spanish Ambassador v Buntish (1615) 80 ER 1157 274 Spraage v Stone (1773) 27 ER 466 391 Squib v Wyn (1717) 24 ER 432 340 Stafford’s (Lord) Case (1609) 77 ER 586 112, 119 Startup v Doderidge (1705) 88 ER 885 19 Stationer’s Co. v Patentees of Roll’s Abridgement (1666) 124 ER 842 276 Stationer’s Co. v Seymour (1677) 86 ER 865 276, 278 Stephens v Stephens (1736) 25 ER 751 117 Stern v Vanburgh (1679) 84 ER 347 388 Stock v Stock (1594) 79 ER 1156 274 Stokes v Porter (1559) 73 ER 364 343

OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 11/07/16, SPi



414 table of cases

Case name Source reference Page

Stowel v Zouch (1569) 75 ER 536 194, 237 Strafford (Earl) v Lady Wentworth (1720) 24 ER 249 27 Strahan v Newbery (1774) 98 ER 913 275 Stretton v Tayler (1589) 78 ER 395 296 Stringer v Phillips (1730) 21 ER 1054 270 Stroud v Marshall (1595) 78 ER 643 199 Sturton (Vicar) v Greisley (1580) 123 ER 979 370 Sutton v Moody (1697) 87 ER 715, 88 ER 1223,

91 ER 1063 267, 284

Swans, Case of (1592) 77 ER 435 264, 265, 266 Swayne’s Case (1608) 77 ER 568 251 Symmes v Smith (1633) 82 ER 166 89 Tanner v Chapman (1680) 23 ER 252 328 Taverner v Cromwell (1584) 74 ER 571, 76 ER 940 193, 251 Tay v Slaughter (1690) 24 ER 8 79, 255 Taylor v Biddall (1678) 86 ER 1078 116 Taylor v Chambers (1611) 79 ER 58 304 Taylor v Horde (1757) 97 ER 190 246 Tey’s Case (1592) 77 ER 113 238 Thomas v Butler (1672) 86 ER 146 341 Thompson v Leach (1689) 87 ER 199 199 Thompson v Leach (1698) 90 ER 596 199 Thoroughgood’s Case (1584) 76 ER 408 208 Throckmerton v Tracy (1555) 75 ER 222 257 Thurman & Cooper’s Case (1618) 81 ER 631 386 Thurman v Cooper (1618) 81 ER 634 386 Tipping v Tipping (1721) 24 ER 589 296 Tonson v Collins (1761) 96 ER 169 xvii Tonson v Collins (1761) 96 ER 180 xvii, xviii, 274, 276 Tonson v Walker (1739) unreported; cited in Tonson v Collins 96 ER 184 276 Tonson v Walker (1752) 36 ER 1017 276 Tooker’s Case (1601) 76 ER 567 89 Trevillian v Andrew (1698) 87 ER 719 101 Tully v Sparkes (1728) 92 ER 503 328 Turner v Binion (1661) 145 ER 452 301 Turnman v Cooper (1618) 9 ER 406 386 Turpine v Forreyner (1611) 80 ER 797 257 Twyne’s Case (1601–2) 76 ER 809 203, 298, 300 Tylle v Peirce (1634) 79 ER 927 336 Tyrrel’s Case (1557) 73 ER 336, 123 ER 341 228 Vane v Fletcher (1717) 24 ER 422 200 Vernon’s Case (1572) 76 ER 845 93, 225 Vynior’s Case (1609) 77 ER 597 339 Walker v Harris (Walker’s Case) (1587) 76 ER 676 126 Walker v Woollaston (1731) 24 ER 868 340 Walsh v Walsh (1695) 24 ER 27 350 Walthoe v Walker (1736) unreported; cited in Tonson v Collins 96 ER 184 276 Wankford v Wankford (1704) 91 ER 265 345, 346 Ward v Sudman (1601) 72 ER 838 225 Warneford v Warneford (1727) 93 ER 834 209 Watts v Lock (c. 1628–9) 21 ER 113 211 Webb v Rose (1732) unreported; cited in Tonson v Collins 96 ER 184 276 Wegg v Villers (1651) 2 Roll. Abr. 796 115 Wellock v Hamond (1590) 78 ER 460 105 Whaley v Tankard (1672) 83 ER 445 242, 389 Whelpdale’s Case (1604) 77 ER 239 200 Whitehall v Squire (1689) 91 ER 262 343 Whitlock’s Case (1609) 77 ER 580 26, 205

OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 11/07/16, SPi



table of cases 415

Case name Source reference Page

Wilcocks v Wilcocks (1706) 23 ER 961 351 Wilford’s Case (1599) 78 ER 918 293 Willion v Berkley (1562) 75 ER 339 74, 156, 277 Winchcombe v Bishop of Winchester (1616) 80 ER 313 190 Winchester’s Case (1583) 76 ER 621 10 Wind v Jekyl (1719) 24 ER 522 198, 256 Windham v Chetwynd (1757) 97 ER 377 256 Windham v Windham (1581) 123 ER 352 257 Wood v Duke of Southampton (1692) 1 ER 58 104 Woodliff v Drury (1595) 78 ER 679 227 Woodroff v Wickworth (1719) 24 ER 236 341 Woodward v Lord Darcy (1558) 75 ER 282 345 Wright v Gerrard (1618) 80 ER 449 19 Wright v Moor (c. 1645–6) 21 ER 536 301 Wright v Wright (1596) 76 ER 509, 78 ER 760 19, 20, 370 Yelverton v Yelverton (1595) 78 ER 646 225 York (Archbishop) v Duke of Newcastle (1704) 91 ER 559 18 Young v — (1698) 91 ER 1384 22 Zinzon v Talmash (1680) 89 ER 838 258





Table of Statutes




While the 1225 confirmation of Magna Carta traditionally ranks as the first statute, this Table includes some earlier enactments, notably King John’s ‘Great Charter’ of 1215. Blackstone’s citations of statutes by regnal year and chapter number are not invariably accurate or consistent, but broadly follow The Statutes at Large, ed. O. Ruffhead, 8 vols (1763). Where they differ from Statutes of the Realm, 9 vols (1810–28) [henceforth SR] or the Chronological Table and Index of the Statutes, Part I (1988) [CT], the modern citation is supplied in parentheses; dates generally follow CT from 1235 onwards.

Statute Page Charter of Liberties, Henry I (1100) 47 Assize of Arms, 27 Hen. II (1181) 43 Magna Carta, 17 John (1215)

cl. 3 47

cl. 6 47

cl. 7 91

cl. 12 42, 49

cl. 14 42

cl. 15 42

cl. 16 283

cl. 26 90

cl. 27 54

cl. 32 48

cl. 37 49

cl. 47 25 Magna Carta, 1 Hen. III (1216)

cl. 6 47

cl. 7 90, 91 Magna Carta, 2 Hen. III (1217)

cl. 20 25

cl. 43 183 Charter of the Forest, 9 Hen. III (1225) [SR: 25 Edw. I]

cl. 10 282

cl. 13 265, 266 Magna Carta, 9 Hen. III (1225) [SR: 25 Edw. I]

cl. 3 45

cl. 4 193

cl. 16 25

cl. 18 332

cl. 32 197, 374 〈28〉

cl. 36 184

cl. 37 49 Statute [SR: Provisions] of Merton, 20 Hen. III (1236)

c. 4 21

c. 6 46, 47 Statute of Leap Year, 21 Hen. III [SR: 40 Hen. III] (1256) 95 Statute of Marlbridge [SR: Marlborough], 52 Hen. III (1267)

c. 16 44

c. 23 192, 193 Statute of Westminster I, 3 Edw. I (1275)

c. 22 44

c. 36 43, 58, 372 〈4〉

c. 39 19

418 table of statutes

Statute Page Statute of Glocester, 6 Edw. I (1278)

c. 3 207

c. 5 192

c. 7 92 Statute of Mortmain, 7 Edw. I (1279) 25, 96, 184 Statute of Wales, 12 Edw. I (1284) 143 Statute of Merchants, 13 Edw. I (1285) 108, 109, 198 Statute of Westminster II, 13 Edw. I (1285)

c. 1 75, 77

c. 7 376 〈24〉

c. 18 108, 197

c. 19 334

c. 22 122, 130

c. 32 184

c. 33 184

c. 34 88 Modus levandi fines, 18 Edw. I (1290) [SR: date uncertain] 237, 238, 240 Quia emptores terrarum, 18 Edw. I (1290)

c. 1 48, 61, 68, 109, 174, 184, 185,

197, 204, 205, 374 〈28〉, 374–5 〈29〉

c. 3 184 Magna Carta, 25 Edw. I (1297) [SR: Confirmation of Liberties] 42

cc. 5 & 6 49 27 Edw. I st. 2 (1299) 185 27 Edw. I c. 1 (1299) 239 Articuli super cartas, 28 Edw. I c. 1 (1300) 58 34 Edw. I st. 3 (1306) 185 de Militibus, I Edw. II [SR: Statute for respiting of knighthood, uncertain date] 41, 46, 372 〈4〉 Statute of York, 12 Edw. II (1318)

c. 2 210 Praerogativa regis, 17 Edw. II st. 1 [SR: date and status uncertain]

c. 3 44

c. 6 [SR: c. 8] 374 〈29〉

c. 8 [SR: c. 10] 188 1 Edw. III c. 12 (1326) 48, 197 18 Edw. III st. 3. c. 3 (1344) 185 25 Edw. III st. 5 (1351)

c. 2 171

c. 5 341, 342

c. 11 43 Ordin. de feodis majorum, 27 Edw. III c. 9 (1353) 108, 198 31 Edw. III c. 11 (1357) 334 34 Edw. III (1360)

c. 15 374 〈29〉

c. 16 240 50 Edw. III c. 6 (1376) 223, 226 1 Ric. II c. 9 (1377) 223, 226 2 Ric. II sess. 2. c. 3 (1379) 226 15 Ric. II c. 5 (1391) 185, 224 1 Hen. IV c. 6 (1399) 236 4 Hen. IV c. 7 (1402 226 5 Hen. IV c. 14 (1403) 238, 239 11 Hen. VI (1433)

c. 3 226

c. 5 226 1 Ric. III (1483–4)

c. 1 225, 226

table of statutes 419

Statute Page

c. 5 226

c. 7 239 1 Hen. VII c. 1 (1485) 226 3 Hen. VII c. 4 (1487) 298 4 Hen. VII (1488)

c. 17 226

c. 20 296

c. 24 79, 239, 240 11 Hen. VII (1495)

c. 3 197

c. 20 78, 207, 241, 245 19 Hen. VII c. 15 (1503) 226 3 Hen. VIII c. 4 (1511) 197 7 Hen. VIII c. 4 (1515) 78 21 Hen. VIII (1529)

c. 5 335, 344

c. 6 289

c. 15 96 23 Hen. VIII (1531)

c. 6 108, 198, 232

c. 10 185 26 Hen. VIII (1534)

c. 13 79

c. 15 334 27 Hen. VIII (1535)

c. 10 92, 120, 226, 254

c. 16 230 28 Hen. VIII (1536)

c. 5 340

c. 11 83 31 Hen. VIII (1539)

c. 1 124, 221

c. 3 57

c. 13 20 32 Hen. VIII (1540)

c. 1 254

c. 2 19, 179

c. 28 79, 217

c. 29 56

c. 32 124, 221

c. 34 105

c. 36 79, 240, 241

c. 37 295

c. 46 45 33 Hen. VIII c. 39 (1541) 79 34 [SR: 34 & 35] Hen. VIII c. 4 (1542) 318 34 & 35 Hen. VIII (1542)

c. 5 254, 336

c. 20 78, 79, 245 37 Hen. VIII c. 9 (1545) 313 1 Edw. VI c. 12 (1547) 88, 171 5 & 6 Edw. VI (1551)

c. 11 88, 172

c. 16 23 1 & 2 P. & M. c. 8 (1554) 186 2 [SR: 2 & 3] P. & M. c. 7 (1555) 305

420 table of statutes

Statute Page 1 Eliz. c. 19 (1558) 218 5 Eliz. (1562)

c. 4 285

c. 11 376 〈16〉 13 Eliz. (1571)

c. 5 203, 285, 298

c. 7 194, 320, 322, 323,

400 〈 3〉, 402 〈40〉

c. 8 203, 313

c. 10 17–18, 218

c. 20 220 14 Eliz. (1572)

c. 8 78, 245

c. 11 218, 220

c. 14 218 18 Eliz. (1575)

c. 1 376 〈16〉

c. 6 219

c. 11 220 23 Eliz. c. 3 (1580) 239 27 Eliz. c. 4 (1584) 203 31 Eliz. (1588)

c. 2 239

c. 6 190

c. 12 305 43 Eliz. (1601)

c. 4 79, 254

c. 8 342

c. 29 218 1 Jac. I (1603)

c. 3 218

c. 15 195, 318, 322, 323, 327,

402 〈 29〉

c. 21 304

c. 27 283 7 Jac. I c. 11 (1609) 283 21 Jac. I (1623)

c. 3 276

c. 17 313

c. 19 79, 195, 245, 320, 322, 323,

401 〈 14〉, 401 〈18〉, 402 〈 29〉, 402 〈33〉

16 Car. I c. 20 (1640) 46 12 Car. II (1660)

c. 13 313

c. 24 51, 54, 59, 197 13 & 14 [SR: 14] Car. II c. 33 (1662) 276 17 Car. II c. 3 (1665) 186 22 & 23 Car. II (1670)

c. 10 343, 348

c. 25 283 29 Car. II (1677)

c. 3 166, 176, 203, 209, 221, 232,

247, 255, 302, 303, 314,

338, 340, 348, 378 〈11〉, 383 〈 8〉, 387 〈35〉, 388

〈42〉, 390 〈29〉, 402 〈11〉

c. 30 403 〈32〉

table of statutes 421

Statute Page 30 Car. II c. 3 (1678) 345 1 Jac. II c. 17 (1685) 348, 350 1. W. & M. st. 2. c. 2 (1688) 185 3 & 4 W. & M. [SR: 3 W. & M.] c. 14 (1691) 166, 256 4 & 5 W. & M. [SR: 4 W. & M.] (1692)

c. 2 333

c. 16 107

c. 20 345 7 & 8 W. III (1695)

c. 37 186

c. 38 333, 350 8 & 9 W. III (1696)

c. 3 127

c. 26 376 〈17〉 9 & 10 [SR: 9] W. III c. 17 (1697) 315 10 & 11 W. III c. 16 [SR: 10 W. III c. 22] (1698) 114 11 & 12 [SR: 11] W. III c. 4 (1698)

c. 4 174, 200

c. 6 170 12 [SR: 12 & 13] W. III c. 2 (1701) 156 2 & 3 Ann. (1703)

c. 4 233

c. 5 333

c. 11 [SR: c. 20] 186 3 & 4 Ann. c. 9 [SR: c. 8] (1704) 315 4 Ann. c. 16 [SR: 4 & 5 Ann. c. 3] (1705) 123, 130, 241 4 & 5 Ann. c. 16 [SR: c. 3] (1706) 78, 198, 207, 232, 247, 338,

385 〈 2〉, 388 〈41〉

5 Ann. c. 14 (1706) [SR: 6 Ann. c. 16] 283 6 Ann. (1707)

c. 3 [recte c. 31; SR: c. 58] 191, 385 〈12〉

c. 18 [SR: 72] 119

c. 35 [SR: c. 62] 233 7 Ann. (1708)

c. 20 233

c. 21 173 8 Ann. (1709)

c. 14 [SR: c. 18] 328

c. 19 [SR: c. 21] 276, 394 〈23〉 9 Ann. (1710)

c. 10 [SR: c. 11] 345

c. 23 [SR: c. 16] 285 10 Ann. c. 19 [SR: c. 18] (1711) 276 12 Ann. st. 2. (1713)

c. 6 [SR: 13 Ann. c. 6] 289

c. 12 [SR: 13 Ann. c. 11] 190

c. 16 [SR: 13 Ann. c. 15] 313 1 Geo. I st. 2. c. 10 (1714) 188 7 Geo. I (1720)

c. 31 323, 402 〈34〉

c. 32 402 〈37〉 8 Geo. I c. 25 (1721) 378 〈11〉 11 Geo. I c. 18 (1724) 333 4 Geo. II c. 28 (1730) 27, 102 5 Geo. II c. 30 (1731) 320, 323, 400 〈2〉, 〈4〉, 401

〈11〉, 〈17〉, 〈18〉, 〈19〉, 〈21〉, 〈22〉, 〈23〉, 402 〈28〉, 〈31〉 422 table of statutes

Statute Page 7 Geo. II c. 20 (1733) 108 8 Geo. II (1734)

c. 6 233

c. 13 276 9 Geo. II c. 36 (1735) 186 11 Geo. II c. 19 (1737) 83, 198, 273, 377 〈18〉,

385–6 〈2〉

12 Geo. II c. 36 (1738) 395 〈26〉 14 Geo. II c. 20 (1740) 78, 176, 246 15 & 16 [SR: 15] Geo. II c. 28 (1741) 376 〈16〉 17 Geo. II (1743)

c. 38 345

c. 39 174 19 Geo. II (1745)

c. 32 323, 327, 402 〈38〉

c. 37 310, 312 20 Geo. II (1746)

c. 43 51

c. 50 51 24 Geo. II c. 57 (1750) 323, 401 〈25〉 25 Geo. II (1751)

c. 6 256

c. 39 170 26 Geo. II c. 33 (1753) 59 28 Geo. II (1755)

c. 6 289

c. 13 326 29 Geo. II c. 36 (1756) 21 30 Geo. II c. 24 (1757) 306 31 Geo. II c. 41 (1757) 21 32 Geo. II c. 28 (1758) 326 1 Geo. III c. 17 (1760) 326 4 Geo. III c. 33 (1763) 323 5 Geo. III (1765)

c. 12 276

c. 17 218

c. 41 326 7 Geo. III c. 38 (1766) 394 〈24〉 9 Geo. III c. 26 (1769) 401 〈26〉 11 Geo. III c. 20 (1771) 386 〈5〉 14 Geo. III (1774)

c. 48 399 〈44〉

c. 77 401 〈26〉

c. 79 400 〈50〉 15 Geo. III (1775)

c. 51 400 〈55〉

c. 53 384 〈23〉 17 Geo. III (1776)

c. 26 399 〈46〉

c. 30 400 〈55〉

c. 57 395 〈24〉 18 Geo. III c. 60 (1778) 386 〈6〉



OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 12/07/16, SPi



Index of Persons and Places



[Blackstone’s original index appears at the end of Book IV]

Abimelech (OT) 3 on title by occupancy 177 on dower 89, 92, 94 Abraham (OT) 3, 4, 7, on wills and testaments 332, on estates 109, 117–18

302, 330–1 339, 345, 346 on forfeiture 192

Alexander III (d. 1181), Bretagne, region in France 196 on hereditaments 10

pope 14 Bridgeman, Sir Orlando on inheritance 143, 160, 167,

Alfred the Great (849–99), king (1606–74), lawyer and 170, 173, 252

of Wessex 16 lord chief baron 115 on simony 189–90

Arbuthnot, John (1667–1735), Brook (Broke), Sir Robert on study 259

author 35 (d. 1558), chief justice 150 on tenures 39, 48, 61, 64, 70,

Aristotle (384–322 bc), Burn, Richard (1709–85), legal 74, 75, 289

philosopher 308 writer 285 on tithes 17

Arthur (1187–c. 1203), nephew on titles 131

of King John 148 Caedwalla (c. 659–89), king of on wills and testaments 332,

Athelstan (c. 893–939), king of Wessex 209 337, 349

England 16 Caesar, Julius (100–44 bc), Craig, Thomas (1538–1608),

Augustine (d. 604), archbishop Roman general and Scottish lawyer and

of Canterbury 15 dictator 56, 278, 281 jurist 28, 156

Augustus [Octavian] (63 Calthrope (Calthorpe), Charles

bc–14 ad), Roman (c. 1524–1616), judge 147 d’Argentré, Bertrand (1519–90), emperor 223 Canaan (OT) 4 French judge and

Canute (c. 994–1035), king of historian 196

Bacon, Sir Francis (1561–1626), England 87, 143, 144, 281, de’ Tedeschi, Niccolò

philosopher and 286, 288, 349 (Panormitanus ) (1386– jurist 159, 160, 224, 226, Caracalla (188–217), Roman 1445), Italian jurist 288 228, 339 emperor 351 Domat, Jean (1625–96), French

Baldus de Ubaldis (1327–1400), Cecil, William, Baron Burghley jurist 142

Italian jurist 72 (c. 1520–98), lord high du Fresne, Charles (1610–88),

Barbeyrac, Jean (1674–1744), treasurer 219 French historian and

French jurist 5 Charlemagne (c. 742–814), Holy lexicographer 194, 196, 261

Becket, Thomas (c. 1118–70), Roman Emperor 15 du Halde, Jean-Baptiste

archbishop of Charles I (1600–49), king of (1674–1743), French Canterbury 14 England 46 historian 55

Boeckelmann, Johann Charles II (1630–85), king of Dudley, Edmund (c. 1460–1510),

Friedrich (1633–81), England 54 lawyer and politician 45 German jurist 71 Chichele, Henry (c. 1362–1443), Dunstan (924–88), archbishop

Brabant, Duchy in Holy archbishop of of Canterbury 16

Roman Empire 290 Canterbury 344 Dyer, Sir James (1512–82), chief

Bracton, Henry (c. 1210–68), Cicero (106–43 bc), Roman justice 160

treatise attributed to author 2

on alienation 216, 237 Claudius (10 bc–54 ad), Edgar (c. 943–75), king of the on dower 87, 88 Roman emperor 351 the English 280 on inheritance 143, 145, 156 Coke, Sir Edward (1552–1634), Edmond [Edmund] (921–46), on mortuaries 288 chief justice king of England 87 on personal property 260, on alienation 59, 184, 208, Edward (c. 871–924), king of

265, 274 210, 222, 240 Wessex 16

on tenures 40, 47, 52, 58, on bankruptcy 318 Edward I (1239–1307), king of

60, 66–7, 287 on chattels 385, 266, 305 England 54, 91, 96, 199

OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 12/07/16, SPi



424 index of persons and places

Edward II (1284–1327), king of Guthrun (d. 890), king of East Innocent IV (d. 1254),

England 41, 44 Anglia 16 pope 334

Edward III (1312–77), king of Isaac (OT) 3

England 78, 96, 199, 223 Hale, Sir Matthew (1609–76),

Edward IV (1442–83), king of chief justice 150, 159, 160 Jacob (OT) 331

England 78, 91, 224, 249 Hawkins, William (1673–1746), James I (1566–1625), king of

Edward VI (1537–53), king of serjeant at law 285 England 51, 344

England 46, 64 Henry I (1068–1135), king of John (1167–1216), king of

Edward the Confessor (c. 1003– England 33 England 16, 33, 49,

66), king of England 33, Henry II (1133–89), king of 148, 282 66, 209, 281 England, statutes Jordan (OT) 4

Edwin (d. 633), king of associated with Joseph (OT) 331

Northumbria 208 advowsons 14 Justinian I (483–565),

Eliezer (OT) 7, 331 fines 237 Byzantine emperor Elizabeth I (1533–1603), queen free fishery 25 157, 158, 279, 312,

of England 46, 156, 218 tenures 41, 49 337, 351

Empson, Sir Richard (c. 1450– wills and testaments 340 Justinus (2nd cent. ad),

1510), lawyer and Henry III (1207–72), king of Roman historian 2 politician 45 England, statutes

Euripides (c. 485–406 bc), associated with Khan, Genghis (1162–1227),

Athenian playwright 347 dower 90–1 Mongol emperor 281

Eusebius (c. 260–c. 341), bishop fines 237

of Caesarea, historian, Magna Carta 34 Le Rouillé, Guillaume exegete 331 mortuaries 288 (1494–1550), French

property from jurist 46, 261

Finch, Sir Henry (1558–1625), accession 274 Littleton, Sir Thomas (d. 1481),

jurist 53, 332 tenures 44, 85 jurist

Fitzherbert, Sir Anthony Henry IV (1366–1413), king of on alienation 164, 216

(1470–1538), jurist 67, England 91 on dower 89, 91 150, 199, 332 Henry VI (1421–71), king of on estates 69, 75, 105,

Fortescue, Sir John (c. 1397– England 73, 199, 224 126, 127

c. 1479), chief justice 156 Henry VII (1457–1509), king of on tenures 50, 52, 53, 54, 55,

England 45, 79, 240 57, 58, 85, 128

Gaul, region encompassing Henry VIII (1491–1547), king Locke, John (1632–1704),

modern-day France 30 of England 20, 186, 261 philosopher 5, 274

Gilbert, Sir Geoffrey or Jeffrey Hesiod (7th cent. bc), Greek Lot (OT) 4

(1674–1726), lord chief poet 157 Lyndwood, William (c. 1375– baron and jurist 254 Hobart, Sir Henry (c. 1560– 1446), bishop of St

Glanvill(e), Ranulf de 1625), chief justice 17 David’s 288, 344

(c. 1120–c. 1190), treatise Hobbes, Thomas (1588–1679), attributed to philosopher 5 Machpelah, field of (OT) 302

on alienation 108, 237 Holt, Sir John (1642–1710), lord Madox, Thomas (1666–1727), on chattels 260 chief justice 323 historian 96 on dower 90 Horace (65–8 bc), Roman Malcolm III (c. 1031–93), king on inheritance 142, 145, 147, poet 312 of Scotland 55

169, 340 Hoveden (Howden), Roger of Manwood, John (d. 1610),

on tenures 47, 53, 54, 55 (fl. 1174–1201), English jurist 159 on wills and testaments chronicler 233 Martial ( d. c. 103), Roman

331–2, 337 poet 275

Godefroy, Denis (1549–1622), Ingulphus (d. 1109), reputed Mary I (1516–58), queen of

French jurist 194 historian 209 England 156

Grotius, Hugo (1583–1645), Innocent II ( d. 1143), pope 20 Molesworth, Robert (1656–

Dutch jurist 1, 5, 272, Innocent III (1161–1216), 1725), statesman and 309, 312–13 pope 17 writer 62

OUP CORRECTED PROOF – FINAL, 12/07/16, SPi



index of persons and places 425

Montesquieu, Charles Louis Richard I (1157–99), king of Temple, Sir William (1628–

de Sécondat (1689–1755), England 19, 25, 148 99), statesman and French philosopher 55, Richard III (1452–85), king of author 30, 61 142 England 226 Terence (d. c. 159 bc), Roman

Moses (OT) 308 playwright 275

St German, Christopher Titius, Gottlieb Gerhard

Noah (OT) 331 (1460–1540), jurist (1661–1714), German Normandy, duchy in northern 69, 235 jurist 5

France, laws of Sarum, Salisbury 31

feudal 33, 261 Schilter, Joannes (1632–1705), Walker, Sir Walter (1600–74), on alienation by deed 209 German jurist 36 civilian 349 on dower 90 Selden, John (1584–1654), Walter, Hubert ( d. 1205), on inheritance 148, 156 jurist and historian 56, archbishop of on marriage 46 90, 157 Canterbury 57 on tenures 85, 286 Severus, Alexander (209–35), Warburton, William (1698–

Roman emperor 30, 351 1779), bishop of

Palmer, Sir Geoffrey (1598– Sharp, Granville (1735–1813), Gloucester 35

1670), lawyer and abolitionist 272 Wilkins, David (1685–1745), attorney general 115 Skene, John, Lord Curriehill Prussian scholar and

Papinian (c. 142–212 ad), (c. 1543–1617), Scottish historian 331

Roman jurist 351 jurist 53 William I, the Conqueror

Paris, Matthew (c. 1200–59), Smith, Sir Thomas (1513–77), (1028–87), king of

chronicler 14 civilian and diplomat 50, England

Paulus, Julius (fl. c. 200 ad), 64, 219 Domesday Book and

Roman jurist 168 Solon (c. 630–c. 560 bc), the council of

Pegu, city in Myanmar Athenian lawmaker Sarum 31–2, 66

(Burma) 319 253, 331 heriots and 43, 286–7

Perkins, John (d. 1545), Somner, William (1598–1669), introduces feudal

jurist 333 antiquarian 53, 54 polity 30–3, 145

Pigott, Nathaniel (1661–1737), Spelman, Sir Henry (1564– origin of royal line 156

lawyer 78, 244 1641), antiquary 28, 70, title of 165

Plowden, Edmund (c. 1518–85), 286 William II ( c. 1056–1100), king

law reporter 160 Statius (45–96 ad), Roman of England 33, 43

Pollux, Julius (fl. 2nd cent. ad), poet 275 William III (1650–1702), king

Greek scholar and Sta(u)n(d)ford(e), Sir William of England 130 rhetorician 25 (1509–58), judge 88 Wood, Thomas (1661–1722),

Pontoppidan, Erik (1698–1764), Stiernhöök, Johan (1596– legal scholar 71

Danish historian 29 1675), Swedish jurist 62, Wright, Sir Martin (1691–1767),

Pope, Alexander (1688–1744), 307 lawyer and judge 32,

poet 35 Sweyn ( c. 960–1014), king of 70–1, 153

Procopius (6th cent. ad), Denmark, Norway, and

Byzantine historian briefly England 87 Yorke, Charles (1722–70), lord 209 chancellor 173

Puf(f)endorf, Samuel von Tacitus (c. 56–c. 120), Roman

(1632–94), German historian 4, 36, 46, 56, jurist 5, 264, 279 93, 281





