The Online Library of Liberty
A Project Of Liberty Fund, Inc.

Sir Frederick Pollock, The History of English Law
before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1 [1898]

The Online Library Of Liberty
This E-Book (PDF format) is published by Liberty Fund, Inc., a private,
non-profit, educational foundation established in 1960 to encourage study of the ideal
of a society of free and responsible individuals. 2010 was the 50th anniversary year of
the founding of Liberty Fund.

It is part of the Online Library of Liberty web site http://oll.libertyfund.org, which
was established in 2004 in order to further the educational goals of Liberty Fund, Inc.
To find out more about the author or title, to use the site's powerful search engine, to
see other titles in other formats (HTML, facsimile PDF), or to make use of the
hundreds of essays, educational aids, and study guides, please visit the OLL web site.
This title is also part of the Portable Library of Liberty DVD which contains over
1,000 books and quotes about liberty and power, and is available free of charge upon
request.

The cuneiform inscription that appears in the logo and serves as a design element in
all Liberty Fund books and web sites is the earliest-known written appearance of the
word “freedom” (amagi), or “liberty.” It is taken from a clay document written about
2300 B.C. in the Sumerian city-state of Lagash, in present day Iraq.

To find out more about Liberty Fund, Inc., or the Online Library of Liberty Project,
please contact the Director at oll@libertyfund.org.

LIBERTY FUND, INC.
8335 Allison Pointe Trail, Suite 300
Indianapolis, Indiana 46250-1684



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Edition Used:

The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I. Reprint of 2nd edition, with
a Select Bibliography and Notes by Professor S.F. Milsom. (Indianapolis: Liberty
Fund, 2010). Vol. 1.

Author: Sir Frederick Pollock
Author: Frederic William Maitland

About This Title:

First published in 1895, Sir Frederick Pollock and Frederic William Maitland’s legal
classic The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I expanded the work of
Sir Edward Coke and William Blackstone by exploring the origins of key aspects of
English common law and society and with them the development of individual rights
as these were gradually carved out from the authority of the Crown and the Church.
Although it has been more than a century since its initial publication, Pollock and
Maitland’s work is still considered an accessible and useful foundational reference for
scholars of medieval English law. Volume one begins with an examination of Anglo-
Saxon law, goes on to consider the changes in law introduced by the Normans, then
moves to the twelfth-century “Age of Glanvill,” with the first great compilation of

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 2 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

English laws and customs, followed by the thirteenth-century “Age of Bracton,”
author of another major treatise on the same subject.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 3 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

About Liberty Fund:

Liberty Fund, Inc. is a private, educational foundation established to encourage the
study of the ideal of a society of free and responsible individuals.

Copyright Information:

Select bibliography and notes by Professor S. F. C. Milsom, published here as an
appendix, was originally published in Cambridge University Press’s 1968 reissue of
The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I. Reprinted by permission of
Cambridge University Press.

Fair Use Statement:

This material is put online to further the educational goals of Liberty Fund, Inc.
Unless otherwise stated in the Copyright Information section above, this material may
be used freely for educational and academic purposes. It may not be used in any way
for profit.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 4 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Table Of Contents
Preface to the Second Edition
Preface to the First Edition
List of Abbreviations
List of Texts Used. 1
Additions and Corrections
Book I: Sketch of Early English Legal History
Chapter I: The Dark Age In Legal History
Chapter II: Anglo-saxon Law
Chapter III: Norman Law 1
Chapter IV: England Under the Norman Kings
Chapter V: Roman and Canon Law
Chapter VI: The Age of Glanvill
Chapter VII: The Age of Bracton
Book II: The Doctrines of English Law In the Early Middle Ages
Chapter I: Tenure
Chapter II: The Sorts and Conditions of Men
Chapter III: Jurisdiction and the Communities of the Land

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 5 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[Back to Table of Contents]

Preface To The Second Edition
In this edition the first chapter, by Prof. Maitland, is new. In Book II, c. ii. § 12, on
“Corporations and Churches” (formerly “Fictitious Persons”), and c. iii. § 8, on “The
Borough,” have been recast. There are no other important alterations: but we have to
thank our learned critics, and especially Dr. Brunner of Berlin, for various
observations by which we have endeavoured to profit. We have thought it convenient
to note the paging of the first edition in the margin.

f. p.

f. w. m.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 6 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[Back to Table of Contents]

Preface To The First Edition
The present work has filled much of our time and thoughts for some years. We send it
forth, however, well knowing that in many parts of our field we have accomplished, at
most, a preliminary exploration. Oftentimes our business has been rather to quarry
and hew for some builder of the future than to leave a finished building. But we have
endeavoured to make sure, so far as our will and power can go, that when his day
comes he shall have facts and not fictions to build with. How near we may have come
to fulfilling our purpose is not for us to judge. The only merit we claim is that we
have given scholars the means of verifying our work throughout.

We are indebted to many learned friends for more or less frequent help, and must
specially mention the unfailing care and attention of Mr. R. T. Wright, the Secretary
of the University Press.

Portions of the book have appeared, in the same words or in substance, in the
Contemporary Review, the English Historical Review and the Harvard Law Review,
to whose editors and proprietors we offer our acknowledgments and thanks.

f. p.

f. w. m.

Note. It is proper for me to add for myself that, although the book was planned in
common and has been revised by both of us, by far the greater share of the execution
belongs to Mr. Maitland, both as to the actual writing and as to the detailed research
which was constantly required.

f. p.

21 Feb. 1895.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 7 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[Back to Table of Contents]

List Of Abbreviations
A.-S. Anglo-Saxon.
Bl. Com. Blackstone’s Commentaries.
Co. Coke.
Co. Lit. Coke upon Littleton.
D. B. Domesday Book.
D. G. R. Deutsches Genossenschaftsrecht.
D. R. G. Deutsche Rechtsgeschichte.1
E. H. R. English Historical Review.
Fitz. Abr. Fitzherbert’s Abridgement.
Fitz. Nat. Brev. Fitzherbert’s Natura Brevium.
Harv. L. R. Harvard Law Review.
Lit. Littleton’s Tenures.
L. Q. R. Law Quarterly Review.
Mon. Germ. Monumenta Germaniae.
P. C. Pleas of the Crown.
P. Q. W. Placita de Quo Warranto.
Reg. Brev. Registrum Brevium.
Rep. Coke’s Reports.
R. H. Hundred Rolls.
Rot. Cart. Charter Rolls.
Rot. Cl. Close Rolls.
Rot. Parl. Parliament Rolls.
Rot. Pat. Patent Rolls.
Sec. Inst. Coke’s Second Institute.
Sel. Chart. Stubbs’s Select Charters.
X. Decretales Gregorii IX.
Y. B. Year Book.
1The second edition of Schröder’s D. R. G. is referred to.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 8 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[Back to Table of Contents]

List Of Texts Used.1
[R = Rolls Series. Rec. Com. = Record Commission.

Seld. = Selden Society. Camd. = Camden Society.

Surt. = Surtees Society.]

Collections of ancient laws and documents.

Die Gesetze der Angelsachsen, ed. F. Liebermann, in progress.
Die Gesetze der Angelsachsen, ed. Reinhold Schmid, 2nd ed., Leipzig, 1858.
Ancient Laws and Institutes of England, 8vo ed. (Rec. Com.).
Councils and Ecclesiastical Documents, ed. Haddan and Stubbs, vol. iii.
Oxford, 1871.
Quadripartitus, ed. F. Liebermann, Halle, 1892.
Consiliatio Cnuti, ed. F. Liebermann, Halle, 1893.
Leges Edwardi Confessoris, ed. F. Liebermann, Halle, 1894.
Instituta Cnuti, ed. F. Liebermann, Transactions of Royal Hist. Soc. N. S. vol.
vii. p. 77.
Codex Diplomaticus Ævi Saxonici, ed. J. M. Kemble (Eng. Hist. Soc.).
Diplomatarium Anglicum Ævi Saxonici, ed. B. Thorpe, London, 1865.
Cartularium Saxonicum, ed. W. de G. Birch, 1885 ff.
Placita Anglo-Normannica, ed. M. M. Bigelow, London, 1879.
Select Charters, ed. W. Stubbs, Oxford, 1881.
Chartes des Libertés Anglaises, ed. Ch. Bémont, Paris, 1892.
Statutes of the Realm, vol. i (Rec. Com.), 1800.

Judicial Records.

Rolls of the King’s Court, Ric. I. (Pipe Roll Soc.).
Rotuli Curiae Regis temp. Ric. I. et Joh., ed. Palgrave (Rec. Com.).
Placitorum Abbreviatio (Rec. Com.).
Select Pleas of the Crown, 1200–1225 (Seld.).
Select Civil Pleas, 1200–1203 (Seld.).
Pleas of the Crown for the County of Gloucester, 1221, ed. Maitland,
London, 1884.
Bracton’s Note Book, ed. Maitland, Cambridge, 1887.
Three Assize Rolls for the County of Northumberland (Surt.).
Placita de Quo Warranto (Rec. Com.).
Somersetshire Assize Rolls (Somers. Record Soc.).
Select Cases from Coroners’ Rolls (Seld.).
Rotuli Parliamentorum, vol. i (official edition).
Memoranda de Parliamento, 1305 (R).
Select Pleas in Manorial Courts (Seld.).
The Court Baron (Seld.).

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 9 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Durham Halmote Rolls (Surt.).
The Leet Jurisdiction in Norwich (Seld.).

Miscellaneous Records.

Domesday Book (official edition).
Pipe Roll of 31 Henry I. (Rec. Com.).
Pipe Rolls of Henry II. (Pipe Roll Soc.).
Red Book of the Exchequer (R).
Liber Niger Scaccarii, ed. Hearne, Oxford, 1728.
Rotuli Literarum Clausarum, 1204–1227 (Rec. Com.).
Rotuli Literarum Patentium, 1201–1216 (Rec. Com.).
Rotuli Chartarum, 1199–1216 (Rec. Com.).
Rotuli de Oblatis et Finibus, temp. Joh. (Rec. Com.).
Excerpta e Rotulis Finium, 1216–1272 (Rec. Com.).
Fines, sive Pedes Finium, 1195–1215, ed. Hunter (Rec. Com.).
Feet of Fines, 1182–1196 (Pipe Roll Soc.).
Rotuli Hundredorum, Hen. III. et Edw. I. (Rec. Com.).
Parliamentary Writs (Rec. Com.).
Testa de Neville (Rec. Com.).
Documents illustrative of English History, ed. Cole (Rec. Com.).
Calendarium Genealogicum (Rec. Com.).
Foedera, Conventiones etc., ed. 1816 (Rec. Com.).
Prynne, Records, i.e. An exact Chronological Vindication . . . of the King’s
Supreme Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, etc., London, 1655.
Munimenta Gildhallae (R), containing Liber Albus and Liber Custumarum.

Law-books.

Bracton, Tractatus de Legibus, ed. 1569.
Bracton and Azo (Seld.).
Britton, ed. F. M. Nichols, Oxford, 1865.
Fleta, seu Commentarius Iuris Anglicani, ed. 1685.
Glanvill, Tractatus de Legibus, ed. 1604.
Hengham, Summae, printed at the end of Selden’s ed. of Fortescue, De
Laudibus.
The Mirror of Justices (Seld.).

Law reports.

Year Books of 20–21, 21–22, 30–31, 32–33, 33–35 Edward I. (R).

Chronicles, Annals etc.

Abbatum. Gesta Abbatum Monasterii S. Albani (R).
Abingdon, Chronicon Monasterii de (R).
Anglo-Saxon Chronicle (R).
Annales Monastici (R).

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 10 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Antiquis Legibus, Liber de (Camd.).
Becket. Materials for the Life of Thomas Becket (R).
Benedictus Abbas. See Gesta Henrici.
Brakelonda, Chronica Jocelini de (Camd.).
Burton, Annales de, in Annales Monastici, vol. i (R).
Cambrensis. See Giraldus.
Canterbury. See Gervase.
Coggeshall, Radulphi de, Chronicon Anglicanum (R).
Cotton, Bartholomaei de, Historia Anglicana (R).
Diceto, Radulfide, Opera Historica (R).
Dunstaplia, Annales Prioratus de, in Annales Monastici, vol. iii (R).
Durham, Symeon of, The Historical Works of (R).
Eadmeri, Historia Novorum (R).
Edward I. and Edward II., Chronicles of (R).
Eveshamensis, Chronicon Abbatiae (R).
Flores Historiarum (R).
Franciscana, Monumenta (R).
Gervase of Canterbury, Works of (R).
Gesta Henrici Secundi (Benedict of Peterborough) (R).
Giraldus Cambrensis, The Works of (R).
Gloucester, Metrical Chronicle of Robert of (R).
Hemingburgh, Walteri de, Chronicon (Eng. Hist. Soc.).
Hovedene, Rogeri de, Chronica (R).
Hugonis, Magna Vita S. (R).
Huntendunensis, Henrici, Historia (R).
Liber de Antiquis Legibus (Camd.).
Malmesbiriensis, Willelmi, Gesta Regum (R).
Mapes, Gualterus, de Nugis Curialium (Camd.).
Melsa, Chronicon Monasterii de (R).
Monte, Roberti de, Chronica, in Chronicles of Stephen etc. vol. iv (R).
Newborough, William of, in Chronicles of Stephen etc. vol. i (R).
Parisiensis, Matthaei, Chronica Majora (R).
Parisiensis, Matthaei, Historia Anglorum (R).
Ramsey, Chronicle of the Abbey of (R).
Rishanger, Willelmi, Chronica et Annales (R).
Tewkesbury, Annals of, in Annales Monastici, vol. i (R).
Torigneio, Roberti de, Chronica, in Chronicles of Stephen etc. vol. iv (R).
Triveti, Nicholai, Annales (Eng. Hist. Soc.).
Waverleia, Annales de, in Annales Monastici, vol. ii (R).
Wigorniensis, Florentii, Chronicon (Eng. Hist. Soc.).
Wykes, Thomae, Chronicon, in Annales Monastici, vol. iv (R).
York, Historians of the Church of (R).

Letters, etc.

Academica, Munimenta (R).
Cantuarienses, Epistolae, in Chronicles etc. of Richard I., vol. ii (R).
Cantuarienses, Literae (R).

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 11 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Dunelmense, Registrum Palatinum (R).
Grosseteste, Letters of Bishop (R).
Lanfranci Opera, ed. Giles, Oxford, 1844.
Northern Registers, Historical Papers and Letters from (R).
Osmund, Register of St. (R).
Peckham, Registrum Johannis (R).
Royal and other Historical Letters, Henry III. (R).
Saresberiensis, Joannis, Opera, ed. Giles, Oxford, 1848.

Cartularies.

Bath, Two Chartularies (Somerset Record Soc. 1893).
Battle, Cartulary (Camd.).
Brinkburn, Cartulary (Surt.).
Burton, Cartulary (Salt Society, 1884).
Gloucester, History and Cartulary (R).
Guisborough, Cartulary (Surt.).
Malmesbury, Register (R).
Newminster, Cartulary (Surt.).
Paul’s, Domesday of St. (Camd.).
Peterborough, Black Book of, at the end of Chronicon Petroburgense
(Camd.).
Ramsey, Cartulary (R).
Rievaulx, Cartulary (Surt.).
Sarum, Charters and Documents of (R).
Selby, Coucher Book (Yorkshire Archaeological Soc. 1891–93).
Whalley, Coucher Book (Chetham Soc. 1847).
Whitby, Cartulary (Surt.).
Winchcombe, Landboc, vol. i, ed. D. Royce, Exeter, 1892.
Worcester, Register (Camd.).
Round, Ancient Charters (Pipe Roll Soc.).
Madox, Formulare Anglicanum, London, 1702.
Monasticon Anglicanum, ed. 1817 etc.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 12 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[Back to Table of Contents]

Additions And Corrections
In the First of the two Books into which our work is divided we have endeavoured to
draw a slight sketch, which becomes somewhat fuller as time goes on, of the general
outlines of that part of English legal history which lies on the other side of the
accession of Edward I. In the Second Book we have tried to set forth at some length
the doctrines and rules of English law which prevailed in the days of Glanvill and the
days of Bracton, or, in other words, under Henry II., his sons and grandson. The
chapters of our First Book are allotted to various periods of history, those of the
Second to various branches of law. In a short Introduction we hope to explain why we
have been guilty of what may be regarded as certain offences, more especially certain
offences of omission.

It has been usual for writers commencing the exposition of any particular system of
law to undertake, to a greater or less extent, philosophical discussion of the nature of
laws in general, and definition of the most general notions of jurisprudence. We
purposely refrain from any such undertaking. The philosophical analysis and
definition of law belongs, in our judgment, neither to the historical nor to the
dogmatic science of law, but to the theoretical part of politics. A philosopher who is
duly willing to learn from lawyers the things of their own art is full as likely to handle
the topic with good effect as a lawyer, even if that lawyer is acquainted with
philosophy, and has used all due diligence in consulting philosophers. The matter of
legal science is not an ideal result of ethical or political analysis; it is the actual result
of facts of human nature and history. Common knowledge assures us that in every
tolerably settled community there are rules by which men are expected to order their
conduct. Some of these rules are not expressed in any authentic form, nor declared
with authority by any person or body distinct from the community at large, nor
enforced by any power constituted for that purpose. Others are declared by some
person or body having permanently, or for the time being, public authority for that
purpose, and, when so declared, are conceived as binding the members of the
community in a special manner. In civilized states there are officers charged with the
duty and furnished with the means of enforcing them. Of the former kind are the
common rules of morals and manners, in so far as they do not coincide with rules of
law. We shall find that in England, as elsewhere, and in times which must be called
recent as compared with the known history of ancient civilization, many things were
left to the rule of social custom, if not to private caprice or uncontrolled private force,
which are now, as a matter of course, regulated by legislation, and controlled by
courts of justice. By gradual steps, as singularly alike in the main in different lands
and periods, at the corresponding stages of advance, as they have differed in detail,
public authority has drawn to itself more and more causes and matters out of the
domain of mere usage and morals; and, where several forms of public authority have
been in competition (as notably, in the history of Christendom, the Church has striven
with secular princes and rulers to enlarge her jurisdiction at their expense), we find
that some one form has generally prevailed, and reigns without serious rivalry. Thus,
in every civilized Commonwealth we expect to find courts of justice open to common
resort, where judges and magistrates appointed in a regular course by the supreme

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 13 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

governors of the Commonwealth, or, at least, with their allowance and authority,
declare and administer those rules of which the State professes to compel the
observance. Moreover, we expect to find regularly appointed means of putting in
force the judgments and orders of the courts, and of overcoming resistance to them, at
need, by the use of all or any part of the physical power at the disposal of the State.
Lastly, we expect to find not only that the citizen may use the means of redress
provided and allowed by public justice, but that he may not use others. Save in cases
particularly excepted, the man who takes the law into his own hands puts himself in
the wrong, and offends the community. “The law is open, and there are deputies; let
them implead one another.” Such are for the citizen, the lawyer, and the historian, the
practical elements of law. When a man is acquainted with the rules which the judges
of the land will apply to any subject of dispute between citizens, or to any act
complained of as an offence against the common weal, and is further acquainted with
the manner in which the decision of the competent court can be enforced, he must be
said to know the law to that extent. He may or may not have opinions upon the
metaphysical analysis of laws or legal duty in general, or the place of the topic in
hand in a scientific arrangement of legal ideas. Law, such as we know it in the
conduct of life, is matter of fact; not a thing which can be seen or handled, but a thing
perceived in many ways of practical experience. Commonly there is no difficulty in
recognizing it by its accustomed signs and works. In the exceptional cases where
difficulties are found, it is not known that metaphysical definition has ever been of
much avail.

It may be well to guard ourselves on one or two points. We have said that law may be
taken for every purpose, save that of strictly philosophical inquiry, to be the sum of
the rules administered by courts of justice. We have not said that it must be, or that it
always is, a sum of uniform and consistent rules (as uniform and consistent, that is, as
human fallibility and the inherent difficulties of human affairs permit) administered
under one and the same system. This would, perhaps, be the statement of an ideal
which the modern history of law tends to realize rather than of a result yet fully
accomplished in any nation. Certainly it would not be correct as regards the state of
English legal institutions, not only in modern but in quite recent times. Different and
more or less conflicting systems of law, different and more or less competing systems
of jurisdiction, in one and the same region, are compatible with a high state of
civilization, with a strong government, and with an administration of justice well
enough liked and sufficiently understood by those who are concerned.

Another point on which confusion is natural and may be dangerous is the relation of
law to morality. Legal rules are not merely that part of the moral rules existing in a
given society which the State thinks proper to enforce. It is easily recognized that
there are, and must be, rules of morality beyond the commandments of law; no less is
it true, though less commonly recognized, that there are and must be rules of law
beyond or outside the direct precepts of morality. There are many things for which it
is needful or highly convenient to have a fixed rule, and comparatively or even wholly
indifferent what that rule shall be. When, indeed, the rule is fixed by custom or law,
then morality approves and enjoins obedience to it. But the rule itself is not a moral
rule. In England men drive on the left-hand side of the road, in the United States and
nearly all parts of the Continent of Europe on the right. Morality has nothing to say to

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 14 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

this, except that those who use the roads ought to know and observe the rule,
whatever it be, prescribed by the law of the country. Many cases, again, occur, where
the legal rule does not profess to fulfil anything like perfect justice, but where
certainty is of more importance than perfection, and an imperfect rule is therefore
useful and acceptable. Nay, more, there are cases where the law, for reasons of
general policy, not only makes persons chargeable without proof of moral blame, but
will not admit proof to the contrary. Thus, by the law of England, the possessor of a
dangerous animal is liable for any mischief it may do, notwithstanding that he may
have used the utmost caution for its safe keeping. Thus, in our modern law, a master
has to answer for the acts and defaults of a servant occupied about his business,
however careful he may have been in choosing and instructing the servant. Thus,
again, there are cases where an obviously wrongful act has brought loss upon innocent
persons, and no redress can be obtained from the primary wrong-doer. In such cases it
has to be decided which of those innocent persons shall bear the loss. A typical
example is the sale of stolen goods to one who buys them in good faith. The
fraudulent seller is commonly out of reach, or, if within reach, of no means to make
restitution. Either the true owner must lose his goods, or the purchaser must lose his
money. This question, simple enough as to the facts, is on the very border-line of legal
policy. Some systems of law favour the first owner, some the purchaser, and in our
English law itself the result may be one way or the other, according to conditions
quite independent of the actual honesty or prudence of the parties. In the dealings of
modern commerce, questions which are reducible to the same principle arise in
various ways which may be complicated to an indefinite extent. Evidently there must
be some law for such cases; yet no law can be made which will not seem unjust to the
loser. Compensation at the public expense would, perhaps, be absolutely just, and it
might be practicable in a world of absolutely truthful and prudent people. But in such
a world frauds would not be committed on individuals any more than on the State.

Another point worth mention is that the notion of law does not include of necessity
the existence of a distinct profession of lawyers, whether as judges or as advocates.
There cannot well be a science of law without such a profession; but justice can be
administered according to settled rules by persons taken from the general body of
citizens for the occasion, or in a small community even by the whole body of
qualified citizens; and under the most advanced legal systems a man may generally
conduct his own cause in person, if so minded. In Athens, at the time of Pericles, and
even of Demosthenes, there was a great deal of law, but no class of persons answering
to our judges or counsellors. The Attic orator was not a lawyer in the modern sense.
Again, the Icelandic sagas exhibit a state of society provided with law quite definite
as far as it goes, and even minutely technical on some points, and yet without any
professed lawyers. The law is administered by general assemblies of freemen, though
the court which is to try a particular cause is selected by elaborate rules. There are old
men who have the reputation of being learned in the law; sometimes the opinion of
such a man is accepted as conclusive; but they hold no defined office or official
qualification. In England, as we shall see hereafter, there was no definite legal
profession till more than a century after the Norman Conquest. In short, the presence
of law is marked by the administration of justice in some regular course of time,
place, and manner, and on the footing of some recognized general principles. These
conditions appear to be sufficient, as they are necessary. But if we suppose an Eastern

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 15 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

despot to sit in the gate and deal with every case according to the impression of the
moment, recognizing no rule at all, we may say that he is doing some sort of justice,
but we cannot say that he is doing judgment according to law. Probably no prince or
ruler in historical times ever really took upon himself to do right according to his
mere will and pleasure. There are always points of accepted faith which even the
strongest of despots dares not offend, points of custom which he dares not disregard.

At the same time the conscious separation of law from morals and religion has been a
gradual process, and it has largely gone hand in hand with the marking off of special
conditions of men to attend to religious and to legal affairs, and the development,
through their special studies, of jurisprudence and theology as distinct sciences. If
there be any primitive theory of the nature of law, it seems to be that laws are the
utterance of some divine or heroic person who reveals, or declares as revealed to him,
that which is absolutely right. The desire to refer institutions to a deified or canonized
legislator is shown in England, as late as the fourteenth century, by the attribution to
King Alfred of everything supposed to be specially national and excellent. In the
extant Brahmanical recensions of early Hindu law this desire is satisfied with
deliberate and excessive minuteness. Wherever and whenever such notions prevail,
the distinction between legal and moral duty can at best be imperfectly realized.
During the age of which we are to speak in this book a grand attempt was being made
to reduce morality to legal forms. In the system of the medieval Church the whole of
“external” moral duty is included in the law of God and of Holy Church. Morality
becomes a thing of arguments and judgments, of positive rules and exceptions, and
even of legislative declaration by the authority supreme on earth in matters of faith
and morals. Many things on which Protestants are accustomed to spend their
astonishment and indignation are merely the necessary consequences of this theory.
We shall often have to observe that the wide and flexible jurisdiction of the spiritual
power was of great service in the middle ages, both in supplementing the justice of
secular courts, and in stimulating them by its formidable competition to improve their
doctrine and practice; but a discussion of the Church’s penitential system will not be
expected of us.

We have spoken but briefly of the law which prevailed in England before the coming
of the Normans, and therefore we ought perhaps to say here that in our opinion it was
in the main pure Germanic law. Question has been made at various times as to how
much of ancient British custom survived the conquest of Britain by successive
invaders, and became incorporated in English law. We are unable to assign any
definite share to this Celtic element. The supposed proofs of its existence have, so far
as we are aware, no surer foundation than coincidence. Now the mere coincidence of
particulars in early bodies of law proves nothing beyond the resemblance of all
institutions in certain stages. There are, again, many points of real organic connexion
between Celtic and English law even if there has been no borrowing from the
Welshman on the Englishman’s part. If there be a true affinity, it may well go back to
a common stock of Aryan tradition antecedent to the distinction of race and tongue
between German and Celt. And if in a given case we find that an institution or custom
which is both Welsh and English is at the same time Scandinavian, Greek, Roman,
Slavonic or Hindu, we may be reasonably assured that there is nothing more specific
in the matter. Or, if there be a true case of survival, it may go back to an origin as

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 16 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

little Celtic or even Aryan as it is Germanic. Some local usages, it is quite possible,
may be relics of a prehistoric society and of an antiquity now immeasurable, saved by
their obscurity through the days of Celt, Saxon and Norman alike. There is no better
protection against the stronger hand; bracken and lichens are untouched by the storm
that uproots oak and beech. But this is of no avail to the Celtic enthusiast, or rather of
worse than none. Those who claim a Celtic origin for English laws ought to do one of
two things: prove by distinct historical evidence that particular Celtic institutions were
adopted by the English invaders, or point out similar features in Welsh and English
law which cannot be matched either in the laws of continental Germany or in those of
other Aryan nations. Neither of these things, to the best of our knowledge, has ever
been effectually done. Indeed the test last named would be hardly a safe one. The
earliest documents of Welsh law known to exist are in their present form so much
later than the bulk of our Anglo-Saxon documents that, if a case of specific borrowing
could be made out on the face of them, we should need further assurance that the
borrowing was not the other way. The favourite method of partisans in this kind is, as
has been said, to enumerate coincidences. And by that method our English medieval
law could with little ado be proved to be Greek, Slavonic, Semitic, or, for aught one
knows, Chinese. We cannot say that no element derived from the Celtic inhabitants of
Britain exists in it, for there is no means of proving so general a negative. But there
seems to be no proof nor evidence of the existence of that element in any such
appreciable measure as would oblige us to take account of it in such a work as the
present. Again, there is the possibility that Celtic details, assimilated in Gaul by
French law during its growth, passed into England at the Norman Conquest. But it is
not for us to discuss this possibility. On the other hand, no one can doubt that the
English law stated and defined in the series of dooms which stretches from Æthelbirht
to Cnut finds nearer kinsfolk in the law that prevailed in Saxony and Norway and on
the Lombard plain than those that it finds among the Welsh or Irish.

Coming to the solid ground of known history, we find that our laws have been formed
in the main from a stock of Teutonic customs, with some additions of matter, and
considerable additions or modifications of form received directly or indirectly from
the Roman system. Both the Germanic and the Romanic elements have been
constituted or reinforced at different times and from different sources, and we have
thus a large range of possibilities to which, in the absence of direct proof, we must
attend carefully in every case before committing ourselves to a decision.

Taking first the Germanic material of our laws, we begin with the customs and
institutions brought in by the English conquest of Britain, or rather by the series of
conquests which led to the formation of the English kingdom. This is the prime stock;
but it by no means accounts for the whole of the Germanic elements. A distinct
Scandinavian strain came in with the Danish invasions and was secured by the short
period of Danish sovereignty. A third of England, a populous and wealthy third,
became known as the Danelaw. To some extent, but probably to no great extent, the
Norman law and practice of William the Conqueror may have included similar matter.
The main importance of the Norman contribution, however, was in other kinds. Much
Anglo-Norman law is Germanic without being either Anglo-Saxon or Norse. Indeed
of recent years it has become the fashion upon the Continent to speak of Anglo-
Norman law as a daughter of Frankish law. The Frankish monarchy, the nearest

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 17 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

approach to a civilized power that existed in western Europe since the barbarian
invasions, was in many things a pattern for its neighbours and for the states and
principalities that rose out of its ruins. That we received from the Normans a
contribution of Frankish ideas and customs is indubitable. It was, indeed, hardly
foreign to us, being of kindred stock, and still not widely removed from the common
root of Germanic tradition. We must not omit, however, to count it as a distinct
variation. Neither must we forget that English princes had already been following in
some measure the same models that the Dukes of the Normans copied. From the time
of Charles the Great onward, the rulers of both Mercia and Wessex were in intimate
relations with the Frankish kings.

Now each of these Germanic strains, the purely Anglo-Saxon, the Scandinavian, the
Frankish, has had its champions. To decide between them is often a difficult, and
sometimes in our opinion an impossible task. A mere “method of agreement” is, as
already said, full of dangers, and such is the imperfection of our record that we can
seldom use a “method of differences” in any convincing fashion. Even for the sake of
these somewhat remote and obscure problems, the first thing needful seems to be that
we should have a fairly full statement of the English law of the Angevin time. Before
we speculate about hypothetical causes, we ought to know as accurately as possible
the effect that has to be accounted for. The speculation we must leave for the more
part to those who can devote their time to a close study of Anglo-Saxon, Scandinavian
and Frankish law. The English law of the Angevin age is for the present our principal
theme, though we have sometimes glanced at earlier and at later times also.

As to the Roman, or more properly Romanic, element in our English law, this also is a
matter which requires careful distinction. It has been maintained at various times, and
sometimes with great ingenuity, that Roman institutions persisted after Britain was
abandoned by the Roman power, and survived the Teutonic invasions in such force as
to contribute in material quantity to the formation of our laws. But there is no real
evidence of this. Whether the invaders may not have learnt something in the arts of
peace and war from those whom they were conquering, something of strategy,
architecture, agriculture, is not here the question. We speak of law, and within the
sphere of law everything that is Roman or Romanized can be accounted for by later
importation. We know that the language and the religion of Rome were effaced.
Roman Christianity had to make a fresh conquest of the English kingdom almost as if
the British Church had never existed. The remnant of that Church stood aloof, and it
would seem that Augustine did not think it entitled to much conciliation, either by its
merits or by its importance.1 It is difficult to believe that civil institutions remained
continuous in a country where the discontinuity of ecclesiastical affairs is so pointedly
marked, and in an age when the Church was far more stable and compact than any
civil institution whatever. And, in point of fact, there is no trace of the laws and
jurisprudence of imperial Rome, as distinct from the precepts and traditions of the
Roman Church, in the earliest Anglo-Saxon documents. Whatever is Roman in them
is ecclesiastical. The danger of arguing in these matters from a mere enumeration of
coincidences has already been pointed out with reference to the attempt, in our
opinion a substantially similar one, to attribute English law to a Celtic origin. This
inroad of the Roman ecclesiastical tradition, in other words, of the system which in
course of time was organized as the Canon Law, was the first and by no means the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 18 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

least important of the Roman invasions, if we may so call them, of our Germanic
polity. We need not doubt the statement that English princes began to collect their
customary laws in writing after the Roman example made known to them by
Augustine and his successors.2

Somewhat later the intercourse of English princes with the Frankish court brought in a
fresh accession of continental learning and continental forms, in the hands of clerks
indeed, but applicable to secular affairs. In this way the Roman materials assimilated
or imitated by the Franks easily found their way into England at a second remove.
Many, perhaps most, of the facts that have been alleged to show the persistence of
Roman institutions in Britain are really of this kind. Such are for example the forms
and phrases of the Latin charters or land-books that we find in the Codex
Diplomaticus. A difficult question indeed is raised by these continental materials on
their own ground, namely, what proportion of Germanic and Franco-Gallic usages is
of Roman origin, and how far those parts that are Roman are to be ascribed to a
continuous life of Roman institutions and habits in the outlying provinces of the
empire, more especially in Gaul. Merovingian Gaul has been, and for a long time to
come is likely to be, the battle-field of scholars, some of whom can see little that is
Roman, some little that is Germanic. Interesting as these problems are, they do not
fall within our present scope.

A further importation of more sudden and masterful fashion came with the Norman
Conquest. Not only had the Normans learnt a Romance tongue, but the dukes of
Normandy had adopted the official machinery of Frankish or French government,
including of course whatever Roman elements had been taken up by the Franks. Here,
again, a remoter field of inquiry lies open, on which we do not adventure ourselves. It
is enough to say, at present, that institutions which have now-a-days the most homely
and English appearance may nevertheless be ultimately connected, through the
customs of Normandy, with the system of government elaborated in the latter
centuries of the Roman Empire. The fact that this kind of Romanic influence operated
chiefly in matters of procedure does not make it the less important, for procedure is
the life of ancient law. But this, it need hardly be remarked, is a very different matter
from a continuous persistence of unadulterated Roman elements. It may be possible to
trace a chain of slender but unbroken links from the court of our William or Henry to
that of Diocletian or Constantine. Such a chain, however, is by no means strengthened
by the fact that Papinian was once at York, as it would in no way be weakened if that
fact could be discredited.

Soon after the Norman Conquest a new and a different wave of Roman influence
began to flow. The first ripple of it reached our shore when Lanfranc the lawyer of
Pavia became the Conqueror’s trusted adviser. In the middle of the next century it was
streaming outwards from Bologna in full flood. Hitherto we have been speaking of a
survival of Roman law in institutions and habits and customs; what we have now
before us is of another kind, a scholarly revival of the classical Roman law that is to
be found in Justinian’s books. Of this we have spoken at some length in various parts
of our work. For about a century—let us say between 1150 and 1250— this tide was
shaping and modifying our English law; and we have tried to keep before the eyes of
our readers the question—to our mind one of the central questions of English

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 19 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

history—why the rapid and, to a first glance, overwhelming flow of Romanic learning
was followed in this country by an equally rapid ebb.

At a later time yet other Roman elements began to make their way into our system
through the equity administered by the chancellor. But of these we shall not speak in
this book, for we shall not here bring down the story of our law beyond the time when
Edward I. began his memorable reforms. Our reason for stopping at that moment we
can give in a few words. So continuous has been our English legal life during the last
six centuries, that the law of the later middle ages has never been forgotten among us.
It has never passed utterly outside the cognizance of our courts and our practising
lawyers. We have never had to disinter and reconstruct it in that laborious and
tentative manner in which German historians of the present day have disinterred and
reconstructed the law of medieval Germany. It has never been obliterated by a
wholesale “reception” of Roman law. Blackstone, in order that he might expound the
working law of his own day in an intelligible fashion, was forced at every turn to take
back his readers to the middle ages, and even now, after all our reforms, our courts are
still from time to time compelled to construe statutes of Edward I.’s day, and, were
Parliament to repeal some of those statutes and provide no substitute, the whole
edifice of our land law would fall down with a crash. Therefore a tradition, which is in
the main a sound and truthful tradition, has been maintained about so much of English
legal history as lies on this side of the reign of Edward I. We may find it in
Blackstone; we may find it in Reeves; we may find many portions of it in various
practical text-books. We are beginning to discover that it is not all true; at many
points it has of late been corrected. Its besetting sin is that of antedating the
emergence of modern ideas. That is a fault into which every professional tradition is
wont to fall. But in the main it is truthful. To this must be added that as regards the
materials for this part of our history we stand very much where Blackstone stood.
This we write to our shame. The first and indispensable preliminary to a better legal
history than we have of the later middle ages is a new, a complete, a tolerable edition
of the Year Books. They should be our glory, for no other country has anything like
them: they are our disgrace, for no other country would have so neglected them.

On the other hand, as regards the materials which come from a slightly earlier time,
we do not stand nearly where Blackstone stood. The twelfth and thirteenth centuries
have been fortunate in our own age. Very many and some of the best and most
authentic of the texts on which we have relied in the following pages were absolutely
unknown to Blackstone and to Reeves. To the antiquaries of the seventeenth century
high praise is due; even the eighteenth produced, as it were out of due time, one
master of records, the diligent Madox; but at least half of the materials that we have
used as sources of first-hand knowledge have been published for the first time since
1800, by the Record Commissioners, or in the Rolls Series, or by some learned
society, the Camden or the Surtees, the Pipe Roll or the Selden. Even while our pages
have been in the press Dr. Liebermann has been restoring to us the law-books of the
twelfth century. Again, in many particular fields of Old English law— villeinage, for
example, and trial by jury and many another—so much excellent and very new work
has been done by men who are still living, by Germans, Frenchmen, Russians as well
as Englishmen and Americans, and so much of it lies scattered in monographs and
journals—we should be ungrateful indeed did we not name the Harvard Law

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 20 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Review—that the time seemed to have come when an endeavour to restate the law of
the Angevin age might prosper, and at any rate ought to be made.

One of our hopes has been that we might take some part in the work of bringing the
English law of the thirteenth century into line with the French and German law of the
same age. That is the time when French law is becoming clear in Les Olim, in
Beaumanoir’s lucid pages, in the so-called Establishments of St. Louis, in the Norman
custumal and in many other books. It is also the classical age of German law, the age
of the Sachsenspiegel. We have been trying to do for English law what has within late
years been done for French and German law by a host of scholars. We have often had
before our minds the question why it is that systems which in the thirteenth century
were so near of kin had such different fates before them. The answer to that question
is assuredly not to be given by any hasty talk about national character. The first step
towards an answer must be a careful statement of each system by itself. We must
know in isolation the things that are to be compared before we compare them. A small
share in this preliminary labour we have tried to take. Englishmen should abandon
their traditional belief that from all time the continental nations have been ruled by
“the civil law,” they should learn how slowly the renovated Roman doctrine worked
its way into the jurisprudence of the parliament of Paris, how long deferred was “the
practical reception” of Roman law in Germany, how exceedingly like our common
law once was to a French coutume. This will give them an intenser interest in their
own history. What is more, in the works of French and German medievalists they will
now-a-days find many an invaluable hint for the solution of specifically English
problems.

We have left to Constitutional History the field that she has appropriated. An exact
delimitation of the province of law that should be called constitutional must always be
difficult, except perhaps in such modern states as have written constitutions. If we
turn to the middle ages we shall find the task impossible, and we see as a matter of
fact that the historians of our constitution are always enlarging their boundaries.
Though primarily interested in such parts of the law as are indubitably constitutional,
they are always discovering that in order to explain these they are compelled to
explain other parts also. They cannot write about the growth of parliament without
writing about the law of land tenure; “the liberty of the subject” can only be
manifested in a discourse on civil and criminal procedure. It may be enough therefore
if, without any attempt to establish a scientific frontier, we protest that we have kept
clear of the territory over which they exercise an effective dominion. Our reason for
so doing is plain. We have no wish to say over again what the Bishop of Oxford has
admirably said, no hope of being able to say with any truth what he has left unsaid.
Besides, for a long time past, ever since the days of Selden and Prynne, many
Englishmen have been keenly interested in the history of parliament and of taxation
and of all that directly concerns the government of the realm. If we could persuade a
few of them to take a similar interest in the history of ownership, possession, contract,
agency, trust, legal proof and so forth, and if we could bring the history of these, or of
some of these, matters within a measurable distance of that degree of accuracy and
completion which constitutional history has attained in the hands of Dr. Stubbs, we
should have achieved an unlooked-for success. At the same time, we shall now and
again discuss some problems with which he and his predecessors have busied

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 21 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

themselves, for we think that those who have endeavoured to explore the private law
of the middle ages may occasionally see even in political events some clue which
escapes eyes that are trained to look only or chiefly at public affairs.

The constitutional is not the only department of medieval law that we have left on one
side. We have said very little of purely ecclesiastical matters. Here again we have
been compelled to draw but a rude boundary. It seemed to us that a history of English
law which said nothing of marriage, last wills, the fate of an intestate’s goods, the
punishment of criminous clerks, or which merely said that all these affairs were
governed by the law and courts of the church, would be an exceedingly fragmentary
book. On the other hand, we have not felt called upon to speak of the legal
constitution of the ecclesiastical hierarchy, the election and consecration of bishops,
the ordination of clerks, the power of provincial councils and so forth, and we have
but now and then alluded to the penitential system. What is still the sphere of
ecclesiastical law we have avoided; into what was once its sphere we could not but
make incursions.

At other points, again, our course has been shaped by a desire to avoid what we
should regard as vain repetition. When the ground that we traverse has lately been
occupied by a Holmes, Thayer, Ames or Bigelow, by a Brunner, Liebermann or
Vinogradoff, we pass over it rapidly; we should have dwelt much longer in the
domain of criminal law if Sir James Stephen had not recently laboured in it. And then
we have at times devoted several pages to the elucidation of some question, perhaps
intrinsically of small importance, which seemed to us difficult and unexplored and
worthy of patient discussion, for such is the interdependence of all legal rules that the
solution of some vital problem may occasionally be found in what looks at first sight
like a technical trifle.

We have thought less of symmetry than of the advancement of knowledge. The time
for an artistically balanced picture of English medieval law will come: it has not come
yet.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 22 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[Back to Table of Contents]

BOOK I

SKETCH OF EARLY ENGLISH LEGAL HISTORY

CHAPTER I

The Dark Age In Legal History
Such is the unity of all history that any one who endeavours to The difficulty of
tell a piece of it must feel that his first sentence tears a seamless beginning.
web. The oldest utterance of English law that has come down to
us has Greek words in it: words such as bishop, priest and deacon.1 If we would
search out the origins of Roman law, we must study Babylon: this at least was the
opinion of the great Romanist of our own day.2 A statute of limitations must be set;
but it must be arbitrary. The web must be rent; but, as we rend it, we may watch the
whence and whither of a few of the severed and ravelling threads which have been
making a pattern too large for any man’s eye.

To speak more modestly, we may, before we settle to our task, Proposed retrospect.
look round for a moment at the world in which our English legal
history has its beginnings. We may recall to memory a few main facts and dates
which, though they are easily ascertained, are not often put together in one English
book, and we may perchance arrange them in a useful order if we make mile-stones of
the centuries.3

By the year 200 Roman jurisprudence had reached its zenith. The classical age of
Papinian was slain in 212,4 Ulpian in 228.5 Ulpian’s pupil Roman law.
Modes-tinus may be accounted the last of the great lawyers.6 All
too soon they became classical; their successors were looking backwards, not
forwards. Of the work that had been done it were folly here to speak, but the law of a
little town had become ecumenical law, law alike for cultured Greece and for wild
Britain. And yet, though it had assimilated new matter and new ideas, it had always
preserved its tough identity. In the year 200 six centuries and a half of definite legal
history, if we measure only from the Twelve Tables, were consciously summed up in
the living and growing body of the law.

Dangers lay ahead. We notice one in a humble quarter. Certain The beginnings of
religious societies, congregations (ecclesiae) of non-conformists, ecclesiastical law.
have been developing law, internal law, with ominous rapidity.
We have called it law, and law it was going to be, but as yet it was, if the phrase be
tolerable, unlawful law, for these societies had an illegal, a criminal purpose.
Spasmodically the imperial law was enforced against them; at other times the utmost
that they could hope for from the state was that in the guise of “benefit and burial
societies” they would obtain some protection for their communal property.7 But

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 23 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

internally they were developing what was to be a system of constitutional and
governmental law, which would endow the overseer (episcopus) of every
congregation with manifold powers. Also they were developing a system of punitive
law, for the offender might be excluded from all participation in religious rites, if not
from worldly intercourse with the faithful.8 Moreover, these various communities
were becoming united by bonds that were too close to be federal. In particular, that
one of them which had its seat in the capital city of the empire was winning a
preeminence for itself and its overseer.9 Long indeed would it be before this overseer
of a non-conformist congregation would, in the person of his successor, place his heel
upon the neck of the prostrate Augustus by virtue of God-made law. This was not to
be foreseen; but already a merely human jurisprudence was losing its interest. The
intellectual force which some years earlier might have taken a side in the debate
between Sabinians and Proculians now invented or refuted a christological heresy.
Ulpian’s priesthood10 was not priestly enough.11

The decline was rapid. Long before the year 300 jurisprudence, Third Century.
the one science of the Romans, was stricken with sterility;12 it Decline of Roman
was sharing the fate of art.13 Its eyes were turned backwards to law.
the departed great. The constitutions of the emperors now
appeared as the only active source of law. They were a disordered mass, to be
collected rather than digested. Collections of them were being unofficially made: the
Codex Gregorianus, the Codex Hermogenianus. These have perished; they were
made, some say, in the Orient.14 The shifting eastward of the imperial centre and the
tendency of the world to fall into two halves were not for the good of the West. Under
one title and another, as coloni, laeti, gentiles, large bodies of untamed Germans were
taking up their abode within the limit of the empire.15 The Roman armies were
becoming barbarous hosts. Constantine owed his crown to an Alamannian king.16

It is on a changed world that we look in the year 400. After one Fourth Century.
last flare of persecution (303), Christianity became a lawful Church and State.
religion (313). In a few years it, or rather one species of it, had
become the only lawful religion. The “confessor” of yesterday was the persecutor of
to-day. Heathenry, it is true, died hard in the West; but already about 350 a pagan
sacrifice was by the letter of the law a capital crime.17 Before the end of the century
cruel statutes were being made against heretics of all sorts and kinds.18 No sooner
was the new faith lawful, than the state was compelled to take part in the multifarious
quarrels of the Christians. Hardly had Constantine issued the edict of tolerance, than
he was summoning the bishops to Arles (314), even from remote Britain, that they
might, if this were possible, make peace in the church of Africa.19 In the history of
law, as well as in the history of dogma, the fourth century is the century of
ecclesiastical councils. Into the debates of the spiritual parliaments of the empire20 go
whatever juristic ability, and whatever power of organization are left among mankind.
The new supernatural jurisprudence was finding another mode of utterance; the
Bishop of Rome was becoming a legislator, perhaps a more important legislator than
the emperor.21 In 380 Theodosius himself commanded that all the peoples which
owned his sway should follow, not merely the religion that Christ had delivered to the
world, but the religion that St. Peter had delivered to the Romans.22 For a disciplinary
jurisdiction over clergy and laity the state now left a large room wherein the bishops

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 24 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

ruled.23 As arbitrators in purely secular disputes they were active; it is even probable
that for a short while under Constantine one litigant might force his adversary
unwillingly to seek the episcopal tribunal.24 It was necessary for the state to protest
that criminal jurisdiction was still in its hands.25 Soon the church was demanding,
and in the West it might successfully demand, independence of the state and even a
dominance over the state: the church may command and the state must obey.26 If
from one point of view we see this as a triumph of anarchy, from another it appears as
a triumph of law, of jurisprudence. Theology itself must become jurisprudence, albeit
jurisprudence of a supernatural sort, in order that it may rule the world.

Among the gigantic events of the fifth century the issue of a Fifth Century. The
statute-book seems small. Nevertheless, through the turmoil we Theodosian Code.
see two statute-books, that of Theodosius II. and that of Euric the
West Goth. The Theodosian Code was an official collection of imperial statutes
beginning with those of Constantine I. It was issued in 438 with the consent of
Valentinian III. who was reigning in the West. No perfect copy of it has reached us.27
This by itself would tell a sad tale; but we remember how rapidly the empire was
being torn in shreds. Already Britain was abandoned (407). We may doubt whether
the statute-book of Theodosius ever reached our shores until it had been edited by
Jacques Godefroi.28 Indeed we may say that the fall of a loose stone in Britain
brought the crumbling edifice to the ground.29 Already before this code was
published the hordes of Alans, Vandals and Sueves had swept across Gaul and Spain;
already the Vandals were in Africa. Already Rome had been sacked by the West
Goths; they were founding a kingdom in southern Gaul and were soon to have a
statute-book of their own. Gaiseric was not far off, nor Attila. Also let us remember
that this Theodosian Code was by no means well designed if it was to perpetuate the
memory of Roman civil science in that stormy age. It was no “code” in our modern
sense of that term. It was only a more or less methodic collection of modern statutes.
Also it contained many things that the barbarians had better not have read; bloody
laws against heretics, for example.

We turn from it to the first monument of Germanic law that has Laws of Euric.
come down to us. It consists of some fragments of what must
have been a large law-book published by Euric for his West Goths, perhaps between
470 and 475.30 Euric was a conquering king; he ruled Spain and a large part of
southern Gaul; he had cast off, so it is said, even the pretence of ruling in the
emperor’s name. Nevertheless, his laws are not nearly so barbarous as our curiosity
might wish them to be. These West Goths who had wandered across Europe were
veneered by Roman civilization. It did them little good. Their later law-books, that of
Reckessuinth (652–72), that of Erwig (682), that of Egica (687–701) are said to be
verbose and futile imitations of Roman codes. But Euric’s laws are sufficient to
remind us that the order of date among these Leges Barbarorum is very different from
the order of barbarity. Scandinavian laws that are not written until the thirteenth
century will often give us what is more archaic than anything that comes from the
Gaul of the fifth or the Britain of the seventh. And, on the other hand, the mention of
Goths in Spain should remind us of those wondrous folk-wanderings and of their
strange influence upon the legal map of Europe. The Saxon of England has a close

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 25 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

cousin in the Lombard of Italy, and modern critics profess that they can see a
specially near kinship between Spanish and Icelandic law.31

In legal history the sixth century is the century of Justinian. But, Sixth Century. The
in the west of Europe this age appears as his, only if we take into century of Justinian.
account what was then a remote future. How powerless he was to
legislate for many of the lands and races whence he drew his grandiose titles—
Alamannicus, Gothicus, Francicus and the rest—we shall see if we inquire who else
had been publishing laws. The barbarians had been writing down their customs. The
barbarian kings had been issuing law-books for their Roman subjects. Books of
ecclesiastical law, of conciliar and papal law, were being compiled.32

The discovery of fragments of the laws of Euric the West Goth The Lex Salica.
has deprived the Lex Salica of its claim to be the oldest extant
statement of Germanic custom. But if not the oldest, it is still very old; also it is rude
and primitive.33 It comes to us from the march between the fifth and sixth centuries;
almost certainly from the victorious reign of Chlodwig (486–511). An attempt to fix
its date more closely brings out one of its interesting traits. There is nothing
distinctively heathen in it; but (and this makes it unique34 ) there is nothing
distinctively Christian. If the Sicambrian has already bowed his neck to the catholic
yoke, he is not yet actively destroying by his laws what he had formerly adored.35 On
the other hand, his kingdom seems to stretch south of the Loire, and he has looked for
suggestions to the laws of the West Goths. The Lex Salica, though written in Latin, is
very free from the Roman taint. It contains in the so-called Malberg glosses many old
Frankish words, some of which, owing to mistranscription, are puzzles for the
philological science of our own day. Like the other Germanic folk-laws, it consists
largely of a tariff of offences and atonements; but a few precious chapters, every word
of which has been a cause of learned strife, lift the curtain for a moment and allow us
to watch the Frank as he litigates. We see more clearly here than elsewhere the
formalism, the sacramental symbolism of ancient legal procedure. We have no more
instructive document; and let us remember that, by virtue of the Norman Conquest,
the Lex Salica is one of the ancestors of English law.

Whether in the days when Justinian was legislating, the Western The Lex Ribuaria and
or Ripuarian Franks had written law may not be certain; but it is Lex Burgundionum.
thought that the main part of the Lex Ribuaria is older than
596.36 Though there are notable variations, it is in part a modernized edition of the
Salica, showing the influence of the clergy and of Roman law. On the other hand,
there seems little doubt that the core of the Lex Burgundionum was issued by King
Gundobad (474–516) in the last years of the fifth century.37

Burgundians and West Goths were scattered among Roman The Lex Romana
provincials. They were East Germans; they had long been Burgundionum.
Christians, though addicted to the heresy of Arius. They could
say that they had Roman authority for their occupation of Roman soil. Aquitania
Secunda had been made over to the West Goths; the Burgundians vanquished by
Aetius had been deported to Savoy.38 In their seizure of lands from the Roman
possessores they had followed, though with modifications that were profitable to

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 26 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

themselves, the Roman system of billeting barbarian soldiers.39 There were many
Romani as well as many barbari for whom their kings could legislate. Hence the Lex
Romana Burgundionum and the Lex Romana Visigothorum. The former40 seems to
be the law-book that Gundobad promised to his Roman subjects; he died in 516.
Rules have been taken from the three Roman codices, from the current abridgements
of imperial constitutions and from the works of Gaius and Paulus. Little that is good
has been said of this book.
Far more comprehensive and far more important was the The Lex Romana
Breviary of Alaric or Lex Romana Visigothorum.41 Euric’s son, Visigothorum.
Alaric II., published it in 506 as a statute-book; among the
Romani of his realm it was to supplant all older books. It contained large excerpts
from the Theodosian Codex, a few from the Gregorianus and Hermogenianus, some
post-Theodosian constitutions, some of the Sententiae of Paulus, one little scrap of
Papinian and an abridged version of the Institutes of Gaius. The greater part of these
texts was equipped with a running commentary (interpretatio) which attempted to
give their upshot in a more intelligible form. It is thought now-a-days that this
“interpretation” and the sorry version of Gaius represent, not Gothic barbarism, but
degenerate Roman science. A time had come when lawyers could no longer
understand their own old texts and were content with debased abridgements.42

The West Goths’ power was declining. Hardly had Alaric issued Importance of the
his statute-book when he was slain in battle by the Franks. Soon Breviary.
the Visigothic became a Spanish kingdom. But it was not in
Spain that the Breviarium made its permanent mark. There it was abrogated by
Reckessuinth when he issued a code for all his subjects of every race.43 On the other
hand, it struck deep root in Gaul. It became the principal, if not the only,
representative of Roman law in the expansive realm of the Franks. But even it was too
bulky for men’s needs. They made epitomes of it and epitomes of epitomes.44

Then, again, we must remember that while Tribonian was busy The Edictum
upon the Digest, the East Goths were still masters of Italy. We Theodorici.
recall the event of 476; one emperor, Zeno at Byzantium, was to
be enough. Odovacer had ruled as patrician and king. He had been conquered by the
East Goths. The great Theodoric had reigned for more than thirty years (493–526); he
had tried to fuse Italians and Goths into one nation; he had issued a considerable body
of law, the Edictum Theodorici, for the more part of a criminal kind.45

Lastly, it must not escape us that about the year 500 there was in The Collectio
Rome a monk of Scythian birth who was labouring upon the Dionysiana.
foundations of the Corpus Iuris Canonici. He called himself
Dionysius Exiguus. He was an expert chronologist and constructed the Dionysian
cycle. He was collecting and translating the canons of eastern councils; he was
collecting also some of the letters (decretal letters they will be called) that had been
issued by the popes from Siricius onwards (384–498).46 This Collectio Dionysiana
made its way in the West. Some version of it may have been the book of canons
which our Archbishop Theodore produced at the Council of Hertford in 673.47 A
version of it (Dionysio-Hadriana) was sent by Pope Hadrian to Charles the Great in
774.48 It helped to spread abroad the notion that the popes can declare, even if they

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 27 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

cannot make, law for the universal church, and thus to contract the sphere of secular
jurisprudence.

In 528 Justinian began the work which gives him his fame in Justinian’s books.
legal history; in 534, though there were novel constitutions to
come from him, it was finished. Valuable as the Code of imperial statutes might be,
valuable as might be the modernized and imperial edition of an excellent but ancient
school-book, the main work that he did for the coming centuries lies in the Digest. We
are told now-a-days that in the Orient the classical jurisprudence had taken a new
lease of life, especially in the school at Berytus.49 We are told that there is something
of a renaissance, something even of an antiquarian revival visible in the pages of the
Digest, a desire to go back from vulgar practice to classical text, also a desire to
display an erudition that is not always very deep. Great conqueror, great builder, great
theologian, great law-giver, Justinian would also be a great master of legal science
and legal history. The narrow escape of his Digest from oblivion seems to tell us that,
but for his exertions, very little of the ancient treasure of wisdom would have reached
modern times: and a world without the Digest would not have been the world that we
know. Let us, however, remember the retrospective character of the book. The ius, the
unenacted law, ceased to grow three hundred years ago. In time Justinian stands as far
from the jurists whose opinions he collects as we stand from Coke or even from
Fitzherbert.

Laws have need of arms: Justinian knew it well. Much depended Justinian and Italy.
upon the fortunes of a war. We recall from the Institutes the
boast that Africa has been reclaimed. Little was at stake there, for Africa was doomed
to the Saracens; nor could transient success in Spain secure a western home for the
law books of Byzantium.50 All was at stake in Italy. The struggle with the East Goths
was raging; Rome was captured and recaptured. At length the emperor was victorious
(552), the Goths were exterminated or expelled; we hear of them no more. Justinian
could now enforce his laws in Italy and this he did by the pragmatic sanction pro
petitione Vigilii (554).51 Fourteen years were to elapse and then the Lombard hordes
under Alboin would be pouring down upon an exhausted and depopulated land. Those
fourteen years are critical in legal history; they suffer Justinian’s books to obtain a
lodgement in the West. The occidental world has paid heavily for Code and Digest in
the destruction of the Gothic kingdom, in the temporal power of the papacy, and in an
Italy never united until our own day; but perhaps the price was not too high. Be that as
it may, the coincidence is memorable. The Roman empire centred in New Rome has
just strength enough to hand back to Old Rome the guardianship of her heathen
jurisprudence, now “enucleated” (as Justinian says) in a small compass, and then loses
for ever the power of legislating for the West. True that there is the dwindling
exarchate in Italy; true that the year 800 is still far off; true that one of Justinian’s
successors, Constantine IV., will pay Rome a twelve days’ visit (663) and rob it of
ornaments that Vandals have spared;52 but with what we must call Graeco-Roman
jurisprudence, with the Ecloga of Leo the Isaurian and the Basilica of Leo the Wise,
the West, if we except some districts of southern Italy,53 has no concern. Two halves
of the world were drifting apart, were becoming ignorant of each other’s language,
intolerant of each other’s theology. He who was to be the true lord of Rome, if he
loathed the Lombard, loved not the emperor. Justinian had taught Pope Vigilius, the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 28 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Vigilius of the pragmatic sanction, that in the Byzantine system the church must be a
department of the state.54 The Bishop of Rome did not mean to be the head of a
department.

During some centuries Pope Gregory the Great (590–604) is one Laws of Æthelbert.
of the very few westerns whose use of the Digest can be
proved.55 He sent Augustin to England. Then in “Augustin’s day,” about the year
600, Æthelbert of Kent set in writing the dooms of his folk “in Roman fashion.”56
Not improbably he had heard of Justinian’s exploits; but the dooms, though already
they are protecting with heavy bót the property of God, priests and bishops, are
barbarous enough. They are also, unless discoveries have yet to be made, the first
Germanic laws that were written in a Germanic tongue. In many instances the desire
to have written laws appears so soon as a barbarous race is brought into contact with
Rome.57 The acceptance of the new religion must have revolutionary consequences
in the world of law, for it is likely that heretofore the traditional customs, even if they
have not been conceived as instituted by gods who are now becoming devils, have
been conceived as essentially unalterable. Law has been the old; new law has been a
contradiction in terms. And now about certain matters there must be new law.58 What
is more, “the example of the Romans” shows that new law can be made by the issue
of commands. Statute appears as the civilized form of law. Thus a fermentation
begins and the result is bewildering. New resolves are mixed up with statements of
old custom in these Leges Barbarorum.

The century which ends in 700 sees some additions made to the Seventh and Eighth
Kentish laws by Hlothær and Eadric, and some others made by Centuries. Germanic
Wihtræd; there the Kentish series ends. It also sees in the dooms laws.
of Ine the beginning of written law in Wessex.59 It also sees the
beginning of written law among the Lombards; in 643 Rothari published his edict;60
it is accounted to be one of the best statements of ancient German usages. A little later
the Swabians have their Lex Alamannorum,61 and the Bavarians their Lex
Baiuwariorum.62 It is only in the Karolingian age that written law appears among the
northern and eastern folks of Germany, the Frisians, the Saxons, the Angli and Warni
of Thuringia, the Franks of Hamaland.63 To a much later time must we regretfully
look for the oldest monuments of Scandinavian law.64 Only two of our “heptarchic”
kingdoms leave us law, Kent and Wessex, though we have reason to believe that Offa
the Mercian (ob. 796) legislated.65 Even Northumbria, Bede’s Northumbria, which
was a bright spot in a dark world, bequeaths no dooms. The impulse of Roman
example soon wore out. When once a race has got its Lex, its aspirations seem to be
satisfied. About the year 900 Alfred speaks as though Offa (circ. 800), Ine (circ. 700),
Æthelbert (circ. 600) had left him little to do. Rarely upon the mainland was there any
authoritative revision of the ancient Leges, though transcribers sometimes modified
them to suit changed times, and by so doing have perplexed the task of modern
historians. Only among the Lombards, who from the first, despite their savagery,
seem to show something that is like a genius for law,66 was there steadily progressive
legislation. Grimwald (668), Liutprand (713–35), Ratchis (746) and Aistulf (755)
added to the edict of Rothari. Not by abandoning, but by developing their own ancient
rules, the Lombards were training themselves to be the interpreters and in some sort
the heirs of the Roman prudentes.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 29 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

As the Frankish realm expanded, there expanded with it a System of personal
wonderful “system of personal laws.”67 It was a system of racial laws.
laws. The Lex Salica, for example, was not the law of a district,
it was the law of a race. The Swabian, wherever he might be, lived under his
Alamannic law, or, as an expressive phrase tells us, he lived Alamannic law (legem
vivere). So Roman law was the law of the Romani. In a famous, if exaggerated
sentence, Bishop Agobard of Lyons has said that often five men would be walking or
sitting together and each of them would own a different law.68 We are now taught
that this principle is not primitively Germanic. Indeed in England, where there were
no Romani, it never came to the front, and, for example, “the Danelaw” very rapidly
became the name for a tract of land.69 But in the kingdoms founded by Goths and
Burgundians the intruding Germans were only a small part of a population, the bulk
of which was Gallo-Roman, and the barbarians, at least in show, had made their entry
as subjects or allies of the emperor. It was natural then that the Romani should live
their old law, and, as we have seen,70 their rulers were at pains to supply them with
books of Roman law suitable to an age which would bear none but the shortest of law-
books. It is doubtful whether the Salian Franks made from the first any similar
concession to the provincials whom they subdued; but, as they spread over Gaul,
always retaining their own Lex Salica, they allowed to the conquered races the right
that they claimed for themselves. Their victorious career gave the principle an always
wider scope. At length they carried it with them into Italy and into the very city of
Rome. It would seem that among the Lombards, the Romani were suffered to settle
their own disputes by their own rules, but Lombard law prevailed between Roman and
Lombard. However, when Charles the Great vanquished Desiderius and made himself
king of the Lombards, the Frankish system of personal law found a new field. A few
years afterwards (800) a novel Roman empire was established. One of the immediate
results of this many-sided event was that Roman law ceased to be the territorial law of
any part of the lands that had become subject to the so-called Roman Emperor. Even
in Rome it was reduced to the level of a personal or racial law, while in northern Italy
there were many Swabians who lived Alamannic, and Franks who lived Salic or
Ripuarian law, besides the Lombards.71 In the future the renovatio imperii was to
have a very different effect. If the Ottos and Henries were the successors of Augustus,
Constantine and Justinian, then Code and Digest were Kaiserrecht, statute law for the
renewed empire. But some centuries were to pass before this theory would be
evolved, and yet other centuries before it would practically mould the law of
Germany. Meanwhile Roman law was in Rome itself only the personal law of the
Romani.

A system of personal laws implies rules by which a “conflict of The vulgar Roman
laws” may be appeased, and of late years many of the law.
international or intertribal rules of the Frankish realm have been
recovered.72 We may see, for example, that the law of the slain, not that of the slayer,
fixes the amount of the wergild, and that the law of the grantor prescribes the
ceremonies with which land must be conveyed. We see that legitimate children take
their father’s, bastards their mother’s law. We see also that the churches, except some
which are of royal foundation, are deemed to live Roman law, and in Italy, though not
in Frankland, the rule that the individual cleric lives Roman law seems to have been
gradually adopted.73 This gave the clergy some interest in the old system. But

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 30 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

German and Roman law were making advances towards each other. If the one was
becoming civilized, the other had been sadly barbarized or rather vulgarized. North of
the Alps the current Roman law regarded Alaric’s Lex as its chief authority. In Italy
Justinian’s Institutes and Code and Julian’s epitome of the Novels were known, and
someone may sometimes have opened a copy of the Digest. But everywhere the law
administered among the Romani seems to have been in the main a traditional,
customary law which paid little heed to written texts. It was, we are told, ein
römisches Vulgarrecht, which stood to pure Roman law in the same relation as that in
which the vulgar Latin or Romance that people talked stood to the literary
language.74 Not a few of the rules and ideas which were generally prevalent in the
West had their source in this low Roman law. In it starts the history of modern
conveyancing. The Anglo-Saxon “land-book” is of Italian origin.75 That England
produces no formulary books, no books of “precedents in conveyancing,” such as
those which in considerable numbers were compiled in Frankland,76 is one of the
many signs that even this low Roman law had no home here; but neither did our
forefathers talk low Latin.

In the British India of to-day we may see and on a grand scale The latent Digest.
what might well be called a system of personal laws, of racial
laws. If we compared it with the Frankish, one picturesque element would be wanting.
Suppose that among the native races there was one possessed of an old law-book, too
good for it, too good for us, which gradually, as men studied it afresh, would begin to
tell of a very ancient but eternally modern civilization and of a skilful jurisprudence
which the lawyers of the ruling race would some day make their model. This romance
of history will not repeat itself.

During the golden age of the Frankish supremacy, the age which The capitularies.
closely centres round the year 800, there was a good deal of
definite legislation: much more than there was to be in the bad time that was coming.
The king or emperor issued capitularies (capitula).77 Within a sphere which cannot
be readily defined he exercised a power of laying commands upon all his subjects,
and so of making new territorial law for his whole realm or any part thereof; but in
principle any change in the law of one of the folks would require that folk’s consent.
A superstructure of capitularies might be reared, but the Lex of a folk was not easily
alterable. In 827 Ansegis, Abbot of St. Wandrille, collected some of the capitularies
into four books.78 His work seems to have found general acceptance, though it shows
that many capitularies were speedily forgotten and that much of the Karolingian
legislation had failed to produce a permanent effect. Those fratricidal wars were
beginning. The legal products which are to be characteristic of this unhappy age are
not genuine laws; they are the forged capitularies of Benedict the Levite and the false
decretals of the Pseudo-Isidore.

Slowly and by obscure processes a great mass of ecclesiastical Growth of Canon law.
law had been forming itself. It rolled, if we may so speak, from
country to country and took up new matter into itself as it went, for bishop borrowed
from bishop and transcriber from transcriber. Oriental, African, Spanish, Gallican
canons were collected into the same book and the decretal letters of later were added
to those of earlier popes. Of the Dionysiana we have already spoken. Another

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 31 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

celebrated collection seems to have taken shape in the Spain of the seventh century; it
has been known as the Hispana or Isidoriana,79 for without sufficient warrant it has
been attributed to that St. Isidore of Seville (ob. 636), whose Origines80 served as an
encyclopaedia of jurisprudence and all other sciences. The Hispana made its way into
France, and it seems to have already comprised some spurious documents before it
came to the hands of the most illustrious of all forgers.

Then out of the depth of the ninth century emerged a book which Ninth and Tenth
was to give law to mankind for a long time to come. Its core was Centuries. The false
the Hispana; but into it there had been foisted besides other Isidore.
forgeries, some sixty decretals professing to come from the very
earliest successors of St. Peter. The compiler called himself Isidorus Mercator; he
seems to have tried to personate Isidore of Seville. Many guesses have been made as
to his name and time and home. It seems certain that he did his work in Frankland,
and near the middle of the ninth century. He has been sought as far west as le Mans,
but suspicion hangs thickest over the church of Reims. The false decretals are
elaborate mosaics made up out of phrases from the Bible, the fathers, genuine canons,
genuine decretals, the West Goth’s Roman law-book; but all these materials,
wherever collected, are so arranged as to establish a few great principles: the grandeur
and superhuman origin of ecclesiastical power, the sacrosanctity of the persons and
the property of bishops, and, though this is not so prominent, the supremacy of the
Bishop of Rome. Episcopal rights are to be maintained against the chorepiscopi,
against the metropolitans, and against the secular power. Above all (and this is the
burden of the song), no accusation can be brought against a bishop so long as he is
despoiled of his see: Spoliatus episcopus ante omnia debet restitui.

Closely connected with this fraud was another. Some one who The forged
called himself a deacon of the church of Mainz and gave his capitularies.
name as Benedict, added to the four books of capitularies, which
Ansegis had published, three other books containing would-be, but false capitularies,
which had the same bent as the decretals concocted by the Pseudo-Isidore. These are
not the only, but they are the most famous manifestations of the lying spirit which had
seized the Frankish clergy. The Isidorian forgeries were soon accepted at Rome. The
popes profited by documents which taught that ever since the apostolic age the
bishops of Rome had been declaring, or even making, law for the universal church.
On this rock or on this sand a lofty edifice was reared.81

And now for the greater part of the Continent comes the time Church and State.
when ecclesiastical law is the only sort of law that is visibly
growing. The stream of capitularies ceased to flow; there was none to legislate; the
Frankish monarchy was going to wreck and ruin; feudalism was triumphant.
Sacerdotalism also was triumphant, and its victories were closely connected with
those of feudalism. The clergy had long been striving to place themselves beyond the
reach of the state’s tribunals. The dramatic struggle between Henry II. and Becket has
a long Frankish prologue.82 Some concessions had been won from the Merovingians;
but still Charles the Great had been supreme over all persons and in all causes.
Though his realm fell asunder, the churches were united, and united by a principle
that claimed a divine origin. They were rapidly evolving law which was in course of

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 32 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

time to be the written law of an universal and theocratic monarchy. The mass, now
swollen by the Isidorian forgeries, still rolled from diocese to diocese, taking up new
matter into itself. It became always more lawyerly in form and texture as it
appropriated sentences from the Roman law-books and made itself the law of the only
courts to which the clergy would yield obedience. Nor was it above borrowing from
Germanic law, for thence it took its probative processes, the oath with oath-helpers
and the ordeal or judgment of God. Among the many compilers of manuals of church
law three are especially famous: Regino, Abbot of Prüm (906–915),83 Burchard,
Bishop of Worms (1012–23),84 and Ivo, Bishop of Chartres (ob. 1117).85 They and
many others prepared the way for Gratian, the maker of the church’s Digest, and
events were deciding that the church should also have a Code and abundant Novels.
In an evil day for themselves the German kings took the papacy from the mire into
which it had fallen, and soon the work of issuing decretals was resumed with new
vigour. At the date of the Norman Conquest the flow of these edicts was becoming
rapid.

Historians of French and German law find that a well-marked The darkest age.
period is thrust upon them. The age of the folk-laws and the
capitularies, “the Frankish time,” they can restore. Much indeed is dark and
disputable; but much has been made plain during the last thirty years by their
unwearying labour. There is no lack of materials, and the materials are of a strictly
legal kind: laws and statements of law. This done, they are compelled rapidly to pass
through several centuries to a new point of view. They take their stand in the
thirteenth among law-books which have the treatises of Glanvill and Bracton for their
English equivalents. It is then a new world that they paint for us. To connect this new
order with the old, to make the world of “the classical feudalism”86 grow out of the
world of the folk-laws is a task which is being slowly accomplished by skilful hands;
but it is difficult, for, though materials are not wanting, they are not of a strictly legal
kind; they are not laws, nor law-books, nor statements of law. The intervening, the
dark age, has been called “the diplomatic age,” whereby is meant that its law must be
hazardously inferred from diplomata, from charters, from conveyances, from
privileges accorded to particular churches or particular towns. No one legislates. The
French historian will tell us that the last capitularies which bear the character of
general laws are issued by Carloman II. in 884, and that the first legislative
ordonnance is issued by Louis VII. in 1155.87 Germany and France were coming to
the birth and the agony was long. Long it was questionable whether the western world
would not be overwhelmed by Northmen and Saracens and Magyars; perhaps we are
right in saying that it was saved by feudalism.88 Meanwhile the innermost texture of
human society was being changed; local customs were issuing from and then
consuming the old racial laws.

Strangely different, at least upon its surface, is our English story. Legislation in
The age of the capitularies (for such we well might call it) begins England.
with us just when it has come to its end upon the Continent. We
have had some written laws from the newly converted Kent and Wessex of the
seventh century. We have heard that in the day of Mercia’s greatness Offa (ob. 796),
influenced perhaps by the example of Charles the Great, had published laws. These
we have lost, but we have no reason to fear that we have lost much else. Even Egbert

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 33 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

did not legislate. The silence was broken by Alfred (871–901), and then, for a century
and a half we have laws from almost every king: from Edward, Æthelstan, Edmund,
Edgar, Æthelred and Cnut. The age of the capitularies begins with Alfred, and in
some sort it never ends, for William the Conqueror and Henry I. take up the tale.89
Whether in the days of the Confessor, whom a perverse, though explicable, tradition
honoured as a preeminent law-giver, we were not on the verge of an age without
legislation, an age which would but too faithfully reproduce some bad features of the
Frankish decadence, is a question that is not easily answered. Howbeit, Cnut had
published in England a body of laws which, if regard be had to its date, must be called
a handsome code. If he is not the greatest legislator of the eleventh century, we must
go as far as Barcelona to find his peer.90 He had been to Rome; he had seen an
emperor crowned by a pope; but it was not outside England that he learnt to legislate.
He followed a fashion set by Alfred. We might easily exaggerate both the amount of
new matter that was contained in these English capitularies and the amount of
information that they give us; but the mere fact that Alfred sets, and that his
successors (and among them the conquering Dane) maintain, a fashion of legislating
is of great importance. The Norman subdues, or, as he says, inherits a kingdom in
which a king is expected to publish laws.

Were we to discuss the causes of this early divergence of English England and the
from continental history we might wander far. In the first place, continent.
we should have to remember the small size, the plain surface, the
definite boundary of our country. This thought indeed must often recur to us in the
course of our work: England is small: it can be governed by uniform law: it seems to
invite general legislation. Also we should notice that the kingship of England, when
once it exists, preserves its unity: it is not partitioned among brothers and cousins.
Moreover we might find ourselves saying that the Northmen were so victorious in
their assaults on our island that they did less harm here than elsewhere. In the end it
was better that they should conquer a tract, settle in villages and call the lands by their
own names, than that the state should go to pieces in the act of repelling their inroads.
Then, again, it would not escape us that a close and confused union between church
and state prevented the development of a body of distinctively ecclesiastical law
which would stand in contrast with, if not in opposition to, the law of the land.91
Such power had the bishops in all public affairs, that they had little to gain from
decretals forged or genuine;92 indeed Æthelred’s laws are apt to become mere
sermons preached to a disobedient folk. However we are here but registering the fact
that the age of capitularies, which was begun by Alfred, does not end. The English
king, be he weak like Æthelred or strong like Cnut, is expected to publish laws.

But Italy was to be for a while the focus of the whole world’s Eleventh Century.
legal history. For one thing, the thread of legislation was never
quite broken there. Capitularies or statutes which enact territorial law came from
Karolingian emperors and from Karolingian kings of Italy,
and then from the Ottos and later German kings. But what is The Pavian law-
more important is that the old Lombard law showed a marvellous school.
vitality and a capacity of being elaborated into a reasonable and
progressive system. Lombardy was the country in which the principle of personal law
struck its deepest roots. Besides Lombards and Romani there were many Franks and

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 34 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Swabians who transmitted their law from father to son. It was long before the old
question Qua lege vivis? lost its importance. The “conflict of laws” seems to have
favoured the growth of a mediating and instructed jurisprudence. Then at Pavia in the
first half of the eleventh century a law-school had arisen. In it men were endeavouring
to systematize by gloss and comment the ancient Lombard statutes of Rothari and his
successors. The heads of the school were often employed as royal justices (iudices
palatini); their names and their opinions were treasured by admiring pupils. From out
this school came Lanfranc. Thus a body of law, which though it had from the first
been more neatly expressed than, was in its substance strikingly like, our own old
dooms, became the subject of continuous and professional study. The influence of
reviving Roman law is not to be ignored. These Lombardists knew their Institutes,
and, before the eleventh century was at an end, the doctrine that Roman law was a
subsidiary common law for all mankind (lex omnium generalis) was gaining ground
among them; but still the law upon which they worked was the old Germanic law of
the Lombard race. Pavia handed the lamp to Bologna, Lombardy to the Romagna.93

As to the more or less that was known of the ancient Roman The new birth of
texts there has been learned and lively controversy in these last Roman law.
years.94 But, even if we grant to the champions of continuity all
that they ask, the sum will seem small until the eleventh century is reached. That large
masses of men in Italy and southern France had Roman law for their personal law is
beyond doubt. Also it is certain that Justinian’s Institutes and Code and Julian’s
Epitome of the Novels were beginning to spread outside Italy. There are questions
still to be solved about the date and domicile of various small collections of Roman
rules which some regard as older than or uninfluenced by the work of the Bolognese
glossators. One critic discovers evanescent traces of a school of law at Rome or at
Ravenna which others cannot see. The current instruction of boys in grammar and
rhetoric involved some discussion of legal terms. Definitions of lex and ius and so
forth were learnt by heart; little catechisms were compiled;95 but of anything that we
should dare to call an education in Roman law there are few, if any, indisputable signs
before the school of Bologna appears in the second half of the eleventh century. As to
the Digest, during some four hundred years its mere existence seems to have been
almost unknown. It barely escaped with its life. When men spoke of “the pandects”
they meant the bible.96 The romantic fable of the capture of an unique copy at the
siege of Amalfi in 1135 has long been disproved; but, if some small fragments be
neglected, all the extant manuscripts are said to derive from two copies, one now lost,
the other the famous Florentina written, we are told, by Greek hands in the sixth or
seventh century. In the eleventh the revival began. In 1038 Conrad II., the emperor
whom Cnut saw crowned, ordained that Roman law should be once more the
territorial law of the city of Rome.97 In 1076 the Digest was cited in the judgment of
a Tuscan court.98 Then, about 1100, Irnerius was teaching at Bologna.99

Here, again, there is room for controversy. It is said that he was The recovered Digest.
not self-taught; it is said that neither his theme nor his method
was quite new; it is said that he had a predecessor at Bologna, one Pepo by name. All
this may be true and is probable enough: and yet undoubtedly he was soon regarded
as the founder of the school which was teaching Roman law to an intently listening
world. We with our many sciences can hardly comprehend the size of this event. The

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 35 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

monarchy of theology over the intellectual world was disputed. A lay science claimed
its rights, its share of men’s attention. It was a science of civil life to be found in the
human, heathen Digest.100

A new force had begun to play and sooner or later every body of Influence of the
law in western Europe felt it. The challenged church answered Bolognese
with Gratian’s Decretum (circ. 1139) and the Decretals of jurisprudence.
Gregory IX. (1234). The canonist emulated the civilian and for a
long while maintained in the field of jurisprudence what seemed to be an equal
combat. Unequal it was in truth. The Decretum is sad stuff when set beside the Digest
and the study of Roman law never dies. When it seems to be dying it always returns to
the texts and is born anew. It is not for us here to speak of its new birth in the France
of the sixteenth or in the Germany of the nineteenth century; but its new birth in the
Italy of the eleventh and twelfth concerns us nearly. Transient indeed but all-
important was the influence of the Bologna of Irnerius and of Gratian upon the form,
and therefore upon the substance, of our English law. The theoretical continuity or
“translation” of the empire which secured for Justinian’s books their hold upon Italy,
and, though after a wide interval, upon Germany also, counted for little in France or in
England. In England, again, there was no mass of Romani, of people who all along
had been living Roman law of a degenerate and vulgar sort and who would in course
of time be taught to look for their law to Code and Digest. Also there was no need in
England for that reconstitution de l’unité nationale which fills a large space in
schemes of French history, and in which, for good and ill, the Roman texts gave their
powerful aid to the centripetal and monarchical forces. In England the new learning
found a small, homogeneous, well conquered, much governed kingdom, a strong, a
legislating kingship. It came to us soon; it taught us much; and then there was healthy
resistance to foreign dogma. But all this we shall see in the sequel.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 36 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER II

Anglo-Saxon Law
This book is concerned with Anglo-Saxon legal antiquities, but Scope of this chapter.
only so far as they are connected with, and tend to throw light
upon, the subsequent history of the laws of England, and the scope of the present
chapter is limited by that purpose. Much of our information about the Anglo-Saxon
laws and customs, especially as regards landholding, is so fragmentary and obscure
that the only hope of understanding it is to work back to it from the fuller evidence of
Norman and even later times. It would be outside our undertaking to deal with
problems of this kind.1

The habit of preserving some written record of all affairs of Imperfection of
importance is a modern one in the north and west of Europe. But written records of
it is so prevalent and so much bound up with our daily habits that early Germanic law.
we have almost forgotten how much of the world’s business,
even in communities by no means barbarous, has been carried on without it. And the
student of early laws and institutions, although the fact is constantly thrust upon him,
can hardly accept it without a sort of continuing surprise. This brings with it a
temptation of some practical danger, that of overrating both the trustworthiness of
written documents and the importance of the matters they deal with as compared with
other things for which the direct authority of documents is wanting. The danger is a
specially besetting one in the early history of English law; and that inquirer is
fortunate who is not beguiled into positive error by the desire of making his
statements appear less imperfect. In truth, the manners, dress, and dialects of our
ancestors before the Norman Conquest are far better known to us than their laws.
Historical inquiry must be subject, in the field of law, to peculiar and inevitable
difficulties. In most other cases the evidence, whether full or scanty, is clear so far as
it goes. Arms, ornaments, miniatures, tell their own story. But written laws and legal
documents, being written for present use and not for the purpose of enlightening
future historians, assume knowledge on the reader’s part of an indefinite mass of
received custom and practice. They are intelligible only when they are taken as part of
a whole which they commonly give us little help to conceive. It may even happen that
we do not know whether a particular document or class of documents represents the
normal course of affairs, or was committed to writing for the very reason that the
transaction was exceptional. Even our modern law is found perplexing, for reasons of
this kind, not only by foreigners, but by Englishmen who are not lawyers.

We cannot expect, then, that the extant collections of Anglo-Saxon laws should give
us anything like a complete view of the legal or judicial institutions of the time. Our
Germanic ancestors were no great penmen, and we know that the reduction of any
part of their customary laws to writing was in the first place due to foreign influence.
Princes who had forsaken heathendom under the guidance of Roman clerks made
haste, according to their lights, to imitate the ways of imperial and Christian Rome.2

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 37 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Although English princes issued written dooms with the advice of their wise men at
intervals during nearly five centuries, it seems all but certain that none of them did so
with the intention of constructing a complete body of law. The very slight and
inconspicuous part which procedure takes in the written Anglo-Saxon laws is enough
to show that they are mere superstructures on a much larger base of custom. All they
do is to regulate and amend in details now this branch of customary law, now another.
In short, their relation to the laws and customs of the country as a whole is not unlike
that which Acts of Parliament continue to bear in our own day to the indefinite mass
of the common law.

Our knowledge of Anglo-Saxon law rests, so far as positive Anglo-Saxon dooms
evidence goes, on several classes of documents which and custumals.
supplement one another to some extent, but are still far from
giving a complete view. We have in the first place the considerable series of laws and
ordinances of Saxon and English princes, beginning with those of Æthelbert of Kent,
well known to general history as Augustine’s convert, which are of about the end of
the sixth century. The laws of Cnut may be said to close the list. Then from the
century which follows the Norman Conquest we have various attempts to state the
Old English law. These belong to the second class of documents, namely,
compilations of customs and formulas which are not known ever to have had any
positive authority, but appear to have been put together with a view to practical use,
or at least to preserve the memory of things which had been in practice, and which the
writer hoped to see in practice again. Perhaps our most important witness of this kind
is the tract or custumal called Rectitudines singularum personarum.3 Some of the so-
called laws are merely semi-official or private compilations, but their formal
profession of an authority they really had not makes no difference to their value as
evidence of what the compilers understood the customary law to have been. To some
extent we can check them by their repetition of matter that occurs in genuine Anglo-
Saxon laws of earlier dates. Apocryphal documents of this kind are by no means
confined to England, nor, in English history, to the period before the Conquest. Some
examples from the thirteenth century have found their way into the worshipful
company of the Statutes of the Realm among the “statutes of uncertain time.” It has
been the work of more than one generation of scholars to detect their true character,
nor indeed is the work yet wholly done. From the existence and apparent, sometimes
real, importance of such writings and compilations as we have now mentioned there
has arisen the established usage of including them, together with genuine legislation,
under the common heading of “Anglo-Saxon laws.” As for the deliberate fables of
later apocryphal authorities, the “Mirror of Justices” being the chief and flagrant
example, they belong not to the Anglo-Saxon but to a much later period of English
law. For the more part they are not even false history; they are speculation or satire.

Another kind of contemporary writings affords us most valuable Charters.
evidence for the limited field of law and usage which those
writings cover. The field, however, is even more limited than at first sight it appears
to be. We mean the charters or “land-books” which record the munificence of princes
to religious houses or to their followers, or in some cases the administration and
disposition of domains thus acquired. Along with these we have to reckon the extant
Anglo-Saxon wills, few in number as compared with charters properly so called, but

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 38 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

of capital importance in fixing and illustrating some points. It was Kemble’s great
achievement to make the way plain to the appreciation and use of this class of
evidences by his Codex Diplomaticus. We have to express opinions more or less
widely different from Kemble’s on several matters, and therefore think it well to say
at once that no one who has felt the difference between genius and industrious good
intentions can ever differ with Kemble lightly or without regret. Kemble’s work often
requires correction; but if Kemble’s work had not been, there would be nothing to
correct.4

Then we have incidental notices of Anglo-Saxon legal matters in Chronicles etc.
chronicles and other writings, of which the value for this purpose
must be judged by the usual canons of coincidence or nearness in point of time, the
writer’s means of access to contemporary witness or continuous tradition not
otherwise preserved, his general trustworthiness in things more easily verified, and so
forth. Except for certain passages of Bede, we do not think that the general literary
evidence, so to call it, is remarkable either in quantity or in quality. Such as we have
is, as might be expected, of social and economic interest in the first place, and throws
a rather indirect light upon the legal aspect of Anglo-Saxon affairs.

Lastly, we have legal and official documents of the Anglo- Anglo-Norman
Norman time, and foremost among them Domesday Book, which documents.
expressly or by implication tell us much of the state of England
immediately before the Norman Conquest. Great as is the value of their evidence, it is
no easy matter for a modern reader to learn to use it. These documents, royal and
other inquests and what else, were composed for definite practical uses. And many of
the points on which our curiosity is most active, and finds itself most baffled, were
either common knowledge to the persons for whose use the documents were intended,
or were not relevant to the purpose in hand. In the former case no more information
was desired, in the latter none at all. Thus the Anglo-Norman documents raise
problems of their own which must themselves be solved before we can use the results
as a key to what lies even one generation behind them.

On the whole the state of English law before the Conquest Survey of Anglo-
presents a great deal of obscurity to a modern inquirer, not so Saxon legal
much for actual lack of materials as for want of any sure clue to institutions.
their right interpretation at a certain number of critical points.
Nevertheless we cannot trace the history of our laws during the two centuries that
followed the Conquest without having some general notions of the earlier period; and
we must endeavour to obtain a view that may suffice for this purpose. It would be a
barren task to apply the refined classification of modern systems to the dooms of Ine
and Alfred or the more ambitious definitions of the Leges Henrici Primi. We shall
take the main topics rather in their archaic order of importance. First comes the
condition of persons; next, the establishment of courts, and the process of justice; then
the rules applicable to breaches of the peace, wrongs and offences, and finally the law
of property, so far as usage had been officially defined and enforced, or new modes of
dealing with property introduced. The origin and development of purely political
institutions has been purposely excluded from our scope.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 39 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

As regards personal condition, we find the radical distinction, Personal conditions:
universal in ancient society, between the freeman and the slave. lordship.
But in the earliest English authorities, nay, in our earliest
accounts of Germanic society, we do not find it in the clear-cut simplicity of Roman
law. There is a great gulf between the lowest of freemen and the slave; but there are
also differences of rank and degrees of independence among freemen, which already
prepare the way for the complexities of medieval society. Some freemen are lords,
others are dependents or followers of lords. We have nothing to show the origin or
antiquity of this division; we know that it was the immemorial custom of Germanic
chiefs to surround themselves with a band of personal followers, the comites
described by Tacitus, and we may suppose that imitation or repetition of this custom
led to the relation of lord and man being formally recognized as a necessary part of
public order. We know, moreover, that as early as the first half of the tenth century
the division had become exhaustive. An ordinance of Æthelstan treats a “lordless
man” as a suspicious if not dangerous person; if he has not a lord who will answer for
him, his kindred must find him one; if they fail in this, he may be dealt with (to use
the nearest modern terms) as a rogue and vagabond.5 The term “lord” is applied to the
king, in a more eminent and extensive but at the same time in a looser sense, with
reference to all men owing or professing allegiance to him.6 Kings were glad to draw
to their own use, if they might, the feeling of personal attachment that belonged to
lordship in the proper sense, and at a later time the greater lords may now and again
have sought to emulate the king’s general power. In any case this pervading division
of free persons into lords and men, together with the king’s position as general over-
lord, combined at a later time with the prevalence of dependent land tenures to form
the more elaborate arrangements and theories of medieval feudalism. It does not seem
possible either to assign any time in English history when some freemen did not hold
land from their personal lords, or to assign the time when this became a normal state
of things. In the latter part of the ninth century there was already a considerable class
of freemen bound to work on the lands of others, for an ordinance of Alfred fixes the
holidays that are to be allowed them; and we can hardly doubt that this work was
incident to their own tenure.7 At all events dependent landholding appears to have
been common in the century before the Norman Conquest. It was the work of the
succeeding century to establish the theory that all land must be “held of” some one as
a fixed principle of English law, and to give to the conditions of tenure as distinct
from the personal status of the tenant an importance which soon became
preponderant, and had much to do with the ultimate extinction of personal servitude
under the Tudor dynasty.8

Dependence on a lord was not the only check on the individual The family.
freedom of a freeborn man. Anglo-Saxon polity preserved, even
down to the Norman Conquest, many traces of a time when kinship was the strongest
of all bonds. Such a stage of society, we hardly need add, is not confined to any one
region of the world or any one race of men. In its domestic aspect it may take the
form of the joint family or household which, in various stages of resistance to modern
tendencies and on various scales of magnitude, is still an integral part of Hindu and
South Slavonic life. When it puts on the face of strife between hostile kindreds, it is
shown in the war of tribal factions, and more specifically in the blood-feud. A man’s
kindred are his avengers; and, as it is their right and honour to avenge him, so it is

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 40 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

their duty to make amends for his misdeeds, or else maintain his cause in fight. Step
by step, as the power of the State waxes, the self-centred and self-helping autonomy
of the kindred wanes. Private feud is controlled, regulated, put, one may say, into
legal harness; the avenging and the protecting clan of the slain and the slayer are
made pledges and auxiliaries of public justice. In England the legalized blood-feud
expired almost within living memory, when the criminal procedure by way of
“appeal” was finally abolished. We have to conceive, then, of the kindred not as an
artificial body or corporation to which the State allows authority over its members in
order that it may be answerable for them, but as an element of the State not yielding
precedence to the State itself. There is a constant tendency to conflict between the old
customs of the family and the newer laws of the State; the family preserves archaic
habits and claims which clash at every turn with the development of a law-abiding
commonwealth of the modern type. In the England of the tenth century,9 we find that
a powerful kindred may still be a danger to public order, and that the power of three
shires may be called out to bring an offending member of it to justice. At the same
time the family was utilized by the growing institutions of the State, so far as was
found possible. We have seen that a lordless man’s kinsfolk might be called upon to
find him a lord. In other ways too the kindred was dealt with as collectively
responsible for its members.10 We need not however regard the kindred as a defined
body like a tribe or clan, indeed this would not stand with the fact that the burden of
making and the duty of exacting compensation ran on the mother’s side as well as the
father’s. A father and son, or two half-brothers, would for the purposes of the blood-
feud have some of their kindred in common, but by no means all.

The legal importance of the kindred continues to be recognized in the very latest
Anglo-Saxon custumals, though some details that we find on the subject in the so-
called laws of Henry I. fall under grave suspicion, not merely of an antiquary’s
pedantic exaggeration, but of deliberate copying from other Germanic law-texts. It is
probable that a man could abjure his kindred, and that the oath used for the purpose
included an express renunciation of any future rights of inheritance. We do not know
whether this was at all a common practice, or whether any symbolic ceremonies like
those of the Salic law were or ever had been required in England.11

Further, we find distinctions of rank among freemen which, Ranks: ceorl, eorl,
though not amounting to fundamental differences of condition, gesíð.
and not always rigidly fixed, had more or less definite legal
incidents. From the earliest times a certain preeminence is accorded (as among almost
all Germanic people)12 to men of noble birth. The ordinary freeman is a “ceorl,”
churl (there is no trace before the Norman Conquest of the modern degradation of the
word); the noble by birth is an “eorl.” This last word came later, under Danish
influence, to denote a specific office of state, and our present “earl” goes back to it in
that sense. The Latin equivalent comes got specialized in much the same way. But
such was not its ancient meaning. Special relations to the king’s person or service
produced another and somewhat different classification. “Gesíð” was the earliest
English equivalent, in practical as well as literal meaning, of comes as employed by
Tacitus; it signified a well-born man attached to the king by the general duty of
warlike service, though not necessarily holding any special office about his person. It
is, however, a common poetic word, and it is not confined to men. It was current in

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 41 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Ine’s time but already obsolete for practical purposes in Alfred’s; latterly it appears to
have implied hereditary rank and considerable landed possessions. The element of
noble birth is emphasized by the fuller and commoner form “gesíðcund.”

The official term of rank which we find in use in and after Thegn.
Alfred’s time is “thegn”13 (þegen, in Latin usually minister).
Originally a thegn is a household officer of some great man, eminently and especially
of the king. From the tenth century to the Conquest thegnship is not an office unless
described by some specific addition (horsþegen, discþegen, and the like) showing
what the office was. It is a social condition above that of the churl, carrying with it
both privileges and customary duties. The “king’s thegns,” those who are in fact
attached to the king’s person and service, are specially distinguished. We may perhaps
roughly compare the thegns of the later Anglo-Saxon monarchy to the country
gentlemen of modern times who are in the commission of the peace and serve on the
grand jury. But we must remember that the thegn had a definite legal rank. His
wergild, for example, the fixed sum with which his death must be atoned for to his
kindred, or which he might in some cases have to pay for his own misdoing, was six
times as great as a common man’s; and his oath weighed as much more in the curious
contest of asseverations, quite different from anything we now understand by
evidence, by which early Germanic lawsuits were decided. It is stated in more than
one old document that a thegn’s rights might be claimed by the owner of five hides (at
the normal value of the hide, 600 acres) of land, a church and belfry, a “burgh-gate-
seat” (which may imply a private jurisdiction, or may only signify a town house), and
a special place in the king’s hall. The like right is ascribed to a merchant who has
thrice crossed “the wide sea” (the North Sea as opposed to the Channel) at his own
charges.14 This may be suspected, in the absence of confirmation, of being merely the
expression of what, in the writer’s opinion, an enlightened English king ought to have
done to encourage trade, still it is not improbable. We have no reason to reject the
tradition about the five hides, which is borne out by some later evidence. But this
gives us no warrant in any case for denying that a thegn might have less than five
hides of land, or asserting that he would forfeit his rank if he lost the means of
supporting it on the usual scale. However, these details are really of no importance in
the general history of our later law, for they left no visible mark on the structure of
Anglo-Norman aristocracy.15

The last remark applies to certain other distinctions which are Other distinctions.
mentioned in our authorities as well known, but never distinctly
explained. We read of “twelf-hynd” and “twy-hynd” men, apparently so called from
their wergild being twelve hundred and two hundred shillings respectively. There was
also an intermediate class of “six-hynd” men. It would seem that the “twelf-hynd”
men were thegns, and the “twy-hynd” man might or might not be. But these things
perhaps had no more practical interest for Glanvill, certainly no more for Bracton,
than they have for us.

In like manner, the privileges of clerks in orders, whether of Privileges of clergy.
secular or regular life, do not call for close investigation here.
Orders were regarded as conferring not only freedom where any doubt had existed,
but a kind of nobility. There was a special scale of wergild for the clergy; but it was a

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 42 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

question whether a priest who was in fact of noble birth should not be atoned for with
the wergild appropriate to his birth, if it exceeded that which belonged to his
ecclesiastical rank, and some held that for the purpose of wergild only the man’s rank
by birth should be considered.

It is well known that the superior clergy took (and with good cause) a large part in
legislation and the direction of justice, as well as in general government. Probably we
owe it to them that Anglo-Saxon law has left us any written evidences at all. But the
really active and important part of the clergy in the formation of English law begins
only with the clear separation of ecclesiastical and civil authority after the Conquest.

We now have to speak of the unfree class.

Slavery, personal slavery, and not merely serfdom or villeinage Slavery.
consisting mainly in attachment to the soil, existed, and was fully
recognized, in England until the twelfth century. We have no means of knowing with
any exactness the number of slaves, either in itself, or as compared with the free
population. But the recorded manumissions would alone suffice to prove that the
number was large. Moreover, we know, not only that slaves were bought and sold, but
that a real slave-trade was carried on from English ports. This abuse was increased in
the evil times that set in with the Danish invasions. Raids of heathen Northmen, while
they relaxed social order and encouraged crime, brought wealthy slave-buyers, who
would not ask many questions, to the unscrupulous trader’s hand. But slaves were
exported from England much earlier. Selling a man beyond the seas occurs in the
Kentish laws as an alternative for capital punishment;16 and one obscure passage
seems to relate to the offence of kidnapping freeborn men.17 Ine’s dooms forbade the
men of Wessex to sell a countryman beyond seas, even if he were really a slave or
justly condemned to slavery.18

Selling Christian men beyond seas, and specially into bondage to Slave-trade.
heathen, is forbidden by an ordinance of Æthelred, repeated
almost word for word in Cnut’s laws.19 Wulfstan, Archbishop of York, who probably
took an active part in the legislation of Æthelred, denounced the practice in his
homilies,20 and also complained that men’s thrall-right was narrowed. This is
significant as pointing to a more humane doctrine, whatever the practice may have
been, than that of the earlier Roman law. It seems that even the thrall had personal
rights of some sort, though we are not able with our present information to specify
them. Towards the end of the eleventh century the slave trade from Bristol to Ireland
(where the Danes were then in power) called forth the righteous indignation of
another Wulfstan, the Bishop of Worcester, who held his place through the Conquest.
He went to Bristol in person, and succeeded in putting down the scandal.21 Its
continued existence till that time is further attested by the prohibition of Æthelred and
Cnut being yet again repeated in the laws attributed to William the Conqueror.22

Freemen sometimes enslaved themselves in times of distress as Manumission.
the only means of subsistence; manumission of such persons
after the need was past would be deemed a specially meritorious work, if not a
duty.23 Sometimes well-to-do people bought slaves, and immediately afterwards

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 43 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

freed them for the good of their own souls, or the soul of some ancestor. At a later
time we meet with formal sales by the lord to a third person in trust (as we should
now say) to manumit the serf.24 The Anglo-Saxon cases do not appear to be of this
kind. Sometimes a serf “bought himself” free. We may suppose that a freedman was
generally required or expected to take his place among the free dependants of his
former master; and the express licence to the freedman to choose his own lord, which
is occasionally met with, tends to show that this was the rule. The lord’s rights over
the freedman’s family were not affected if the freedman left the domain.25 There is
nothing to suggest that freed-men were treated as a distinct class in any other way.
What has just been said implies that a bondman might acquire, and not unfrequently
did acquire, money of his own; and, in fact, an ordinance of Alfred expressly makes
the Wednesday in the four ember weeks a free day for him, and declares his earnings
to be at his own disposal.26 Moreover, even the earliest written laws constantly
assume that a “theow” might be able to pay fines for public offences.

On the whole the evidence seems to show that serfdom was Slavery and serfage.
much more of a personal bondage and less involved with the
occupation of particular land before the Norman Conquest than after; in short that it
approached, though it only approached, the slavery of the Roman law. Once, and only
once, in the earliest of our Anglo-Saxon texts,27 we find mention in Kent, under the
name of lœt, of the half-free class of persons called litus and other like names in
continental documents. To all appearance there had ceased to be any such class in
England before the time of Alfred: it is therefore needless to discuss their condition or
origin.

There are traces of some kind of public authority having been required for the owner
of a serf to make him free as regards third persons; but from almost the earliest
Christian times manumission at an altar had full effect.28 In such cases a written
record was commonly preserved in the later Anglo-Saxon period at any rate, but it
does not appear to have been necessary or to have been what we should now call an
operative instrument. This kind of manumission disappears after the Conquest, and it
was long disputed whether a freed bondman might not be objected to as a witness or
oath-helper.29

We now turn to judicial institutions. An Anglo-Saxon court, Courts and justice.
whether of public or private justice, was not surrounded with
such visible majesty of the law as in our own time, nor furnished with any obvious
means of compelling obedience. It is the feebleness of executive power that explains
the large space occupied in archaic law by provisions for the conduct of suits when
parties make default. In like manner the solemn prohibition of taking the law into
one’s own hands without having demanded one’s right in the proper court shows that
law is only just becoming the rule of life. Such provisions occur as early as the dooms
of Ine of Wessex,30 and perhaps preserve the tradition of a time when there was no
jurisdiction save by consent of the parties. Probably the public courts were always
held in the open air; there is no mention of churches being used for this purpose, a
practice which was expressly forbidden in various parts of the continent when court
houses were built. Private courts were held, when practicable, in the house of the lord
having the jurisdiction, as is shown by the name halimote or hall-moot. This name

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 44 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

may indeed have been given to a lord’s court by way of designed contrast with the
open-air hundred and county courts. The manor-house itself is still known as a court
in many places in the west and south-east of England.31Halimote is not known,
however, to occur before the Norman Conquest.

So far as we can say that there was any regular judicial system in Anglo-Saxon law, it
was of a highly archaic type. We find indeed a clear enough distinction between
public offences and private wrongs. Liability to a public fine or, in grave cases,
corporal or capital punishment, may concur with liability to make redress to a person
wronged or slain, or to his kindred, or to incur his feud in default. But neither these
ideas nor their appropriate terms are confused at any time. On the other hand, there is
no perceptible difference of authorities or procedure in civil and criminal matters
until, within a century before the Conquest, we find certain of the graver public
offences reserved in a special manner for the king’s jurisdiction.

The staple matter of judicial proceedings was of a rude and simple kind. In so far as
we can trust the written laws, the only topics of general importance were manslaying,
wounding, and cattle-stealing. So frequent was the last-named practice that it was by
no means easy for a man, who was minded to buy cattle honestly, to be sure that he
was not buying stolen beasts, and the Anglo-Saxon dooms are full of elaborate
precautions on this head, to which we shall return presently.

As to procedure, the forms were sometimes complicated, always Procedure.
stiff and unbending. Mistakes in form were probably fatal at
every stage. Trial of questions of fact, in anything like the modern sense, was
unknown. Archaic rules of evidence make no attempt to apply any measure of
probability to individual cases.32 Oath was the primary mode of proof, an oath going
not to the truth of specific fact, but to the justice of the claim or defence as a whole.
The number of persons required to swear varied according to the nature of the case
and the rank of the persons concerned. Inasmuch as the oath, if duly made, was
conclusive, what we now call the burden of proof was rather a benefit than otherwise
under ancient Germanic procedure. The process of clearing oneself by the full
performance of the oath which the law required in the particular case is that which
later medieval authorities call “making one’s law,” facere legem. It remained possible,
in certain cases, down to quite modern times. An accused person who failed in his
oath, by not having the proper number of oath-helpers33 prepared to swear, or who
was already disqualified from clearing himself by oath, had to go to one of the forms
of ordeal. The ordeal of hot water appears in Ine’s laws though until lately it was
concealed from our view by the misreading of one letter in the text.34 Trial by combat
was to all appearance unknown to the Anglo-Saxon procedure,35 though it was
formally sanctioned on the continent by Gundobad, king of the Burgundians, at the
beginning of the sixth century and is found in the laws of nearly all the German
tribes.36 An apparently genuine ordinance of William the Conqueror enables
Englishmen to make use of trial by battle in their lawsuits with Normans, but
expressly allows them to decline it. This is strong to prove that it was not an English
institution in any form.37 Permitted or justified private war, of which we do find
considerable traces in England,38 is quite a different matter. The Anglo-Norman
judicial combat belongs to a perfectly regular and regulated course of proceeding, is

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 45 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

as strictly controlled as any other part of it, and has no less strictly defined legal
consequences.

A “fore-oath,” distinct from the definitive oath of proof, was required of the party
commencing a suit, unless the fact complained of were manifest; thus a fore-oath was
needless if a man sued for wounding and showed the wound to the court. A defendant
who was of evil repute might be driven by the fore-oath alone to the alternative of a
threefold oath or the ordeal.39

As regards the constitution of Anglo-Saxon courts, our direct evidence is of the
scantiest. We have to supplement it with indications derived from the Norman and
later times.

One well-known peculiarity of the Anglo-Saxon period is that Union of temporal
secular and ecclesiastical courts were not sharply separated, and and spiritual
the two jurisdictions were hardly distinguished. The bishop sat in jurisdiction.
the county court; the church claimed for him a large share in the
direction of even secular justice,40 and the claim was fully allowed by princes who
could not be charged with weakness.41 Probably the bishop was often the only
member of the court who possessed any learning or any systematic training in public
affairs.

The most general Anglo-Saxon term for a court or assembly The king’s justice not
empowered to do justice is gemót. In this word is included all ordinary.
authority of the kind from the king and his witan42 downwards.
Folcgemót appears to mean any public court whatever, greater or less. The king has
judicial functions, but they are very far removed from our modern way of regarding
the king as the fountain of justice. His business is not to see justice done in his name
in an ordinary course, but to exercise a special and reserved power which a man must
not invoke unless he has failed to get his cause heard in the jurisdiction of his own
hundred.43 Such failure of justice might happen, not from ill-will or corruption on the
part of any public officer, but from a powerful lord protecting offenders who were his
men.44

In such cases the king might be invoked to put forth his power. It is obvious that the
process was barely distinguishable from that of combating an open rebellion.45

After the Norman Conquest, as time went on, the king’s justice became organized and
regular, and superseded nearly all the functions of the ancient county and hundred
courts. But the king’s power to do justice of an extraordinary kind was far from being
abandoned. The great constructive work of Henry II. and Edward I. made it less
important for a time. In the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries it showed its vitality in
the hands of the king’s chancellors, and became the root of the modern system of
equity.46 Down to our own time that system preserved the marks of its origin in the
peculiar character of the compulsion exercised by courts of equitable jurisdiction.
Disobedience to their process and decrees was a direct and special contempt of the
king’s authority, and a “commission of rebellion” might issue against a defendant

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 46 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

making default in a chancery suit, however widely remote its subject-matter might be
from the public affairs of the kingdom.47

We have many examples, notwithstanding the repeated Jurisdiction of witan.
ordinances forbidding men to seek the king’s justice except after
failure to obtain right elsewhere, of the witan exercising an original jurisdiction in
matters of disputed claims to book-land.48 This may be explained in more than one
way. Book-land was (as we shall see) a special form of property which only the king
could create, and which, as a rule, he created with the consent and witness of his wise
men. Moreover, one or both parties to such suits were often bishops or the heads of
great houses of religion, and thus the cause might be regarded as an ecclesiastical
matter fit to be dealt with by a synod rather than by temporal authority, both parties
doubtless consenting to the jurisdiction.

The charters that inform us of what was done, especially in 803 and 825, at the synods
or synodal councils of Clovesho,49 that “famous place” whose situation is now matter
of mere conjecture,50 leave no doubt that on these occasions, at least, the same
assembly which is called a synod also acted as the witan. The secular and spiritual
functions of these great meetings might have been discriminated by lay members not
taking part in the ecclesiastical business; but it is by no means certain that they
were.51 In any case it is highly probable that the prohibitions above cited were never
meant to apply to the great men of the kingdom, or royal foundations, or the king’s
immediate followers.

The ordinary Anglo-Saxon courts of public justice were the County and hundred
county court and the hundred court, of which the county court courts.
was appointed to be held twice a year, the hundred every four
weeks.52 Poor and rich men alike were entitled to have right done to them, though the
need of emphasizing this elementary point of law in the third quarter of the tenth
century suggests that the fact was often otherwise.53

Thus the hundred court was the judicial unit, so to speak, for ordinary affairs. We
have no evidence that any lesser public court existed. It is quite possible that some
sort of township meeting was held for the regulation of the common-field husbandry
which prevailed in most parts of England: and the total absence of any written record
of such meetings, or (so far as we know) allusion to them, hardly makes the fact less
probable. But we have no ground whatever for concluding that the township-moot, if
that were its name, had any properly judicial functions. “Mark-moot,” which has been
supposed to be the name of a primary court, appears rather to mean a court held on the
marches of adjacent counties or hundreds, or perhaps on the boundary dyke itself.54

The ordinances which tell us of the times of meeting appointed for the county and
hundred courts tell us nothing whatever of their procedure. It may be taken as certain,
however, that they had no efficient mode of compelling the attendance of parties or
enforcing their orders. A man who refused to do justice to others according to the law
could only be put out of the protection of the law, save in the cases which were grave
enough to call for a special expedition against him. Outlawry, developed in the
Danish period as a definite part of English legal process, remained such until our own

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 47 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

time. All this is thoroughly characteristic of archaic legal systems in general. Nothing
in it is peculiarly English, not much is peculiarly Germanic.

Thus far we have spoken only of public jurisdiction. But we Private jurisdiction.
know that after the Norman Conquest England was covered with
the private jurisdictions of lords of various degrees, from the king himself
downwards, holding courts on their lands at which their tenants were entitled to seek
justice in their own local affairs, and bound to attend that justice might be done to
their fellows. “Court baron” is now the most usual technical name for a court of this
kind, but it is a comparatively modern name. Further, we know that private
jurisdiction existed on the continent much earlier, and that it existed in England in the
early part of the eleventh century. It is a question not free from doubt whether the
institution was imported from the continent not long before that time, or on the
contrary had been known in England a good while before, perhaps as early as the date
of our earliest Anglo-Saxon laws and charters, notwithstanding that it is not expressly
and directly mentioned in documents of the earlier period. For our present purpose it
is enough to be sure that private courts were well established at the date of the
Conquest, and had been increasing in number and power for some time.55

Proceeding to the subject-matters of Anglo-Saxon jurisdiction, Subject-matter of
we find what may be called the usual archaic features. The only Anglo-Saxon justice.
substantive rules that are at all fully set forth have to do with
offences and wrongs, mostly those which are of a violent kind, and with theft, mostly
cattle-lifting. Except so far as it is involved in the law of theft, the law of property is
almost entirely left in the region of unwritten custom and local usage. The law of
contract is rudimentary, so rudimentary as to be barely distinguishable from the law of
property. In fact people who have no system of credit and very little foreign trade, and
who do nearly all their business in person and by word of mouth with neighbours
whom they know, have not much occasion for a law of contract. It is not our purpose
to consider in this place the relation of Anglo-Saxon customs and ordinances to those
of Germanic nations on the continent; to inquire, for example, why the Salic or the
Lombard laws should present striking resemblances even in detail to the laws of
Alfred or Cnut, but provide with equal or greater minuteness for other similar cases
on which the Anglo-Saxon authorities are silent. In the period of antiquarian
compilation which set in after the Norman Conquest, and of which the so-called laws
of Henry I. are the most conspicuous product, we see not only imitation of the
continental collections, but sometimes express reference to their rules.56 But this kind
of reference, at the hands of a compiler who could also quote the Theodosian code,57
throws no light whatever on the possibilities of continental influence at an earlier
time. It is highly probable that Alfred and his successors had learned persons about
them who were more or less acquainted with Frankish legislation if not with that of
remoter kingdoms. But it suffices to know that, in its general features, Anglo-Saxon
law is not only archaic, but offers an especially pure type of Germanic archaism. We
are therefore warranted in supposing, where English authority fails, that the English
usages of the Anglo-Saxon period were generally like the earliest corresponding ones
of which evidence can be found on the continent.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 48 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Preservation of the peace and punishment of offences were dealt The king’s peace.
with, in England as elsewhere, partly under the customary
jurisdiction of the local courts, partly by the special authority of the king. In England
that authority gradually superseded all others. All criminal offences have long been
said to be committed against the king’s peace; and this phrase, along with “the king’s
highway,” has passed into common use as a kind of ornament of speech, without any
clear sense of its historical meaning. The two phrases are, indeed, intimately
connected; they come from the time when the king’s protection was not universal but
particular, when the king’s peace was not for all men or all places, and the king’s
highway was in a special manner protected by it. Breach of the king’s peace was an
act of personal disobedience, and a much graver matter than an ordinary breach of
public order; it made the wrong-doer the king’s enemy. The notion of the king’s peace
appears to have had two distinct origins. These were, first, the special sanctity of the
king’s house, which may be regarded as differing only in degree from that which
Germanic usage attached everywhere to the homestead of a freeman; and, secondly,
the special protection of the king’s attendants and servants, and other persons whom
he thought fit to place on the same footing. In the later Anglo-Saxon period the king’s
particular protection is called grið as distinct from the more general word frið.
Although the proper name is of comparatively recent introduction58 and of
Scandinavian extraction, the thing seems to answer to the Frankish sermo or verbum
regis, which is as old as the Salic law.59 The rapid extension of the king’s peace till it
becomes, after the Norman Conquest, the normal and general safeguard of public
order, seems peculiarly English.60 On the continent the king appears at an early time
to have been recognized as protector of the general peace, besides having power to
grant special protection or peace of a higher order.61

It is not clear whether there was any fixed name for the general The various peaces.
peace which was protected only by the hundred court and the
ealdorman. Very possibly the medieval usage by which an inferior court was said to
be in the peace of the lord who held the court may go back in some form to the
earliest time when there were any set forms of justice; and there is some evidence that
in the early part of the tenth century men spoke of the peace of the witan.62 We have
not found English authority for any such term as folk-peace, which has sometimes
been used in imitation of German writers. No light is thrown on early Anglo-Saxon
ideas or methods of keeping the peace by the provision that every man shall be in a
hundred and tithing, for it first appears in this definite form in the laws of Cnut,63 and
both its history and meaning are disputable. This, however, is a matter of
administrative mechanism rather than of the law itself. We shall have a word to say
about this matter when hereafter we speak of frankpledge.

In Anglo-Saxon as well as in other Germanic laws we find that Feud and atonement.
the idea of wrong to a person or his kindred is still primary, and
that of offence against the common weal secondary, even in the gravest cases. Only
by degrees did the modern principles prevail, that the members of the community
must be content with the remedies afforded them by law, and must not seek private
vengeance, and that, on the other hand, public offences cannot be remitted or
compounded by private bargain.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 49 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Personal injury is in the first place a cause of feud, of private war between the
kindreds of the wrong-doer and of the person wronged. This must be carefully
distinguished from a right of specific retaliation, of which there are no traces in
Germanic law.64 But the feud may be appeased by the acceptance of a composition.
Some kind of arbitration was probably resorted to from a very early time to fix the
amount. The next stage is a scale of compensation fixed by custom or enactment for
death or minor injuries, which may be graduated according to the rank of the person
injured. Such a scale may well exist for a time without any positive duty of the
kindred to accept the composition it offers. It may serve only the purpose of saving
disputes as to the amount proper to be paid when the parties are disposed to make
peace. But this naturally leads to the kindred being first expected by public opinion
and then required by public authority not to pursue the feud if the proper composition
is forthcoming, except in a few extreme cases which also finally disappear. At the
same time, the wrong done to an individual extends beyond his own family; it is a
wrong to the community of which he is a member; and thus the wrong-doer may be
regarded as a public enemy. Such expressions as “outlaw against all the people” in the
Anglo-Saxon laws preserve this point of view.65 The conception of an offence done
to the state in its corporate person, or (as in our own system) as represented by the
king, is of later growth.

Absolute chronology has very little to do with the stage of Tariff of
growth or decay in which archaic institutions, and this one in compositions.
particular, may be found in different countries and times. The
Homeric poems show us the blood-feud in full force in cases of manslaying (there is
little or nothing about wounding), tempered by ransom or composition which appears
to be settled by agreement or arbitration in each case. In the classical period of Greek
history this has wholly disappeared. But in Iceland, as late as the time of the Norman
Conquest of England, we find a state of society which takes us back to Homer.
Manslayings and blood-feuds are constant, and the semi-judicial arbitration of wise
men, though often invoked, is but imperfectly successful in staying breaches of the
peace and reconciling adversaries. A man’s life has its price, but otherwise there is not
even any recognized scale of compositions. In the Germanic laws both of England and
of the mainland we find a much more settled rule some centuries earlier. Full scales of
composition are established. A freeman’s life has a regular value set upon it, called
wergild, literally “man’s price” or “man-payment,”66 or oftener in English documents
wer simply; moreover, for injuries to the person short of death there is an elaborate
tariff. The modern practice of assessing damages, though familiar to Roman law in
the later republican period, is unknown to early Germanic law, nor were there in
Germanic procedure any means of applying the idea if it had existed. Composition
must generally be accepted if offered; private war is lawful only when the adversary
obstinately refuses to do right. In that case indeed, as we learn from a well-known
ordinance of Alfred,67 the power of the ealdorman, and of the king at need, may be
called in if the plaintiff is not strong enough by himself; in other words the
contumacious denier of justice may be dealt with as an enemy of the commonwealth.
At a somewhat later time we find the acceptance and payment of compositions
enforced by putting the obligation between the parties under the special sanction of
the king’s peace.68 But it was at least theoretically possible, down to the middle of
the tenth century, for a manslayer to elect to bear the feud of the kindred.69 His own

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 50 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

kindred, however, might avoid any share in the feud by disclaiming him; any of them
who maintained him after this, as well as any of the avenging kinsfolk who meddled
with any but the actual wrong-doer, was deemed a foe to the king (the strongest form
of expressing outlawry) and forfeited all his property.

We find the public and private aspects of injurious acts pretty Wer, wíte, bót.
clearly distinguished by the Anglo-Saxon terms. Wer, as we have
said, is the value set on a man’s life, increasing with his rank. For many purposes it
could be a burden as well as a benefit; the amount of a man’s own wer was often the
measure of the fine to be paid for his offences against public order. Wíte is the usual
word for a penal fine payable to the king or to some other public authority. Bót (the
modern German Busse) is a more general word, including compensation of any kind.
Some of the gravest offences, especially against the king and his peace, are said to be
bótleás, “bootless”; that is, the offender is not entitled to redeem himself at all, and is
at the king’s mercy. The distinction between wer and wíte must be very ancient; it
corresponds to what is told us of German custom by Tacitus.70

The only punishments, in the proper sense, generally applicable Punishment.
to freemen, were money fines, and death in the extreme cases
where redemption with a money fine was not allowed. A credible tradition preserved
in the prologue to Alfred’s laws tells us that after the conversion of the English to
Christianity the bishops and wise-men “for the mild-heartedness sake that Christ
taught” sanctioned the redemption by fine of offences less than that of treason against
one’s lord.71 Mutilation and other corporal punishments are prescribed (but with the
alternative of redemption by a heavy fine) for false accusers, for habitual criminals,
and for persons of evil repute who have failed in the ordeal.72

Imprisonment occurs in the Anglo-Saxon laws only as a means of temporary security.
Slaves were liable to capital and other corporal punishment, and generally without
redemption. The details have no material bearing on the general history of the law,
and may be left to students of semi-barbarous manners. Outlawry, at first a
declaration of war by the commonwealth against an offending member, became a
regular means of compelling submission to the authority of the courts, as in form it
continued so to be down to modern times.73 In criminal proceedings, however, it was
used as a substantive penalty for violent resistance to a legal process or persistent
contempt of court.74 Before the Conquest, outlawry involved not only forfeiture of
goods to the king, but liability to be killed with impunity. It was no offence to the
king to kill his enemy, and the kindred might not claim the wergild.75 It was thought,
indeed, down to the latter part of the sixteenth century, that the same reason applied to
persons under the penalties appointed by the statutes of praemunire, which expressly
included being put out of the king’s protection.76

It would appear that great difficulty was found both in obtaining Difficulties in
specific evidence of offences, and in compelling accused and compelling
suspected persons to submit themselves to justice, and pay their submission to courts.
fines if convicted. This may serve to explain the severe
provisions of the later Anglo-Saxon period against a kind of persons described as
“frequently accused,” “of no credit.”77 One who had been several times charged

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 51 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

(with theft, it seems we must understand), and kept away from three courts running,
might be pursued and arrested as a thief, and treated as an outlaw if he failed to give
security to answer his accusers.78 A man of evil repute is already half condemned,
and if he evades justice it is all but conclusive proof of guilt. In communities where an
honest man’s neighbours knew pretty well what he was doing every day and most of
the day, this probably did not work much injustice. And English criminal procedure
still held to this point of view two centuries after the Conquest. It may be said to
linger even now-a-days in the theoretical power of grand juries to present offences of
their own knowledge.

Several passages, and those from a period of comparatively Maintenance of
settled government, show that great men, whose followers had offenders by great
committed crimes, often harboured and maintained them in open men.
defiance of common right.79 If it was needful for Æthelstan, the
victor of Brunanburh, to make ordinances against lawlessness of this kind, we can
only think that weaker princes left it without remedy, not because the evil was less in
their days, but because they had no power to amend it. The same thing was common
enough in the Scottish highlands as late as the early part of the eighteenth century.80

Putting together these indications of a feeble executive power, Why no trial by
we are apt to think that the absence of trial by battle from Anglo- battle.
Saxon procedure can best be explained by the persistence of
extra-judicial fighting. Gundobad of Burgundy, and other Germanic rulers after him,
tempted their subjects into court by a kind of compromise. It is hardly possible to
suppose that their ostensible reason of avoiding perjury was the real one. Rather it
was understood, though it could not be officially expressed, that Burgundian and
Lombard81 freemen would submit to being forbidden to fight out of court on the
terms of being allowed to fight under legal sanction, thus combining the physical joy
of battle with the intellectual luxury of strictly formal procedure. It seems plausible to
suppose that the mechanism of Anglo-Saxon government was not commonly strong
enough to accomplish even so much. All this, however, is conjectural. There is no
reason to doubt that among some Germanic tribes battle was recognized as a form of
ordeal from very ancient times; we have no means of solving the ulterior question
why those tribes did not include the ancestors of the Anglo-Saxons.

Offences specially dealt with in various parts of the Anglo-Saxon Special offences
laws are treason, homicide, wounding and assault (which, treason.
however, if committed by freemen, are more wrongs than
crimes), and theft. Treason to one’s lord, especially to the king, is a capital crime. And
the essence of the crime already consists in compassing or imagining the king’s death,
to use the later language of Edward III.’s Parliament.82 The like appears in other
Germanic documents.83 It seems probable, however, that this does not represent any
original Germanic tradition, but is borrowed from the Roman law of maiestas, of
which one main head was plotting against the lives of the chief magistrates.84 No part
of the Roman law was more likely to be imitated by the conquerors of Roman
territory and provinces; and when an idea first appears in England in Alfred’s time,
there is no difficulty whatever in supposing it imported from the continent. Not that
rulers exercising undefined powers in a rude state of society needed the Lex Julia to

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 52 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

teach them the importance of putting down conspiracies at the earliest possible stage.
We are now speaking of the formal enunciation of the rule. On the other hand, the
close association of treason against the king with treason against one’s personal lord
who is not the king is eminently Germanic. This was preserved in the “petty treason”
of medieval and modern criminal law.

The crime of treason was unatonable,85 and the charge had to be repelled by an oath
adequate in number of oath-helpers, and perhaps in solemnity, to the wergild of the
king or other lord as the case might be. If the accused could not clear himself by oath,
and was driven to ordeal, he had to submit to the threefold ordeal,86 that is, the hot
iron was of three pounds’ weight instead of one pound, or the arm had to be plunged
elbow-deep instead of wrist-deep into the boiling water.87

Homicide appears in the Anglo-Saxon dooms as a matter for Homicide.
composition in the ordinary case of slaying in open quarrel.
There are additional public penalties in aggravated cases, as where a man is slain in
the king’s presence or otherwise in breach of the king’s peace. And a special
application of the king’s protection is made in favour of strangers; a matter of some
importance when we remember that before the time of Alfred a Mercian was a
stranger in Kent, and a Wessex man in Mercia. Two-thirds of a slain stranger’s wer
goes to the king. We find a rudiment of the modern distinction between murder and
manslaughter, but the line is drawn not between wilful and other killing, but between
killing openly and in secret. It would seem indeed that “morð” at one time meant only
killing by poison or witchcraft. The offence of “morð” was unatonable, and the
murderer, if ascertained, might be delivered over to the dead man’s kindred.88

An outlaw might, as we have seen, be slain with impunity; and it Justifiable homicide.
was not only lawful but meritorious to kill a thief flying from
justice.89 An adulterer taken in flagrante delicto by the woman’s lawful husband,
father, brother, or son, might be killed without risk of blood-feud. In like manner
homicide was excusable when the slayer was fighting in defence of his lord, or of a
man whose lord he was, or of his kinsman; but a man must in no case fight against his
own lord.90 A man who slew a thief (or, it would seem, any one) was expected to
declare the fact without delay, otherwise the dead man’s kindred might clear his fame
by their oath and require the slayer to pay wergild as for a true man.91 We do not find
any formalities prescribed in the genuine dooms. The safest course would no doubt be
to report to the first credible person met with, and to the first accessible person having
any sort of authority.92

Injuries and assaults to the person were dealt with by a minute Personal injuries:
scale of fixed compensations, which appears, though much misadventure.
abridged, as late as the Anglo-Norman compilations. But rules of
this kind are not heard of in practice after the Conquest. It is worth while to notice that
the contumelious outrage of binding a freeman, or shaving his head in derision, or
shaving off his beard, was visited with heavier fines than any but the gravest
wounds.93 In the modern common law compensation for insult, as distinct from
actual bodily hurt, is arrived at only in a somewhat indirect fashion, by giving juries a
free hand in the measure of damages. Accidental injuries are provided for in a certain

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 53 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

number of particular cases. A man carrying a spear should carry it level on his
shoulder in order to be free from blame if another runs upon the point. If the point is
three fingers or more above the butt (so as to bring the point to the level of a man’s
face), he will be liable to pay wer in case of a fatal accident, and all the more if the
point were in front (so that he could have seen the other’s danger).94 This is rational
enough; but in the case of harm ensuing even by pure accident from a distinct
voluntary act, we find that the actor, however innocent his intention, is liable, and that
the question of negligence is not considered at all. Legis enim est qui inscienter
peccat, scienter emendet, says the compiler of the so-called laws of Henry I.,
translating what was doubtless an English proverb.95 There is no earlier English
authority, but such is known to have been the principle of all old Germanic laws. It
seems to have extended, or to have been thought by some to extend, even to harm
done by a stranger with weapons which the owner bad left unguarded. Cnut’s laws
expressly declare, as if it were at least an unsettled point, that only the actual wrong-
doer shall be liable if the owner can clear himself of having any part or counsel in the
mischief.96 Borrowing or stealing another man’s weapons, or getting them by force
or fraud from an armourer who had them in charge for repair, seems to have been a
rather common way of obscuring the evidence of manslaying, or making false
evidence; and it was a thing that might well be done in collusion. One man would be
ready to swear with his oath-helpers, “I did not kill him,” the other, with equal
confidence, “No weapon of mine killed him.”97 And in consequence, it would seem,
of the general suspicion attaching to every one possibly concerned, an armourer was
bound to answer to the owner at all hazards (unless it were agreed to the contrary) for
the safe custody and return of weapons entrusted to him,98 perhaps even for their
return free from any charge of having been unlawfully used.99 Such a charge might
have involved the forfeiture of the weapon until quite modern times.

The extreme difficulty of getting any proof of intention, or of its Archaic principle of
absence, in archaic procedure is, perhaps, the best explanation of responsibility for
rules of this kind. At all events, they not only are characteristic of accidents.
early German law, but they have left their mark on the developed
common law to a notable extent. In modern times the principle of general
responsibility for pure accidents arising from one’s lawful act has been disallowed in
the United States, and more lately in England. But, as regards the duty of safely
keeping in cattle, and in the case of persons collecting or dealing with things deemed
of a specially dangerous kind, the old Germanic law is still the law of this land and of
the greater part of North America.

Fire, which English law has regarded for several centuries as a specially dangerous
thing in this sense, and which is dealt with in some of the early Germanic dooms, is
not mentioned for this purpose in our documents.100 Liability for damage done by
dogs is on the other hand rather elaborately dealt with by a scale of compensation
increasing after the first bite.101

There are traces of the idea which underlay the Roman noxal actions, and which crops
up in the medieval rule of deodand, that where a man is killed by accident, the
immediate cause of death, be it animate or inanimate, is to be handed over to the
avenger of blood as a guilty thing. When men were at work together in a forest, and

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 54 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

by misadventure one let a tree fall on another, which killed him, the tree belonged to
the dead man’s kinsfolk if they took it away within thirty days.102 This kind of
accident is still quite well known in the forest countries of Europe, as witness the rude
memorial pictures, entreating the passer’s prayers, that may be seen in any Tyrolese
valley. Also a man whose beast wounded another might surrender the beast as an
alternative for money compensation.103

Theft, especially of cattle and horses, appears to have been by far Theft.
the commonest and most troublesome of offences. There is a
solitary and obscure reference to “stolen flesh” in the laws of Ine.104 Perhaps this is
to meet the case of a thief driving cattle a certain distance and then slaughtering them,
and hiding the flesh apart from the hides and horns, which would be more easily
identified. If we are surprised by the severity with which our ancestors treated theft,
we have only to look at the prevalence of horse-stealing in the less settled parts of the
western American states and territories in our own time, and the revival of archaic
methods for its abatement. Collusion with thieves on the part of seemingly honest folk
appears to have been thought quite possible: Cnut required every man above twelve
years to swear that he would be neither a thief nor an accomplice with thieves,105 and
special penalties for letting a thief escape, or failing to raise, or follow, the hue and
cry, point in the same direction.106 Slavery was a recognized penalty when the thief
was unable to make restitution. This, if it stood alone, might be regarded as handing
over the debtor’s person by way of compensation rather than a punishment in the
modern sense. But moreover the offender’s whole family might lose their freedom as
accomplices. The harshness of this rule was somewhat relaxed if the thief’s wife
could clear herself by oath from having had any part in stolen cattle which had been
found in his house.107 But as late as the early part of the eleventh century, Wulfstan’s
homily108 complains that “cradle-children” are unjustly involved in the slavery of
their parents. All this, however, belongs to social antiquities rather than to legal
history. The common law of theft is wholly post-Norman. Nor is it needful to dwell
on the Anglo-Saxon treatment of special and aggravated forms of theft, such as
sacrilege.109 Stealing on Sunday, in Lent, and on Christmas, Easter, or Ascension
Day, was punishable with a double fine by the old Wessex law.110

In a modern system of law we expect a large portion of the Property.
whole to be concerned with the rules of acquiring, holding, and
transferring property. We look for distinctions between land and movables, between
sale and gift, between the acts completed among living persons and dispositions to
take effect by way of inheritance. If the word property be extended to include rights
created by contract, we may say that we contemplate under this head by far the greater
and weightier part of the whole body of legal rules affecting citizens in their private
relations. But if we came with such expectations to examine laws and customs so
archaic as the Anglo-Saxon, we should be singularly disappointed. Here the law of
property is customary and unwritten, and no definite statement of it is to be found
anywhere, while a law of contract can hardly be said to exist, and, so far as it does
exist, is an insignificant appurtenance to the law of property. But we must remember
that even Hale and Blackstone, long after that view had ceased to be appropriate,
regarded contract only as a means of acquiring ownership or possession. Yet more
than this; it is hardly correct to say that Anglo-Saxon customs or any Germanic

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 55 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

customs, deal with ownership at all. What modern lawyers call ownership or property,
the dominium of the Roman system, is not recognized in early Germanic ideas.
Possession, not ownership, is the leading conception; it is possession that has to be
defended or recovered, and to possess without dispute, or by judicial award after a
dispute real or feigned, is the only sure foundation of title and end of strife. A right to
possess, distinct from actual possession, must be admitted if there is any rule of
judicial redress at all; but it is only through the conception of that specific right that
ownership finds any place in pure Germanic law. Those who have studied the modern
learning of possessory rights and remedies are aware that our common law has never
really abandoned this point of view.

Movable property, in Anglo-Saxon law, seems for all practical Sale and other
purposes to be synonymous with cattle. Not that there was no contracts.
other valuable property; but arms, jewels, and the like, must with
rare exceptions have been in the constant personal custody of the owners or their
immediate attendants. Our documents leave us in complete ignorance of whatever
rules existed. We may assume that actual delivery was the only known mode of
transfer between living persons; that the acceptance of earnest-money and giving of
faith and pledges were customary means of binding a bargain; and that contracts in
writing were not in use. There is no evidence of any regular process of enforcing
contracts, but no doubt promises of any special importance were commonly made by
oath, with the purpose and result of putting them under the sanction of the church.
There is great reason to believe that everywhere or almost everywhere a religious
sanction of promises has preceded the secular one,111 and that honourable obligation
has been more effective than might be supposed in aiding or supplementing the
imperfections of legality.112 Apparently the earliest form of civil obligation in
German law was the duty of paying wergild. Payment, when it could not be made
forthwith, was secured by pledges, who no doubt were originally hostages. Gradually
the giving of security sinks into the background, and the deferred duty of payment is
transformed into a promise to pay. But our Anglo-Saxon authorities are of the very
scantiest. We find the composition of a feud secured by giving pledges and the
payment by instalments regulated;113 and in Alfred’s laws there is mention of a
solemn kind of promise called “god-borh”; if a suit is brought upon it, the plaintiff
must make his fore-oath in four churches, and when that has been done, the defendant
must clear himself in twelve, so that falsehood on either side would involve manifold
perjury and contempt of the church and the saints.114 Here we seem to have a
mixture of secular and ecclesiastical sanctions, rendered all the easier by the bishop
constantly being, as we have seen, the chief judicial officer of the shire. But this must
have been a very special procedure, and probably confined to persons of high rank.
And it is hard to tell what the subject-matter of these solemn undertakings can have
been, unless it were marriages of the parties’ children and what we now should call
family settlements and, perhaps, reconciliation of standing feuds. We may guess, from
what is known of the practice of local courts in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries,
that before the Conquest the hundred courts did to some extent do justice in matters of
bargain and promise in the ordinary affairs of life. But we have no direct information
whatever.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 56 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

On the other hand, there runs persistently through the Anglo- Claims for stolen
Saxon laws a series of ordinances impressing on buyers of cattle things: warranty.
the need of buying before good witnesses. But this has nothing to
do with the validity of the sale between the parties. The sole purpose, judging by the
terms and context of these enactments, is to protect the buyer against the subsequent
claims of any person who might allege that the cattle had been stolen from him.
Difficulties of this kind were especially rife when the sale had been made (in the
earlier times) in another English kingdom, or up the country. Hlothær and Eadric laid
down the precautions to be observed by a Kentish man buying cattle in London, then
a Mercian town.115 Evidently great suspicion attached to sales made anywhere out of
open market. Some ordinances require the presence of the portreeve or other credible
men at sales without the gates; others attempt to prohibit selling altogether except in
towns. Afterwards witnesses are required in town and country alike,116 and in the
latest period we find the number of four witnesses specified.117 A buyer who
neglected to take witness was liable to eviction, if the cattle were claimed as stolen,
without even the chance of calling the seller to warrant him, and he might also incur a
forfeiture to the lord of the place, and be called on to clear himself by oath of any
complicity in the theft. If he had duly taken witness, he still had to produce the seller,
or, if the seller could not be found, to establish his own good faith by oath.

If the seller appeared, he had in turn to justify his possession, and this process might
be carried back to the fourth remove from the ultimate purchaser. These elaborate
provisions for vouching to warranty (A.-S. teám)118 or the custom on which they
were founded, persisted for some time after the Norman Conquest,119 and are
interesting by their analogy to the doctrine of warranty in the law of real property,
which afterwards underwent a far more full and technical development, and remained,
long after it had been forgotten in practice, at the foundation of many parts of modern
conveyancing. The dooms of Ine contain a curious archaic provision120 for a buyer
clearing himself by an oath taken over the stolen property at the seller’s grave, in the
case of the seller having died since the purchase of the slave, or other thing in dispute.

With regard to the tenure of land we have a considerable bulk of Land tenure.
information, derived partly from charters and wills, partly from
occasional passages in the laws, and partly from other documents, especially the tract
known as Rectitudines singularum personarum. We have gone into the matter
elsewhere,121 and we may confine ourselves here to a short statement of what is
positively known.

Our Anglo-Saxon charters or books are mostly grants of Book-land.
considerable portions of land made by kings to bishops and
religious houses, or to lay nobles. Land so granted was called book-land, and the grant
conferred a larger dominion than was known to the popular customary law. During
the ninth century and the early part of the tenth the grant usually purports to be with
the consent of the witan. Alodium (of which we have no English form) is, in
documents of the Norman age, a regular Latin translation of book-land. There is great
reason to believe that a grant of book-land usually made no difference at all to the
actual occupation of the soil. It was a grant of lordship and revenues, and in some
cases of jurisdiction and its profits. The inhabitants rendered their services and dues to

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 57 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

new lords, possibly enough to the same bailiff on behalf of the new lord, and things
went on otherwise as before. The right of alienating book-land depended on the terms
of the original grant. They were often large enough to confer powers equivalent to
those of a modern tenant in fee simple. Accordingly book-land granted by such terms
could be and was disposed of by will, though it is impossible to say that the land dealt
with in extant Anglo-Saxon wills was always book-land. Lords of book-land might
and sometimes did create smaller holdings of the same kind by making grants to
dependants. It is important to remember that book-land was a clerkly and exotic
institution, and that grants of it owe their existence directly or indirectly to royal
favour, and throw no light, save incidentally, on the old customary rules of
landholding.

When the day of conquest was at hand, many of the tillers of the Inferior tenures: læ´
ground were dependent on a lord to whom they owed rents and n-land.
services substantially like those of which we have ample and
detailed evidence in later documents. A large proportion of them were personally
freemen;122 the homesteads were several, and every freeman was answerable for his
own fence.123 There is little doubt that, except in the western counties, common-field
agriculture was general if not universal;124 and probably the scheme of distribution
and the normal amount of holdings was very like that which we find after the
Conquest. Freemen sometimes held considerable estates under a lord, but our
authorities are too scanty to enable us to say on what terms.125 In the later Anglo-
Saxon period, land held of a superior, whether much or little, is called læ´n-land. It is
not clear whether this term extended to customary tenures (those for example which
would result from a grant of book-land as between the new lord and the occupiers) or
was limited to interests created by an express agreement. In the latter case it may be
compared with the Gallo-Frankish precarium, from which indeed it was perhaps
derived.126

Folk-land is a term which occurs only in a few documents, and Folk-land.
then without any decisive explanation. In the most authoritative
of these, a law of Edward the Elder, it is contrasted with book-land as if it included all
land that was not book-land. Spelman, so reading the passage, defined folk-land as
land held by common, that is customary law, without written title. On this view an
Englishman who was asked, “What do you mean by folk-land? ” would have
answered, “Land held by folk-right.” In 1830 John Allen put forth another view which
prevailed for two generations. He said127 that “folk-land, as the word imports, was
the land of the folk or people. It was the property of the community.” The proposed
analogy to the Latin ager publicus was accepted as confidently as it was proposed,
and with singularly little discussion, by Kemble and almost every one who treated of
Anglo-Saxon land tenures down to 1893. Difficulties occurred, however, in working
out Allen’s theory, and were found to increase as one scholar after another entered
farther upon details. In particular, it was hard to account for the number of freemen,
which must have been considerable in the time of Edward the Elder at all events,
holding land which was not book-land. Various conjectural names for that kind of
holding were proposed by Kemble and others, but for none of them was there any
authority. If these lands were included in folk-land, and folc-land meant ager
publicus, then every one who had not book-land was in name and in law a mere tenant

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 58 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

from the state. If not, there was no evidence that land held by the most general and
practically important form of title had any proper name at all. Neither conclusion
could be deemed satisfying. In 1893 Mr. Paul Vinogradoff128 pointed out that
Allen’s theory was really gratuitous. The documents do not by any means require it;
the analogy of other compounds in which the word folc occurs is against it; and when
it turns out to give rise to more difficulties than it removes, it is better to fall back
upon the older and simpler explanation. Folk-land, then, appears to have been, as
Spelman said, land held without written title under customary law. We have no right
to assume that there were not varieties of tenure within this general description, or
that custom was uniform even in the same kingdom. It is probable that the alienation
of folk-land was difficult, and we do not know to what extent, if to any considerable
extent, power to dispose of it by will had been introduced. The problem of
reconstructing the old folk-right in detail belongs, however, rather to the history of
Germanic social antiquities than to that of the laws of England; and our interpretation
of the scanty evidence available must depend in great measure on the manner in
which the fuller evidence of the two centuries after the Conquest is interpreted.129

After the Norman Conquest book-land preserved its name for a Transition to Anglo-
time in some cases, but was finally merged in the feudal tenures Norman feudalism.
in the course of the twelfth century. The relations of a grantee of
book-land to those who held under him were doubtless tending for some considerable
time before the Conquest to be practically very like those of a feudal superior; but
Anglo-Saxon law had not reached the point of expressing the fact in any formal way.
The Anglo-Saxon and the continental modes of conveyance and classification of
tenures must have coalesced sooner or later. But the Conquest suddenly bridged a gap
which at the time was still well-marked. After its work is done we find several new
lines of division introduced and some old ones obliterated, while all those that are
recognized are deeper and stronger than before. The king’s lordship and the hands that
gather the king’s dues are everywhere; and where they have come the king’s law will
soon follow.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 59 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER III

Norman Law1
Of the law of Normandy as it was on the eve of William’s Obscurity of Norman
expedition, little is known for certain. To illustrate the period legal history.
which had elapsed since the settlement of the Northmen in
Neustria, there are no written laws, no books on law and very few charters, while the
chroniclers have not much to tell about the legal structure of the duchy, and what they
tell is not always trustworthy. The England of the same period supplies us with the
laws of Edward the Elder, Æthelstan, Edmund, Edgar, Æthelred and Cnut; also with a
large collection of land-books and writs. Even in later days, after the duke of the
Normans had become king of the English, the duchy was slow to follow the kingdom
in the production of abiding memorials of its law. It has nothing to set against
Domesday Book or against those law-books which we know as the Leges of the
Confessor, the Conqueror and Henry the First. The oldest financial records,2 the
oldest judicial records3 that it has transmitted to us, are of much later date than the
parallel English documents. Its oldest law-books, two small treatises now fused
together and published under the title Le très ancien Coutumier,4 are younger and
slighter than our Glanvill, and the Grand Coutumier, if not younger, is slighter than
our Bracton.5 Doubtless we have been more fortunate than our neighbours in the
preservation of documents; still we have every reason to believe that the conquerors
of England had little, if any, written law to bring with them. Hrolf, it is true, had
gained the reputation of lawgiver; but our own history will show us that such a
reputation might be easily gained by one who was regarded as the founder of a state
or the representative of a race: Alfred was becoming, Edward the Confessor was to
become, the hero of a legal myth. Hrolf may have published laws, in particular laws
about theft, but what we hear of them will hardly dispose us to think that they would
remain in force for long.6 But not only had the Normans no written law of their own
making; there was none that they could readily borrow from their French neighbours.
Their invasions occurred in the very midnight of the legal history of France; indeed
they brought the midnight with them. The stream of capitularies ceases to flow; no
one attempts to legislate; and when the worst days are over, the whole structure of
society has been so much changed, that the old written laws, the Lex Salica, the
ordinances of Merovingian and Karlovingian kings, will no longer meet the facts.
When an Englishman of the twelfth century, the compiler of the Leges Henrici, strives
to eke out the old English dooms with foreign texts and goes as far back as the Lex
Salica, which was centuries old before Hrolf landed in Normandy, we know that he
has no foreign texts at his command that are less obsolete.

The yet debated question, whether for a century or thereabouts Norman law was
after their settlement in Neustria, the law of the Northmen or French.
Normans was mainly Frankish or mainly Scandinavian, we are
not called upon to discuss. It is now generally admitted that for at least half a century
before the battle of Hastings, the Normans were Frenchmen, French in their language,

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 60 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

French in their law, proud indeed of their past history, very ready to fight against
other Frenchmen if Norman home-rule was endangered, but still Frenchmen, who
regarded Normandy as a member of the state or congeries of states that owed service,
we can hardly say obedience, to the king at Paris. Their spoken language was French,
their written language was Latin, but the Latin of France; the style of their legal
documents was the style of the French chancery; very few of the technical terms of
their law were of Scandinavian origin. When at length the “custom” of Normandy
appears in writing, it takes its place among other French customs, and this although
for a long time past Normandy has formed one of the dominions of a prince, between
whom and the king of the French there has been little love and frequent war; and the
peculiar characteristics which mark off the custom of Normandy from other French
customs seem due much rather to the legislation of Henry of Anjou than to any
Scandinavian tradition.7

To say that the law of Normandy was mainly French is to say Norman law was
that it was feudal. But feudalism is an unfortunate word. In the feudal.
first place it draws our attention to but one element in a complex
state of society and that element is not the most distinctive: it draws our attention only
to the prevalence of dependent and derivative land tenure.8 This however may well
exist in an age which cannot be called feudal in any tolerable sense. What is
characteristic of “the feudal period” is not the relationship between letter and hirer, or
lender and borrower of land, but the relationship between lord and vassal, or rather it
is the union of these two relationships. Were we free to invent new terms, we might
find feudo-vassalism more serviceable than feudalism. But the difficulty is not one
which could be solved by any merely verbal devices. The impossible task that has
been set before the word feudalism is that of making a single idea represent a very
large piece of the world’s history, represent the France, Italy, Germany, England, of
every century from the eighth or ninth to the fourteenth or fifteenth. Shall we say that
French feudalism reached its zenith under Louis d’Outre-Mer or under Saint Louis,
that William of Normandy introduced feudalism into England or saved England from
feudalism, that Bracton is the greatest of English feudists or that he never misses an
opportunity of showing a strong anti-feudal bias? It would be possible to maintain all
or any of these opinions, so vague is our use of the term in question. What would be
the features of an ideally feudal state? What powers, for example, would the king
have: in particular, what powers over the vassals of his vassals? Such a question has
no answer, for the ideal does not remain the same from century to century, and in one
and the same land at one and the same time different men have different ideals: the
king has his opinion of what a king should be; his vassals have another opinion. The
history of feudal law is the history of a series of changes which leave unchanged little
that is of any real importance.

This, if true of the whole, is true of every element of feudalism, Feudalism in
and true in the first place of that element whence it takes its Normandy.
name. In England from almost, if not quite, the earliest moment
of its appearance, the word feodum seems not merely to imply, but to denote, a
heritable, though a dependent right. But if on the continent we trace back the use of
this word, we find it becoming interchangeable with beneficium, and if we go back
further we find beneficium interchangeable with precarium. A tenancy at will has, we

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 61 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

may say, become a tenancy in fee; but we cannot speak of a tenancy at will and a
tenancy in fee in one breath.9 The Norman conquest of England occurs at a particular
moment in the history of this process. It has already gone far; the words feum, feudum,
feodum are fast supplanting beneficium; the feodum is hereditary; men now see little
difference between the feodum and the alodus or alodium, the fullest ownership that
there can be. And yet a trait of precariousness clings to the fee; it is easily forfeitable,
and the lord’s rights in the land appear in the shape of reliefs and wardships. So also
with vassalism. Time was when the vassus was an unfreeman, though that time has
long since passed away, and some vassals of the king of the French are apt to behave
as sovereign princes. So again with that most essential element of feudalism,
jurisdiction in private hands, the lord’s court. Its growth, whether we have regard to
England or to the continent, seems the obscurest of all problems, for the law is rapidly
shifting and changing just at the time when it is leaving the fewest explicit memorials
of its shifts and changes. And it is so preeminently with the political character of
feudalism. Is the feudal tie the loose bond—hardly other than an alliance between two
sovereigns—which binds the duke of the Normans to the king of the French? Does the
duke conceive that it is but a similar tie that binds his viscounts and barons to him?
Often enough such questions must be solved by the sword; there is no impartial
tribunal for their solution. It is characteristic of the time that rights of sovereignty
shade off into rights of property: the same terms and formulas cover them both: the
line between them is drawn by force rather than by theory. This had been so in
Normandy. Every moment at which the duke was weak had been marked by
rebellions. Duke William had been stern and victorious and had reduced his vassals to
submission; but so soon as he was dead there was another era of anarchy and private
war. Indeed a first glance at the Norman chronicles might induce us to say that the
Normans had little law beyond “the good old rule, the simple plan.” But lawlessness
is often a superficial phenomenon and whenever the duke was strong enough to keep
the peace then law revived. We hear the same of England: times of “unlaw” alternate
with times of law. At one moment prudent travellers journey in parties of twenty, at
the next a girl may go from end to end of the realm and fear no harm. All depends
upon the ruling man. To say then of the Norman law of William’s day that it was
feudal, is to say little; but it would be difficult for us to say more without going
beyond the direct and contemporary evidence or repeating what has elsewhere been
admirably said of the history of feudalism in general. But a few traits may be noted.

To the great generalization which governs the whole scheme of Dependent land
Domesday Book, the theory that every acre of land is tenure.
immediately or mediately “held of” the sovereign lord, the
Normans in their own country may not have arrived. But Domesday Book by itself
would suffice to show that it was not far from their minds, and in the Norman charters
we frequently discover the phenomena of dependent tenure. The rich man who wishes
to endow a religious house endows it with land; but in many cases we see that he is
not an absolute owner of the land that he gives, or at all events is not the only person
interested in it. The land is held by tenants of divers classes, milites, vavassores,
hospites, coloni, conditionarii, villani, rustici, and these tenants (that is to say, his
rights over these tenants) he gives to the church.10 But further, if he has subordinates
who have rights in the land, he has also superiors with rights in the land; he makes the
gift with the consent of his lord; that lord’s confirmation is confirmed by the duke of

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 62 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

the Normans, perhaps it is even confirmed once more by the duke or king of the
French.11 Of the alodium we often read, and occasionally it is contrasted with the
beneficium, the one still meaning full ownership, the other dependent, and in some
degree precarious, tenure.12 But the two are being fused together. Sometimes the
alodium is held of a lord and the alodial owner does not dispose of it, without his
lord’s consent; nay, the lord has rights over him and over it, and those rights can be
conveyed to a third person.13 On the other hand, the beneficium has gone half-way to
meet the alodium. The viscounts and barons of Normandy held beneficia, feoda,
honores of the duke; in return they owed him military service, though the precise
amount of the service may not have been fixed.14 We need not suppose that this had
been so from the first, from the day when, according to Norman tradition, Hrolf roped
out the land and distributed it among his followers.15 Whatever may have been the
terms upon which Hrolf received Normandy from Charles the Simple—and the
Norman tale was that he received it as the most absolute alodium16 —his successors
were conceived as holding a fief of the kings of the French in return for homage and
service; and so, whatever may have been the terms on which Hrolf’s followers
acquired their lands, their successors were conceived as holding benefices or fiefs of
the dukes of the Normans in return for homage and service. From the first the rights
of the Norman nobles seem to have been hereditary. It may well be, however, that
there was an element of precariousness in their tenure, an element which appears in
later days in the shape of the duke’s right to reliefs and wardships, and certainly their
hold on the land was not sufficiently secure to prevent him from habitually having
splendid fiefs to give away to his kinsfolk.17 On the eve of the conquest of England
many of the great houses owed their greatness to some more or less legitimate
relationship—legitimacy was a matter of degree—between them and the ducal family.
Still the feoda were hereditary, and seemingly even women might inherit them. The
alodium and the beneficium were meeting in the feodum. A new scheme of proprietary
rights, of dependent proprietary rights, was being fashioned, and into that scheme
every acre of a conquered kingdom might be brought.18

Some such scheme of dependent ownership is necessary if Seignorial justice.
among the subjects of proprietary rights are to be reckoned
justice and office. It can never be suffered that one who is not a sovereign prince
should own a jurisdiction in the absolute sense in which he owns his flocks and herds.
That in Normandy the right of doing justice and receiving the profits thereof had
become heritable is plain. The honores of the Norman nobles comprised rights of
jurisdiction; the viscounts were in name the successors of royal officials, of Frankish
vicecomites whose offices had become hereditary.19 Also the lands of the churches
were defended by ducal grants of “immunity,” grants modelled on Frankish
precedents.20 But the principles which regulated the existence and the competence of
seignorial courts are very dark to us. Whether the right to hold a court can only be
conferred by the sovereign’s grant, or whether it arises from the mere relation
between lord and men, or between lord and tenants, is a question to which we get no
certain answer for a long time after the conquest of England, whether we ask it of
England or of Normandy. In good times, however, the duke’s justice was powerful
throughout his duchy. It is as supreme judge hearing and deciding the causes of all his
subjects, the guardian of the weak against the mighty, the stern punisher of all
violence, that his courtly chroniclers love to paint him,21 and we may doubt whether

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 63 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

in his own country the Conqueror had ever admitted that feudal arrangements made
by his men could set limits to his jurisdiction.22

As to any constitutional restraints on the ducal power, the most Limits to the ducal
opposite opinions have prevailed. The duke of the earliest period power.
has been everything, from the most absolute of monarchs to a
mere first among equals.23 What we know is that when the time for the conquest of
England is approaching, the duke consults, or professes to consult the great men of his
realm, lay and spiritual, the optimates, the proceres of Normandy. He holds a court;
we dare hardly as yet call it a court of his tenants in chief; but it is an assembly of the
great men, and the great men are his vassals. Seemingly it is for them to make the
judgments of the court,24 and just as the English witan attest or confirm the king’s
grants, so the Norman proceres attest or confirm the charters of the duke.25 In the
lower courts also, so it would seem, the lord of the court is not the only judge; he is
surrounded by doomsmen.26

Probably the ordinary procedure of the courts was much the Legal procedure.
same in Normandy and in England. In neither country had men
passed the stage at which they look to the supernatural for proof of doubtful facts. The
means of proof are solemn formal oaths and ordeals designed to elicit the judgment of
God.27 One ordeal the Normans recognized which had no place in English law,
namely, the ordeal of battle.28 When immediately after the Conquest we find this
mode of proof in England, we may say with some certainty that here we have a
Norman institution. The same may be said with great probability of a far more
important institution, of which we must speak at length hereafter, namely the sworn
inquest, the germ of the jury.

Perhaps criminal law, or what served as such, had reached a later Criminal law.
stage of development in Normandy than in England. The great
need of the time was that the ancient system of money compositions, of bót and wer
and wíte, should give way before a system of true punishments, and in Normandy the
alternations of rough anarchy and stern repression may have hastened this desirable
process. At any rate from Normandy we hear little or nothing of the old money
payments, though at one time they had been familiar enough both to the Franks and to
the Norsemen, and in En gland the writers of the twelfth century, who still know all
about the wer of the West-Saxon, the Mercian, the Dane, say no word of the
Norman’s wer and show no acquaintance with any Norman or Frankish criminal
tariff.29

We may be more certain that in another direction Norman law Ecclesiastical law.
had outstripped English law along what must seem to us a
destined path of progress. It had come in sight of an ecclesiastical jurisprudence, of
conflicts and compacts between church and state. Within our island church and state
might still appear as but two phases of one organization; on the continent this could
not be so. Long ago the claim of a “supernational” church to jurisdiction had raised
difficult problems and been satisfied for a while by complicated compromises—but
only for a while, for the church was not easily satiable.30 By the Conquest England
was drawn into the midstream of a controversial torrent. Whatever else he might leave

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 64 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

for the future, the Conqueror would have to define in precise terms his relation to the
spiritual power in his new kingdom, and his definition would, if this were possible, be
that which had come down to him from Norman dukes and Frankish kings. On the
one hand, he would concede an ample room to “the canons and episcopal laws”; on
the other he would insist that the spiritual power should assume no right in England
that it had not exercised in Normandy.31

One ecclesiastical institution there was in Normandy, which, so The truce of God.
William might hope, would hardly be necessary in England: the
truce of God. In England the old family blood-feud was not dead, but it had not as yet
developed into the feudal right of private warfare. In France a religious movement,
which had its origin in the south, had been setting limits to this anarchical right by
putting certain places and persons and seasons under the protection of the church and
outside the limits of fair fighting. The truce of God had been received in Normandy; it
reigned there after England had been conquered; but we only find very faint and
uncertain traces in England either of it or of that tolerated private warfare which it
presupposed.32

Of the condition of the great mass of the inhabitants of Condition of the
Normandy, the tillers of the soil, we know singularly little; the peasantry.
chronicles have hardly a word to say about them, the charters do
little more than mention their existence. This we know, that in the early years of
Richard the Good there was a formidable revolt of the Norman peasants, which was
fiercely suppressed. According to the chronicler, the insurgents showed a high degree
of organization; they sent representatives to a central assembly.33 This story,
remarkable if true, is scarcely less remarkable if false, but the mere rebellion will
make us believe that the Norman peasant was seldom a slave. It has been said by high
authority that there are few traces of any serfage in Normandy even in the eleventh
century, none in the twelfth.34 The charters of the Conqueror’s day frequently speak
of hospites, coloni, rustici, villani, rarely of servi, though now and again we have
hints that some men and some lands are not deemed “free.”35 In later times
Normandy was distinguished among the provinces of France by a singular absence of
serfage, and such evidence as we have tends to show that the Conqueror left a land
where there were few slaves for one in which there were many, for one in which the
slave was still treated as a vendible chattel, and the slave-trade was flagrant.

The Normans then had no written law to bring with them to Jurisprudence.
England, and we may safely acquit them of much that could be
called jurisprudence. Not but that there were among them men distinguished above
others for their knowledge of the law. The famous founder of the Abbey of Bec,
Herlwin, who had spent most of his life as layman and knight, was deeply learned in
the law of the land, and when he had become an abbot he still gave opinions in
temporal causes; but not until he was near forty years of age did he learn the first
rudiments of letters.36 His legal knowledge was probably the same in kind as that
attributed, as we shall read hereafter, to the English bishop Æthelric and the monks of
Abingdon, a knowledge of the law to be evoked by concrete cases, not a body of
doctrine to be taught or written in a book.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 65 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

But the mention of Herlwin must remind us of Herlwin’s prior, Lanfranc the Pavian
of Lanfranc the lawyer of Pavia, of Lanfranc the Conqueror’s lawyer.
right-hand man. Those who tell us of the great theologian, of the
great disciplinarian, never forget to add that he was a lawyer of world-wide fame, the
most accomplished of pleaders. Now, as we have already said, the Lombard lawyers,
especially the lawyers of Pavia, had been engaged in a task well fitted to be an
education for one who was to be William’s prime minister. They had been
harmonizing, digesting and modernizing the ancient statutes of the Lombard kings, a
body of law very similar to our own old English dooms.37 Some Roman law they
knew, and unless Pavian tradition deceives us, we may still read the ingenious
arguments by which the youthful Lanfranc puzzled and abashed his conservative
opponents, arguments which derive their force from the supposition that the dooms of
King Liutprand and the institutes of Justinian are or ought to be harmonious.38
Lanfranc, yet a layman, left Italy for Normandy and opened a school, a secular school,
at Avranches. What he taught there we are not told; but he may have taught law as
well as grammar and rhetoric. He was remembered in Normandy as one of the
discoverers of Roman law.39 If he taught law at Avranches or at Bec,40 then we may
say that the Normans were being educated for their great exploit: when the time for
subduing England should come, the man at arms would have the lawyer behind him.
But, be this as it may, the very existence of Lanfranc, who knew Lombard law and
Roman law and Canon law—when he was archbishop the decreta and canones were
ever in his mouth41 —who mastered English law so thoroughly that he carried all
before him even when the talk was of sake and soke,42 must complicate the problem
of any one who would trace to its sources the English law of the twelfth century. Who
shall say that there is not in it an Italian element? The Norman Conquest takes place
just at a moment when in the general history of law in Europe new forces are coming
into play. Roman law is being studied, for men are mastering the Institutes at Pavia
and will soon be expounding the Digest at Bologna; Canon law is being evolved, and
both claim a cosmopolitan dominion.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 66 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER IV

England Under The Norman Kings
The Norman Conquest is a catastrophe which determines the Effects of the Norman
whole future history of English law. We can make but the conquest.
vaguest guesses as to the kind of law that would have prevailed
in the England of the thirteenth century or of the nineteenth had Harold repelled the
invader. We may for example ask, but we shall hardly answer, the question, whether
the history of law in England would not have closely resembled the history of law in
Germany, whether a time would not have come when English law would have
capitulated and made way for Roman jurisprudence. But it is slowly that the
consequences of the great event unfold themselves, and they are not to be deduced
from the bare fact that Frenchmen subjugated England. Indeed if we read our history
year by year onwards from 1066, it will for a long time seem doubtful whether in the
sphere of law the Conquest is going to produce any large changes. The Normans in
England are not numerous. King William shows no desire to impose upon his new
subjects any foreign code. There is no Norman code. Norman law does not exist in a
portable, transplantable shape. English law will have this advantage in the
struggle:—a good deal of it is in writing.

But then, the problem to which the historian must address No mere mixture of
himself should not be stated as though it were a simple ethnical two national laws.
question between what is English and what is French. The
picture of two rivulets of law meeting to form one river would deceive us, even could
we measure the volume and analyze the waters of each of these fancied streams. The
law which prevails in the England of the twelfth century—this one thing we may say
with some certainty—cannot be called a mixture of the law which prevailed in
England on the day when the Confessor was alive and dead, with the law which
prevailed in Normandy on the day when William set sail from Saint Valery. Nor can
we liken it to a chemical compound which is the result of a combination of two
elements. Other elements, which are not racial, have gone to its making. Hardly have
Normans and Englishmen been brought into contact, before Norman barons rebel
against their Norman lord, and the divergence between the interests of the king and
the interests of the nobles becomes as potent a cause of legal phenomena as any old
English or old Frankish traditions can be. Nor dare we neglect, if we are to be true to
our facts, the personal characters of the great men who accomplished the subjection of
England, the characters of William and Lanfranc. The effects, even the legal effects,
of a Norman conquest of England would assuredly have been very different from
what they were, had the invading host been led by a Robert Curt-hose. And in order to
notice just one more of the hundred forces which play upon our legal history, we have
but to suppose that the Conqueror, instead of leaving three sons, had left one only, and
to ask whether in that case a charter of liberties would ever have been granted in
England. We have not to speak here of all these causes; they do not come within the
history of law; only we must protest against the too common assumption that the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 67 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

English law of later times must in some sort be just a mixture, or a compound, of two
old national laws.

If for a moment we turn from the substance to the language of History of our legal
the law, we may see how slowly what we are apt to think the language.
most natural consequences of the Conquest manifest themselves.
One indelible mark it has stamped for ever on the whole body of our law. It would be
hardly too much to say that at the present day almost all our words that have a definite
legal import are in a certain sense French words. The German jurist is able to expound
the doctrines of Roman law in genuinely German words. On many a theme an English
man of letters may, by way of exploit, write a paragraph or a page and use no word
that is not in every sense a genuinely English word; but an English or American
lawyer who attempted this puritanical feat would find himself doomed to silence. It is
true, and it is worthy of remark, that within the sphere of public law we have some old
terms which have come down to us from unconquered England. Earl was not
displaced by count, sheriff was not displaced by viscount; our king, our queen, our
lords, our knights of the shire are English; our aldermen are English if our mayors are
French; but our parliament and its statutes, our privy council and its ordinances, our
peers, our barons, the commons of the realm, the sovereign, the state, the nation, the
people are French; our citizens are French and our burgesses more French than
English. So too a few of the common transactions of daily life can be described by
English verbs. A man may give, sell, buy, let, hire, borrow, bequeath, make a deed, a
will, a bond, and even be guilty of manslaughter or of theft, and all this in English.
But this is a small matter. We will say nothing of the terms in which our land law is
expressed, estate, tenement, manor, mortgage, lease and the like, for though we have
English freeholds and half-English copyholds, this is a region in which we should
naturally look for many foreign terms. But let us look elsewhere and observe how
widely and deeply the French influence has worked. Contract, agreement, covenant,
obligation, debt, condition, bill, note, master, servant, partner, guarantee, tort,
trespass, assault, battery, slander, damage, crime, treason, felony, misdemeanour,
arson, robbery, burglary, larceny, property, possession, pledge, lien, payment, money,
grant, purchase, devise, descent, heir, easement, marriage, guardian, infant, ward, all
are French. We enter a court of justice: court, justices, judges, jurors, counsel,
attorneys, clerks, parties, plaintiff, defendant, action, suit, claim, demand, indictment,
count, declaration, pleadings, evidence, verdict, conviction, judgment, sentence,
appeal, reprieve, pardon, execution, every one and every thing, save the witnesses,
writs and oaths, have French names. In the province of justice and police with its
fines, its gaols and its prisons, its constables, its arrests, we must, now that outlawry is
a thing of the past, go as far as the gallows if we would find an English institution.
Right and wrong we have kept, and, though we have received tort, we have rejected
droit: but even law probably owes its salvation to its remote cousin the French lei.1

But all this is the outcome of a gradual process; we cannot say Struggle between
that it is the necessary result of the conquest of England by Latin, French and
French-speaking men. Indeed for some time after the conquest English.
the English language seems to have a fair chance of holding its
own in legal affairs. In the first place, the combat between English and French, if it
must begin sooner or later, can for a while be postponed or concealed, for there is a

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 68 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

third and a powerful rival in the field. Latin becomes the written language of the law.
It was a language understood and written by the learned men of both races: it was the
language of such legal documents as the Normans knew, and, though it was not the
language of the English dooms or the English courts, still it was the language of the
English charters or land-books. In the second place, English had long been a written
language, and a written language which could be used for legal and governmental
purposes, while French was as yet hardly better than a vulgar dialect of
Latin:—French would become Latin if you tried to write it at its best. And so the two
languages which William used for his laws, his charters and his writs were Latin and
English.2 Again, there were good reasons why the technical terms of the Old English
law should be preserved if the king could preserve them. They were the terms that
defined his royal rights. On the whole he was well satisfied with the goodly heritage
which had come to him from his cousin King Edward. If only he could maintain
against his followers the rights of the old English kingship, he would have done
almost as much as he could hope to do. And so his rights and their rights must be
registered in the Old English terms. His clerks must still write, if not of sacu and
socne, still of saca et soca. Many foreign words have made their way into Domesday
Book, but many Old English words which had definite legal meanings were
preserved.3

During the century that follows, Latin keeps its preeminence, and Latin as a legal
when, under Henry II. and his sons, the time comes for the language.
regular enrolment of all the king’s acts and of all the judgments
of his court, Latin becomes the language of our voluminous official and judicial
records. From this position it is not dislodged until the year 1731, when it gives place
to English.4 It were needless to say that long before that date both French and English
had been used for some very solemn, perhaps the solemnest legal purposes; but
seemingly we may lay down some such rule as this, namely, that if a series of records
goes back as far as the twelfth or the first half of the thirteenth century, it will until the
reign of George II. be a series of Latin records. It is only in the newer classes of
authoritative documents that either English or French has an opportunity of asserting
its claims. French becomes the language of the privy seal, while Latin remains the
language of the great seal. French expels Latin and English expels French from the
parliament rolls and the statute rolls, but these rolls are new in Edward I.’s day.5 In
particular, Latin remains the language in which judicial proceedings are formally
recorded, even though they be the proceedings of petty courts. In Charles I.’s day the
fact that the Star Chamber has no proper Latin roll can be used as a proof that it is an
upstart.6

But, though throughout the middle ages some Latin could be Struggle between
written by most men who could write at all, and the lord of a French and English.
manor would still have his accounts as well as his court rolls
made up in Latin, still only the learned could speak Latin readily, and it could not
become the language of oral pleading or of debate. Here was a field in which French
and English might strive for the mastery. There could for a long while be no doubt as
to which of these two tongues would be spoken in and about the king’s court. The
king spoke French, his barons French, his prelates French, and even when barons and
prelates were beginning to think of themselves as Englishmen, some new wave of

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 69 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

foreign influence would break over the court; the new French queen brings with her a
new swarm of Frenchmen. And “the king’s court” was not then a term with several
meanings; the language of courtiers and courtliness was of necessity the language of
business, discussion, pleading. All this might well have happened, however, and yet
the English language, which was in the future to be the language even of courtiers,
might have retained its stock of old and its power of engendering new legal terms. A
French-speaking royal tribunal might have been merely superimposed upon an
English substructure. But here what is perhaps the main theme of our legal history
decides the fate of words. Slowly but surely justice done in the king’s name by men
who are the king’s servants becomes the most important kind of justice, reaches into
the remotest corners of the land, grasps the small affairs of small folk as well as the
great affairs of earls and barons. This is no immediate and no necessary effect of the
Norman Conquest. It would never have come about if the nobles who helped William
to conquer England could have had their way; William himself can hardly have dared
to hope for it. The destiny of our legal language was not irrevocably determined until
Henry of Anjou was king.

If we must choose one moment of time as fatal, we ought to Victory of French.
choose 1166 rather than 1066, the year of the assize of novel
disseisin rather than the year of the battle of Hastings. Then it was that the decree
went forth which gave to every man dispossessed of his freehold a remedy to be
sought in a royal court, a French-speaking court. Thenceforward the ultimate triumph
of French law terms was secure. In all legal matters the French element, the royal
element, was the modern, the enlightened, the improving element. The English stock
of words is stricken with barrenness, the French stock can grow. The things of the law
which have English names are things that are obsolete or obsolescent, sake and soke,
wer and wite: —already men hardly know what these words mean.7 It is difficult for
us to believe that in the local courts, the suitors, who were for the more part peasants,
pleaded their causes and rendered their judgments in French; still from the thirteenth
century we get books of precedents for pleadings in manorial courts which are written
in French, while we look in vain for any similar books written in English.8 We may
suspect that if the villagers themselves did not use French when they assailed each
other in the village courts, their pleaders used it for them, and before the end of the
thirteenth century the professional pleader might already be found practising before a
petty tribunal and speaking the language of Westminster Hall.9 Then in 1362 a
statute, itself written in French, declared that as the French tongue was but little
understood, all pleas should be “pleaded, shown, defended, answered, debated and
judged” in the English tongue.10 But this came too late. It could not break the
Westminster lawyers of their settled habit of thinking about law and writing about law
in French, and when slowly French gave way before English even as the language of
law reports and legal text-books, the English to which it yielded was an English in
which every cardinal word was of French origin. How far this process had gone at the
end of the thirteenth century we may learn from Robert of Gloucester’s historical
poem. He sets himself to translate into English verse the Constitutions of Clarendon,
and in so doing he uses the terms which we now write as custom, grant, lay fee,
service, pleading, assize, judgment, traitor, chattels, felon, patron, advowson, court,
plea, purchase, amendment, hold in chief, bailiff, homage, confirm, appeal, debt.11
Down to the end of the middle ages a few Old English terms perdured which, at least

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 70 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

as technical terms, we have since lost: English “domes-men” might still “deem dooms
in a moot hall”; but the number of such terms was small and the blight of archaism
was on them.12

Meanwhile men had begun to write French and to write it for French documents.
legal purposes. Legal instruments in French come to us but very
rarely, if at all, from the twelfth century;13 they become commoner in the thirteenth
and yet commoner in the fourteenth, but on the whole Latin holds its own in this
region until it slowly yields to English, and the instruments that are written in French
seldom belong to what we may call the most formal classes; they are wills rather than
deeds, agreements rather than charters of feoffment, writs under the privy seal, not
writs under the great seal.

From the royal chancery Latin is not to be driven. The example Language of Statute
set by the Conqueror when he issued laws in English as well as law.
in Latin was not followed; Latin is the language for laws and
ordinances until the middle of the thirteenth century. Then for one brief moment the
two vulgar tongues appear on an equality; in 1258 Henry III. declared both in French
and in English his acceptance of the provisions which were forced upon him in the
parliament at Oxford.14 But while this English proclamation long remains unique,
French forces its way to the front. It wrestles with Latin for the possession of the
statute roll and the parliament rolls. By the end of Edward II.’s reign it has fairly won
the statutes roll,15 and is fast gaining a mastery over the parliament rolls. For about
two centuries, from the reign of Edward I. to the reign of Richard III., it is the usual
language of the enacted law. Late in the fourteenth century English begins to make an
insidious attack. Petitions to parliament are sometimes presented in English, and the
English petition is sometimes put upon the roll without being translated. However, the
middle ages are just at an end before the records of the En glish legislature are written
mainly in English, and to this day, as all know, what a lawyer must regard as the most
solemn of all our formulas is French— La reine le veult.16

Again, in the thirteenth century French slowly supplanted Latin French law-books.
as the literary language of the law. It is very possible that the
learned Bracton thought about law in Latin; he wrote in Latin, and the matter that he
was using, whether he took it from the Summa Azonis or from the plea rolls of the
king’s court, was written in Latin. But the need for French text-books was already
felt, and before the end of the century this need was being met by the book that we
call Britton, by other tracts,17 and by those reports of decided cases which we know
as the Year Books. Thenceforward French reigns supreme over such legal literature as
there is. We must wait for the last half of the fifteenth century if we would see English
law written about in the English tongue, for the sixteenth if we would read a technical
law-book that was written in English.18

This digression, which has taken us far away from the days of Language and law.
the Norman Conquest, may be pardoned. Among the most
momentous and permanent effects of that great event was its effect on the language of
English lawyers, for language is no mere instrument which we can control at will; it
controls us. It is not a small thing that a law-book produced in the England of the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 71 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

thirteenth century will look very like some statement of a French coutume and utterly
unlike the Sachsen-spiegel, nor is it a small thing that in much later days such foreign
influences as will touch our English law will always be much rather French than
German. But we have introduced in this place what must have been said either here or
elsewhere about our legal language, because we may learn from it that a concurrence
of many causes was requisite to produce some of those effects which are usually
ascribed to the simple fact that the Normans conquered England.19

We may safely say that William did not intend to sweep away Preservation of Old
English law and to put Norman law in its stead. On the contrary, English law.
he decreed that all men were to have and hold the law of King
Edward—that is to say, the Old English law—but with certain additions which he,
William, had made to it.20 So far as we know, he expressly legislated about very few
matters.
He forbad the bishops and archdeacons to hold in the hundred The Conqueror’s
courts pleas touching ecclesiastical discipline; such pleas were legislation.
for the future to be judged according to the canons and not
according to the law of the hundred; the lay power was to aid the justice of the
church; but without his leave, no canons were to be enacted and none of his barons or
ministers excommunicated.21 He declared that his peace comprehended all men both
English and Normans.22 He required from every freeman an oath of fealty.23 He
established a special protection for the lives of the Frenchmen; if the slayer of a
Frenchman was not produced, a heavy fine fell on the hundred in which he was slain.
He declared that this special protection did not extend to those Frenchmen who had
settled in England during the Confessor’s reign.24 He defined the procedural rules
which were to prevail if a Frenchman accused an Englishman, or an Englishman a
Frenchman.25 He decreed that the county and hundred courts should meet as of old.
He decreed that every freeman should have pledges bound to produce him in court.26
He forbad that cattle should be sold except in the towns and before three witnesses.
He forbad that any man should be sold out of the country. He substituted mutilation
for capital punishment.27 This may not be an exhaustive list of the laws that he
published, nor can we be certain that in any case his very words have come down to
us; but we have good reason to believe that in the way of express legislation he did
these things and did little more.

In the long run by far the most important of these rules will be Character of
that which secures a place in England for the canonical William’s laws.
jurisprudence. And here we have a good instance of those results
which flow from the Norman Conquest—a concrete conquest of England by a certain
champion of Roman orthodoxy—which are in no wise the natural outcome of the
mere fact that Englishmen were subju-gated by Normans. For the rest, there are some
rules which might have come from a king of the old race, could such a king have been
as strong a ruler as William was. He would have had many precedents for attempting
to prevent the transfer of stolen goods by prohibiting secret sales.28 It was old, if
disregarded, law that men were not to be sold over sea.29 It was law of Cnut’s day
that every freeman should be in pledge.30 A wave of religious sentiment had set
against capital punishment.31 Whether the king could exact an oath of fealty from all
men, even from the men of his men, was a question of power rather than of right.32

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 72 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Only two rules drew a distinction between French and English. We may doubt,
however, whether the murder fine had not its origin in the simple principle that the
lives of the Normans were to be as well protected in England as the lives of strangers
were in Normandy; at any rate the device of making a district pay if a stranger was
murdered in it and the murderer was not produced in court, was not foreign to
Frankish nor yet to Scandinavian law. We are also told, though the tale comes from
no good source, that Cnut had protected his Danes by a fine similar to that which was
now to protect the Normans.33 Again, the procedure in criminal cases is by no means
unfavourable to the men of the vanquished race. The Englishman whom a Frenchman
accuses has the choice between battle and ordeal. The Englishman who brings an
accusation can, if he pleases, compel his French adversary to join battle; otherwise the
Frenchman will be able to swear away the charge with oath-helpers “according to
Norman law.” Certainly we cannot say that the legislator here shows a marked
partiality for one class of his subjects. In this matter mere equality would not be
equity, for English law has not known the judicial combat, and perhaps the other
ordeals have not been much used in Normandy. As it is, the Englishman, whether he
be accuser or accused, can always insist on a wager of battle if he pleases; he is the
Norman’s peer.34

In different ages and circumstances the pride of a conquering Personal or national
race will show itself in different forms. Now-a-days the victor law.
may regard the conflict as one between civilization and
barbarism, or between a high and a low morality, and force his laws upon the
vanquished as the best, or the only reasonable laws. Or again, he may deliberately set
himself to destroy the nationality of his new subjects, to make them forget their old
language and their old laws, because these endanger his supremacy. We see
something of this kind when Edward I. thrusts the English laws upon Wales. The
Welsh laws are barbarous, barely Christian, and Welshmen must be made into
Englishmen.35 In older and less politic days all will be otherwise. The conquerors
will show their contempt for the conquered by allowing such of them as are not
enslaved to live under their old law, which has become a badge of inferiority. The law
of the tribe is the birthright of the men of the tribe, and aliens can have no part or lot
in it. Perhaps we should be wrong were we to attribute any large measure of either of
these sentiments to the generality of the Norman invaders; but probably they stood
nearer to the old and tribal than to the modern and political point of view. A scheme
of “personal laws” would have seemed to them a natural outcome of the conquest.
The Norman will proudly retain his Norman law and leave English law to the English.
We have seen that in matters of procedure William himself favoured some such
scheme, and to this idea of personal law may be due what is apt to look like an act of
gross iniquity. Roger of Breteuil and Waltheof conspired against William; Waltheof
was condemned to death; Roger was punished “according to the law of the Normans”
by disherison and perpetual imprisonment.36 But it was too late for a system of
“personal,” that is of racial laws. Even in France law was becoming territorial, and a
king of the English who was but duke of the Normans was interested in obliterating a
distinction which stood in his way if he was to be king of England. The rules which
mark the distinction between the two races rapidly disappear or are diverted from
their original purpose. Murder fines will swell the royal treasure, and early in Henry
I.’s reign it is already law that every slain man is a Frenchman unless his Englishry

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 73 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

can be proved.37 Outside the towns, Englishmen seem to have taken to trial by battle
very kindly, and already in the first years of the twelfth century William’s ordinance
about procedure had lost its force.38 No doubt William and his sons distrusted the
English; even Henry would suffer no Englishman to be abbot or bishop.39 No doubt
too the English were harshly and at times brutally treated; but harshness and brutality
are one thing, an attempt to rule them by Norman law would have been another.

Indeed the capital instance of harsh treatment consists in an Maintenance of
application of the theory that they have not been conquered by English land law.
foreign enemies, but, having rebelled against one who was de
iure king of the English, are to be lawfully punished for their unlawful revolt. Those
who fought by Harold’s side forfeited their lands, and so of course did those who
resisted William after he was crowned. These forfeitures, so far from clearing the way
for pure Norman land law, had the effect of bringing even the Norman barons under
English land law. Here a combination might be made of all that was favourable to the
duke in the Norman, with all that was favourable to the king in the English system.
William’s tenants in chief were to owe him definite quantities of military service; the
somewhat vaguely territorialized scheme which had produced Harold’s army was to
be superseded by a set of determinate contracts, more determinate perhaps than any
that had as yet been concluded in Normandy. On the other hand, the king was going
rigorously to exact the old English land tax, the danegeld. With geld in view he
achieved the most magnificent of all his feats, the compilation of Domesday Book. It
is very possible that he purposed to reform the capricious assessment which had come
down to him from his ancestors. In the meantime, however, each Norman baron was
to stand in the geld system just where some one Englishman or some definite group of
Englishmen had stood. For the purpose of taxation the Frenchman succeeded to the
duties of his English antecessores. Moreover, what the Frenchman succeeded to was
in many cases a superiority over free tenants of the soil. The rights of these tenants
might be left to the uncovenanted mercies of their new lord; but the superiority often
included rights of a jurisdictional kind, rights of sake and soke, and in this matter the
king had an interest. The French lord was not to get other fines and forfeitures than
those which his antecessor had received. For a long time after the Conquest a serious
attempt was made to maintain the old law of sake and soke despite its archaisms.

All this made English testimony and English tradition of The English in court.
importance; the relative rights of the various Norman magnates
were known only to Englishmen. Englishmen were mixed up with Frenchmen at the
moots and often spoke the decisive word. The aged Æthelric, Bishop of Chichester, “a
man very learned in the laws of the land,” was brought by the Conqueror’s command
to Penenden Heath that he might hear Lanfranc wax eloquent over sake and soke and
flymena-fyrmð.40 Eadric the steersman of the Confessor’s ship, and Kineward who
had been sheriff of Worcestershire, Siward of Shropshire, and Thurkill of
Warwickshire were ready to attest the sake and soke which the church of Worcester
had over Hamton and Bengeworth; but the Abbot of Evesham dared not face them.41
Godric, Godwin and Colswein were among the “approved knights French and
English” who heard the Abbot of Ely’s suit at Kentford, and that suit, in which many
Normans were concerned, was decided under the king’s command by a verdict of
English jurors who knew how the disputed lands lay in the time of King Edward.42

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 74 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

The Abbot of Abingdon was protected in his possessions by the learning and
eloquence of lawyerly English monks, whose arguments were not to be withstood.43

On the other hand, it is not to be denied that the few legal ideas Norman ideas and
and institutions which we can confidently describe as imported institutions.
from Normandy, were of decisive importance. This is
preeminently true of the transplanted Frankish inquest. It has in it the germ of all that
becomes most distinctively English in the English law of the later middle ages, the
germ of trial by jury and of a hard and fast formulary system of actions which will be
tough enough to resist the attacks of Romanism. However, the fate of the inquest was
still in the balance a century after the Conquest, and, but for the comprehensive
ordinances of Henry II., it might have perished in England as it perished in its original
home. Whether any definitely new idea is introduced into the English land law is a
more disputable question, that cannot be here discussed, but undoubtedly the
conquest, the forfeiture, the redistribution of the land gave to the idea of dependent
and derivative tenure a dominance that it could not obtain elsewhere, and about that
idea in its Norman or French shape there clung traditions of the old Frankish world,
which in the subjugated country under its foreign kings might bear fruit in a land law
of unexampled simplicity. As to the institutes of private law we know much too little
to justify dogmatic ascriptions of this to an English and that to a French origin; and
when the French origin may be granted, we are far from being able to say that here is
something which the Normans brought with them in the year 1066. French influences
had been at work in the court of Edward the Confessor; Frankish influences had been
at work in the courts of much earlier kings; after the Conquest England lay open for
two centuries and more to the latest Parisian fashions. For example, the style of the
English chancery—and this in England becomes the model for all legal
documents—goes back by one path and another through the Frankish chancery to
Rome. But the paths are very various. Some of the Conqueror’s charters are very like
those which Edward and Cnut had issued, and very unlike those of Henry II.44 We
may say, if we please, that the seal, of which our law made much in the later middle
ages, of which it makes much at the present day, is French. But the Confessor had a
seal, and in all probability but very few of the men who fought by the side of the
Norman duke had seals. The chief result of the Norman Conquest in the history of law
is to be found not so much in the subjection of race to race as in the establishment of
an exceedingly strong kingship which proves its strength by outliving three disputed
successions and crushing a rebellious baronage.45

During the whole Norman period there was little legislation. We Rufus.
have spoken of the Conqueror’s laws. It seems probable that
Rufus set the example of granting charters of liberties to the people at large. In 1093,
sick and in terror of death, he set his seal to some document that has not come down
to us. Captives were to be released, debts forgiven, good and holy laws maintained.46
Whatever promises he made, he broke. His claim upon the historians of English law is
of another kind: for he surely built her an house to dwell in. Englishmen were proud
of his work at Westminster. Search the wide world round, they said, there is no such
hall for feast and plea.

Aulam maiorem construxit Londoniarum,

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 75 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Orbis terrarum non optinet utiliorem
Iudicibus legis, ac ad convivia regis,
Regum regnorum flos est domus illa domorum.47

The verses are rude but have the right ring in the ears of English lawyers.

Henry at his coronation, compelled to purchase adherents, Henry I.
granted a charter full of valuable and fairly definite
concessions.48 He was going back to his father’s ways. The abuses introduced by his
brother were to be abolished, abuses in the matter of reliefs, wardships, marriages,
murder fines and so forth. Debts and past offences were to be forgiven. The demesne
lands of the military tenants were to be free from the danegeld. Above all the laga
Eadwardi as amended by William I. was to be restored. Though the king required that
concessions similar to those which he made in favour of his barons should be made by
them in favour of their tenants, we can hardly treat this charter as an act of legislation.
It is rather a promise that the law disregarded by Rufus shall henceforth be observed.
This promise in after times became a valuable precedent, but it could not be enforced
against the king, and Henry did not observe it. The other great record of his reign, the
Pipe Roll of his thirty-first year, shows that rightfully or wrongfully he was able to
extend the rights of the crown beyond the limits that had been assigned to them in
1100, and the steady action of the exchequer under the direction of his able minister,
Bishop Roger of Salisbury, evolved a law for the tenants in chief which was perhaps
the severest in Europe.49 This was done in silence by the accumulation of precedent
upon precedent. For the rest, we know that Henry, early in his reign, issued a writ
declaring that the county and hundred courts should be held as they were held in the
time of King Edward, straitly enjoining all men to attend them in the ancient fashion
whenever royal pleas were to be heard, and in some measure defining the relation of
these old tribunals to the feudal courts.50 We are told that he legislated about theft,
restoring capital punishment, that he issued severe laws against the utterers of bad
money, that he prohibited the rapacious exactions of his courtiers, who had made the
advent of his peripatetic household a terror to every neighbourhood, that he legislated
about measures taking his own arm as the standard ell; but we depend on the
chroniclers for our knowledge of these acts, and as yet they are not careful to preserve
the words of the lawgiver.51 We have, however, a writ in which he speaks of the
“new statutes” which he had made against thieves and false moneyers.52

Stephen on his accession conceded to his subjects in vague Stephen.
phrase “all the liberties and good laws which King Henry had
given and granted to them, and all the good laws and good customs which they had
enjoyed in the time of King Edward.”53 Later on he had to promise once more that he
would observe “the good laws and just and ancient customs, as to murder fines, pleas
and other matters,” and that he would extirpate the unjust exactions introduced by the
sheriffs and others. More specific promises made to the church, besides the large and
dangerous promise that she should be “free.”54 In the ecclesiastical sphere there had
been a good deal of legislation. With the assent of the king, stringent canons had been
enacted and enforced; in particular, the rule of celibacy had been imposed upon a
reluctant clergy. It was in the ecclesiastical council, rather than the king’s court, that
the spirit of reforming legislation was once more active.55

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 76 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

The best proof, however, of the perdurance of the Old English The law-books or
law is given by what we may generically call the law-books of “Leges.”
the Norman period. The Conqueror had amended and confirmed
the laga Eadwardi; Henry I. had confirmed the laga Eadwardi and his father’s
amendments of it. Where then could the law of Edward, that is to say, the law of
Edward’s time, be found? No doubt a good deal of it was to be found in the code of
Cnut and in the yet earlier dooms. But the language in which they were written was
unintelligible to Frenchmen, and was fast becoming unintelligible even to
Englishmen, for just at this time the English language was undergoing a rapid change.
What is more, it was plain that, despite the large words of the Norman kings, the old
dooms in their integrity could not fit the facts of the new age. Thus what was wanted
was no mere translation of ancient texts, but a modernized statement of the old law, a
practicable laga Eadwardi. Divers men in divers parts of the country tried to meet this
want. The result of their efforts is a curious and intricate group of writings, which
even at the end of the nineteenth century will hardly have been unravelled. We shall
here speak very briefly of it, adopting what we believe to be the soundest results of
recent criticism.56

In the first place, we may put on one side certain documents Genuine laws of
which profess to give us, not the old law, but the results of William I.
William’s legislation, the documents from which we have
already extracted our account of his edicts. We probably have in its original form, that
of a writ sent into the various counties, the ordinance which severed the ecclesiastical
from the temporal courts.57 We have in English as well as in Latin the ordinance
about criminal accusations brought by men of the one race against men of the other.58
Lastly, we have a set of ten brief paragraphs dealing with the oath of fealty, the
murder fine, the abolition of capital punishment and the other matters which have
already come before us. These ten laws may not have been collected until some time
after the Conqueror’s death, and it is more than probable that we have not the words
that he used; but the collection seems to have been made early in the twelfth, if not
before the end of the eleventh century, and the result is trustworthy. At a much later
date some one tampered with this set of laws, interpolated new matter into it and
threw it into the form of a solemn charter.59

But we must pass to the attempts which were made to state the The Quadripartitus.
laga Eadwardi. In the reign of Henry I. some one set himself to
translate the old dooms into Latin. To all seeming he was not an Englishman by race
and English was not his natural tongue. He may have been a secular clerk living at
Winchester and employed in the king’s court or exchequer. He was closely connected
by some tie or another with Archbishop Gerard of York. We have more than one
edition of his work; these can be distinguished from each other by the author’s
increasing mastery of the English language, though to the end he could perpetrate bad
mistakes. As the work went on, he conceived the project of adding to his Latin
version of the ancient dooms three other books and calling the whole Liber
Quadripartitus. The first book was to contain the Old English laws done into Latin;
the second was to contain some important state papers of his own day; the third was to
be about legal procedure; the fourth about theft. If the two last books were ever
written, they have not come down to us. The first and second books we have. The

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 77 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

second opens with the coronation charter of Henry I. Then apparently it purposes to
give us the documents which relate to the quarrel about the investitures; but it
gradually degenerates into a defence of Archbishop Gerard. The author seems to have
been at his work between the years 1113 and 1118; but, as already said, he returned to
it more than once.

Whatever grander projects he may at times have entertained, what he has left as a
monument of English law is in the main a laborious but not very successful translation
of the old dooms. He translated after his fashion most of the dooms that have come
down to us, except the very ancient Kentish laws, and he translated a few which have
not come down to us save through his hands. He translated for the more part without
note or comment, translated honestly if unintelligently. But he aspired to be more than
a mere translator. He put Cnut’s code in the forefront; this was the latest and most
authoritative statement of English law; the earlier dooms—they go back even to
Alfred and to Ine—come afterwards as being of less practical value. He does not
regard himself as a mere antiquarian.60

Closely connected with the Quadripartitus is a far more Leges Henrici.
important book, the so-called Leges Henrici. It seems to have
been compiled shortly before the year 1118. After a brief preface, it gives us Henry’s
coronation charter (this accounts for the name which has unfortunately been given in
modern days to the whole book), and then the author makes a gallant, if forlorn,
attempt to state the law of England. At first sight the outcome seems to be a mere
jumble of fragments; rules brought from the most divers quarters are thrown into a
confused heap. But the more closely we examine the book, the more thoroughly
convinced we shall be that its author has undertaken a serious task in a serious spirit;
he means to state the existing law of the land, to state it in what he thinks to be a
rational, and even a philosophical form. But the task is beyond his powers. For one
thing, his Latin is of the worst; he learnt it in a bad school and it will hardly suffer him
to express his meaning; probably his mother tongue was French. Then the books from
which he copies overweight him; he cannot adhere to any one plan or pursue any one
line of thought. Nevertheless he is in earnest, and when he can leave his books alone
and succeed in explaining himself, he tells us many things that are of great value. He
had a good many books at his command. He took much from the code of Cnut and
from some of the older dooms, but unless (this is not impossible) he himself was the
author or projector of the Quadripartitus, he seems to have been dependent on the
first book of that work for his text of these Old English laws. His object being to state
the laga Eadwardi as amended by the Conqueror and Henry I., he naturally made
great use of this English matter; but he dipped at times into other springs. He had
found a source of “general jurisprudence” in Isidore’s Origines. Ecclesiastical causes
were no longer subject to native English law; the Conqueror had handed them over to
the canones, and for the canones of the catholic church our author had to look to
foreign books, in particular to that compiled by Burchard of Worms. He took a few
passages from the venerable Lex Salica, from the Lex Ribuaria, from the Frankish
capitularies; we may safely say that, had these ancient authorities been regarded by
the Normans in England as practicable written law he would have taken more. He
took one little sentence out of an epitome of the West Goths’ version of the
Theodosian Code.61 But the most interesting parts of his work are those which we

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 78 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

can trace to no remoter fount. If they paint English law as a wonderful confusion, they
may yet be painting it correctly, and before we use hard words of him who wrote
them, we should remember that he was engaged on an utterly new task, new in
England, new in Europe: he was writing a legal textbook, a text-book of law that was
neither Roman nor Canon law. To have thought that a law-book ought to be written
was no small exploit in the year 1118.62

The writer of the Leges Henrici is in some sort the champion of The Consiliatio and
West Saxon, or rather of Wessex law. Wessex is in his opinion Instituta Cnuti.
the head of the realm, and in doubtful cases Wessex law should
prevail.63 Other attempts to state the old law were made elsewhere. In the early years
of the twelfth century two Latin translations of Cnut’s dooms, besides that contained
in the Quadripartitus, were made, and in each case by one who tried to be more than a
translator; he borrowed from other Anglo-Saxon documents, some of which have not
come down to us, and endeavoured to make his work a practicable law-book. One of
the most remarkable features of all these books is that their authors seem to be, at
least by adoption and education, men of the dominant, not men of the subject race; if
not Frenchmen by birth, they are Frenchmen by speech.64 At a later date, some forest
laws were concocted for Cnut, but to describe these we must use a harsh term; to all
seeming they are the work of a forger, who was inventing a justification for the
oppressive claims of those mighty hunters, the Norman kings.65

Then we have another document which professes to give us the Les Leis Williame.
old laws, the laws which King Edward held and which King
William granted to the people of England. We have it both in French and in Latin, and
to distinguish it from its fellows it has been called the bilingual code. We shall call it
the Leis Williame. Its history is obscure and has been made the more obscure by
contact with the forgeries of the false Ingulf. The Latin text is a translation of the
French text, though not an exact translation of any version of the French text that has
come down to modern times; but the French text may have been made from a Latin or
from an English original. That we have here no authoritative code but mere private
work will scarcely be disputed. It falls somewhat easily into three parts. The first
seems to consist of certain rules of the Old English law as they were understood under
the Norman kings together with some of the Norman novelties. It is an intelligent and
to all seeming a trustworthy statement. It harmonizes well with the ancient dooms, but
is not made up of extracts from them. Its author may have been specially familiar with
the Danelaw. The last part of the document is a pretty close translation of certain parts
of the code of Cnut. Then between these two parts there come a few articles which
betray the influence of Roman law. If the whole document comes from one man, we
cannot well suppose him to have done his work after the early years of the twelfth
century; his statement of the old law seems too good to be of later date. We must
further suppose that, having come to the end of the English rules that were known to
him as living law, he taxed his memory for other rules and succeeded in remembering
some half-dozen large maxims which had caught his eye in some Roman book, and
that finally, being weary of trying to remember and to define, he took up the code of
Cnut and translated part of it. The first section of his work is far from valueless; it is
one more proof that attempts were being made to state the laga Eadwardi in a rational
form. As to the middle section, it shows us how men were helplessly looking about

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 79 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

for some general principles of jurisprudence which would deliver them from their
practical and intellectual difficulties.66

Lastly, we have a book written in Latin which expressly purports Leges Edwardi
to give us the law of Edward as it was stated to the Conqueror in Confessoris.
the fourth year of his reign by juries representing the various
parts of England.67 However, the purest form in which we have it speaks of what was
done in the reign of William Rufus,68 and probably was compiled in the last years of
Henry I.69 It is private work of a bad and untrustworthy kind. It has about it
something of the political pamphlet and is adorned with pious legends. The author,
perhaps a secular clerk of French parentage, writes in the interest of the churches, and,
it is to be feared, tells lies for them.70 He professes to hate the Danes of the past and
the Danelaw. According to him, William, being himself of Scandinavian race, was on
the point of imposing the Danelaw upon the whole country, but at length was induced
by the suppliant jurors to confirm the law of Edward. This, it is explained, was really
the law of Edgar, but, from Edgar’s death until the accession of the Confessor, law
had slumbered in England—thus does this romancer strive to blacken the memory of
Cnut, the great lawgiver. Little, if any, use is made of the Anglo-Saxon dooms; loose,
oral tradition is the author’s best warrant. Unfortunately, however, the patriotic and
ecclesiastical leanings of his book made it the most popular of all the old law-
books.71 In the thirteenth century it was venerable; even Bracton quoted from it.72 A
second and more polished edition of it was soon made by its author’s or another’s
hand; also there is a French version. And then men added to it other pious legends
about the good old days when sheriffs were elective and the like. It has gone on doing
its bad work down to our own time. It should only be used with extreme caution, for
its statements, when not supported by other evidence, will hardly tell us more than
that some man of the twelfth century, probably some man of Henry I.’s day, would
have liked those statements to be true.73

The picture that these law-books set before us is that of an Character of the law
ancient system which has received a rude shock from without disclosed by the
while within it was rapidly decaying. The men who would state Leges.
the existing law are compelled to take the old English dooms as
the basis for their work, even though they can hardly understand the Old English
language. The old dooms are written law; they have not been abrogated; they have
been confirmed; other written law there is none or next to none; Normandy has none;
northern France has none, or none that is not effete. At a pinch a man may find
something useful in the new science of the canonists, in the aged Lex Salica, in vague
rumours of Roman law which come from afar. Any rule that looks authoritative and
reasonable is welcome; we may say that it is law because it ought to be law. But in the
main we must make the best of the dooms of Cnut and the older dooms. And the
difficulty of making much that is good of them is not caused merely by the collision
of two races, or by any preference of the Normans for laws that are not English. No
doubt in the local courts confusion had been confounded by the influx of conquering
Frenchmen; but there were causes enough of confusion which would have done their
work even had there been no ethnical conflict to aid them. Everywhere in western
Europe new principles of social and political order were emerging; new classes were
being formed; the old laws, the only written laws, were becoming obsolete; the state

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 80 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

was taking a new shape. If from the northern France or from the Germany of the first
years of the twelfth century we could have a law-book, it would not be very simple or
elegant or intelligible. As it is, our neighbours have little to show between the last of
the capitularies and those feudal law-books which stand on a level with our own
Glanvill. While the complex process which we call feudalism is transmuting the
world, no one issues laws or writes about law. If in England it is otherwise, this seems
to be chiefly due to two causes:—In England the age of the capitularies had not
ended; but lately Cnut had legislated on a scale which for the eleventh century must
be called magnificent. And then that very collision between two races which makes
the law-books disorderly and obscure has made them necessary. The laga Eadwardi is
confirmed. Even clerks of Norman race wish to know what the laga Eadwardi is.

These law-books have, we may say, one main theme. It is a very Practical problems in
old theme. An offence, probably some violent offence, has been the Leges.
committed. Who then is to get money, and how much money, out
of the offender? It is the old theme of wer and wíte and bót. But the criminal tariff has
become exceedingly complex, and is breaking down under its own weight. In the first
place the old tribal differences, which have become local differences, cannot yet be
disregarded. A text writer must still start with this, that England is divided between
three laws, Wessex law, Mercian law, Danelaw. We must not make light of the few
variances between these three laws which are expressly noticed by the books. If in the
eleventh century a middle finger is more valuable than a first finger among the men of
the Danelaw and less valuable among the men of Wessex, here is a difference which
would have its equivalent in modern England if the law of Lancashire differed from
the law of Yorkshire about the negotiable qualities of a bill of exchange, a difference
fruitful of knotty problems. The law of Herefordshire, as settled by Earl William
FitzOsbern, was that no knight should have to pay more than seven shillings for any
offence.74 Becket asserted even in the king’s court that the heaviest amercement
known to Kentish law was forty shillings.75 But the country was becoming covered
with small courts; every one who could was acquiring or assuming sake and soke. The
courts rose one above the other; the great old tribal customs were breaking up into
multitudinous petty customs. This introduced new complexities. We can see that for
the writer of the LegesHenrici the grand central problem of the law is the question,
Who in the myriad of possible cases has sake and soke, the right to hold a court for
the offender and to pocket the profits of jurisdiction? The claims of the lords, the
claims of the church, the claims of the king are adding to the number of the various
fines and mulcts that can be exacted, and are often at variance with each other. Let us
suppose that a man learned in the law is asked to advise upon a case of homicide.
Godwin and Roger met and quarrelled, and Godwin slew Roger. What must be paid;
by whom; to whom? Our jurist is not very careful about those psychical elements of
the case which might interest us, but on the other hand he requires information about a
vast number of particulars which would seem to us trivial. He cannot begin to cast up
his sum until he has before him some such statement as this:—Godwin was a free
ceorl of the Abbot of Ely: Roger, the son of a Norman father, was born in En gland of
an English mother and was a vavassor of Count Alan: the deed was done on the
Monday after Septuagesima, in the county of Cambridge, on a road which ran
between the land which Gerard a Norman knight held of Count Eustace and the land
of the Bishop of Lincoln: this road was not one of the king’s highways: Godwin was

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 81 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

pursued by the neighbours into the county of Huntingdon and arrested on the land of
the Abbot of Ramsey: Roger, when the encounter took place, was on his way to the
hundred moot: he has left a widow, a paternal uncle and a maternal aunt. As a matter
of fact, the result will probably be that Godwin, unable to satisfy the various claims to
which his deed has given rise, will be hanged or mutilated. This, however, is but a
slovenly, practical solution of the nice problem, and even if he be hanged, there may
be a severe struggle over such poor chattels as he had. The old law consisted very
largely of rules about these matters; but it is falling to pieces under the pressure of
those new elements which feudalism has brought with it. For a while there must be
chaos and “unlaw”; every lord may assume what jurisdictional powers he pleases and
will be able to find in the complicated tangle of rules some plausible excuse for the
assumption. The Normans, hallowed and lay, have thrown themselves with all their
native ardour into the warfare of litigation and chicane over rights which have Old
English names; “nullus clericus nisi causidicus.”76

Only to one quarter can we look hopefully. Above all local Custom of the king’s
customs rose the custom of the king’s court, “the tremendous court.
empire of kingly majesty.”77 Of the law that this court
administered we know little, only we may guess that in a certain sense it was equity
rather than strict law. On the one hand, the royal tribunal cannot have held itself
straitly bound by the Old English law; the men who sat in it were Frenchmen, few of
whom could understand a word of English. On the other hand, it must often have
happened that the traditional Norman customs would not meet the facts, for a Norman
count and a Norman bishop would be quarrelling over the titles of their English
antecessores, and producing English land-books. Besides, the king did not mean that
England should be another Normandy; he meant to have at least all the rights that his
cousin and predecessor had enjoyed. The jurisprudence of his court, if we may use so
grand a phrase, was of necessity a flexible, occasional jurisprudence, dealing with an
unprecedented state of affairs, meeting new facts by new expedients, wavering as
wavered the balance of power between him and his barons, capable of receiving
impressions from without, influenced by the growth of canon law, influenced perhaps
by Lombard learning, modern in the midst of antique surroundings. In retrospect it
would appear to a statesman of Henry II.’s day as something so unlike the laga
Eadwardi, that it must be pronounced distinctively un-English and therefore
distinctively Norman, and Norman in a sense it was.78 It was not a jurisprudence that
had been transplanted from Normandy; but it had been developed by a court
composed of Frenchmen to meet cases in which Frenchmen were concerned; the
language in which men spoke it was French; and in the end, so far as it dealt with
merely private rights, it would closely resemble a French coutume.

The future was to make the jurisprudence of the king’s court by Royal justice.
far the most important element in the law of England, but we can
hardly say that it was this during the reigns of the Norman kings. In the main that
court was a court only for the great men and the great causes. It is true that these
foreign kings did not allow their justiciary powers to be limited by any of those
hedges which might have grown up in an unconquered country and confined the
scope of royal justice to certain particular fields. The list of the “pleas of the crown”
was long, disorderly, elastic;79 the king could send a trusted baron or prelate to

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 82 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

preside in the county courts; he could evoke causes into his own court.80 But
evocatory writs must be paid for and they were not to be had as matters of course. The
local courts, communal and seignorial, were the ordinary tribunals for ordinary
causes; the king’s justice was still extraordinary, and even the pleas of the crown were
for the more part heard by the sheriffs in the shire-moots.81 Then, again, the king’s
court was not in permanent session. Under the two Williams the name curia Regis
seems to be borne only by those great assemblages that collect round the king thrice a
year when he wears his crown. It was in such assemblages that the king’s justice was
done under his own eye, and no doubt he had his way; still it was not for him to make
the judgments of his court.82 Under Henry I. something that is more like a permanent
tribunal, a group of justiciars presided over by a chief justiciar, becomes apparent.
Twice a year this group, taking the name of “the exchequer,” sat round the chequered
table, received the royal revenue, audited the sheriffs’ accounts and did incidental
justice. From time to time some of its members would be sent through the counties to
hear the pleas of the crown, and litigants who were great men began to find it worth
their while to bring their cases before this powerful tribunal. We cannot say that these
justiciars were professionally learned in English law; but the king chose for the work
trusty barons and able clerks, and some of these clerks, besides having long
experience as financiers and administrators, must have had a tincture of the new
canonical jurisprudence.83 But, for all this, when Henry died little had yet been done
towards centreing the whole work of justice in one small body of learned men. And
then a disputed succession to the throne, a quarrel between the king and the officers of
his exchequer, could impair, or for a while destroy, all such concentration as there
was. In the woful days of Stephen, the future of English law looks very uncertain. If
English law survives at all, it may break into a hundred local customs, and if it does
so, the ultimate triumph of Roman law is assured.84

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 83 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER V

Roman And Canon Law
In any case the restoration of order after the anarchy of Stephen’s Contact of English
reign and the accession to the throne of a prince who would treat with Roman and
England as the buttress of a continental empire must have canon law.
induced a critical period in the history of English law. But we
must add that in any case the middle of the twelfth century would have been critical.
Even had Harold held his own, had his sons and grandsons succeeded him as peaceful
and conservative English kings, their rule must have come into contact with the
claims of the cosmopolitan but Roman church, and must have been influenced, if only
in the way of repulsion, by the growth of the civil and canon law. Of all the centuries
the twelfth is the most legal. In no other age, since the classical days of Roman law,
has so large a part of the sum total of intellectual endeavour been devoted to
jurisprudence.

We have told above how Irnerius taught at Bologna.1 Very soon Revival of Roman
a school had formed itself around his successors. The fame of law.
“the four doctors,” Bulgarus, Martinus, Jacobus, Hugo, had gone
out into all lands; the works of Placentinus were copied at Peterborough. From every
corner of western Europe students flocked to Italy. It was as if a new gospel had been
revealed. Before the end of the century complaints were loud that theology was
neglected, that the liberal arts were despised, that Seius and Titius had driven
Aristotle and Plato from the schools, that men would learn law and nothing but law.2
This enthusiasm for the new learning was not soon spent; it was not spent until in the
middle of the thirteenth century Accursius had summed up its results in the Glossa
Ordinaria and Azo of Bologna had taught Bracton what a law-book should be.

The keenest minds of the age had set to work on the classical Cosmopolitan claims
Roman texts and they were inspired by a genuine love of of Roman law.
knowledge. Still they were far from regarding their study as mere
historical research; indeed for a critical examination of ancient history they were but
ill prepared. The Roman law was for them living law. Its claim to live and rule was
intimately connected with the continuity of the empire. A vast part, if not the whole,
of the civilized world owed obedience to the Caesar for the time being. The German
Henries and Fredericks were the successors of Augustus and the Antonines; the laws
of their ancestors had not been repealed and therefore were in force. Even in those
kingdoms in which it was impossible to press the claims of a German prince, the king
might theoretically be regarded as holding the place of an emperor. Our own Henry I.
was he not Gloriosus Caesar Henricus?3 But, such theories apart, the Roman law
demanded reverence, if not obedience, as the due of its own intrinsic merits. It was
divinely reasonable.

Growth of canon law.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 84 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Another body of jurisprudence was coming into being. From humble beginnings the
canon law had grown into a mighty system. Already it asserted its right to stand
beside or above the civil law. The civil law might be the law of earth, ius soli; here
was the law of heaven, ius poli. The time had now come when the Hildebrandine
papacy could insist that, subject to small variations, the universal church had a
common law. Many men had been endeavouring to state that law, but the fame of
earlier labourers was eclipsed by that of Gratian.4 A monk of Bologna, that city which
was the centre of the new secular jurisprudence, he published between the years 1139
and 1142 (the work used to be ascribed to a somewhat later date) a book which he
called Concordia discordantium canonum, but which was soon to become for all
mankind simply the DecretumGratiani, or yet more simply the Decretum.5 It is a
great law-book. The spirit which animated its author was not that of a theologian, not
that of an ecclesiastical ruler, but that of a lawyer. One large section of his work is
taken up with the discussion of hypothetical cases (causae); he states the various
questions of law (quaestiones) that are involved in these cases; he endeavours to
answer the questions by sorting and weighing the various “authorities” (to use our
English word) which bear upon them. These authorities consist of canons new and
old, decretals new and old, including of course the Isidorian forgeries, principles of
Roman law, passages from the fathers and the Bible. The Decretum soon became an
authoritative text-book and the canonist seldom went behind it. All the same, it never
became “enacted law.” The canonist had for it rather that reverence which English
lawyers have paid to Coke upon Littleton than that utter submission which is due to
every clause of a statute. A sure base had now been found for the new science.
Gratian became the master of a school, a school of lawyers well grounded in Roman
law, many of them doctors utriusque iuris, who brought to bear upon the Decretum
and the subsequent decretals the same methods that they employed upon Code and
Digest. Legists and decretists alike looked to Italy for their teachers; but the papal
system was even more cosmopolitan than the imperial; the sway of the Roman church
was wider than that of the Roman empire. Gratian, Rufinus, Johannes Faventinus,
Pillius, Hostiensis—these names we read in English books, to say nothing of those
great canonists who attain to the papal throne, of Alexander III. and Innocent III.,
Gregory IX. and Innocent IV.

Gratian had collected decretals down to the year 1139. But the The Decretals.
time had now come when the popes were beginning to pour out
decretals for the whole of western Christendom in great abundance. Under Alexander
III. and Innocent III. the flow was rapid indeed. From time to time compilations of
these were made (compilationes antiquae) and Englishmen in Italy took part in this
work;6 but they were all set aside by a grand collection published by Gregory IX. in
1234. This was an authoritative statute book; all the decretals of a general import that
had not been received into it were thereby repealed, and every sentence that it
contained was law. It comprised five books. In 1298 Boniface VIII. added to these the
“Sext,” the Liber Sextus, a collection of those decretals issued since the Gregorian
codification, which were to be in force for the future. Another collection of decretals
known as the Clementines (they had proceeded from Clement V.) was added in 1317,
and in 1500 the Corpus Iuris Canonici was completed by yet another collection—this
had no statutory authority—known as the Extravagants; but by this time canon law
had seen its best days. We must yet say a few more words of its vigorous maturity.7

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 85 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

It was a wonderful system. The whole of western Europe was The canonical system.
subject to the jurisdiction of one tribunal of last resort, the
Roman curia. Appeals to it were encouraged by all manner of means, appeals at
almost every stage of almost every proceeding.8 But the pope was far more than the
president of a court of appeal. Very frequently the courts Christian which did justice
in England were courts which were acting under his supervision and carrying out his
written instructions. A very large part, and by far the most permanently important
part, of the ecclesiastical litigation that went on in this country, came before English
prelates who were sitting, not as English prelates, not as “judges ordinary,” but as
mere delegates of the pope commissioned to hear and determine this or that particular
case.9 When once the supreme pontiff has obtained seisin of a cause, that cause
proceeds under his directions. He bids two or three English prelates try it, but he also
tells them by what rules they are to try it, he teaches them, corrects them, reproves
them, expresses in a fatherly way his surprise at their ignorance of law. Very many of
the decretals are mandates issued to these judges delegate, mandates which deal with
particular cases. Others are answers to questions of law addressed to the pope by
English or other prelates. These mandates and these answers were of importance, not
merely to the parties immediately concerned, but to all the faithful, for the canonist
would treat as law in other cases the rules that were thus laid down. His science was
to a great degree a science of “case law,” and yet not of case law as we now
understand it, for the “dicta” rather than the “decisions” of the popes were law; indeed
when the decretals were collected, the particular facts of the cases to which they had
reference, the species facti, were usually omitted as of no value. The pope enjoyed a
power of declaring law to which but wide and vague limits could be set. Each separate
church might have its customs, but there was a ius commune, a common law, of the
universal church. In the view of the canonist, any special rules of the church of
England have hardly a wider scope, hardly a less dependent place, than have the
customs of Kent or the by-laws of London in the eye of the English lawyer.10 During
the time with which we are now dealing, the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, no
English canonist attempts to write down the law of the English church, for the English
church has very little law save the law of the church Catholic and Roman. When in
the next century John de Athona wrote a commentary on the constitutions made by
certain papal legates in England, he treated them as part and parcel of a system which
was only English because it was universal, and brought to bear upon them the
expositions of the great foreign doctors, Hostiensis, Durandus and the rest. On the
other hand, a large portion of this universal system was in one sense specifically
English. England seems to have supplied the Roman curia with an amount of
litigation far larger than that which the mere size or wealth of our country would have
led us to expect. Open the Gregorian collection where we will, we see the pope
declaring law for English cases. The title De filiis presbyterorum ordinandis vel non
has eighteen chapters; nine of these are addressed to English prelates. The title De
iure patronatus has thirty-one chapters and at least fifteen of them are in this sense
English. But if an English advocate made his way to Rome, he was like to be told by
the pope that his doctrine was the product of English beer, and might carry home with
him a rescript which would give the English bishops a sound lesson in the law of
prescription.11

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 86 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

The relation between the two great systems was in the twelfth Relation of canon to
century very close. The canon law had borrowed its form, its Roman law.
language, its spirit, and many a maxim from the civil law. Of
course, however, it had to deal with many institutions which had never come within
the ken of the classical Roman lawyers, or had been treated by them in a manner
which the church could not approve. Thus, for example, the law of marriage and
divorce, a topic which the church had made her own, had to be rewritten. Some
elements which we may call Germanic had made their way into the ecclesiastical
system; in penal causes the proof by compurgation was adopted, and, wherever the
testamentary executor may come from, he does not come from the Roman law. Still
the canonist’s debt to the civilian was heavy; he had borrowed, for instance, the
greater part of his law of procedure, and he was ever ready to eke out Gratian by an
appeal to Justinian. In Richard I.’s day the monks of Canterbury went to law with the
archbishop; a statement of their case has come down to us; probably it was drawn up
by some Italian; it contains eighty citations of the Decretum, forty of the Digest, thirty
of the Code. The works of the classical Roman jurists were ransacked to prove that
the archbishop’s projected college of canons would be an injury to his cathedral
monastery.12 In the thirteenth century the canon law began to think that she could
shift for herself and to give herself airs of superiority. The bishops of Rome began to
discourage a system which had only too much to say about the grandeur of emperors
and hardly a word of popes. If they could have had their way, the civil law would
have been but the modest handmaid of the canon law.13 But in the days of our King
Stephen the imperial mother and her papal daughter were fairly good friends. It was
hand in hand that they entered England.

The history of law in England, and even the history of English Roman and canon law
law, could not but be influenced by them. Their action, however, in England.
hardly becomes visible until the middle of the twelfth century is
at hand. If the compiler of the Leges Henrici adopts a sentence which can be
ultimately traced to the Theodosian Code through epitomes and interpretations, if the
compiler of the Leis Williame seems to have heard a few Roman maxims, all this
belongs to the pre-scientific era.14 If William of Malmesbury, when copying a history
of the Roman emperors, introduces into his work a version of the Breviary of Alaric,
he is playing the part of the historian, not of the jurist.15 It is remarkable enough that
within a century after Lanfranc’s death, within much less than a century after the
death of Irnerius, a well-informed Norman abbot ascribed to them jointly the credit of
discovering Justinian’s books at Bologna.16 The story is untrue, for Lanfranc had left
Italy long before Irnerius began to teach; still his name would never have been
coupled with that of Irnerius had he known no Roman law. Lanfranc’s pupil Ivo of
Chartres, the great canonist, knew much Roman law17 and becomes of importance in
English history; it was his legal mind that schemed the concordat between Henry I.
and Anselm.18 More to the point is it that from Burchard of Worms or some other
canonist the author of our Leges Henrici had borrowed many a passage while as yet
the Decretum Gratiani was unwritten. Yet more to the point, that already in the reign
of Rufus, William of St. Calais, Bishop of Durham, when accused of treason in the
king’s court, shows that he has the Pseudo-Isidorian doctrines at his fingers’ ends,
demands a canonical tribunal, formally pleads an exceptio spolii, appeals to Rome,
and even—for so it would seem—brings a book of canon law into court.19 When

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 87 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Stephen made his ill-advised attack on Roger of Salisbury and the other bishops, once
more the exceptio spolii was pleaded, again the demand for a canonical tribunal was
urged, and the king himself appealed to the pope.20 The time when Gratian was at
work on the Decretum, when the four doctors were flourishing at Bologna, was a time
at which the English king had come into violent collision with the prelates of the
church, and those prelates were but ill agreed among themselves.

At this time it was that Archbishop Theobald, at the instance Vacarius.
perhaps of his clerk Thomas,—Thomas who was himself to be
chancellor, archbishop and martyr,—Thomas who had studied law at Bologna and
had sat, it may be, at the feet of Gratian21 —imported from Italy one Vacarius.22 The
little that we know of his early life seems to point to Mantua as his home and a short
tract on Lombard law has been ascribed to him. It is not unlikely that Theobald
availed himself of the help of this trained legist in his struggle with Stephen’s brother,
Henry Bishop of Winchester, who, to the prejudice of the rights of Canterbury, had
obtained the office of papal legate. That Vacarius taught Roman law in England there
can be no doubt; a body of students looked up to him as their magister and reverently
received his glosses.23 That he taught in the archbishop’s household, which was full
of men who were to become illustrious in church and state, is highly probable. That
he also taught at Oxford, where a school was just beginning to form itself, is not so
plain, but is asserted by one who ought not to have made a mistake about such a
matter.24 That Stephen endeavoured to silence him and to extirpate the books of civil
and canon law we are told upon good authority.25 We are told also, and may well
believe, that the royal edict was ineffectual. Further, we know that Vacarius wrote a
book and have some reason for ascribing this to the year 1149; he wrote it for the use
of poor students who could not afford to purchase the Roman texts. That book still
exists. It might be described as a condensed version of Justinian’s Code illustrated by
large extracts from the Digest.26 It is a thoroughly academic book, as purely
academic as would be any lectures on Roman law delivered now-a-days in an English
university. In what of it has been printed we can see no practical hints, no allusions to
English affairs.27 Besides this, we have from Vacarius a christological pamphlet on
the assumption of the manhood, and a little tract on the law of marriage in which he
appears as an acute critic of the mischievous doctrine which the canonists and divines
were evolving.28 Unless he had a namesake, he spent the rest of a long life in
England, held some preferment in the northern province, was attached to Becket’s
rival, Archbishop Roger of York, and acted as Roger’s compurgator when a charge of
complicity in the murder of St. Thomas was to be disproved.29 We do not know that
he took any part in the controversy between Henry and Becket; if he did, we must
look for him rather among the king’s than among the archbishop’s legal advisers.
Perhaps he lived until 1198 or 1200;30 if so, he must have been a very young man
when Theobald fetched him from Italy.31

From Stephen’s reign onwards, the proofs that Roman and canon Legists and canonists
law are being studied in England become more frequent. The in England.
letters of Archbishop Theobald’s secretary, John of Salisbury,
the foremost scholar of the age, are full of allusions to both laws; many of these occur
in relation to English ecclesiastical law-suits of which John is forwarding reports to
the pope. In his Polycraticus he has given a sketch of civil procedure which drew high

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 88 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

praise from Savigny.32 The epistles ascribed to Peter of Blois, archdeacon of Bath
and of London, are stuffed with juristic conceits. Giraldus Cambrensis is by way of
lamenting that literature is being obliterated by law, while students of jurisprudence
neglect its elements.33 Maxims out of the Institutes or the Digest become part of the
stock in trade of the polite letter writer, the moralist, and the historian. Manuscripts
are being copied. Abbot Benedict of Peterborough has in his monastery the whole
Corpus Iuris Civilis in two volumes, besides various parts of it, the Summa of
Placentinus and the Summa—this, it is said, may be the work of a Norman or an
Englishman—that is known as Olim; he has also the Decretum, a collection of
Decretals and the canonical text-books of Rufinus and Johannes Faventinus.34
Thomas of Marlborough, who became monk, prior, Abbot at Evesham, had taught law
at Oxford and, for so it would seem, at Exeter, and he brought with him to his
monastery a collection of books utriusque iuris.35 It is plain that a flourishing school
of Roman and canon law had grown up at Oxford.36

But the Italians had been first in the field and easily maintained Scientific work in
their preeminence. During the rest of the middle ages hardly a England.
man acquires the highest fame as legist or decretist who is not
Italian, if not by birth, at least by education. The second place must be conceded to
the French universities; in particular to the school of Orleans. There are some signs of
original work in England. The scholars of Vacarius glossed his glosses. Some
manuals of procedure have been preserved which good critics have ascribed to the
England or the Normandy of the twelfth century.37 Of these the most interesting to us
is one which has been attributed to no less a man than William Longchamp. A clerk
of Norman race, he became for some years, as all know, King Richard’s viceroy and
the true ruler of England. Even after his fall he was still the king’s chancellor.38
Another lawyer who for a while controls the destiny of our land is Cardinal Guala
Bicchieri,39 but it were needless to say that he was no Englishman. Probably that one
of our countrymen who gains most fame in the cosmopolitan study is Ricardus
Anglicus.40 He has been somewhat hastily identified with Richard le Poore, who
became Dean of Salisbury, Bishop of Chichester, of Salisbury, of Durham.41 In the
next century the most prominent name is that of William of Drogheda, who taught at
Oxford and wrote a Summa Aurea.42 But the Roman Catholicism—we need no better
term—of the canon law made against the development of national schools. All the
great cases, the causes célèbres, went to Rome, and the English litigant, if prudent and
wealthy, secured the services of the best Italian advocates. In their dispute with the
archbishop, the monks of Canterbury retain the illustrious Pillius and the illustrious
Ugolino, who will be Gregory IX.43 Thomas of Marlborough, prior of Evesham,
despite his having taught law at Oxford, attended the lectures of Azo, “master of all
the masters of law,” before he trusted himself to plead the cause of his abbey at the
threshold of the Apostles.44 It was not from any English civilian but from Azo
himself that our Bracton borrowed. Henry III. kept in his pay Henry of Susa, who was
going to be cardinal Bishop of Ostia, and who, for all men who read the law of the
church, will be simply Hostiensis.45 Edward I. had Franciscus Accursii at his side.46
The great “prizes of the profession” were beyond the reach of the Englishman; “the
leaders of the profession” whose books, he had to read, whose opinions he had to
quote, were Italians.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 89 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

As to Roman law, it led to nothing. For a while in their The civilian in
enthusiasm men might be content to study for its own sake this England finds little to
record of human wisdom, of almost superhuman wisdom, so it do.
must have seemed to them. But it soon became plain that in
England there would be no court administering Roman law, unless it were the court of
a learned university. And then, as already said, the church, or at any rate a powerful
party in the English church, began to look askance at the civilian. Theology was to be
protected against law. Beneficed clerks were no longer to study the secular
jurisprudence. In the year 1219 Honorius III. forbad that the civil law should be taught
in the university of Paris,47 and when we read how in 1234 our Henry III. ordained
that the leges should no longer be taught in the London schools—probably this refers
to the schools of St. Paul’s Cathedral—it is by no means certain that we ought not to
connect this with a movement in favour of ecclesiastical reform, rather than with that
“Nolumus leges Angliae mutare” which the barons were about to utter.48 Matthew
Paris has handed down to us what purports to be the text of a papal bull which goes
much further.49 Innocent IV., perhaps the greatest lawyer among all the popes, is
supposed to decree in the year 1254 that in France, England, Scotland, Wales and
Hungary—in short almost everywhere save in Italy and Germany—the imperial laws
shall not be read, unless the kings of those countries will have it otherwise. In those
countries, he is made to say, the causes of the laity are decided, not by the imperial
laws, but by customs, while for ecclesiastical causes the constitutions of the holy
fathers will suffice. Strong reasons have been shown for the condemnation of this
would-be bull as a forgery, or as the manifesto of English divines who will make
believe that the pope has done what he ought to do.50 Genuine or spurious, it is an
instructive document, for it tells us that in England the civilian is between two fires.
The best churchmen do not love him; ecclesiastical reformers are coming to the aid of
national conservatism. This did not destroy the study of the Roman books. Oxford and
Cambridge gave degrees as well in the civil as in the canon law.51 The one
considerable work produced by an English canonist of the fourteenth century, the
gloss of John de Athona on the legatine constitutions, is full of references to Code and
Digest. But the civilian, if he was not a canonist, had no wide field open to him in
England. He might become a diplomatist; there was always a call in the royal
chancery for a few men who would be ready to draw up treaties and state-papers
touching international affairs, and to meet foreign lawyers on their own ground. Nor
must it be forgotten that so long as the English king was endeavouring to govern
Guienne from Westminster, he was obliged to keep in his employ men who could
write fluently about such romanesque institutions as emphyteusis, “active and passive
testamenti factio” and the like,52 for Guienne was in theory a country of the written
law. But except as a diplomatist, a chancery clerk, or a teacher, the civilian would find
little to do in England. The court of admiralty, the courts of the universities, even
when they had come into existence, could not provide employment for many
practitioners.

The history of Roman and canon law as studied and administered in England deserves
to be written at length. We have said of it but enough to serve our immediate purpose;
for we have now to note in the first place that a large tract in the field of law was
made over to the ecclesiastical courts and their canonical jurisprudence, and secondly

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 90 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

that this canonical jurisprudence affected the development of our English temporal
law.

The demarcation of the true province of ecclesiastical law was no The province of
easy task; it was not to be accomplished in England, in France, in ecclesiastical law.
Germany, without prolonged struggles.53 The Conqueror, when
he ordained that “the episcopal laws” were not to be administered as of old in the
hundred courts, left many questions open. During the first half of the twelfth century
the claims of the church were growing, and the duty of asserting them passed into the
hands of men who were not mere theologians but expert lawyers. Then, as all know,
came the quarrel between Henry and Becket. In the Constitutions of Clarendon (1164)
the king offered to the prelates a written treaty, a treaty which, so he said, embodied
the “customs” of his ancestors, more especially of his grandfather. Becket, after some
hesitation, rejected the constitutions. The dispute waxed hot; certain of the customs
were condemned by the pope. The murder followed, and then Henry was compelled
to renounce, though in carefully guarded terms, all his innovations.54 But his own
assertion all along had been that he was no innovator; and though the honours and
dishonours of the famous contest may be divided, the king was left in possession of
the greater part of the field of battle. At two points he had been beaten:—the clerk
suspected of felony could not be sentenced by, though he might be accused before, a
lay court; appeals to Rome could not be prohibited, though in practice the king could,
when he chose, do much to impede them. Elsewhere Henry had maintained his
ground, and from his time onwards the lay courts, rather than the spiritual, are the
aggressors and the victors in almost every contest. About many particulars we shall
have to speak in other parts of our work; here we may take a brief survey of the
province, the large province, which the courts Christian retain as their own.

The church claims cognizance of a cause for one of two reasons:—either because the
matter in dispute is of an ecclesiastical or spiritual kind, or because the persons
concerned in it, or some of them, are specially subject to the ecclesiastical
jurisdiction.55

I. (a) In the first place, she claims an exclusive cognizance of all Matters of
affairs that can fairly be called matters of ecclesiastical economy, ecclesiastical
the whole law of ecclesiastical status, the ordination and economy.
degradation of clerks, the consecration of bishops, all purely
spiritual functions such as the celebration of divine service, also the regulation of
ecclesiastical corporations and the internal administration of their revenues. In this
region the one limit set to her claims is the principle asserted by the state that the
rights of the patrons (advocati) of churches are temporal rights, that the advowson
(advocatio ecclesiae) is temporal property.56 To start with, the majority of churches
had been owned by the landowners who built them.57 The spiritual power had
succeeded in enforcing the rule that the “institution” of the clerk lies with the bishop;
the choice of the clerk still lay with the landowner. Henry II. maintained, Becket
controverted, Alexander condemned this principle; but, despite papal condemnation, it
seems to have been steadily upheld by the king’s court, which prohibited the courts
Christian from interfering with the right of patronage;58 and very soon we may find
two prelates in litigation about an advowson before the royal justices.59 In this

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 91 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

instance the clergy seem to have given way somewhat easily;60 both parties were at
one in treating the advowson as a profitable, vendible right. Henry’s victory at this
point was of the utmost importance in after ages. It distinguishes England from other
countries, and provides a base for anti-papal statutes.61 As regards other matters
falling under the present head there was little debate; but it behoves us to notice that
our temporal lawyers were thus excluded from some fruitful fields of jurisprudence.
The growth of our law of corporations is slow, because our courts have nothing to do
with the internal affairs of convents and chapters—the only institutions, that is, which
seem to require treatment as fictitious persons; and we might have come by a law of
trusts sooner than we did, if the justices had been bound to deal with the
administration of revenues given to prelates or convents as a provision for particular
purposes, such as the relief of the poor or the maintenance of fabrics.62

(b) The ecclesiastical tribunals would much like to claim the Church property.
decision of all causes which in any way concern those lands that
have been given to a church, at all events if given by way of “alms.” Henry himself
was willing to make what may seem to us a large concession at this point. If both
parties agreed that the land had been given in alms, litigation about it was to proceed
in the ecclesiastical forum; if they did not agree, then the preliminary question, which
would decide where the case should be tried, was to be settled by the verdict of a jury.
Here he was successful and much more than successful. The courts of his successors
insisted on their exclusive right to adjudge all questions relating to the possession or
ownership of land, albeit given in alms; the spiritual judges could in this province do
no more than excommunicate for sacrilege one who invaded soil that had been
devoted to God in the strictest sense by being consecrated.63

(c) The courts Christian claimed the exaction of spiritual dues, Ecclesiastical dues.
tithes, mortuaries, oblations, pensions. The justice of the claim
was not contested, but it was limited by the rule that a question about the title to the
advowson is for the lay court. From century to century there was a border warfare
over tithes between the two sets of lawyers, and from time to time some curious
compromises were framed.64

(d) More important is it for us to notice that the church claims Matrimonial causes.
marriage, divorce, and consequently legitimacy, as themes of
ecclesiastical jurisdiction. This claim was not disputed by Henry II. or his successors.
However, the church in the twelfth century became definitely committed to the
doctrine that children who were born out of wedlock are legitimated by the marriage
of their parents.65 As regards the inheritance of land, a matter which lay outside the
spiritual sphere, the king’s courts would not accept this rule.66 The clergy
endeavoured to persuade the lay power to bring its law into harmony with the law of
the church, and then in the year 1236, as all know, the barons replied with one voice
that they would not change the law of England.67 Thenceforward the king’s justices
assumed the right to send to a jury the question whether a person was born before or
after the marriage of his parents, and it might well fall out that a man legitimate
enough to be ordained or (it may be) to succeed to the chattels of his father, would be
a bastard incapable of inheriting land either from father or from mother. But except
when this particular question about the retroactive force of marriage arose, it was for

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 92 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

the ecclesiastical court to decide the question of legitimacy, and, if this arose
incidentally in the course of a temporal suit, it was sent for trial to the bishop and
concluded by his certificate.68

(e) Yet more important to us at the present day was another claim Testamentary causes.
of the church, which has had the effect of splitting our English
law of property into two halves. She claimed as her own the testament, that “last will”
of a dead man which was intimately connected with his last confession. She claimed
not merely to pronounce on the validity of wills, but also to interpret them, and also to
regulate the doings of her creature the testamentary executor, whom she succeeded in
placing alongside of the English heir. In the course of the thirteenth century the
executor gradually becomes a prominent figure in the king’s courts; he there sues the
testator’s debtors and is sued by his creditors; but the legatees who claim under the
will must seek their remedies in the courts of the church. In this instance the common
lawyers seem to have suffered the canonists to gradually enlarge a territory which was
to be very valuable in the future. As a general rule, land could not be given by
testament, and our king’s court was concentrating its attention on land and crime.
Meanwhile the church extends her boundaries,69 and at last succeeds in compassing
the whole law of succession to movables ab intestato. The process whereby this was
accomplished is very obscure; we shall speak of it upon another occasion; but here we
may say that a notion prevailed that intestacy, if it be not exactly a sin,70 is often
God’s judgment on sin, for so closely is the last will connected with the last
confession, that to die intestate is to die unconfessed.71 And so “the law of personal
property” falls apart from “the law of real property” and we at this day are suffering
the consequences.

(f) With great difficulty were the courts Christian prevented from Pledge of faith.
appropriating a vast region in the province of contract. They
claimed to enforce—at the very least by spiritual censures—all promises made by
oath, or by “pledge of faith.” The man who pledges his faith, pawns his Christianity,
puts his hopes of salvation in the hand of another.72 Henry II. asserted his jurisdiction
over such cases; Becket claimed at least a concurrent jurisdiction for the church.
Henry was victorious. From his day onwards the royal court was always ready to
prohibit ecclesiastical judges from entertaining a charge of breach of faith, unless
indeed both parties to the contract were clerks, or unless the subject-matter of the
promise was something that lay outside the jurisdiction of the temporal forum.73 All
the same, there can be no doubt that during the whole of the next century the courts
Christian were busy with breaches of faith. Very often a contractor expressly placed
himself under their power and renounced all right to a prohibition. Such a
renunciation was not fully effectual, for the right to issue the prohibition was the right
of the king, not of the contractor; still, as Bracton explains, a man commits an
enormous sin by seeking a prohibition when he has promised not to seek one and may
very properly be sent to prison.74 In practice ecclesiastical judges were quite willing
to run the risk of being prohibited; indeed the law of the church compelled them to
take this hazard. A certain jurisdiction over marriage settlements of money or
movable goods, the church had as part of its jurisdiction over marriage.75

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 93 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

(g) There remains the indefinitely wide claim to correct the Correction of sinners.
sinner for his soul’s health, to set him some corporeal penance.
The temporal courts put a limit to this claim by asserting that, if the sin be also an
offence which they can punish, the spiritual judges are not to meddle with it. There
are some few exceptions; the bodies of the clergy are doubly protected; you may be
put to penance for laying violent hands upon a clerk besides being imprisoned for the
breach of the peace and having to pay damages for the trespass.76 But, even though
this rule be maintained, much may be done for the correction of sinners. The whole
province of sexual morality is annexed by the church; she punishes fornication,
adultery, incest; and these offences are not punished by the king’s court, though the
old local courts are still exacting legerwites and childwites, fines for fornication. So
also the province of defamation is made over to the spiritual jurisdiction, for, though
the local courts entertain actions for slander and libel, the king’s court, for some
reason or another, has no punishment for the defamer, no relief for the defamed.77
Usury is treated as a mere sin while the usurer is living; but if he dies in his sin, the
king seizes his goods.78 Simony naturally belongs to the church courts; perjury, not
always well distinguished from the breach of a promissory oath, would come before
them upon many occasions, though with perjured jurors the royal court could deal. Of
heresy we need as yet say nothing, for England had hardly been troubled by heretics.
No doubt the church courts were quite prepared to deal with heresy should it raise its
head, and had they called upon the state to burn or otherwise punish the heretic, it is
not likely that they would have called in vain.79

II. (a) But the church had opened a second parallel. She claimed Jurisdiction over
cognizance of all personal causes, criminal or civil, in which a clerks.
clerk was the accused or the defendant. The story of “the benefit
of clergy” we shall tell elsewhere. On the whole, save in one particular, the state had
its way. The clerk accused of felony was to be tried in the ecclesiastical court and was
to suffer no other punishment than that which the ecclesiastical court could inflict; it
could inflict lifelong imprisonment. But whatever may have been the case in the
twelfth century, the clerk of the thirteenth can be tried and punished for all his minor
offences as though he were a layman. Then again, in Bracton’s day the clerk has no
privilege when he is defendant in a civil action, though in the past clerks have been
allowed to sue each other for debts and the like in court Christian.80 It should be well
understood that “the benefit of clergy” as allowed by English law was but a small part
of that general immunity from lay justice which was claimed for the ordained by
canonists in England as well as elsewhere.81

(b) On the continent of Europe the church often claimed as her Miserabiles personae.
own the suits of the miserabiles personae, as they were called, of
widows and orphans.82 Of any such claim we hear little or nothing in England,
though some tradition of it may affect the later history of the Court of Chancery. In
England it is the king who sets feudal rules aside in order that summary justice may
be done to the widow.83

Large then is the province of ecclesiastical law; but it might have The sphere of canon
been much larger. Despite the many advantages that Henry II. law.
gave to his antagonists by his rages and his furies, he handed

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 94 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

down to his successors a larger field of purely temporal justice than was to be found
elsewhere.84 Even in Normandy Richard had to consign to the ecclesiastical forum all
questions about broken oath or broken faith.85 But we are here concerned with the
fact that from the middle of the twelfth century onwards a very large mass of
litigation, of litigation too which in no very strict sense can be called ecclesiastical,
was handed over to tribunals which administered the canon law, tribunals which were
often constituted by a papal rescript, and from which there lay an appeal to the Roman
curia.

The canon law begins to affect our temporal law sometimes by Influence of canon
way of repulsion, sometimes by way of attraction. It is in upon English law.
opposition to “the canons and Roman laws”86 that (if we may so
speak) our English law becomes conscious of its own existence. In the Constitutions
of Clarendon we have our first authoritative redaction of hitherto unwritten customs.
If our consuetudines are to prevail against the leges and canones, they must be
accurately formulated and set in writing. The “Nolumus leges Angliae mutare” of
1236 is no announcement of a purely abstract conservatism; our English rule is to be
maintained in opposition to the canons. Repulsion begets emulation. Glanvill will
have it that the English laws, at least those made by the king with the counsel of his
barons, are leges, just as much leges as any that are studied at Bologna.87 But this is
not all. In later days, in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, the canon law can be
administered in England without influencing our common law. The king’s justices,
the practitioners in the king’s court, are in all probability profoundly ignorant of the
Digest and the Decretals. The learned doctors who practise before the episcopal
tribunals are not so ignorant of the temporal law, for it sets limits to their sphere of
action; still they would not profess themselves masters of it. But in the twelfth, and
even in the thirteenth, century this was not so. Henry’s greatest, his most lasting
triumph in the legal field was this, that he made the prelates of the church his
justices.88 Nothing could be less true than that he quarrelled with the whole mass of
bishops and clergy. No doubt his bestowal of the great places of the church upon men
who had earned, or were to earn, them by fiscal and justiciary labours, has an evil side
as well as a good. We are here concerned with its good side. English law was
administered by the ablest, the best educated, men in the realm; nor only that, it was
administered by the selfsame men who were “the judges ordinary” of the church’s
courts, men who were bound to be, at least in some measure, learned in the canon law.
At one moment Henry has three bishops for his “archjusticiars.”89 The climax is
reached in Richard’s reign. We can then see the king’s court as it sits day by day.
Often enough it was composed of the Archbishop of Canterbury, two other bishops,
two or three archdeacons, two or three ordained clerks who were going to be bishops
and but two or three laymen.90 The majority of its members might at any time be
called upon to hear ecclesiastical causes and learn the lessons in law that were
addressed to them in papal rescripts. Blackstone’s picture of a nation divided into two
parties, “the bishops and clergy” on the one side contending for their foreign
jurisprudence, “the nobility and the laity” on the other side adhering “with equal
pertinacity to the old common law” is not true.91 It is by “popish clergymen” that our
English common law is converted from a rude mass of customs into an articulate
system, and when the “popish clergymen,” yielding at length to the pope’s
commands, no longer sit as the principal justices of the king’s court, the creative age

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 95 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

of our medieval law is over. Very characteristic of our thirteenth century is it that
when there is talk of legitimation per subsequens matrimonium, the champion of the
common law is a canon of St. Paul’s, William Raleigh, who is going to be a bishop
and somewhat of a martyr, whose name is to be joined with the names of Anselm and
Becket.92 These royal clerks have two sides; they are clerks, but they are royal. It
would not surprise us to discover that Martin Pateshull, justice of the Bench, had
prohibited Martin Pateshull, archdeacon of Norfolk, from meddling with lay fee. But
as archdeacon he was bound to have a decent acquaintance with the canon law, and as
justice he could not forget what he knew as archdeacon. In the second half of
Richard’s reign Hubert Walter, the chief justiciar of England, who sat day by day at
Westminster, was also the Archbishop of Canterbury. A spiteful tongue has told us
that he was no great Latinist, that he could be guilty of “Tres sunt species cautionis,
fideiussoriam, iuratoriam, pignoraticiam” and the like;93 still, though we can suppose
that this busy primate of England was not deeply read in the Decretum, he must have
heard a great deal of Decretum and Code and Digest, even before his prolonged
struggle with the Canterbury monks and their Pillius and their Ugolino.

We attribute to these clerical justices in general no more than a English law
superficial acquaintance with the canon law, an acquaintance administered by
with its main principles and with its methods. But this much we ecclesiastics.
must attribute to them, and it means a great deal. Let us conceive
a man, whose notion of law and the logic of law is that which is displayed in the
Leges Henrici, coming upon a glossed version of the Decretum, or still better upon
some Summa such as that attributed to William of Longchamp. His whole conception
of what a law-book, what a judgment should be, of how men should state law and
argue about law, must undergo a radical change. Viewed therefore from one point, the
effect produced on English law by its contact with the romano-canonical learning
seems immeasurable, or measurable only by the distance that divides Glanvill’s
treatise from the Leges Henrici.

Law, it may be said, is one thing and the expression of law Nature of the
another. But we can hardly, even in thought, divorce the matter canonical influence.
of law from its form. Old traditional rules must lose their old
meaning so soon as men attempt to weave them into a reasonable system. English
law, more especially the English law of civil procedure, was rationalized under the
influence of the canon law. Here and there we may note a plain case in which the one
system has borrowed a whole set of rules from the other. Thus Glanvill tells us that
the “exceptions,” or as we should say the “challenges,” which can be made against
jurors are the same as the exceptions which can be made against witnesses in the
courts Christian.94 Here a whole chapter of law, which in the hands of the canonists
is already becoming a bulky chapter, is borrowed. Such instances, however, are rare,
and this instance is typical and instructive. Our English jurors are already very unlike,
and are becoming more unlike, the canonical testes; and they will not be made any
more like the canonical testes by the application to them of these rules about
exceptions or challenges. Another mass of rules is borrowed. The elementary outlines
of the science of pleading can only be expressed in terms familiar to civilians and
canonists. In any case we must begin by saying that “of exceptions (special pleas)
some are dilatory, while others are peremptory.”95 But in our lay courts a distinctive

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 96 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

form is given to these rules by the mode of trial which prevails there, the trial by jury,
and before long the canonist will hardly be able to understand the English lawyer’s
doctrine of special pleas. The assize of novel disseisin is suggested by the actio spolii;
but it is not the actio spolii. Our English law shows itself strong enough to assimilate
foreign ideas and convert them to its own use. Of any wholesale “reception” of
Roman law there is no danger. From the day at Clarendon onwards it is plain that we
have many consuetudines which must be maintained in the teeth of leges and canones.
The king’s justices, more especially those of them who are clerks, become interested
in the maintenance of a system that is all their own. From time to time the more
learned among them will try to attain a foreign, an Italian, standard of accuracy and
elegance; they will borrow terms and definitions, they will occasionally borrow rules;
but there must be no dictation from without. The imperial laws as such have no rights
in England; the canon law has its proper province and should know its place.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 97 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER VI

The Age Of Glanvill
The reign of Henry II. is of supreme importance in the history of The work of Henry II.
our law, and its importance is due to the action of the central
power, to reforms ordained by the king.1 Still it was rather as an organizer and
governor than as a legislator that Henry was active. He issued no code; we may even
doubt whether he published any one new rule which we should call a rule of
substantive law; but he was for ever busy with new devices for enforcing the law.
Much of what he did, much that was to determine the fate of our law in after ages,
was done in an informal fashion without the pomp of legislation. A few words written
or but spoken to his justices might establish a new mode of procedure. There would
be nothing to be proclaimed to the world at large, for in theory there was no change in
the law; and yet very surely the whole law of England was being changed both in
form and in substance. To this administrative character of his reforms we may ascribe
our lamentable lack of documentary evidence. New laws demanding the obedience of
all his subjects would have been preserved; but a mere instruction given to his justices
might not be embodied in any formal instrument and might well escape the notice of
the most punctual chronicler. And so it came about that in a very short time many of
the results of his activity were regarded, not as the outcome of ordinances, but as part
and parcel of the traditional common law. A few ordinances or “assizes,” those which
seemed most important to his contemporaries, found their way into the texts of the
chroniclers; some have been recovered of late years out of almost unique manuscripts;
but we have every reason to fear that others have been irretrievably lost.

The first great legal monument of the reign is, however, no Constitutions of
ordinance. In 1164, when the dispute with Becket was waxing Clarendon.
hot, Henry held a council at Clarendon and there caused a
“recognition and record” to be made of certain of those customs, liberties and
dignities that his ancestors had enjoyed. He called upon his nobles to declare the law
of the realm as to the matters that were in debate between church and state. Their
declaration of the king’s customs was put into a written, document, known to us as
“the Constitutions of Clarendon,” and to this the bishops were required to append
their seals.2 Henry was not legislating; according to his own theory he was playing a
conservative part and relying upon prescriptive right. He demands a definition of the
old law and then tenders this to the prelates as a concordat. Not long afterwards,
probably in the first months of 1166,
he was again holding an assembly at Clarendon and “by the Assize of Clarendon.
counsel of all his barons” he issued an assize which made great
changes in the administration of the criminal law. Whether this was intended to be a
permanent measure or was merely to serve as an instruction for the justices who were
just being sent out to hold an eyre, we cannot say for certain, but it was sufficiently
new and stringent to require the consent of the magnates. We have, however, some
reason for believing that on this same occasion Henry took another step which was to

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 98 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

be of equal importance with that which is recorded by the words of our extant “Assize
of Clarendon,” that he issued—it may be merely by way of instruction to his
justices—an Assize of Novel Disseisin which in course of time was to mould the
whole history of our civil procedure and to cut deeply into the body of our land law.
The words of this ordinance or instruction have not come down to us; very soon they
were concealed from view by the case-law which had grown up around them.
In 1170 Henry instituted a grand inquiry into the conduct of the Inquest of Sheriffs.
sheriffs whom he had removed from their offices. The instruction
for this “Inquest of Sheriffs” we have: it is an early example of those articles of
inquest by which, as time goes on, the whole machinery of justice is subjected to
examination and amendment.
At Northampton in 1176 a fresh set of instructions was given to Assize of
the itinerant justices; the Assize of Clarendon was to be Northampton.
enforced, but in a yet severer form. A brief clause in this Assize
of Northampton seems to be the origin of the possessory action of “most d’ancestor”
which takes its place beside the “novel disseisin.”3 An Assize of Arms from 1181, an
Assize of the Forest from 1184, an Ordinance regulating the collection of the Saladin
Tithe from 1188, an Assize of Bread of an uncertain date,—these seem to complete
the list of the ordinances that have come down to us.4 For the rest, we may draw some
inferences from the sheriffs’ accounts recorded in the annual pipe rolls, from the
works of Glanvill and Richard FitzNeal and from the stories told by the chroniclers.5

If we try to sum up in a few words those results of Henry’s reign Henry’s innovations.
which are to be the most durable and the most fruitful, we may The jury and the
say that the whole of English law is centralized and unified by original writ.
the institution of a permanent court of professional judges, by the
frequent mission of itinerant judges throughout the land, by the introduction of the
“inquest” or “recognition” and the “original writ” as normal parts of the machinery of
justice. We must speak briefly of each of these matters, and will begin with that which
modern Englishmen will be apt to think the most distinctive—the inquest, the
recognition, trial by jury.6

The essence of the jury—if for a while we use the term “jury” in Essence of the jury.
the widest sense that can be given to it—seems to be this: a body
of neighbours is summoned by some public officer to give upon oath a true answer to
some question. That question may take many different forms: it may or it may not be
one which has arisen in the course of litigation; it may be a question of fact or a
question of law, or again what we should now-a-days call a question of mixed fact
and law. What are the customs of your district? What rights has the king in your
district? Name all the landowners of your district and say how much land each of
them has. Name all the persons in your district whom you suspect of murder, robbery
or rape. Is Roger guilty of having murdered Ralph? Whether of the two has the greater
right to Blackacre, William or Hugh? Did Henry disseise Richard of his free tenement
in Dale?—The jury of trial, the jury of accusation, the jury which is summoned where
there is no litigation merely in order that the king may obtain information, these all
spring from a common root. On the other hand, we have to distinguish the jury from a
body of doomsmen, and also from a body of compurgators or other witnesses adduced
by a litigant to prove his case. A verdict, even though it may cover the whole matter

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 99 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

that is in dispute between the litigants, even though it may declare that William has a
better right to Blackacre than has Hugh, differs essentially from a judgment, a doom
adjudging the land to William. Even though the form of the verdict and its conclusive
force be such that the judgment must follow as mere matter of course, still between
the sworn verdict and the judgment there is a deep gulf.7

If what we were seeking for were a court in which at the bidding Jurors, doomsmen
of its president, of some national or royal officer, ealdorman or and witnesses.
reeve, the inhabitants of a district, or some selected group,
perhaps twelve, of such inhabitants, deemed the dooms, we should have no difficulty
in discovering the origin of trial by jury. Everywhere we might find such courts, for
during the earlier middle ages it is the exception, rather than the rule, that the
judgment should be made by the lord or president of the court or by a group of
professional justices. But what the jurors or recognitors of our twelfth century deliver
is no judgment; they come to “recognize,” to declare, the truth: their duty is, not
iudicia facere, but recognoscere veritatem. No less deep is the gulf which separates
them from witnesses adduced by a litigant. If all that we wanted were witnesses, if all
that we wanted were a fixed number of witnesses, for example, twelve, there would
really be no problem before us. But the witnesses of the old Germanic folk-law differ
in two respects from our jurors or recognitors:—they are summoned by one of the
litigants, and they are summoned to swear to a set formula. The jurors are summoned
by a public officer and take an oath which binds them to tell the truth, whatever the
truth may be. In particular, they differ from oath-helpers or compurgators. The oath-
helper is brought in that he may swear to the truth of his principal’s oath. Normally he
has been chosen by the litigant whose oath he is to support, and even when, as
sometimes happens, the law, attempting to make the old procedure somewhat more
rational, compels a man to choose his oath-helpers from among a group of persons
designated by his adversary or by his judges, still the chosen oath-helper has merely
the choice between swearing to a set formula (“The oath is clean that A. B. hath
sworn”) or refusing to swear at all. On the other hand, the recognitor must swear a
promissory oath; he swears that he will speak the truth whatever the truth may be.

Then on the face of our English history we seem to see that the The jury a royal
jury is intimately connected with royal power. Not only do the institution.
king and his officers make the freest use of it in the form of “an
inquest ex officio ” for the purpose of obtaining any information that they want about
royal rights, local customs or other matters in which the king has an interest, but, as a
part of legal procedure civil and criminal, the jury spreads outwards from the king’s
own court. To the last, trial by jury has no place in the ordinary procedure of our old
communal courts.

The English jury has been so highly prized by Englishmen, so Origin of the jury.
often copied by foreigners, that its origin has been sought in
many different directions. At the present day, however, there can be little doubt as to
the quarter to which we ought to look.
We must look to the Frankish inquisitio, the prerogative rights of The Frankish inquest.
the Frankish kings. Not to the ordinary procedure of the Frankish
courts; that, like the procedure of our own ancient communal courts, knows but such

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 100 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

antique modes of proof as the ordeal and the oath with oath-helpers. But the Frankish
king has in some measure placed himself outside the formalism of the old folk-law;
his court can administer an equity which tempers the rigour of the law and makes
short cuts to the truth.8 In particular, imitating, it may be, the procedure of the Roman
fiscus,9 he assumes to himself the privilege of ascertaining and maintaining his own
rights by means of an inquest. He orders that a group of men, the best and most
trustworthy men of a district, be sworn to declare what lands, what rights, he has or
ought to have in their district. He uses this procedure for many different purposes. He
uses it in his litigation:—he will rely on the verdict of the neighbours instead of on
battle or the ordeal. He uses it in order that he may learn how he is served by his
subordinates:—the neighbours are required to say all that they know about the
misconduct of the royal officers. He uses it in order that he may detect those grave
crimes which threaten his peace:—the neighbours must say whether they suspect any
of murders or robberies. The procedure which he employs in support of his own rights
he can and does grant as a favour to others. In particular, he will concede to a church
that its lands shall, like his demesne lands, be protected by inquest, and that the
bishop, if his title be attacked, may put himself upon the verdict of his neighbours
instead of abiding the risk of a judicial combat. All this we see in the Frankish empire
of the ninth century; we see it in the Neustria which the Normans are invading. Then
the deep darkness settles down. When it lifts we see in the new states that have
formed themselves no central power capable of wielding the old prerogatives. For a
long time to come the sworn inquest of neighbours will not be an utterly unknown
thing in France; it will only be finally overwhelmed by the spread of the romano-
canonical procedure. Even in Germany it will appear from time to time. Yet on the
whole we may say that, but for the conquest of England, it would have perished and
long ago have become a matter for the antiquary.

Such is now the prevailing opinion, and it has triumphed in this The jury in England.
country over the natural disinclination of Englishmen to admit
that this “palladium of our liberties” is in its origin not English but Frankish, not
popular but royal. It is certain that of the inquest of office or of the jury of trial the
Anglo-Saxon dooms give us no hint, certain also that by no slow process of evolution
did the doomsman or the oath-helper become a recognitor. The only doubt that there
can be is as to the jury of accusation, the jury as an organ of fama publica.

This species of the inquest is that which is the most likely to The twelve thegns.
have penetrated beyond the limits of the empire, for within those
limits it was adopted by the church for her own purposes. Just as the king might
collect charges of crime, so the church might collect charges of sin. In the early part
of the tenth century the canonist Regino of Prüm describes the bishop holding his
synod, selecting a number of trustworthy men from among the assembled laity,
administering to them an oath that they will tell the truth and conceal nothing for love
or hate, reward or kinship, asking them to report their suspicions of their neighbours,
and compelling to the ordeal or to compurgation those against whom bad tales are
told.10 It would not be wonderful if this procedure spread from the Frankish church to
the English. In the days of Dunstan and Oswald the English church was borrowing
ideas and institutions from the Frankish. But we have no direct proof that at any time
before the Conquest the English church did use this system of sworn communal

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 101 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

accusation. There is, however, one law which must cause some difficulty. It is a law
of Æthelred the Unready, published, so it would seem, in the year 997 and applicable
only to the Danish district.11 In it we read how a moot is to be held in every
wapentake, and how the twelve eldest thegns are to go out with the reeve and to swear
upon the relic that he puts into their hands that they will accuse no innocent and
conceal no guilty man. Certainly this looks like a jury of accusation; but the context
will make us doubt whether we have here a law of any generality.12 There seem,
however, to be good reasons for believing that some of the Scandinavian nations came
by a route of their own to something that was very like the jury.13 The investigation
of this matter is made the more difficult by the comparatively recent date of the
Scandinavian law-books. No doubt there is here a field for research, but it seems
unlikely that any new discovery will disturb the derivation of our English from the
Frankish inquests. We cannot say a priori that there is only one possible origin for the
jury, we cannot even say that England was unprepared for the introduction of this
institution; but that the Norman duke brought it with him as one of his prerogatives
can hardly be disputed.14

Hardly had England been conquered, before the sworn inquest of The inquest in the
neighbours appeared as part of the system of government and Norman age.
royal justice. The great fiscal record known to us as Domesday
Book was compiled out of the verdicts of juries.15 The king makes use of the same
engine in his own litigation; he can bestow the right to make use of it upon favoured
churches;16 he can direct its employment in any particular case.17 We see too a close
connexion between the jury of trial and the protection of possession, a connexion
which is to become prominent hereafter. In the earliest case in which there is to our
knowledge anything that could be called a trial by jury, the Conqueror directs his
justiciars, Archbishop Lanfranc, the Count of Mortain and the Bishop of Coutances,
to summon to one place the moots of several shires to hear a plea between the Abbot
of Ely and divers other persons. Certain of the English who know what lands were
held by the church of Ely on the day of the Confessor’s death are to declare their
knowledge upon oath. This will be a verdict, not a judgment. The justices are to
restore to the church, not all the lands that she had at the date thus fixed, but only such
of them as no one claims under the Conqueror. A particular question, a question about
possession at a given moment of time, is thus singled out as one that should be
decided by a sworn inquest of neighbours.18 Had the Abbot of St. Augustin’s a ship
free to cross the sea on the day when the king last went abroad? How many pigs free
of pannage had the Abbot of Abingdon in the time of Henry I.? Did this land belong
of old to Bridton or to Bridport?—Such and such like are the questions about which
verdicts are taken. Still throughout the Norman period, trial by jury—the introduction
of an inquest into the procedure of a law-suit—remains an exceptional thing. The
Leges Henrici know nothing of it; the iudices who are there mentioned are not
recognitors but doomsmen. Of the accusing jury on the other hand faint traces are to
be found. We certainly cannot say that it was never used, but we read very little about
it.19

Under Henry II. the exceptional becomes normal. The king Henry’s use of the
concedes to his subjects as a royal boon his own prerogative inquest.
procedure. This is done bit by bit, now for this class of cases and

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 102 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

now for that. It is probable that while not yet king he had done something of the same
kind in Normandy.20

It is by no means unlikely that the class of disputes which was The assize utrum.
the first to be submitted to a jury as a matter of common practice
was one in which the claims of the church came into collision with the claims of the
state. In the twelfth century the church was asserting and establishing the principle
that all litigation about land that had been given by way of alms to God and the saints
should come before her courts. This principle was hardly disputed in Stephen’s day;
but of course in many cases the question would arise—“Is this land alms or is it lay
fee?” To allow the case to go for good and all either to the temporal or to the spiritual
forum, would be to beg this preliminary question. Church and state are at issue, and
neither should be judge in its own cause. The voice of the countryside about this
question—which can be regarded as a question of fact, “Lay fee or alms?”—may be
listened to; it comes, so to speak, from the outside and will be impartial. At any rate,
Henry in the Constitutions of Clarendon claimed as one of the ancient customs of the
realm that such a question should be decided by the oath of an inquest in the presence
of his justiciar.21 In this as in other instances we have some evidence that the king’s
claims were founded on past history. A story comes to us from the abbey of St.
Albans which describes a lawsuit of Stephen’s day in which the question “Lay fee or
alms?” was submitted to a jury charged to tell the truth both by the king and by the
bishop of the diocese.22 Be this as it may, already in 1164 Henry asserted that a
procedure which in after days was known as the assisa utrum was and ought to be a
normal part of the machinery of justice. A “recognition” by twelve lawful men was to
decide whether (utrum) the land in question was alms or lay fee.

Some two years later, perhaps at the council held at Clarendon in The assize of novel
the first months of 1166, Henry took a far more important step. disseisin.
He issued an ordinance and instituted a procedure: ordinance and
procedure alike were known as the assize of novel disseisin (assisa novae
disseisinae). At that council was published the edict known as the Assize of
Clarendon, which deals with criminal matters and which served as instructions for the
justices who were being sent out on a great eyre throughout the land. We fix this date
as that of the assize of novel disseisin, because the next pipe roll, a roll which records
the abundant profits reaped by the itinerant justices in the field of criminal law, gives
us also our first tidings of men being amerced for disseisin “against the king’s assize”;
from that moment onwards we get such tidings year by year.23

Of this ordinance, which was in the long run to prove itself one Import of the novel
of the most important laws ever issued in England, we have not disseisin.
the words. Bracton tells us that wakeful nights were spent over
it,24 and we may well believe him, for the principle that was to be enforced was new
and startling. It was this:—If one person is disseised, that is, dispossessed, of his free
tenement unjustly and without a judgment, he is to have a remedy by royal writ: a jury
is to be summoned; in the presence of the king’s justices it is to answer this simple
question about seisin and disseisin; if it gives the plaintiff a verdict he is to be restored
to his possession. We may state the matter in two other ways: by the one we may
show what is being done for our private, by the other what is being done for our

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 103 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

public law. (1) Possession or seisin, as something quite distinct from ownership or
best right, is to be protected by an unusually rapid remedy. (2) The seisin of a free
tenement, no matter of what lord it be holden, is protected by the king. Hereafter in
connexion with property law we may speak of the private side of this new remedy and
of its relation to the actio spolii of the canon law; here we have but to notice the great
principle of public law that the king has laid down. The ownership of land may be a
matter for the feudal courts: the king himself will protect by royal writ and inquest of
neighbours every seisin of a free tenement. It is a principle which in course of time
can be made good even against kings. The most famous words of Magna Carta will
enshrine the formula of the novel disseisin.25

At some time or another in his reign Henry went further than The grand assize.
this. He decreed that no man need answer for his free tenement
without royal writ.26 He decreed also that in a proprietary action for land, an action
proceeding in the feudal court, the defending party, the “tenant” as he was called,
might have the action removed into the king’s court and the whole question of right
determined by the verdict of neighbours. In this case the inquest bears the name of
“the grand assize.”27 It is a far more solemn affair than the assize of novel disseisin
and it speaks to the question of best right. The term “grand assize” would seem to
point to some great ordinance; but the thought cannot but occur to us that the three
principles which we have here stated may have been announced, and that the
institutions which were to maintain them may have been fashioned, at one and the
same time. In every case we see the royal protection of possession. No one is to be
disseised of his free tenement unjustly and without a judgment; no one is to be
disseised of his free tenement even by a judgment unless he has been summoned to
answer by a royal writ; no one is to be forced to defend his seisin of a free tenement
by battle.28 The ordinance that instituted the grand assize was a one-sided measure, a
protection of possessors. The claimant had to offer battle; the possessor, if he pleased,
might refuse battle and put himself upon the grand assize.

Then to all seeming the council held at Northampton in 1176 The assize of mort
instituted a second possessory assize, the assize of mort d’ancestor.
d’ancestor (assisa de morte antecessoris).29 Apparently we have
the words whereby this was accomplished, though the practice of the courts soon left
those words behind it. The principle of the novel disseisin is that one man, even
though he claims and actually has the ownership of the land, is not to turn another
man out of possession without first obtaining a judgment. The principle of the mort
d’ancestor is that if a man has died in seisin, that is, possession of a tenement, and was
not holding it as a mere life-tenant, his heir is entitled to obtain possession of it as
against every other person, no matter that such person claims and actually has a better
right to the land than the dead man had. Such a right, if it exists, must be asserted in
an action: it is not to be asserted by “self-help,” by a seizure of the vacant tenement.
Another and a heavy blow is thus struck at feudal justice, for the defendant in an
assize of mort d’ancestor is very likely to be the dead tenant’s lord, who will have
seized the lands upon some pretext of making good his seignorial claims. Another use
is found for the inquest of neighbours, for the questions whether the dead man died
seised and whether the claimant is his heir will be decided by verdict.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 104 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Scarcely less important than litigation about land is litigation The assize of darrein
about the advowsons of churches. Henry has here asserted as presentment.
against the church that such litigation belongs to a temporal
forum, and as against the feudatories that it belongs to the king’s own court.30 A
proprietary action for an advowson must be begun in the king’s court by royal writ,
“writ of right of advowson”; the claimant must offer battle; his adversary may choose
between battle and the grand assize. Then at some time or another during his reign
Henry gave a possessory action, the assize of darrein presentment (assisa de ultima
presentatione), which stands to the writ of right of advowson in somewhat the same
relation as that in which the novel disseisin stands to the writ of right for land. If the
church is vacant and two persons are quarrelling about the advowson, it is very
necessary that some provisional, some possessory judgment should be given.
Especially necessary is this after the Lateran Council of 1179, for should the church
remain vacant for a few months the diocesan bishop will fill up the vacancy.31 The
principle of the new assize is, simply stated, this: “He who presented last time, let him
present this time also; but this without prejudice to any question of right.” An inquest
of neighbours is summoned to declare who it was that presented the last parson.32

Thus the sworn inquest begins to make its way into our ordinary Assize and jury.
civil procedure. In a proprietary action for land or for advowson,
the “tenant,” the passive party, may, rejecting battle, “put himself upon the grand
assize of our lord the king,” and an inquest will then declare who has the better right.
In four other cases a plaintiff may begin proceedings by obtaining a royal writ, which
will direct that an inquest shall answer a particular question formulated in the writ.
These four cases are the subject-matter of the four petty assizes, (1) the assize utrum,
(2) the novel disseisin, (3) the mort d’ancestor, (4) the darrein presentment. It is
probable that for a short while a few other cases were met in a similar fashion; but in a
little time we have these four and only these four petty assizes. Only in these four
instances does the writ which is the first step in the procedure, “the original writ,”
direct the empanelling of an inquest. Trial by jury, in the narrowest sense of that term,
trial by jury as distinct from trial by an assize, slowly creeps in by another route. The
principle from which it starts is simply this, that if in any action the litigants by their
pleadings come to an issue of fact, they may agree to be bound by the verdict of a jury
and will be bound accordingly. In course of time the judges will in effect drive
litigants into such agreements by saying, “You must accept your opponent’s offer of a
jury or you will lose your cause”; but in theory the jury only comes in after both
parties have consented to accept its verdict. An assize, other than a grand assize, is
summoned by the original writ; it is summoned at the same time that the defendant is
summoned and before his story has been heard; a jury is not summoned until the
litigants in their pleadings have agreed to take the testimony of “the country” about
some matter of fact. In course of time the jury, which has its roots in the fertile ground
of consent, will grow at the expense of the assize, which has sprung from the stony
soil of ordinance. Even an assisa when summoned will often be turned into a jury
(vertitur in juratam) by the consent of the parties. But still trial by jury, if we use this
term in a large sense, and neglect some technical details, is introduced by the
ordinances of Henry II. as part of the usual machinery of civil justice. Already before
the end of his reign it fills a large space in Glanvill’s text-book. The old modes of
proof are not abolished; proof by battle we shall have with us until 1819,33 proof by

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 105 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

oath-helpers until 1833;34 but from this moment onwards they are being pushed into
the background.

Closely connected with the introduction of trial by inquest is the The system of
growth of that system of original writs which is soon to become original writs.
the ground-plan of all civil justice. For a long time past the king
at the instance of complainants has issued writs, which either bade their adversaries
appear in the royal court to answer the complaint, or else committed their causes to
the care of the sheriff or of the feudal lord and commanded that right should be done
to them in the county court or the seignorial court. Such writs were wont to specify
with some particularity the subject-matter of the complaint. The sheriff, for example,
was not merely told to entertain a suit which the Abbot of Abingdon was bringing
against the men of Stanton: he was told to do full right to the abbot in the matter of a
sluice which, so the abbot alleged, had been broken by the men of Stanton. As the
king’s interference becomes more frequent and more normal, the work of penning
such writs will naturally fall into the hands of subordinate officials, who will follow
precedents and keep blank forms. A classification of writs will be the outcome; some
will be granted more or less as a matter of course, will be brevia de cursu, writs of
course; those which are directed to a feudal lord will be distinguished from those
which are directed to a sheriff; those which bid the sheriff do justice, from those
which bid him summon the defendant to the king’s own court; those which relate to
the ownership of land from those which relate to debts. But the introduction of the
possessory assizes gives to this system of writs a peculiar definiteness and rigidity.
The new actions have a new procedure appropriate to them and are governed by
carefully worded formulas. Thus the first writ issued in an assize of novel disseisin
commands the sheriff to summon an inquest in order that one precise question may be
answered:—Did B unjustly and without a judgment disseise A of his free tenement in
X since the king’s last journey into Normandy? At countless points an action thus
begun will differ from a proprietary action for land begun by a writ of right; both of
them will differ from an action of debt, and even between the several possessory
assizes many distinctions must be drawn, in particular as to the number of “essoins,”
excuses for non-appearance, that the litigants may proffer. Thus before the end of
Henry’s reign we must already begin to think of royal justice—and this is becoming
by far the most important kind of justice—as consisting of many various commodities
each of which is kept in a different receptacle. Between these the would-be litigant
must make his choice; he must choose an appropriate writ and with it an appropriate
form of action. These wares are exposed for sale; perhaps some of them may already
be had at fixed prices, for others a bargain must be struck. As yet the king is no mere
vendor, he is a manufacturer and can make goods to order. The day has not yet come
when the invention of new writs will be hampered by the claims of a parliament. But
still in Glanvill’s day the officina iustitiae has already a considerable store of ready-
made wares and English law is already taking the form of a commentary upon writs.

The accusing jury also has become part of the ordinary The accusing jury.
mechanism of justice. The first definite tidings that we get of it
are somewhat puzzling. To all seeming Henry insisted, first for Normandy in the year
1159, and then for England in the year 1164, that the ecclesiastical courts ought to
make use of this institution. Laymen ought not to be put to answer in those courts

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 106 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

upon a mere unsworn suggestion of ill fame. Either someone should stand forth and
commit himself to a definite accusation, or else the ill fame should be sworn to by
twelve lawful men of the neighbourhood summoned for that purpose by the sheriff: in
other words, the ecclesiastical judge ought not to proceed ex officio upon private
suggestions.35 Henry seems to be forcing this rule upon reluctant prelates, and at the
same time to be asserting that it is an ancient rule. From this we may perhaps infer
that the synodal jury, described to us by Regino of Prüm, had been known in
Normandy—it may be, in England also—but that of late it had been thrust aside by a
laxer procedure which was less fair to the laity. This part of the story must remain
very obscure.36 However in 1166 the accusing jury becomes prominent. In every
county twelve men of every hundred and four men of every township are to swear that
they will make true answer to the question whether any man is reputed to have been
guilty of murder, robbery, larceny, or harbouring criminals since the king’s
coronation. Those who are thus accused must go to the ordeal. Even if they are
successful there, even, that is to say, though the judgment of God is in their favour,
they must abjure the realm. Ten years later at Northampton a sharper edge was given
to this new weapon; forgery and arson were added to the list of crimes for which
inquisition was to be made; the criminal who failed at the ordeal was to lose a hand
beside that foot of which the earlier ordinance deprived him. The new ordinance was
to endure during the king’s good pleasure. Such inquests were to be taken before the
itinerant justices of the king; they were also to be taken by the sheriffs, and here we
may see the origin of those inquisitions into crime which in later days the sheriff
makes twice a year as he takes his “turn” through the hundreds.37 Every time that the
justices are sent on their rounds the king can at pleasure add to the list of questions
that they are to put to the jurors; in the next century that list, the articles of the eyre
(capitula itineris), will be long and will be constantly growing longer. Closely
connected with the discovery of crimes is the ascertainment of the king’s rights.
Criminal justice is one source of revenue, but there are others, and the inquest may be
used for their detection. From the verdicts of local juries the king collects whatever
information he may require about his demesne lands, his feudal rights, the receipts of
his sheriffs, the misconduct of his officers.

There can be no doubt that one result of these various measures Structure of the king’s
was to increase at a rapidly accelerating rate the amount of court.
judicial business that was transacted in the king’s name. The
functions of his court were changed and a corresponding change in its structure
became necessary. It was no longer to be an extraordinary tribunal, a court for great
men, for great causes, for matters that concerned the king; it was to become an
ordinary tribunal for the whole realm. Many difficulties, however, meet us if we
attempt to define the structural changes.38 In the first place, we are tempted to use
terms which are more precise than those that were current in the twelfth century. In
particular we are wont to speak of the Curia Regis without remembering that the
definite article is not in our documents. Any court held in the king’s name by the
king’s delegates is Curia Regis. Thus the institution of what in course of time will be
a new tribunal, a Court of King’s Bench or a Court of Common Pleas, may be found
in some small rearrangement, some petty technical change, which at the moment
passes unnoticed. In the second place, the form which his court shall take, the mode in
which it shall do justice, these are matters for the king; he is very free to decide them

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 107 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

from day to day as he pleases, and this by a few spoken words. In the third place, we
have direct evidence that Henry tried experiment after experiment.39 He was keenly
interested in the work of justice and learnt from year to year the lessons that
experience taught him. Therefore it is but too possible that we may give undue weight
to this or that passage in a chronicle. However, from the year 1178 we hear that the
king has chosen five men, two clerks and three laymen, who are not to depart from the
king’s court but are to hear all the complaints of the kingdom; questions that they
cannot decide are to be reserved for the king and his wise men.40 We here see the
definite selection of a small number of men who are to do justice habitually. The court
that they are to hold is to be a permanent and a central court; but a reserve of justice is
to remain in the king and his councillors. It is probable that we have here a measure of
great permanent importance. From the following years we begin to get records which
seem to put before us a tribunal which in the main is like that here described. It sits
term after term; usually at Westminster, often at the exchequer. It is constituted by the
king’s most trusted advisers. There is Ranulf Glanvill who in 1180 became chief
justiciar. There are the three famous clerks who have served Henry well during the
fierce strife with Becket, Richard of Ilchester, now Bishop of Winchester, John of
Oxford, now Bishop of Norwich, Geoffrey Ridel, now Bishop of Ely. There is the
treasurer, Richard son of Nigel, who is to be Bishop of London. A little later there is
Hubert Walter, who is rising to greatness. Some laymen there will be; but earls and
powerful barons are conspicuously absent. We cannot fix the number of the justices.
Sometimes ten or twelve will be mentioned. But the court seems to have, as it were, a
fringe; the chief justiciar, the treasurer, two or three bishops, will usually be sitting,
while others come and go; some of them may be away upon circuits; others who are
named may be not justices, but chamberlains or sewers; and the king is still making
experiments, trying now one man and now another.41

However, we may say that before the end of the reign there is a The central court.
permanent central tribunal of persons expert in the administration
of justice—of sworn judges.42 It can be distinguished from the courts held by the
itinerant justices, for, though every such court is curia Regis, this is capitalis curia
Regis.43 It can be distinguished from the exchequer, for, though it often sits at the
exchequer, and though its principal justices will be also the principal barons of the
exchequer,44 it has a seal of its own and may well sit away from Westminster, while
the fiscal business could hardly be transacted elsewhere.45 It can be distinguished
from those great councils of prelates and nobles that the king holds from time to time;
questions too high for it are to be reserved for such councils.46 Probably it is already
getting the name of “the bench” and its justices are “justices residing at the bench.”47
Though it is curia Regis and capitalis curia Regis it is not necessarily held coram ipso
Rege. Apparently the writs that summon litigants before it, bid them appear “before
the king or before his justices,” that is to say, before the king if he happens to be in
England and doing justice, and if not, then before his justices.48 No doubt when the
king is in this country he will sometimes preside in court, but whether the justices will
then follow the king in his progresses, we cannot say for certain; as a matter of fact
during the last eight years of his reign the king’s visits to England were neither
frequent nor long. Westminster seems to be becoming the home of this tribunal; but as
yet all its arrangements are easily altered.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 108 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

The visitation of the counties by itinerant justices has become Itinerant justices.
systematic. From the early years of the reign we hear of pleas
held on circuit by Richard Lucy the chief justiciar, by Henry of Essex the constable,
and by Thomas Becket the chancellor. In 1166 the assize of Clarendon was enforced
by a party of justices headed by Richard Lucy and Earl Geoffrey of Mandeville. In
1168 Richard of Ilchester, Guy the dean of Waltham, William Basset and Reginald
Warenne visited most of the counties. In 1175 the north and east were perambulated
by Ranulf Glanvill and Hugh of Cressi, the south and west by William of Lanvallei
and Thomas Basset, while the king himself seems to have been journeying with other
justices in his suite.49 In 1176 to execute the assize of Northampton eighteen justices
were employed and the country was divided into six circuits; in 1179 twenty-one
justices were employed and the country was divided into four circuits; indeed from
1176 onwards hardly a year went by without there being a visitation of some part of
England. These itinerant justices seem to have been chiefly employed in hearing the
pleas of the crown (for which purpose they were equipped with the power of
obtaining accusations from the local juries) and in entertaining some or all of the new
possessory actions. The court that they held was, as already said, curia Regis; but it
was not capitalis curia Regis, and probably their powers were limited by the words of
a temporary commission. They were not necessarily members of the central court, and
they might be summoned before it to bear record of their doings;50 still it was usual
that each party of justices should include some few members of the permanent
tribunal. Also the counties were frequently visited for fiscal purposes, justices or
barons of the exchequer being sent there to assess aids and tallages, while the chief
justice of the forest often traversed the land and afflicted the people.

No judicial rolls of the reign have come down to us, but during Cases in the king’s
the last years of it such records were being compiled.51 For our court.
knowledge of what went on in the courts we have still to look to
annalists and biographers, and they are apt to give us not the usual but the
extraordinary. We dare not, for example, draw many general inferences about the
constitution and procedure of the king’s court from that famous scene in the castle of
Northampton, in which Henry and Becket were the principal actors. We see, however,
that, even though the king was angry and was striving to crush one who had become
his enemy, he did not venture to pass judgment. To find the judgment at the king’s
request was the function of the assembled prelates and nobles, or, if the prelates
would not aid in the work, then the lay barons would do it. Even the duty of
pronouncing the judgment was delegated; it was committed to the justiciar, the Earl of
Leicester.52

Another life-like, if not impartial, story tells of a great suit Scenes in court.
between the Abbot of Battle and the Bishop of Chichester,
another of a similar suit between the Abbot of St. Albans and the Bishop of Lincoln.
In both cases abbatial privileges were urged against episcopal rights; in both the
bishop practically lost his cause; but in both papal claims were involved, and the king,
who had no mind to break with the pope, succeeded in bringing about what was in
form a compromise; in neither case therefore was a judgment pronounced. In the
one,53 which occurred in 1157, the king sat in the chapter house of the monks at
Colchester. Around him were the two archbishops, three bishops, his chancellor

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 109 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

(Becket), the two chief justiciars (the Earl of Leicester and Richard Lucy) and several
other barons, while the hall was filled by no small multitude of the people.54 At
times, it would seem, the king retired with a few chosen councillors, the chancellor,
the two justiciars, the constables of England and Normandy, a chamberlain and a
clerk, and gave a private audience to one of the parties. Some of the principal
members of the court had openly and warmly taken sides before the discussion began.
The justiciar Lucy was the abbot’s brother, and played the part of an advocate rather
than of a judge; the chancellor also had espoused the abbot’s cause, and they and
other members of the court took counsel with the abbot while the case was
proceeding. The dispute between the Abbot of St. Albans and the Bishop of
Lincoln55 was heard by the king in the chapel of St. Catherine at Westminster in the
year 1163. He was surrounded by the prelates and nobles; no less than thirteen
bishops were present. But again we see the king retiring to consult with a much
smaller body, which consisted of the Earl of Leicester, Richard de Hommet the
constable of Normandy, and that expert clerk, Richard of Ilchester. Along with these
he carefully perused the St. Albans charters, and showed, so the monks said, a
wisdom comparable to that of Solomon,56 for he declared that the unsealed land-
books of the Anglo-Saxon kings were as good as sealed since they were confirmed by
a sealed charter of Henry I. In vain another of the king’s confidential clerks, Geoffrey
Ridel, disturbed this private session, and suggested defects in the abbot’s title; the
king turned him out of the room. The public session was resumed; the king delivered
an opinion unfavourable to the bishop—“privileges prevail against prescription”57
—but advised a compromise; the bishop confessed the immunity of the abbey and got
some land in return for the confession. On another occasion the king sitting at
Clarendon heard a suit between the Abbot of Battle and Gilbert de Balliol.58 The
justiciar, Richard Lucy, was present, but Henry took a prominent part in the
discussion, maintaining the validity of the royal charters produced by the abbot and
swearing by God’s eyes that such charters cost him dear. Still the judgment was given
by the unanimous consent of the whole court. Short of proclaiming his own will to be
the judgment of his court, there was little that he could not or would not do by way of
controlling all the justice that was done in his name. During the early years of his
reign, though he was abroad and though he had left a justiciar in England, he
maintained this control. The Abbot of St. Albans sent all the way to Toulouse for a
writ directing the justiciar to rehear a case, in which, in consequence of the abbot’s
default, certain lands had been adjudged to his adversary. He had to pay the heavy
sum of a hundred pounds for that writ, and certainly it was of no ordinary kind, for he
had scorned to appear in a court held by a mere justiciar.59 But even for ordinary
writs men had to go abroad.

The curious story told by Richard of Anesty has often been re- The Anesty case.
told.60 He was claiming as heir to his uncle certain lands of
which Mabel of Francheville, whom he asserted to be illegitimate, was in
possession.61 He had to begin by sending to Normandy for the king’s writ; soon after
he had to send for another writ directed to the archbishop, since the question of
bastardy would be transmitted to the ecclesiastical court. The litigation in the spiritual
forum was tedious; he was adjourned from place to place, from month to month. The
king summoned the army for the expedition to Toulouse; Richard had to go as far as
Gascony for yet another royal writ bidding the archbishop proceed despite the war.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 110 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

The litigation went on for another year, during which he appeared in the archbishop’s
court on some ten different occasions. Once more he had to visit France, for he
required the king’s licence for an appeal to the pope. He sent his clerks to Rome and
the pope appointed judges delegate. Then his adversary appealed, and again he had to
send representatives to Rome. At length the pope decided in his favour. Thereupon
the case came back to the royal court and week after week he had to follow it. The
king appointed two justices to hear his cause, and at length by the king’s grace and the
judgment of the king’s court he obtained the wished for lands.62 Many comments
might be made upon this story. It will not escape us that in these early years of
Henry’s reign royal justice is still very royal indeed. Though the king has left his
justiciar in England, there is no one here who can issue what we might have supposed
to be ordinary writs. A great change in this most important particular must soon have
taken place. The judicial rolls of Richard I.’s reign are largely occupied by accounts
of law-suits about very small pieces of ground between men of humble station, men
who could not have laboured as Anesty laboured or spent money as he spent it. But
throughout his reign Henry took an active share in the work of justice. Even when he
had appointed judges to hear a cause, they would advise the successful litigant to wait
until a judgment could be given by the king’s own mouth.63 He was at heart a lawyer,
quite competent to criticize minutely the wording of a charter, to frame a new clause
and give his vice-chancellor a lesson in conveyancing;64 quite willing on the other
hand to confess that there were problems that he could not solve.65 No doubt he sold
his aid; he would take gifts with both hands; he expected to be paid for his trouble. He
sold justice, but it was a better article than was to be had elsewhere.

Walter Map has told us how in the Exchequer a poor man The Spanish suit.
obtained an expeditious judgment against a rich antagonist. Of
this as of a marvellous thing he spoke to Ranulf Glanvill. Yes, said the justiciar, we
are quicker about our business than your bishops are. Very true, replied Map, but you
would be as dilatory as they are if the king were as far away from you as the pope is
from the bishops. Glanvill smiled.66 And then Map tells how all who had a good
cause wished that it might come before the king himself, and he recalls a great day in
the history of English law, the day when our king’s court entertained a plea between
the king of Castile and the king of Navarre.67 Certainly this was no mean event; the
kings of the south had acknowledged that there was excellent justice to be had in
England, and if this was so, to Henry II. the praise is due.68 In the middle of the next
century Henry III. had quarrelled with Bracton’s master and patron, Bishop William
Raleigh, and a proposal was made that the dispute should be referred to the legal
faculty at Paris. Raleigh rejected this plan, saying that there were good enough
lawyers in England, and that time was when the greatest princes of the earth
submitted their causes to English lawyers.69 This boast was not baseless: Henry II.
had made it true.

After many experiments he committed the ordinary work of Law and letters.
justice to a court of experts, to a learned court. It was well
leavened by laymen; a layman presided over it; there was no fear of its meekly
accepting the romano-canonical system; but among its most active members were
great clerks, and the high rank that they had won, for they had become bishops, would
have made them influential members, even had they been less able than they were.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 111 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

But they were able. We speak of such men as Richard of Ilchester, John of Oxford
and Geoffrey Ridel, who had lived in the large world, who had been in France,
Germany, Italy, who had seen men and cities, pope and emperor, and had written the
dispatches of a prince whose policy was at work in every corner of Western
Christendom. Very different were they from the English judges of the fourteenth
century. Law and literature grew up together in the court of Henry II. Roger Hoveden
the chronicler70 and Walter Map the satirist71 were among his itinerant justices. Law
becomes the subject of literature in the Dialogue on the Exchequer and the treatise
ascribed to Glanvill.

The Dialogus de Scaccario is an anonymous book, but there can Richard Fitz Neal.
be little doubt that we are right in ascribing it to Richard Fitz
Neal; that is to say, to Richard the son of that Nigel, Bishop of Ely, who was the
nephew of Roger, Bishop of Salisbury, the great minister of Henry I.72 For three
generations, first Roger, then Nigel, then Richard, held high offices in the king’s court
and exchequer. Richard himself became treasurer in or about the year 1158; in 1189
he became Bishop of London, but he retained the treasurership until his death in
1198.73 He was a well-educated man, knew something of the classical Latin
literature, had heard of Aristotle and Plato, could make a hexameter upon occasion,
and was fond of the technical terms of logic;74 he acted as a royal justice; he wrote a
history of his own time, the lost Tricolumnis;75 but above all he was a financier and
knew all that experience and tradition could teach about the history and practice of the
exchequer. He seems to have set to work on his Dialogue in the year 1177, and to
have finished it in 1179 or thereabouts, when already for twenty years he had been the
king’s treasurer.76

The book stands out as an unique book in the history of medieval Dialogue on the
England, perhaps in the history of medieval Europe. A high Exchequer.
officer of state, the trusted counsellor of a powerful king,
undertakes to explain to all whom it may concern the machinery of government. He
will not deal in generalities, he will condescend to minute details. Perhaps the book
was not meant for the general public so much as for the numerous clerks who were
learning their business in the exchequer,77 but still that such a book should be written,
is one of the wonderful things of Henry’s wonderful reign. We may safely say that it
was not published without the king’s licence, and yet it exposes to the light of day
many things which kings and ministers are wont to treat as solemn mysteries of state.
We should know far more of the history of government than ever will be known,
could we have a Dialogue on the Exchequer from every century; but we have one
only, and it comes from the reign of Henry II. Henry was so strong that he had
nothing to conceal; he could stand criticism; his will and pleasure if properly
explained to his subjects would appear as reasonable, and at any rate would not be
resisted.78 And so his treasurer expounded the course of proceedings in the
exchequer, the constitution of this financial board, its writs and its rolls, the various
sources of royal income, the danegeld and the murder fine, the collection of the debts
due to the king, the treatment of his debtors, and, coming to details, he described the
chess-board and the counters, the tallies, the scales and the melting-pot. But for him,
we should have known little of the administrative and fiscal law of his time or of later

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 112 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

times—for the rolls of the exchequer sadly need a commentary—but, as it is, we may
know much.

What the treasurer’s Dialogue did for administrative and fiscal Ranulf Glanvill.
law was done by another book for private and criminal law. That
book has long been attributed to one who held a yet higher office than the treasurer’s,
to Ranulf Glanvill, the chief justiciar.

Ranulf Glanvill79 came of a family which ever since the His life.
Conquest had held lands in Suffolk; it was not among the
wealthiest or most powerful of the Norman houses, but was neither poor nor
insignificant. Probably for some time before 1163, when he was made sheriff of
Yorkshire, he had been in the king’s service; he had lately been one of those “friends,
helpers and pleaders” who had aided Richard of Anesty in his famous law-suit.80 The
shrievalty of Yorkshire was an office that Henry would not have bestowed upon an
untried man; Glanvill held it for seven years. In 1174, being then sheriff of Lancashire
and custodian of the honour of Richmond, he did a signal service to the king and the
kingdom. At a critical moment he surprised the invading Scots near Alnwick, defeated
them and captured their king. From that time forward he was a prominent man, high
in the king’s favour, a man to be employed as general, ambassador, judge and sheriff.
In 1180 he became chief justiciar of England, prime minister, we may say, and
viceroy. Henry seems to have trusted him thoroughly and to have found in him the
ablest and most faithful of servants. Henry’s friends had of necessity been Richard’s
enemies, and when Henry died, Richard, it would seem, hardly knew what to do with
Glanvill. He decided that the old statesman should go with him on the crusade. To
Acre Glanvill went and there in the early autumn of 1190 he died of sickness.

Whether he wrote the book that has long borne his name is a Tractatus de Legibus.
doubtful question. Some words of the chronicler Roger Hoveden,
his contemporary, may mean that he did write it; but they are obscure words.81 On
the other hand, the title which it generally bears in the manuscripts seems to imply
that he did not write it. It is called “A Treatise on the Laws and Customs of England
composed in the time of King Henry the Second while the honourable (illustris vir)
Ranulf Glanvill held the helm of justice”; but we cannot be certain that this title is as
old as the book. Such a title would sufficiently explain the fact that in the thirteenth
century the book was already known as the “Summa quae vocatur Glaunvile.”82
From internal evidence we infer that it was written before Henry’s death, that is
before the 6th of July, 1189, and yet that it was not completed before the month of
November, 1187.83 Certainly we cannot say that Glanvill was incapable of writing it,
for, though a book written by a layman would at this time have been an extremely rare
thing, we know that Glanvill was not illiterate and could pass remarks on the illiteracy
of the English gentry.84 It is a more serious objection that during the stormy last years
of Henry’s reign the faithful and hardworked justiciar can have had but little leisure
for writing books.85 To this we must add that the author of the treatise writes, not as a
statesman, but as a lawyer. He speaks not as one in authority, but as one who is keenly
interested in the problems of private law and civil procedure, and he is not ashamed to
confess that he raises more questions than he can answer. He feels the impulse of
scientific curiosity. No doubt Ranulf Glanvill was, like his master, a many-sided man,

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 113 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

but his life was very busy, and we cannot but think that such a book as this came from
the pen of some clerk who had time for reading and for juristic speculations. We
should not be surprised if it were the work of Glanvill’s kinsman and secretary,
Hubert Walter, who in his turn was to become a chief justiciar.86 The question is
interesting rather than important, for, though we would gladly know the name of the
man who wrote our first classical text-book, it is plain that he was one who was very
familiar with the justice done in the king’s court during the last years of Henry II. We
may go further, we may safely say that it was not written without Glanvill’s
permission or without Henry’s.

The writer knew something of Roman and of canon law. Perhaps Roman and canon law
he had read the Institutes; probably his idea of what a law-book in the Tractatus.
should be had been derived from some one of the many small
manuals of romano-canonical procedure that were becoming current.87 He does not
however adopt the arrangement of the Institutes as the plan of his treatise, and he
cannot have followed any foreign model very far. The first sentences of his book are a
good example of his method:—“Of pleas some are civil, some are criminal. Again, of
criminal pleas some pertain to the crown of our lord the king, others to the sheriffs of
the counties. To the king’s crown belong these: the crime which in the [Roman] laws
is called crimen laesaemaiestatis, —as by slaying the king or by a betrayal of his
person or realm or army,—the concealment of treasure trove, breach of his peace,
homicide, arson, robbery, rape, forgery, and the like.” We have but to contrast these
sentences with the parallel passages, if such we may call them, in the Leges Henrici to
see the work of the new jurisprudence.88 The dilemma “criminal or civil” is offered
to every plea. This is new and has been foreign to English law. In the disorderly list of
the pleas of the crown a great simplification has been effected: homicide, for example,
is now always a plea of the crown and we can finish the list with a “si quae sunt
similia” which leaves scope for rationalism. And yet the materials that are used are
ancient; the terms which describe the crimen laesae maiestatis are rooted in the old
law. And so throughout: we have no reason to suspect that the writer is giving us his
theories instead of the practice of the king’s court. What he has borrowed from the
new jurisprudence consists first of a few general distinctions, such as that between
criminal and civil pleas, that between possessory and proprietary actions—distinctions
which are already becoming well-marked outlines in the procedure of the royal
court,—and secondly a logical method which we may call dilemmatic. We have to
consider—for naturally procedure is placed in the forefront—how an action is carried
on. The defendant is summoned. Either he appears or he does not appear. If he does
not appear, either he sends an excuse or he sends none. If he sends an excuse, it must
be of this kind or of that:—and so forth. And at every turn the writer has to consider
the wording of those royal writs that are becoming the skeleton of English law.
Substantive law comes in incidentally, and we are allowed to see that some very
elementary problems are still unsolved, for example, that simple problem in the law of
primogenitary inheritance which on King Richard’s death will be raised between John
and Arthur.89 Again, there is a great deal of customary law administered in the local
courts of which he professes his ignorance.90 Old rules about wer and wíte and bót
may still be lurking in out-of-the-way places; but he says nothing of them. He says
nothing of the laga Eadwardi and betrays no acquaintance with those books which
have professed to set forth that ancient system. He is concerned only with the “chief”

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 114 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

or “principal” court of our lord the king, and just because that court is making a
common law by way of commentary on royal assizes and royal writs and is not much
hampered by custom or even by precedent,—for as yet we have no citation of
precedents, no “case law”—he is able to write his lucid book. It became popular.
Many manuscripts of it are yet extant. Seventy years after it was written lawyers were
still using it and endeavouring to bring it up to date.91 Someone was at pains to
translate it from Latin into French.92 A version of it known as Regiam Maiestatem
became current in Scotland.93

We may fairly say that under Henry II., England takes for a short English and
while the lead among the states of Europe in the production of continental literature.
law and of a national legal literature. No other prince in Europe
could have enforced those stringent assizes, and he could not have enforced them in
all of his continental dominions. The most in the way of legislation that a king of the
French could do, the most that an emperor could do in Germany, was to make for the
maintenance of the peace rather a treaty with his vassals than a law for his subjects.94
No one had been legislating since the last Carolingians issued the last capitularies;
law had been taking the form of multi-tudinous local customs. The claims of the
renovated, the scientific, Roman law were unbounded; but north of the Alps it was
only beginning to influence the practice of the temporal tribunals. We cannot call
Glanvill’s treatise the earliest text-book of feudal jurisprudence, for parts at least of
the Libri Feudorum, the work of Lombard lawyers, belong to the first half of the
twelfth century, and some parts of the Assizes of Jerusalem, though not in the form in
which they have come down to us, may be older than the English book; but in the
production of such a book England stands well in advance of France and Germany.95
Moreover it is noticeable that in France the provinces which are the first to come by
written statements of their law are those which have been under Henry’s sway.
Foremost stands Normandy, which in or about the year 1200 has already a brief
written custumal, Normandy where exchequer rolls are compiled and preserved, and
where the judgments of the duke’s court are collected by lawyers; and it is not
impossible that the second place must be conceded to Touraine or Anjou.96

It is a well-known doctrine not yet obsolete among us that our The limit of legal
legal memory is limited by the date of Richard I.’s coronation. memory.
The origin of this doctrine is to be found in certain statutes of
Edward I.’s reign.97 Probably this date was then chosen because it was just possible
that a living man should have been told by his father of what that father had seen in
the year 1189, and in a proprietary action for land the demandant’s champion was
allowed to speak of what his father had seen. And yet had Edward and his parliament
been concerned to mark a boundary beyond which the history of English law could
not be profitably traced for practical purposes, they could hardly have hit upon a
better date than the 3rd of September, 1189. The restless Henry had gone to his rest;
his reforms were beginning to take effect; our first classical text-book had just been
written; the strong central court was doing justice term after term on a large scale; it
was beginning to have a written memory which would endure for all ages in the form
of a magnificent series of judicial records. Our extant plea rolls go back to the year
1194, the great series of the “feet of fines” (documents which tell us of the
compromises, the final concords, made in the king’s court) begins in 1195. The

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 115 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

chancery then takes up the tale; all that goes on therein is punctually recorded upon
the charter, patent, close and fine rolls. The historian of law and constitution has no
longer to complain of a dearth of authentic materials; soon he is overwhelmed by
them.98

Richard’s reign, despite the exciting political struggles which Richard’s reign and
filled its first years, was on the whole a time of steady if John’s.
oppressive government, and the same may be said of so much of
John’s reign as had elapsed before he quarrelled with the church. The system created
by Henry II. was so strong that it would do its work though the king was an absentee.
Term after term, at least from 1194 onwards, a strong central The central court.
court sat at Westminster. Until the middle of 1198 its president
was the archbishop Hubert Walter, and shortly after he had resigned the justiciarship
he became chancellor. During the autumn term of 1196, to take one example, we may
see him presiding in court on October 13, 15, 17, 18, 19, 21, 22, 24, 28, 29, 30,
November 4, 6, 12, 13, 14, 18, 20, 21, 22, 23, 27, 28, 29 and December 1, 2, 3, 4 and
6, until we wonder when he found time for the duties of his archiepiscopate.99 As
justiciar he was succeeded by a lay baron, Geoffrey Fitz Peter, who held the office
until his death in 1213; he is one of the first of English laymen who is famed for his
knowledge of law.100 Another layman who comes to the front as a great judge is
Simon Pateshull;101 he may well have been the father of the yet more celebrated
Martin Pateshull whom Bracton revered.102 Already in 1202 the king’s justices are
officially styled “justices learned in the law.”103 But the court was still full of
bishops, archdeacons and other clerks; for example, three successive bishops of
London, Richard Fitz Neal, William of S. Mère Église, and Eustace of Fauconberg,
were men who had done much justice for the king. During the reign of Richard, who
paid but two brief visits to this country, it is of course an unusual thing to find the
king presiding in person, though undoubtedly he did so while he was here; the court
therefore shows no tendency to become two courts. But John liked to do justice, or
what he called justice, and during his reign he was often travelling about the country
with one party of judges in his train, while another party of judges headed by the chief
justiciar was seated on the Bench at Westminster.104 The permanent central tribunal
is beginning to split itself into two tribunals, one of which follows the king, while the
other remains at the Bench, and a series of small changes is completing the severance
between the court and the exchequer. But at present all these arrangements are of a
temporary character.

The counties also were visited from time to time by itinerant Itinerant justices.
justices. Apparently they were sometimes armed with ampler and
sometimes with less ample powers. There was a great eyre in 1194, and the articles
issued to the justices on that occasion are the most important edict of the period.105
There was little that we could call legislation;
an ordinance of 1195 enforced the ancient rules for the pursuit of Legislation.
malefactors;106 in 1197 an assize of measures was issued,107 in
1205 an assize of money.108 Richard’s curious laws for the fleet of crusaders, under
which thieves are tarred and feathered, deserve a passing word,109 and ordinances of
John’s reign began the extension of English law over those parts of Ireland which
were subject to his power.110 But it was rather by decisions of the courts and by writs

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 116 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

penned in the chancery that English law was being constructed. A comparison of a
collection of formulas which Henry III. sent to the Irish chancery in 1227 with
Glanvill’s treatise shows us that the number of writs which were to be had as of
course, had grown within the intervening forty years.111 A new form of action might
be easily created. A few words said by the chancellor to his clerks— “Such writs as
this are for the future to be issued as of course”— would be as effectual as the most
solemn legislation.112 As yet there would be no jealousy between the justices and the
chancellor, nor would they easily be induced to quash his writs.

It is not for us here to relate the events which led to the exaction The Great Charter.
and grant of the Great Charter, to repeat its clauses, or even to
comment on all the general characteristics of that many-sided instrument. In form a
donation, a grant of franchises freely made by the king, in reality a treaty extorted
from him by the confederate estates of the realm, a treaty which threatens him with
the loss of his land if he will not abide by its terms, it is also a long and miscellaneous
code of laws.113 Of course it is not long when compared with a statute of the
eighteenth century; more words than it contains have often been spent upon some
trifling detail. But, regard being had to its date, it is a lengthy document.114 Every
one of its brief sentences is aimed at some different object and is full of future law.
The relative importance of its various clauses historians will measure by various
standards. It is a great thing that the king should be forced to promise that no scutage
shall be levied save by the common counsel of the realm, and that an attempt should
be made to define the national assembly.115 It is a great thing that he should be
forced to say, “No free man shall be taken or imprisoned or disseised or outlawed or
exiled or in any wise destroyed, save by the lawful judgment of his peers or the law of
the land.”116 But events will show that some of these celebrated clauses are
premature, while others are vague and can be eluded. In the end the very definite
promises about smaller matters—promises which are also laws—are perhaps of
greater value. Precise limits are set to royal claims in strict terms of money, time and
space:—the relief for a knight’s fee is not to exceed one hundred shillings; the king
will hold the felon’s land for a year and a day and no longer; all weirs in the Thames,
in the Medway or elsewhere in England, save along the coast of the sea, shall be
destroyed.117 Such provisions can be enforced by courts of law, which can hardly
enforce against the king his covenant that he will not sell or delay or deny justice, and
that he will appoint as judges only those who know the law.118

On the whole, the charter contains little that is absolutely new. It Restorative character
is restorative. John in these last years has been breaking the law; of the charter.
therefore the law must be defined and set in writing. In several
instances we can prove that the rule that is laid down is one that was observed during
the early part of his reign.119 In the main the reforms of Henry II.’s day are accepted
and are made a basis for the treaty. So successful have the possessory assizes been,
that men will not now be content unless four times in every year two royal justices
come into every county for the purpose of enforcing them.120 In a few cases there is
even retrogression. Every class of men is to be conciliated. The vague large promise
that the church of England shall be free is destined to arouse hopes that have been
dormant and cannot be fulfilled.121 The claims of the feudal lord to hold a court
which shall enjoy an exclusive competence in proprietary actions is acknowledged;

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 117 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Henry II. would hardly have been forced into such an acknowledgment, and it does
immeasurable harm to the form of English law, for lawyers and royal justices will
soon be inventing elaborate devices for circumventing a principle which they cannot
openly attack.122 Even in the most famous words of the charter we may detect a
feudal claim which will only cease to be dangerous when in course of time men have
distorted their meaning:—a man is entitled to the judgment of his peers; the king’s
justices are no peers for earls or barons. Foreign merchants may freely come and go;
they may dwell here and buy and sell; yes, but all cities and boroughs are to enjoy all
their franchises and free customs, and often enough in the coming centuries they will
assert that their dearest franchise is that of excluding or oppressing the foreigner.123
And yet, with all its faults, this document becomes and rightly becomes a sacred text,
the nearest approach to an irrepealable “fundamental statute” that England has ever
had. In age after age a confirmation of it will be demanded and granted as a remedy
for those oppressions from which the realm is suffering, and this when some of its
clauses, at least in their original meaning, have become hopelessly antiquated. For in
brief it means this, that the king is and shall be below the law.124

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 118 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER VII

The Age Of Bracton
The reign of Henry III. (1216–72) is in the history of our law an Reign of Henry III.
age of rapid, but steady and permanent growth. At the end of that
period most of the main outlines of our medieval law have been drawn for good and
all; the subsequent centuries will be able to do little more than to fill in the details of a
scheme which is set before them as unalterable. It is difficult for any historian not to
take a side in the political struggle which fills the reign, the simmering discontent, the
loud debate and the open rebellion; and the side that he takes will probably not be that
of the feeble, wilful and faithless king. But even at the worst of times law was steadily
growing. Henry’s tyranny was the tyranny of one who had a legal system under his
control; it was enforced by legal processes, by judgments that the courts delivered, by
writs that the courts upheld. And on the other side there was little lawlessness. Not
only was it in the name of law that the nation rose against the king, but no serious
attempt was made to undo the work of his courts and his chancery. If only the nation
at large, the universitas regni, could obtain some share in the control over this great
machine, its pressure might be patiently borne. But, leaving the political and
constitutional events of the reign for others, we, placing ourselves at the end, will
make a brief survey of what has been done in the realm of law.

Our English lawyers have no philosophy of law, nor have they General idea of law.
pursued very far the question, How does law, or a law, come into
being? The opening chapters of Justinian’s Institutes were known. The sentences
which define iustitia, iurisprudentia, ius naturale, iusgentium, ius civile, and so forth,
were copied or imitated; but, any real knowledge of Roman history being still in the
remote future, these sentences served as a check upon, rather than as an incentive to,
rational speculation. In practice there is no careful discrimination between ius and lex;
the whole mass of legal rules enforced by the English temporal courts can be
indicated by such phrases as ius regni,1lex regni,2lex terrae,3ius et consuetudo
regni,4lex et consuetudo, leges et consuetudines, lei de la terre, lei et dreit de la
terre.5 Of course ius, lex and consuetudo are not in all contexts exactly equivalent
words; ius and the French dreit often stand for “a right”;6lex and lei are technically
used to signify the various modes of proof, such as the oath, the ordeal, the judicial
combat.7 Glanvill and Bracton make some apology for giving the name leges to the
unwritten laws of England;8 Bracton can upon occasion contrast consuetudo with
lex.9 Of course too it is necessary at times to distinguish a new rule lately established
by some authoritative act, from the old rules which are conceived as having been in
force from time immemorial. The rule in question has its origin in a royal decree or
edict, in a novella constitutio of the princeps,10 in “provisions” made by the king with
the common counsel of his prelates and nobles, in an assize, or when we speak in
English in an “isetnysse”11 —the word “statute” is hardly yet in common use12 —we
may even have to say of some unprincipled rule that it is to be explained only by
reference to the will of the legislator.13 But as yet there is no definite theory as to the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 119 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

relation between enacted and unenacted law, the relation between law and custom, the
relation between law as it is and law as it ought to be. The assizes of Henry II. have
worked themselves into the mass of unenacted law, and their text seems already to be
forgotten. On the other hand, the writer of Edward I.’s day, who is known to us as
Britton, can represent the whole law as statutory: it all proceeds from the king’s
mouth. The king’s justices seem to claim a certain power of improving the law, but
they may not change the law.14 The king without the consent of a national assembly
may issue new writs which go beyond the law, but not new writs which go against the
law.15

The term common law (ius commune, lex communis, commun Common law.
dreit, commune lei) is not as yet a term frequent in the mouths of
out temporal lawyers. On the other hand, ius commune is a phrase well known to the
canonists. They use it to distinguish the general and ordinary law of the universal
church both from any rules peculiar to this or that provincial church, and from those
papal privilegia which are always giving rise to ecclesiastical litigation. Two
examples may suffice. Innocent III. tells the bishops of London and Ely that the
guardianship of vacant churches in the diocese of Canterbury belongs to the
archdeacon, both by common law and by the general custom of the English church.16
In 1218 papal delegates report that the Bishop of Salisbury asserts a right to the
church of Malmesbury both under the common law and by virtue of a papal
privilege.17 But in truth the phrase was usual among the canonists, and they had
warrant in ancient Roman texts for the use that they made of it.18 From the
ecclesiastical it would easily pass into the secular courts. A Bishop of Salisbury in
1252 tells the pope how, acting as a papal delegate, he has decided that the common
law makes in favour of the rector of one church and against the vicar of another. The
common law of which he speaks is the common law of the catholic church; but this
bishop is no other than William of York, who owes his see to the good service that he
has done as a royal justice.19 In connexion with English temporal affairs we may
indeed find the term ius commune in the Dialogue on the Exchequer: the forest laws
which are the outcome of the king’s mere will and pleasure are contrasted with the
common law of the realm.20 A century later, in Edward I.’s day, we frequently find it,
though lex communis (commune lei) has by this time become the more usual phrase.
The common law can then be contrasted with statute law; still more often it is
contrasted with royal prerogative; it can also be contrasted with local custom: in short
it may be contrasted with whatever is particular, extraordinary, special, with
“specialty” (aliquid speciale, especialté).21 When Bracton speaks of common law or
common right—and this he does but very rarely—it is to distinguish from rights
which have their origin in some specially worded contract or donation, those rights
which are given to all men by the law of the land.22 It is not until there is a
considerable mass of enacted law, until the king’s exceptional privileges are being
defined, until the place which local custom is to have in the legal system is being
fixed, that the term becomes very useful, and it is long before the lawyers of the
temporal courts will bear the title “common lawyers,” or oppose “the common law” to
“the law of holy church.”23

The mass of enacted law is as yet by no means heavy. As we Statute law.
have said above, the assizes of the twelfth century seem to be

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 120 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

already regarded as part of the unenacted ancient law. No one is at pains to preserve
their text. As to the Anglo-Saxon dooms, though men are still at times copying and
tampering with the Latin versions of them, they are practically dead, and will remain
almost unknown until in the sixteenth century William Lambard unearths them as
antiquarian curiosities.24 We have in manuscript many collections of statutes
transcribed in the days of the two first Edwards: they seldom, if ever, go behind
Magna Carta. That Charter takes its place as the first chapter of the enacted law; but,
as is well known, its text is not exactly that which John sealed at Runnymead in 1215.
Important changes were made when it was reissued in 1216; The charters.
other important changes were made in 1217, and a few minor
changes in 1225. The charter granted by Henry in 1225, when he had lately attained
his majority, became the Magna Carta of future times.25 He had to confirm it
repeatedly. These repeated confirmations tell us how hard it is to bind the king by
law. The pages of the chroniclers are full of complaints that the terms of the charter
are not observed. These complaints, when they become specific, usually refer to the
articles which gave to the churches the right to elect their prelates. If on the one hand
the king is apt to regard the charter as a mere promise from which, if this be
necessary, the pope will absolve him, on the other hand efforts are made to convert
every one of its clauses into a fundamental, irrepealable law. In 1253 with solemn
ceremonial the anathema was launched, not merely against all who should break the
charter, but also against all who should take any part whatever, even the humble part
of mere transcribers, in making or promulgating or enforcing any statutes contrary to
the sacred text.26 This theoretical sanctity and this practical insecurity are shared with
“the Great Charter of Liberties” by the Charter of the Forest, which was issued in
1217.

The first set of laws which in later days usually bears the name Provisions of Merton,
of “statute” is the Provisions of Merton issued by the king with Westminster and
the consent of the prelates and nobles in 1236 on the occasion of Marlborough.
his queen’s coronation: a few brief clauses amend the law about
divers miscellaneous matters.27 From the time of storm and stress we have the
Provisions of Westminster to which the king gave a reluctant consent in 1259.28 He
did not hold himself bound by them; they never became a well established part of the
law of the land; but in 1267, when the revolutionary period was at an end, almost all
of them were reenacted with the consent of great and small as the Provisions or
Statute of Marlborough.29 These four documents, the two Charters, the Provisions of
Merton and of Marlborough, are the only documents of Henry’s reign which are
generally regarded in after ages as parts of the written law, though to these we may
perhaps add the Dictum of Kenilworth issued in 1266 (an essentially temporary
provision relating to the punishment of the insurgents),30 and a writ of 1256, which
has sometimes been dignified by the title “the Statute of Leap Year”; it deals with a
small matter, the computation of the “excrescent” day of the bissextile.31 But it is
only in retrospect that the quantity of legislation that there has been appears so small.
As yet there is no easily applicable external test by which we can distinguish the
solemn statute from the less solemn ordinance. From Henry’s reign we have neither a
“statute roll” nor any “rolls of parliament”; and we have no reason to believe that any
such records were kept.32 Copies of the two charters were sent about the country; the
only authoritative record that we have of the Provisions of Merton is a writ upon the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 121 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

close roll; the only authoritative records that we have of the Provisions of
Westminster are writs upon the close and patent rolls, and upon those rolls and the
judicial rolls of the king’s court we find traces of other legislative acts, which for one
reason or another did not permanently gain the character of statutes.33

And if merely formal tests fail us, so also will more material Ordinance and
tests. Of course we cannot in dealing with Henry’s day insist that Statute.
a statute must be enacted with the consent of the three estates of
the realm; we may be certain that the third estate was not represented at Merton, and
may gravely doubt whether it was represented at Marlborough. On the other hand, we
may take it as generally admitted that the king cannot by his mere word make law. If
he legislates, this must be by the counsel of the prelates and nobles; even if he
ordains, this should be by the counsel, or at least with the witness, of his habitual
counsellors.34 But it is not easy to mark off the province of ordinances from the
province of laws. In 1253 Henry issued an ordinance for the maintenance of the
peace; it contained little, if anything, that was very new. Matthew Paris tells us that he
wished to add to it something that was new, foreign, Savoyard. He wished to give to
one who was robbed, an action against those whose duty it was to pursue the robbers;
apparently he wished to do what his son did successfully by the statute of Winchester.
Perhaps he desired to imitate an edict issued by his father-in-law Count Raymond of
Provence in 1243.35 But he had to withdraw this part of his decree, because so large a
change in the law could not be made without the common assent of the baron-age.36
But between large changes and small, between changes and ameliorations, between
laws and rules of procedure, no accurate lines could be drawn.

That the king is below the law is a doctrine which even a royal The king below the
justice may fearlessly proclaim.37 The theory that in every state law.
there must be some man or definite body of men above the law,
some “sovereign” without duties and without rights, would have been rejected. Had it
been accepted in the thirteenth century, the English kingship must have become an
absolute monarchy, for nowhere else than in the person of the king could the requisite
“sovereignty” have been found. But, for one thing, nobody supposed that the king
even with the consent of the English prelates and barons could alter the common law
of the catholic church. If the theory of sovereignty popular among Englishmen of our
own day be pressed upon the reluctant middle ages, the whole of Western
Christendom must be treated as one state.38 Theology can be brought in to explain or
to conceal any difficulty that there may be in the conception of a king, who though
subject to no man, is subject to the law:—God is subject to law, and has even made
himself subject to the law for man.39 The practical question is whether there is any
mode in which the law can be enforced against the king. That no ordinary process of
his courts will touch him is admitted.40 For a while men speculate as to whether in an
extreme case the Earl of Chester as count of the palace may not have some coercive
power over the king.41 A more acceptable solution, especially when these palatine
counts have died out, is that the incorporate realm represented by the baronage may
judge the king in his own court, if the worst come to the worst.42 But there is no
established orderly method whereby this can be accomplished, and the right to
restrain an erring king, a king who should be God’s vicar, but behaves as the devil’s
vicar,43 is rather a right of revolution, a right to defy a faithless lord and to make war

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 122 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

upon him, than a right that can be enforced in form of law. The result of the barons’
war is to demonstrate that though the king is not above the law, the law has no means
of punishing him, and no direct means of compelling him to make redress for the
wrongs that he has done.

The unenacted part—and this is the great bulk—of the law seems Unenacted law and
to be conceived as custom (consuetudo). The most important of custom.
all customs is the custom of the king’s court. The custom may be
extended by analogical reasoning; we may argue from one case to another case which
is similar though not precisely similar.44 On the other hand, we should be assigning
far too early a date for our modern ideas, if we supposed that the law of the thirteenth
century was already “case-law,” or that a previous judgment was regarded as “a
binding authority”; it would but be an illustration of the custom of the court. Bracton
achieved the marvellous feat of citing some five hundred cases from the judicial rolls.
But Bracton stands quite alone; his successors Fleta and Britton abbreviate his work
by omitting the citations. By some piece of good fortune Bracton, a royal justice,
obtained possession of a large number of rolls. But the ordinary litigant or his
advocate would have had no opportunity of searching the rolls, and those who know
what these records are like will feel safe in saying that even the king’s justices cannot
have made a habit of searching them for principles of law. Again, we may see that
Bracton had not our modern notions of “authority.” He has told us how he set himself
to peruse the ancient judgments of the just because his ignorant and uneducated
contemporaries were misrepresenting the law; he appealed from them to the great men
of the past, to Martin Pateshull and William Raleigh.45 On rare occasions specific
precedents (exempla) may have been alleged in court;46 in Edward I.’s day the
pleaders are already citing and “distinguishing” previous cases;47 but as a general
rule the judges, assisted by clerks, who were on their way to become judges, would
regard themselves as having an implicit knowledge of the consuetudo curiae and
would not feel bound to argue about past cases. The justices of the bench would often
be fully justified in behaving thus; many of them were experienced men who had
worked their way upwards through all the ranks of the king’s court and chancery. And
so even the knights who were employed to take assizes in their shires, though they
had read no law, would believe that they knew the law and custom applicable to the
cases that came before them. Every man who does his duty knows a great deal of law
and custom: the difficulty is to persuade him that he does not know everything.48

The custom of the king’s court is the custom of England, and Local customs.
becomes the common law. As to local customs, the king’s
justices will in general phrases express their respect for them.49 We see no signs of
any consciously conceived desire to root them out.50 None the less, if they are not
being destroyed, their further growth is checked. Especially in all matters of
procedure, the king’s court, which is now obtaining a thorough control over all other
courts, is apt to treat its own as the only just rules.51 A heavy burden of proof is cast
upon those who would apply other rules; they must be prepared to show not merely
that a local tradition is in their favour, but that this tradition has borne fruit in actual
practice and governed the decisions of the local courts.52 The instances that we get of
customs peculiar to counties or other wide tracts of land, such as the episcopal barony
of Winchester53 or the honour of Britanny,54 are of no great importance. The law

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 123 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

about frankpledge, the law about the presentment of Englishry, may be somewhat
differently understood in the various parts of England; and in the north there prevail
certain forms of land tenure which are hardly to be found in the south:—but this is a
small matter. The county courts are held under the presidency of sheriffs who will ask
advice from Westminster when difficult cases come before them.55 Every manor will
indeed have its own customs, and to the unfreemen these customs will be very
important; such rights as they have against their lords, save the bare right to life and
limb, will be but customary and will not be acknowledged by the general law nor
sanctioned by the king’s court. Still these manorial usages are not so various as we
might have expected them to be. If a custumal be put into our hands, only after a
minute examination of it shall we be able to guess whether it comes from the west or
from the east, from Somersetshire or from Essex. The great estates of the great nobles
have been widely dispersed; the same steward has travelled throughout England
holding all his lord’s courts, reducing their procedure to uniformity, and completing in
a humbler sphere the work of the king’s itinerant justices.56 When the time comes for
the king’s courts to protect that villein tenure which has become copyhold tenure,
there will be little difficulty about the establishment of a set of uniform rules which
will serve as a “common law” for copyholds. Within the walls of a chartered borough
peculiar customs can grow vigorously, for the charter will serve to protect them
against the meddling of the king’s justices. The consuetudo of the borough will be the
lex of the borough, and sometimes it will be solemnly committed to writing.57 But
even here there is less variety than we might have looked for. The aspiring town was
often content to receive as a privilege the custom of some famous borough,
Winchester or Bristol or Oxford, and thenceforward in case of doubt it would send to
its mother town for an exposition of the rules that should guide it.58 On the whole, the
local variations from the general law of the land are of no great moment, and seldom,
if ever, can we connect them with ethnical differences or with remote history. We can
no longer mark off the Danelaw from Mercia or Wessex; we hear of little that is
strange from Cornwall or from Cumberland. The strong central power has quietly
subdued all things unto itself. It has encountered no resistance. No English county
ever rebels for the maintenance of its customary law.

Kent is somewhat of an exception; it has a considerable body of Kentish customs.
customs; there is a lex Kantiae.59 In Edward I.’s day a written
statement of these customs was sanctioned by the king’s justices in eyre.60 In the
main they are concerned with the maintenance of a peculiar form of land-tenure
known as gavelkind. The name seems to tell us that the chief characteristic of that
tenure is or has been the payment of gafol, of rent, as distinguished from the
performance of military service on the one hand and of agricultural labour on the
other.61 There is in Kent a large class of landholders, who are not knights, who are
not gentle folk; they pay rent to their lords; their tenure is protected by law; they are
not burdened with “week work.” They are freemen; indeed in Edward I.’s day it is
said that every one born in Kent is born free.62 The customs of Kent are, at least for
the more part, the customs of these gavelkinders; customs which fall within the
province of private law, which regulate the wife’s dower and the husband’s curtesy,
which divide the dead tenant’s land among all his sons, showing however a certain
preference for the youngest, which determine the procedure that the lord must adopt if
his rent be in arrear, and which, contrary to the general law, allow the sons of the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 124 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

hanged felon to inherit from him. Thus the task of accounting for the lex Kantiae is
that of explaining a passage in the social and economic history of England, and a
difficult passage. There is little in Domesday Book that marks off Kent from the
surrounding counties, little indeed to make us think that at the date of the survey it
was a peculiarly free county, that it was as free as the shires of the Danelaw.63 We
shall hardly find an answer to our question in the fact that the churches held wide
lands in Kent: church lands are not the lands on which as a general rule we find many
freeholders or many freemen. No doubt some traits in the Kentish customs may be
described as archaic—they enshrine Old English proverbs, and a legend grew up
telling how the men of Kent had made special terms with the Conqueror—but
probably we shall do well in looking for the explanation of what has to be explained
to the time which lies on this side of the Conquest.64 Kent is no mountain home of
liberty, no remote fastness in which the remnant of an ancient race has found refuge;
it is the garden of England, of all English counties that which is most exposed to
foreign influences. The great roads which join London to the seaboard are the arteries
along which flows money, the destructive solvent of seignorial power. The tillers of
Kentish soil can maintain their ancient or obtain new liberties, because their lords
have learnt to want money and will rather have current coin than manorial rights. The
gavelkinders are prosperous; they purchase a royal charter from Henry III.65 There is
general prosperity in Kent: even the knights of the county are anxious that the lex
Kantiae should be observed.66 All classes in the county seem to be bound together by
a tie of local patriotism. They feel that they are better off than other Englishmen
are.67 In course of time there must be “treatises on gavelkind” and learned books on
“the tenures of Kent,” for when once a district has established an exemption from
certain of the ordinary rules of law, the number of the rules from which it is exempt
will be apt to grow.68 But on the whole, the brief Kentish custumal of the thirteenth
century is only a small exception to the generality of the common law.

English law was by this time recognized as distinctively English, Englishry of English
and Englishmen were proud of it. From time to time rumours law.
went round that the king’s detestable favourites were going to
introduce foreign novelties from Poitou or Savoy. In a case for which no English
precedent could be found our king’s court refused to follow foreign, presumably
French, precedents.69 But the main contrast to English law was to be found in the
leges et canones. Bracton, having probably taken some Italian legist at his word,
entertained the belief that in almost all countries the leges scriptae prevailed, and that
only England was ruled by unwritten law and custom.70 This was a mistake, for the
Roman jurisprudence was but slowly penetrating into northern France and had hardly
touched Germany; but it served to make a great contrast more emphatic: England was
not governed by the leges scriptae. All men know how at the Merton parliament the
assembled barons declared with one voice that they would not change the laws of
England.71 Perhaps we do well to treat this as an outburst of nationality and
conservatism. English law is to be maintained because it is English, for as to the
specific question then at issue, namely, whether bastards should be legitimated by the
marriage of their parents, we should hardly have suspected our barons of having a
strong and unanimous opinion on so arguable a point. Curiously enough in the very
next year the Norman exchequer decided to follow the church’s rule, perhaps by way
of showing that, despite King Henry’s claims, the breach between Normandy and

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 125 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

England was final.72 But it is by no means impossible that the celebrated Nolumus
expresses a professional as well as a national conservatism; at any rate it was no baron
but a lawyer, an ecclesiastic, a judge, Bracton’s master, William Raleigh, who had to
meet the clerical forces and to stand up for English practice against the laws and
canons and consensus of Christendom.73

Of “equity” as of a set of rules which can be put beside the rules Equity.
of “law,” or of courts whose proper function is the
administration, not of law, but of equity, we shall hear nothing for a long time to
come. We must however remember, first, that a contrast between aequitas and rigor
iuris is already a part of what passes as philosophical jurisprudence, and secondly,
that our king’s court is according to very ancient tradition a court that can do
whatever equity may require. Long ago this principle was asserted by the court of
Frankish kings and, at all events since the Conquest, it has been bearing fruit in
England.74 It means that the royal tribunal is not so strictly bound by rules that it
cannot defeat the devices of those who would use legal forms for the purposes of
chicane; it means also that the justices are in some degree free to consider all the
circumstances of those cases that come before them and to adapt the means to the end.
In the days of Henry II. and Henry III. the king’s court wields discretionary powers
such as are not at the command of lowlier courts, and the use of these powers is an
exhibition of “equity.” Often on the plea rolls we find it written that some order is
made “by the counsel of the court” (de consilio curiae). It is an order that could not be
asked for as a matter of strict right; the rigor iuris does not dictate it—would perhaps
refuse it; but it is made in order that the substantial purposes of the law may be
accomplished without “circuity of action.”75 The need of a separate court of equity is
not yet felt, for the king’s court, which is not as yet hampered by many statutes or by
accurately formulated “case law,” can administer equity.

In the middle of the thirteenth century the high courts that do The king’s courts.
justice in the king’s name are rapidly taking what will long be
their final form. When in 1875 a Supreme Court of Judicature once more absorbs
them, the Court of King’s Bench, the Court of Common Pleas, the Court of
Exchequer and the Chancery will be able to claim some six centuries of existence as
distinct and separate courts.76 To fix precisely the exact moment at which one court
became two or more courts, is perhaps impossible, for “court,” as our modern statute
book would amply prove, is a term that cannot easily be defined. In dealing, however,
with the thirteenth century and the later middle ages we might be justified in saying
that each of the high courts of the realm must have a set of rolls that is its own and a
seal that is its own. A continuous memory of all that it has done seems the essence of
a court’s identity, and this memory takes the shape of a continuous series of written
records.

At what we may call an early time the exchequer ceased to be a The exchequer.
phase of the general governing body of the realm, and became a
department, with a seal and many records of its own, a financial department.77 In
Bishop Richard’s Dialogue we still see all the great ones of the kingdom seated round
the chess-board. The chief justiciar is there and the chancellor of the realm. Gradually
they withdraw themselves from the ordinary work of the board, though they may

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 126 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

attend it on special occasions. The treasurer becomes its president; its seal is kept by
the chancellor of the exchequer, an officer who first appears in Henry III.’s reign, and
the writs that it issues are tested by the senior baron;78 as yet there is no “chief
baron.”79 From the beginning of the reign onwards men are definitely appointed to be
barons of the exchequer.80 They are chosen from among the king’s clerks, but they
keep the old title and are sufficiently the “peers” of the barons of the realm to enable
them to inflict amercements on noble offenders. The treasurer is the head of the court
whatever it may be doing. The position of the chancellor of the exchequer is
subordinate; he keeps the seal of the court, and his accounts may serve to check the
treasurer’s, but apparently the acts of the court are always attributed to the treasurer
and barons.81

The exchequer is called a curia.82 In our view it may be a Work of the
compound institution, in part a judicial tribunal, in part a exchequer.
financial bureau. The process which in course of time will divide
a great “government office” known as the treasury from the court of law held before a
chief baron and other barons, has not as yet gone far. The duty of issuing the king’s
treasure is performed by the treasurer with the assistance of the deputy
chamberlains—already the chamberlainships have become hereditary sinecures83
—and in this matter he is not controlled by the barons. But then in this matter he has
little discretion, for he dares issue no penny save in obedience to an order which
comes to him under the great or the privy seal; even for every payment of an annual
salary he requires such a warrant from above.84 There was, however, some rivalry
between the two departments, and during some late years of Edward I.’s reign the
treasurer, rather than the chancellor, was the king’s first minister.85 The main work of
the court or board over which he presides is that of collecting the king’s revenue. It
receives and audits the accounts of the sheriffs and other collectors; it calls the king’s
debtors before it, hears what they have to say, investigates the truth of their
allegations, grants them an acquittance or issues process against them, “according to
the customs and usages of the exchequer.” We may perhaps call it an administrative
tribunal. If questions of fact or questions of law arise, it ought to judge impartially
between the king and his subjects; but still its duty is to get in what is due to the king,
and to do this spontaneously without waiting for any external impulse. It is a revenue
board which hears and decides. Then also it is often empowered to give relief against
the king. Not that a subject can bring an action against the king either here or
elsewhere, but when a man thinks that he has a claim against the king, either in
respect of some money that the king owes him, or in respect of some land that the
king has seized, he will (this is the common practice of Edward I.’s day) present a
petition to the king and council, and a favourable response to this petition will
generally delegate the matter to the treasurer and barons and bid them do what is
right.86 If a question of general law is involved, they will often be told to associate
with themselves the justices of the two benches, for they themselves are supposed to
know rather “the course of the exchequer” than the common law of the land.
However, during our period we may see an irrepressible tendency at work which will
give them a power to adjudicate in personal actions between subject and subject. In
Edward’s reign they are often forbidden to do this, but they do it; and in so doing they
may be rather striving to retain old powers, powers that had been exercised by the
exchequer when it was a phase of the as yet undifferentiated “curia,” than to usurp a

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 127 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

new function. We are at a loss to account on the one hand for the offence that they
thus gave to the community of the realm, and on the other for the persistent recourse
to their tribunal of creditors who might have gone elsewhere, unless it be that a
creditor might thus obtain the advantage of some of those expeditious and stringent
processes which had been devised for the collection of crown debts. In the end, as is
well known, the exchequer triumphed under the cover of fictions; but this victory
belongs to a later time than that of which we are speaking.87

Men are beginning to speak of the chancery as a curia;88 but The chancery.
even in Edward I.’s reign it is not in our view a court of justice; it
does not hear and determine causes. It was a great secretarial bureau, a home office, a
foreign office and a ministry of justice. At its head was the chancellor, who, when
there was no longer a chief justiciar of the realm, became the highest in rank of the
king’s servants. He was “the king’s secretary of state for all departments.”89 Under
him there were numerous clerks. The highest in rank among them we might fairly call
“under-secretaries of state”; they were ecclesiastics holding deaneries or canonries;
they were sworn of the king’s council; some of them were doctores utriusque iuris;
they were graduates, they were “masters”; some of them as notaries of the apostolic
see were men whose “authenticity” would be admitted all the world over.90 Very
little was done by the king that was not done by a document bearing the great seal; it
was “the key of the kingdom.”91 The exchequer and the two benches had indeed seals
and could issue writs running in the king’s name, writs, for example, summoning
juries, coercing contumacious litigants or carrying judgments into effect; but the
province of such writs was not very wide, and it was a very general rule that no action
could be begun in the king’s courts and that no action touching freehold could be
begun anywhere without an “original” or (as we might say) “originating” writ, which
proceeded from the chancery and served as the justices’ warrant for entertaining that
action.92 During the course of Edward’s reign writs under the privy seal became
common; but the king was constrained to promise that no writ which concerned the
common law should issue under that seal,93 and very many of the writs thus
authenticated were addressed to the chancellor and did but bid him set the great seal
to some instrument which would be the final expression of the king’s will.94
Confidential clerks or “secretaries,” (for this word was coming into use) were
beginning to intervene between the king and his chancellor, sending to him written, or
carrying to him oral messages.95 The chancellor was now a man of exalted rank, and,
though theoretically the chancery “followed the king,” still as a matter of fact it often
happened that the king was at one place while the chancellor was at another.96 In its
final form almost every message, order or mandate that came, or was supposed to
come, from the king, whether it concerned the greatest matter or the smallest, whether
addressed to an emperor or to an escheator, whether addressed to all the lieges or to
one man, was a document settled in the chancery and sealed with the great seal. Miles
of parchment, close rolls and patent rolls, fine rolls and charter rolls, Roman rolls,
Gascon rolls and so forth, are covered with copies of these documents,97 and yet
reveal but a part of the chancery’s work, for no roll sets forth all those “original” writs
that were issued “as of course.”98

The number of writs which were issued as of course for the The original writs.
purpose of enabling those who thought themselves wronged to

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 128 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

bring their cases before the law courts, increased rapidly during the reign of Henry III.
A “register of original writs” which comes from the end of that period will be much
longer than one that comes from the beginning.99 Apparently there were some writs
which could be had for nothing; for others a mark or a half-mark would be charged,
while, at least during Henry’s early years, there were others which were only to be
had at high prices. We may find creditors promising the king a quarter or a third of the
debts that they hope to recover.100 Some distinction seems to have been taken
between necessaries and luxuries. A royal writ was a necessary for one who was
claiming freehold; it was a luxury for the creditor exacting a debt, for the local courts
were open to him and he could proceed there without writ. Elaborate glosses overlaid
the king’s promise that he would sell justice to none, for a line between the price of
justice and those mere court fees, which are demanded even in our own day, is not
easily drawn.101 That the poor should have their writs for nothing, was an accepted
maxim.102 The almost mechanical work of penning these ordinary writs was
confided to clerks who stood low in the official hierarchy, to cursitors (cursarii); it
consisted chiefly of filling with names and sums of money the blanks that were left in
the forms that they found in their registers; but some clerk of a higher grade seems to
have been responsible for every writ.103 No finality was as yet ascribed to the
register; it was not regarded as an exhaustive scheme of justice to which no addition
could be made save by definite legislation, though a common form, when once
settled, was not to be lightly tampered with. New writs could be made, at all events if
they were “personal”, not “real”—any innovation “touching freehold” was a more
serious matter—and they were made somewhat freely.104 To take the best example,
towards the close of Henry’s reign the action of trespass, which is full of future
history, becomes common somewhat suddenly. The chancery had not yet fallen so far
apart from the courts of law that the justices could not get new writs made if they
wanted them. In manuscript registers we find a group of new writs ascribed to
William Raleigh who was for a while the foremost judge in the king’s court.105 For
some years before the barons’ war Henry attempted to govern without a chancellor or
with a chancellor who was such only in name;106 his chancery was no serious
obstacle to his will and pleasure, though now and again even a vice-chancellor might
resign rather than set the seal to a document that he regarded as illegal.107
Complaints against new and unaccustomed writs grew loud.108 The discontented
prelates and barons demanded a real chancellor and one sworn to issue no writs, save
“writs of course,” without warrant from the baronial council.109 Under Edward I. two
different causes tended to give stability and finality to the cycle of original writs. On
the one hand, it became apparent that to invent new remedies was to make new laws,
and events were deciding that only in a parliament of the three estates could new laws
be made: even when the king was concerned, the list of actions was to be a closed
list.110 On the other hand, chancery and chancellor had grown in dignity. There were
great chancellors who were usually the king’s first ministers. The chancery was by
this time independent of the “benches.” The days when the chancellor would often sit
among the justices were passing away, the days for stiff official correspondence
between the courts and the chancery had come.

It is but rarely that we hear of the chancery or the chancellor The chancery not a
performing any work that can fairly be called judicial. The tribunal.
issuing of the “original” writs was not judicial work, though we

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 129 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

may learn from petitions addressed to the chancellor and from other sources that it
was not always done mechanically: a friend of the chancellor might hope for a few
words in his writ that a stranger would hardly have obtained.111 Of any “equitable
jurisdiction” exercised in the chancery we hear nothing; the king’s justices still
believe that they can do what equity requires. But even of what afterwards became the
“common law jurisdiction” of the chancery, the jurisdiction of its “ordinary” or “Latin
side” we hear very little. In later days that jurisdiction was concerned chiefly, though
not solely, with cases in which a subject required some relief against the king.112 In
the latter half of the thirteenth century a subject who has aught against the king has, at
least as a general rule, but one course open to him. He presents a petition to the king
or the king and his council. This may come before the king himself, or before a full
meeting of the council, or before a select body of councillors assigned to deal with
such petitions as can be easily disposed of. If he gets a favourable answer, this—since
as yet he has shown but some plausible case for relief—will in general send him
before some tribunal which will be instructed by a writ from the chancery to hear his
claim and do what is just. Commonly that tribunal is the exchequer, which may be
afforced for the occasion by the presence of the chancellor and the justices;
sometimes it is one of the benches. Occasionally, but rarely, the chancellor is
appointed to hear and decide the cause.113

The king’s court—to say no more of the exchequer and the The two benches.
chancery—has been slowly breaking up into three tribunals;
there is a Common Bench, a King’s Bench, and a yet higher court, which in the days
of Edward I. we may indifferently call the King in Council or the King in Parliament.
A cleft began to appear when Henry II. in 1178 appointed certain justices to sit
permanently in his court and hear the complaints of all men, but reserved the more
arduous cases for himself and the wise men of the realm.114 It disappeared for a
while under the absentee Richard; it reappeared under John, who travelled through the
country with justices in his train while other justices remained on “the bench” at
Westminster.115 Again it disappeared for a while during the minority of Henry III.;
we can see no permanent, central tribunal save that held by “the justices of the bench”
who sit term after term at Westminster, though the council of regency may in some
sort supervise their work. It begins to reappear and this time for good and all when
Henry is of full age and does justice in person. From the year 1234 onwards—but the
exact date can hardly be fixed—there are two different courts, each of which has its
own set of rolls.116 The one is held before the justices of “the bench” who sit at
Westminster, its records are the “de banco rolls”; the other follows the king, its
records are the “coram rege rolls.” A litigant summoned before the one is told to come
“before our justices at Westminster”; if summoned before the other, he must appear
“before us wheresoever we shall be in England.” And then the Great Charter has
decreed that “common pleas” are not to follow the king, but are to be heard in some
certain place.117 Thus “the bench” has become the appropriate tribunal for ordinary
civil suits between subject and subject. The complementary rule, which assigns the
“pleas of the crown” to the court held coram rege, seems to grow up gradually and
not to be the outcome of legislation.118 The court held coram rege is superior to, for
it can correct the errors of, “the bench.”119 Then early in Edward I.’s reign “the
bench,” though in formal documents it will keep its old name and until 1875 be

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 130 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

simply “the bench,” begins to be called the Common Bench, and the name of King’s
Bench is given to the court that is held coram rege, or rather to one offshoot of it.120

We have to state the matter thus, for the court that during Council, parliament
Henry’s reign is held coram rege breaks into segments. For and benches.
ordinary purposes it is a court held by a few professional
justices; but at any moment it may become a fuller and grander tribunal; the king may
be there with his councillors; all the prelates and barons of the realm may be
assembled. But whatever form it takes, it seems to be considered as essentially but
one tribunal, “the court of our lord the king held before the king himself.” In modern
terms we might say that the court held before the king in parliament and the court held
before the king in council are the court of king’s bench raised to a higher power. In
Edward I.’s reign there comes a further change. The term “king’s bench” is brought
into use to signify the court held theoretically coram rege by the professional justices,
and just about the same time a third set of plea rolls begins to appear. Besides the “de
banco rolls” and the “coram rege rolls” there are those records which we know as the
“parliament rolls”; the earliest extant roll comes from the year 1290. For some time to
come, however, the cleft is not very deep; the same plea that is found on a parliament
roll may be found also on a coram rege roll.121 For judicial purposes the
parliamentary sessions of the council can be conceived as strengthened, as “afforced,”
sessions of the king’s bench. All the justices and all the chiefs of the great offices, all
the masters in chancery and so forth, are members of the council, and, if they are not
wanted elsewhere, will be summoned to those plenary sessions of the council that are
known as “parliaments.” There remain in suspense many questions as to the
composition and jurisdiction of this highest of all tribunals. Is that tribunal to be the
assemblage of prelates and barons, or is it to be the king’s council; is it to be but a
court of second instance, or is it to have any original jurisdiction? The fourteenth
century must answer these questions; the thirteenth leaves them open.122

As to the courts held in the king’s name by men who are acting Itinerant justices.
under temporary commissions, men who in a large sense of the
term are “itinerant justices,” we must say but little, though were we to descend to
details much might be said, for the king’s power to issue commissions has hardly a
limit in law, but few limits in custom, and new needs are being ever and anon met by
new devices. But we may distinguish the main types of these commissions. What
seems treated as the humblest is the commission to deliver a gaol. This in the latter
part of Henry III.’s reign is done very frequently; generally it is done by some three or
four knights of the shire, and thus, long before the institution of justices of the peace,
the country knights had been accustomed to do high criminal justice.123 In order to
dispose of the possessory assizes of novel disseisin and mort d’ancestor, a vast
number of commissions were issued in every year. Early in Henry’s reign this work
was often entrusted to four knights of the shire; at a later time one of the permanent
justices would usually be named and allowed to associate some knights with himself.
Apparently a justice of assize had often to visit many towns or even villages in each
county; his work was not all done at the county town.124 It must have been heavy, for
these actions were extremely popular. In the second year of Edward’s reign some two
thousand commissions of assize were issued.125 Just at that time the practice seems
to have been to divide England into four circuits and to send two justices of assize

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 131 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

round each circuit; but a full history of the circuits would be intricate and wearisome.
Above all the other commissions ranked the commission for an iter ad omnia placita,
or more briefly for an iter or eyre. An eyre was by this time a long and laborious
business. In the first place, if we suppose an eyre in Cambridgeshire announced, this
has the effect of stopping all Cambridgeshire business in the bench. Litigants who
have been told to appear before the justices at Westminster will now have to appear
before the justices in eyre at Cambridge. There is no business before the bench at
Westminster if an eyre has been proclaimed in all the counties.126 Then, again, the
justices are provided with a long list of interrogatories (capitula itineris) which they
are to address to local juries. Every hundred, every vill in the county must be
represented before them. These interrogatories—their number increases as time goes
on—ransack the memories of the jurors and the local records for all that has happened
in the shire since the last eyre took place some seven years ago; every crime, every
invasion of royal rights, every neglect of police duties must be presented.127 The
justices must sit in the county town from week to week and even from month to
month before they will have got through the tedious task and inflicted the due tale of
fines and amercements.128 Three or four of the permanent judges will be placed in
the commission; with them will be associated some of the magnates of the district;
bishops and even abbots, to the scandal of strict churchmen, have to serve as justices
in eyre.129 Probably it was thought expedient that some of the great freeholders of
the county should be commissioned, in order that no man might say that his judges
were not his peers. An eyre was a sore burden; the men of Cornwall fled before the
face of the justices;130 we hear assertions of a binding custom that an eyre shall not
take place more than once in seven years.131 Expedients were being adopted which in
course of time would enable the justices of assize to preside in the country over the
trial of actions which were pending before the benches; thus without the terrors of an
eyre, the trial of civil actions would take place in the counties and jurors would no
longer be called to Westminster from their remote homes. But these expedients
belong for the more part to Edward’s reign; under his father a jury wearily travelling
from Yorkshire or Devonshire towards London must have been no very uncommon
sight.132

The king’s courts have been fast becoming the only judicial Triumph of royal
tribunals of any great importance. Throughout the reign the bulk justice.
of their plea rolls increased at a rapid rate. Every term the bench
at Westminster entertained a multitude of causes. The litigants who came before it
were often men of lowly rank who were quarrelling about small parcels of land.
Though we hear some bad stories of corrupt and partial judges,133 it is plain that this
powerful, central tribunal must have been well trusted by the nation at large. Rich and
poor alike would go to it if they could. The local courts were being starved, and this
result we cannot ascribe altogether to the ambition or greed of the lawyers at
Westminster. Of his own free will the small freeholder passed by his lord’s court and
the county court on his way to the great hall. He could there obtain a stronger and
better commodity than any that was to be had elsewhere, a justice which, as men
reckoned in those days, was swift and masterful; he could there force his adversary to
submit to a verdict instead of finding that his claim was met by some antique oath
with oath-helpers. The voice of the nation, or what made itself heard as such, no
longer, as in 1215, demanded protection for the seignorial courts;134 it asked that the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 132 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

royal court should be endowed with yet new and anti-feudal powers; it was to be in all
temporal causes supreme.135 Men were fast coming to the opinion that it ought to be,
in Bentham’s phrase, “omnicompetent,” and that for every wrong there should be a
remedy in the court of their lord the king. This is not an idea that is imposed from
above upon an unwilling people. Bracton himself, the royal judge, the professional
lawyer, does not thrust it forward as an obvious principle. He explains or even
apologizes for certain manifestations of kingly justice which may seem to be at
variance with feudal rules.136 But still this principle is at work: it is the king’s
business to provide a competent remedy for every wrong.137

The number of the justices whom Henry kept in his pay was The judges.
never large. If there were some three or four in his train to hold
the pleas coram rege, some four or five at “the bench,” and three or four barons in the
exchequer, this was enough. During the last years of the reign “the bench” seems to
have but three, or even but two, occupants.138 These judges are very truly the king’s
servants; he can move them about as seems best to him or dismiss them at a moment’s
notice. By slow degrees the work of hearing and deciding causes is being disengaged
from governmental business. The office of a chief justiciar who is both the king’s
prime minister and the president of the highest law court became extinct. Even Hubert
de Burgh had hardly filled the place of Lucy and Glanvill, of Hubert Walter and
Geoffrey Fitz Peter, for he seldom sat on the bench. For a short while after his fall in
1232 the justiciarship was committed to a lawyer, to Stephen Segrave; but from 1234,
when Segrave was disgraced and dismissed, until 1258, when the time of revolution
was at hand, the justiciarship was in abeyance. The title was then revived and borne
for a season by Hugh Bigot, Hugh le Despenser and Philip Basset, whose names
represent the alternating fortunes of contending factions. At last in 1268 Robert de
Brus, the future “competitor” for the crown of Scotland, was appointed “chief justiciar
to hold pleas before the king”; and the words thus added to the old title signified that
only for judicial purposes was he to be chief justiciar.139 With him began the new
line of the chief justices of England who are but the presidents of a law court, and
about the same time the presiding judge at “the bench” or “the common bench” began
to be formally styled its chief justice.140 It was no long er expected of the judge that
he should be a statesman, or of the statesman that he should be expert in the law. We
hear indeed complaints that the king puts unworthy and ignorant men upon the bench,
men who will do just what he wants; but some of the judges of Henry’s reign were
known to their contemporaries merely as great lawyers and seem to have earned the
respect of all parties in the state.141

Many of them were ecclesiastics; among such we may reckon Clerical justices.
Martin Pateshull, William Raleigh, Robert Lexington, William of
York, Henry of Bratton. Even Stephen Segrave seems to have had enough of the clerk
about him to serve as a shield against temporal justice.142 Bishops no longer steadily
sat in the law courts, though they might now and again appear as justices in eyre; but
canonries, deaneries and even bishoprics were still to be earned by good service on
the bench; William Raleigh thus won the see of Norwich and William of York the see
of Salisbury. However, all this was becoming somewhat scandalous; the clergy were
being forbidden by the law of the church to study temporal law or decide temporal
causes.143 Before the end of the reign the lay element among the king’s judges is

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 133 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

beginning to outweigh the ecclesiastical; Thomas Multon and Roger Thurkelby are
laymen who make names for themselves as learned justices;144 but even of Edward
I.’s justices not a few were clerks. This is no small change; it means that the study of
English law is falling apart from all other studies. Just at the same time a class of
advocates who practised in the king’s courts was forming itself. Some of Edward’s
judges had practised at the bar of his courts; his father’s judges seem for the more part
to have worked their way upwards as clerks in the courts, in the exchequer, in the
chancery.145 The change brought good with it and evil. Our judges became a little
less dependent on the king than they had been; our law was protected against
Romanism and our constitution against the monarchical doctrines that Romanism
might have brought with it. On the other hand, law was divorced from literature; the
age for law reports, for Year Books, had come; the age for a great exposition of
English law had gone by. Happily in the fulness of the time the work had been done.

Bracton’s book is the crown and flower of English medieval Bracton.
jurisprudence. What we know of its author has been written
elsewhere, and may here be summed up very briefly.146 His name was Henry of
Bratton; he was a Devonshire man, and in all likelihood he began his career as
William Raleigh’s clerk. In 1245 he was already a justice in eyre and was holding a
dispensation granted by Raleigh and confirmed by Innocent IV. for the tenure of three
benefices. From 1248 until his death in 1268 he steadily took assizes in the south-
western counties. From 1248 to 1257 or thereabouts he was among the justices who
held pleas coram ipso rege: in other words, he was a justice of the nascent court of
King’s Bench, and the very highest places in church and state must have seemed to be
open to him. We may see him witnessing the king’s charters along with the great folk
of the realm. Shortly after this, however, he appears to have retired or been dismissed
from his position in the central court, though to his dying day he acted as a justice of
assize. In 1259 he became rector of the Devonshire parish of Combe-in-Teignhead, in
1261 rector of Bideford, in 1264 archdeacon of Barnstaple, and in the same year
chancellor of Exeter cathedral. Thus he seems to have left the king’s court just at the
time when the revolutionary movement that preceded the barons’ war came to its first
crisis; and just about the same time he was told to restore to the treasury the large
store of plea rolls, those of Martin Pateshull and William Raleigh, which had been in
his possession. Whether he was disgraced, and, if so, whether he had offended the
king or the barons, we cannot as yet decide. In the last year of his life, in 1267, he
appeared once more in a prominent place; he was a member of a commission of
prelates, magnates and justices appointed to hear the complaints of “the disinherited”:
that is, of those who had sided with Simon de Montfort.

His is an unfinished book; we do not know that it was published His book.
in his lifetime. The main part of it seems to have been written
between 1250 and 1258, the time when he had to surrender the plea rolls; apparently
he was still glossing and annotating it at a later time; but at present we cannot always
distinguish his own addiciones from those of later commentators. A “note book” has
come down to us which seems to have been his. It contains some two thousand cases
copied from the rolls of Pateshull and Raleigh, over against some of which marginal
notes have been written; to all appearance they came from Bracton’s hand or from
Bracton’s head.147

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 134 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Romanesque in form, English in substance—this perhaps is the Character of
best brief phrase that we can find for the outcome of his labours; Bracton’s work.
but yet it is not very good.148 He had at his command and had
diligently studied the works of the famous Italian lawyer,
Azo of Bologna; he also made some use at first hand of various Italian form.
parts of the Corpus Iuris Civilis, of the Decretum, and of the
Decretals, and he levied contributions from the canonist Tancred. His general idea of
a law book, of the method by which law should be expounded and legal principles
harmonized, has been derived from these sources. He has borrowed from them large
maxims, such as might well be conceived as parts of universal and “natural” law; he
has borrowed some more specific rules, for the more part such as deal with matters of
rare occurrence in England; he is guilty of a few classical pedantries and sometimes
uses foreign terms instead of those that were current in the courts. It is highly
probable that if many of his fellows on the bench had shared his bent, the romano-
canonical jurisprudence would have become a “subsidiary law” in England: that is, a
law to be adduced when enacted law and customary law had no clear answer for a
question; but we cannot treat his book as a proof that such was the case in his own
day.149 We do not know that any of his fellows had more than that superficial
acquaintance with the law of the church which was common among ecclesiastics: they
might be archdeacons, they might hope to be bishops, but the judicial functions of
bishops and archdeacons were by this time commonly delegated to their
professionally learned “officials.” But further, his own knowledge of Roman law was
by no means very deep when judged by the standard of his time, and we have little
reason for believing that he had acquired it academically. His neology leaves no mark
on the technical language of the courts; the “tenant for term of years” does not
become an “usufructuary”; and if upon a plea roll we find a litigant made to talk about
the corpus and animus necessary for possession, we shall find that the roll is
Bracton’s own.150 Still Bracton’s debt—and therefore our debt—to the civilians is
inestimably great. But for them, his book would have been impossible; but for them,
as the fourteenth century will show us, some beggarly collection of annotated writs
would have been the best that we should have had from him; we should have missed
not only the splendid plan, the orderly arrangement, the keen dilemmas, but also the
sacerdotal spirit of the work.151

On the other hand, the main matter of his treatise is genuine English substance.
English law laboriously collected out of the plea rolls of the
king’s court. He expressly cites some five hundred decisions, and whenever we
compare his treatise with the records—and this can now be done at innumerable
points—he seems to be fairly stating the practice of the king’s court. No doubt our
modern, our very modern, conception of rigorous “case law” was far from his mind.
He assumed a much larger liberty of picking and choosing his “authorities” than
would be conceded now-a-days to an English text-writer. But still his endeavour is to
state the practice, the best and most approved practice, of the king’s court, and of any
desire to romanize the law we must absolutely acquit him. To take the most obvious
instance, in the controversy about the legitimation of bastards he is as staunch an
opponent of the leges and canones as the most bigoted baron could be, and indeed we
find some difficulty in absolving him or his teachers from a charge of having falsified
history in order to secure a triumph for English law.152 The few political inclinations

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 135 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

that we can detect in his book are those of a royal justice; they are anti-feudal and
anti-ecclesiastical leanings. He will maintain the state against the feudal lords, the
kingly power against seignorial justice, and pious churchman, dutiful son of the pope,
though he be, he will maintain the state against the church. As to the flagrant disputes
between the king and the incorporate realm, the universitas regni, perhaps his mind
fluctuated; perhaps, though no courtier, he sometimes said less than he thought; but at
any rate his Romanism has not made him an advocate of absolute monarchy.153

The book was successful. Some forty or fifty manuscripts of it Later law books.
will seem a sufficient body of witnesses to attest its popularity,
especially when we remember that the text of some of our oldest Year Books has to
be sought for in unique copies. It became the basis of the legal literature of Edward
I.’s day. Gilbert Thornton, chief justice of the king’s bench, made an epitome of it.154
This we have lost, unless it be represented by some of those manuscripts of Bracton’s
work which omit his references to the plea rolls. About the year 1290 two other books
were written which are to a great degree reproductions of the classical treatise.155
The so-called “Fleta” is little better than an ill-arranged epitome; what its author has
not borrowed from Bracton he has for the more part borrowed from some of those
little tracts on husbandry and the economic management of manorial affairs which
were becoming popular.156 The so-called “Britton” has better claim to be called an
original work. It is in French, and the whole law has been put into the king’s mouth. It
must have been useful, manuscripts of it are common; on the other hand, Fleta was to
all appearance a failure. To these we might add some little tracts on procedure
ascribed to Ralph Hengham, one of Edward I.’s chief justices. This however is not the
place in which to speak at any length of these products of the Edwardian age; but to
name them has been necessary since sometimes they will help us to discover the law
of Henry III.’s reign when Bracton fails us. After all that has been done towards
publishing the records of that reign, we shall still be dependent on Bracton; but
enough has been published to prove that he is a guide who will not mislead us, if only
we are careful to distinguish—and this is not very difficult—between his statement of
English law and his cosmopolitan jurisprudence.

Of other law books of Henry’s reign little is known and little Other law books of
need be said; the gap between them and Bracton’s Summa is Henry’s reign.
immense. Copies of the chancery’s “register of original writs”
were pretty widely distributed; often a religious house had a copy; sometimes brief
notes of an intensely practical character would be written in them. There is extant, and
now in the press, an interesting book of precedents for the use of pleaders in the
king’s court which belongs to Henry’s time,157 and from that time we begin to get
precedents for the use of pleaders in the local courts, conveyancing precedents, and
precedents for manorial accounts;158 also brief disquisitions on rural economy which
throw light on legal arrangements.159 Once more we must mention—though they are
not literature—the voluminous rolls of the two benches, the exchequer and the
chancery. About the middle of the century these are being supplemented by the rolls
of local courts,160 while much may be learnt from the manorial surveys or “extents,”
numerous examples of which have been preserved in the monastic cartularies and
elsewhere.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 136 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Before the end of the thirteenth century there already exists a The legal profession.
legal profession, a class of men who make money by
representing litigants before the courts and giving legal advice. The evolution of this
class has been slow, for it has been withstood by certain ancient principles.161 The
old procedure required of a litigant that he should appear before the court in his own
person and conduct his own cause in his own words. For one thing, the notion of
agency, the notion that the words or acts of Roger may be attributed to Ralph because
Ralph has been pleased to declare that this shall be so, is not of any great antiquity. In
the second place, so long as procedure is very formal, so long as the whole fate of a
lawsuit depends upon the exact words that the parties utter when they are before the
tribunal, it is hardly right that one of them should be represented by an expert who has
studied the art of pleading:—John may fairly object that he has been summoned to
answer not the circumspect Roger but the blundering Ralph; if Ralph cannot state his
own case in due form of law,
he is not entitled to an answer. Still in yet ancient days a litigant Pleaders.
is allowed to bring into court with him a party of friends and to
take “counsel” with them before he pleads. In the Leges Henrici it is already the
peculiar mark of an accusation of felony that the accused is allowed no counsel, but
must answer at once; in all other cases a man may have counsel.162 What is more, it
is by this time permitted that one of those who “are of counsel with him” should speak
for him. The captiousness of the old procedure is defeating its own end, and so a man
is allowed to put forward some one else to speak for him, not in order that he may be
bound by that other person’s words, but in order that he may have a chance of
correcting formal blunders and supplying omissions. What the litigant himself has
said in court he has said once and for all, but what a friend has said in his favour he
may disavow.163 The professional pleader makes his way into the courts, not as one
who will represent a litigant, but as one who will stand by the litigant’s side and speak
in his favour, subject however to correction, for his words will not bind his client until
that client has expressly or tacitly adopted them. Perhaps the main object of having a
pleader is that one may have two chances of pleading correctly. Even in the thirteenth
century we may see the pleader disavowed. One John de Planez, in pleading for
William of Cookham, called Henry II. the grandfather instead of the father of King
John; William disavowed the plea, and the advocate was amerced for his blunder.164
And so, before any one is taken at his pleader’s words, it is usual for the court to ask
him whether he will abide by the plea.165 Just because the pleader makes his
appearance in this informal fashion, as a mere friend who stands by the litigant’s side
and provisionally speaks on his behalf, it is difficult for us to discover whether
pleaders are commonly employed and whether they are already members of a
professional class. The formal records of litigation take no notice of them unless they
are disavowed.166

It is otherwise with the attorney, for the attorney represents his Attorneys.
principal: he has been appointed, attorned (that is, turned to the
business in hand), and for good and ill, for gain and loss (ad lucrandum et
perdendum) he stands in his principal’s stead. In England and in other countries the
right to appoint an attorney is no outcome of ancient folk-law; it is a royal privilege.
The king, as is often the case, has put himself outside the old law: he appoints
representatives to carry on his multitudinous law-suits, and the privilege that he

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 137 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

asserts on his own behalf he can concede to others. Already in Glanvill’s day every
one who is engaged in civil litigation in the king’s court enjoys this right of
appointing an attorney, or rather, for the word attorney is hardly yet in use, a
responsalis.167 But the right is narrowly limited. The litigant must appear before the
court in his proper person and must there put some one else in his stead to gain or lose
in some particular plea. Whatever is more than this can only be accomplished by
means of a royal writ. Thus it is only under a royal writ that a man can have a general
prospective power of appointing attorneys to act for him in future litigation.168 Such
writs are by no means matters of course; they usually recite some special reasons why
an exceptional boon should be granted:—the grantee is going abroad on the king’s
business, or he is the abbot of a royal monastery and too old or infirm for laborious
journeys.169 In the communal courts a litigant could not appoint an attorney unless he
had the king’s writ authorizing him to do so.170

The attorneys of the period which is now before us do not seem Attorneys not
to be in any sense “officers of the court,” nor do they as yet professional.
constitute a closed professional class. Probably every “free and
lawful” person may appear as the attorney of another; even a woman may be an
attorney,171 and a wife may be her husband’s attorney.172 A bishop will appoint one
of his clerks, an abbot one of his monks, a baron will be represented by his steward or
by one of his knights. Occasionally, however, as we look down the list of attorneys
we see the same names repeating themselves, and draw the inference that there are
some men who are holding themselves out as ready to represent whoever will employ
them. A change comes in Edward I.’s day which gives a new definiteness to the class
of attorneys as well as to the class of counsellors.

Recurring for a moment to the class of counsellors, we observe Professional pleaders.
that Richard of Anesty, when he prosecuted his tedious suit,
followed the royal court in its peregrinations with a group of “friends and helpers and
pleaders” in his train.173 For his litigation in the ecclesiastical courts he naturally
required professional aid, and he had it from Italian lawyers resident in this country;
among them was Master Ambrose, who was in every sense one of the first lawyers in
England, first in time as well as first in learning.174 But even in the king’s court he
was surrounded by friends and helpers and pleaders, and among them was Ranulf
Glanvill.175 For a long time, however, we hear very little of professional counsellors
in the temporal courts. This is the more noticeable because Matthew Paris is full of
complaints against the pack of bellowing legists whom the king employs and whom
he lets slip whenever an episcopal election goes against his wishes.176 They are not
men skilled in English law; they are romanists and canonists; many of them are
foreigners; one of the most infamous of them, if we judge them by Matthew’s report,
is the renowned Hostiensis.177 The only persons who are mentioned as learned in
English law are the king’s justices,178 and they to all appearance have been selected,
not out of a body of advocates seeking for employment from the general public, but
from among the king’s civil servants, the clerks of his court and of his chancery and
those laymen who have done good work in subordinate offices. However, when in his
account of the year 1235 Paris tells us how Henry sought to crush the aged Hubert de
Burgh with accusations, he represents Hubert’s faithful counsellor Lawrence of St.
Albans as having to contend against “all the advocates of the bench whom we

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 138 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

commonly call countors.”179 In 1268 “a countor of the bench” assaulted a justice of
the Jews in Westminster Hall; his fellow countors interceded for him.180 The king
already seems to have permanently retained a number of persons to plead his causes
for him; but whether these men are free to plead for other people when the king’s
interests are not in question, and whether they aspire to any exclusive right of
audience we do not know. But lawyers seem to have rapidly taken possession of the
civic courts in London. In 1259 the king was compelled to concede to the citizens that
in their hustings and other courts they might plead their own causes without lawyers
(causidici), saving pleas of the crown, pleas of land, and pleas of unlawful
distraint.181 This looks as if in London there had been an unusually rapid
development of a professional caste. By this time the practice of the ecclesiastical
courts would serve as an example. The attorney is the temporal equivalent for the
canonical proctor, and the “narrator” or “countor” is the temporal equivalent for the
canonical advocate. In 1237 the legatine constitutions of Cardinal Otho had ordained
that no one was to serve as an advocate in an ecclesiastical court, except in certain
exceptional cases, until he had taken an oath before his bishop to do his duty and not
to pervert justice.182 Thus a close body of professional advocates was formed, and
this would serve as a model for a similar body of professional “countors.”

Then in Edward I.’s day we see that the king has retained Regulation of
pleaders who are known as his servants or serjeants at law pleaders and
(servientes ad legem). Already in 1275 it is necessary to threaten attorneys.
with imprisonment “the serjeant countor” who is guilty of
collusive or deceitful practice.183 Also there seem to be about the court many young
men who are learning to plead, and whose title of “apprentices” suggests that they are
the pupils of the serjeants. We may infer that already before 1292 these practitioners
had acquired some exclusive right of audience. In that year King Edward directed his
justices to provide for every county a sufficient number of attorneys and apprentices
from among the best, the most lawful and the most teachable, so that king and people
might be well served. The suggestion was made that a hundred and forty of such men
would be enough, but the justices might, if they pleased, appoint a larger number.184

By this measure, which, however, may not have been the first of The two branches of
its kind, “both branches of the profession” were placed under the the profession.
control of the justices, and apparently a monopoly was secured
for those who had been thus appointed.185 Some twelve years earlier the mayor and
aldermen of London had been compelled to lament the ignorance and ill manners of
the pleaders and attorneys who practised in the civic courts, and to ordain that none
should habitually practise there who had not been duly admitted by the mayor. They
added that no countor was to be an attorney, and thus sanctioned that “separation of
the two branches of the profession” which still endures in England; but really, as we
have already seen, these two branches had different roots:—the attorney represents his
client, appears in his client’s place, while the countor speaks on behalf of a litigant
who is present in court either in person or by attorney. The civic fathers were further
compelled to threaten with suspension the pleader who took money with both hands
or reviled his antagonist.186 It is from 1292 that we get our first Year Book, and we
see that already the great litigation of the realm, the litigation which is worthy to be
reported, is conducted by a small group of men. Lowther, Spigornel, Howard,

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 139 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Hertpol, King, Huntingdon, Heyham—one of them will be engaged in almost every
case. Nor is it only in the king’s court and the civic courts that the professional
pleader is found. Already in 1240 the Abbot of Ramsey ordained that none of his
tenants was to bring a pleader into his courts to impede or delay his seignorial
justice,187 and in 1275 we find one William of Bolton practising in partnership with
other pleaders before the court of the fair of St Ives.188 Many details are still obscure,
but in Edward I.’s day it is that our legal profession first begins to take a definite
shape. We see a group of counsel, of serjeants and apprentices on the one hand, and a
group of professional attorneys on the other, and both of them derive their right to
practise from the king either mediately or immediately.189

So soon as there is a legal profession, professional opinion is Professional opinion.
among the most powerful of the forces that mould the law, and
we may see it exercising its influence directly as well as indirectly. In Edward I.’s day
it is impossible to uphold a writ which “all the serjeants” condemn, and often enough
to the medieval law-reporter “the opinion of the serjeants” seems as weighty as any
judgment.190

That the professional pleader of Edward I.’s day had learnt law Decline of
as a science, had attended lectures or read books, we do not Romanism.
know; very probably his education had generally been of a
purely empirical kind. Sometimes he was a legist. In 1307 a judge says to counsel,
“Passeley, you are a legist and there is a written law which speaks of this matter, Cogi
possessorem etc. ”191 A certain knowledge of, and reverence for, the broader maxims
of “the written law” is apparent. “Volenti non fit iniuria,” “Melior est conditio
possidentis,” “Res inter alios acta,” such phrases as these can be produced in court
when there is occasion for them.192 They could be easily found; the Decretals of
Pope Boniface VIII. end with a bouquet of these showy proverbs.193 When in any
century from the thirteenth to the nineteenth an English lawyer indulges in a Latin
maxim, he is generally, though of this he may be profoundly ignorant, quoting from
the Sext. But we have only to look at manuscripts of Bracton’s text to see that the
influence of Roman law is on the wane, is already very slight. Transcribers who can
copy correctly enough good homely stuff about the assize of novel disseisin, make
utter nonsense of the subtler discussions which Bracton had borrowed from Azo. A
climax is reached when the actio familiae herciscundae has become an action about
the family of the lady Herciscunda, or, since even her name is outlandish, the lady of
Hertescombe, who probably had estates in Devonshire.194

In England that Roman institution, the notarial system, never Notaries and
took deep root.195 Our kings did not assume the imperial conveyancers.
privilege of appointing notaries, nor did our law require that
deeds or wills or other instruments in common use should be prepared or attested by
professional experts. Now and again when some document was to be drawn up which
would demand the credence of foreigners, a papal notary would be employed. It was a
papal notary who framed the most magnificent record of King Edward’s justice, the
record of the suit in which the crown of Scotland was at stake.196 But it is worthy of
remark that, while in our temporal courts the art of recording pleas had been brought
to a high degree of perfection, the English ecclesiastical courts seem to have borne

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 140 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

among continental canonists a bad repute because of their careless and inartistic
records. This we learn from an Italian notary, one John of Bologna, who dedicated to
Archbishop Peckham a collection of judicial precedents, destined—so its author
hoped—to reform our slovenly insular documents.197 In later days there were always
some apostolic notaries in England. In the fourteenth century the testament of a
prelate or baron will sometimes take the form of a notarial instrument. But an
acquaintance with the law of the land sufficient to enable one to draw a charter of
feoffment, a lease, a mortgage, a will, was in all likelihood a common
accomplishment among the clergy, regular and secular. If we closely scan the
cartulary of any rich religious house we shall probably infer that it had its own
collection of common forms. It is quite conceivable that some instruction in
conveyancing was given in the universities. From the second half of the thirteenth
century we begin to get books of precedents, and sometimes the formulas of purely
temporal transactions will be mixed up with instruments destined to come before the
ecclesiastical courts.198 From the Norman Conquest onwards the practice of using
written instruments slowly spreads downwards from the king’s chancery. The private
deeds (cartae) are for the more part very brief, clear and business-like instruments;
they closely resemble those that were executed in northern France. The most elaborate
documents are those which proceed from the king’s court. If a man wishes to do with
land anything that is at all unusual, he does it by means of a fictitious action brought
and compromised in the king’s court. The instrument which records this compromise,
this “final concord” or “fine,” will be drawn up by the royal clerks, and one copy of it,
the so-called “foot of the fine,” will remain with the court. By this means, before the
thirteenth century is out, some complex “family settlements” are being made. Also the
Lombard merchants have brought with them precedents for bonds, lengthy, precise
and stringent forms, which they compel their English debtors to execute.199

On the whole it is hard for us to determine the degree to which Knowledge of the
knowledge of the law had become the exclusive property of a law.
professional class. On the one hand, there were many things in
Bracton’s book which were beyond the comprehension of the laity— some things, we
suspect, that were too refined for the ordinary lawyer—and it was fully admitted that
the prudent litigant should employ a skilful pleader.200 Even the writer of the Leges
Henrici had observed that we better understand another person’s cause than our
own.201 But the group of professional lawyers which had formed itself round the
king’s court was small; the king’s permanent justices were few, the serjeants were
few, and some seven score apprentices and attorneys seemed enough. A great deal of
legal business was still being transacted, a great deal of justice done, by those who
were not professional experts. The knight, the active country gentleman, would at
times be employed as a justice of assize or of gaol delivery, besides making the
judgments in the county court. The cellarer of the abbey would preside in its manorial
courts and be ready to draw a lease or a will. The freeholders of the shire, besides
attending the communal and the manorial courts, would have hard work to do as
jurors; often would they be called to Westminster, and as yet the separation of matter
of law from matter of fact was not so strict that a juror could afford to know nothing
of legal rules. In one way and another the common folk were constantly receiving
lessons in law; the routine of their lives often took them into the courts, even into
courts presided over by a Pateshull, a Raleigh, a Bracton. This healthy co-operation of

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 141 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

all sorts and conditions of men in the work of the law prevents the jurist from having
it all his own way and making the law too fine a thing for common use.

English law was already spreading beyond the bounds of English law in Wales.
England. In 1272 the time had almost come when Wales would
be subjugated and Edward’s great Statutum Walliae,202 the most comprehensive code
that any English legislator issues during the middle ages, would be promulgated.
Meanwhile in the marches English and Welsh law had met; but the struggle was
unequal, for it was a struggle between the modern and the archaic. Welsh law had
indeed a literature of its own, but had hardly passed that stage which is represented in
England by the Leges Henrici. No doubt there were those who cherished the old tribal
customs. The men of Urchinfield, a district within the English county of Hereford, tell
the king’s justices that the manslayer may make his peace with the kinsmen of the
slain, and they ask that this ancient usage may be observed.203 On the other hand, the
men of Kerry, which lies within the modern county of Montgomery, petition the king
that they may live under English law, because that law has suppressed the blood-feud
and does not punish the innocent along with the guilty.204 The old law of blood-feud
and wergild, or galanas as the Welsh call it, will die hard in Wales; still it is doomed
to die, and along with it the tribal system whence it springs.

Into Ireland Englishmen have carried their own law. A smaller English law in
England has been created across the Channel, with chancery, Ireland.
exchequer, “benches,” council, sheriffs, coroners, all reproduced
upon a diminished scale. Statutes and ordinances and “the register of original writs”
were sent from England into Ireland; the king’s English court claimed a supremacy
over his Irish tribunals, and multitudinous petitions from Ireland came before the
English council at its parliaments.205 It is probable however that, even in those parts
of Ireland which were effectually subject to English domination, the native Irish were
suffered to live under their old law so long as they would keep the king’s peace; but
we may see Innocent IV. intervening to protect them against what seems to be an
iniquitous application of the system of “personal law.”206 Individual Irishmen, like
the men of the Welsh Kerry, petitioned that they might be allowed the benefits of
English law; they probably meant by this that they wished their lives protected by a
law which knew how to hang a manslayer instead of suffering him to purchase peace
by wergild or “eric” fine.207

Whether the king of Scotland was in any degree subject to the English and Scottish
king of England, was a question about which Englishman and law.
Scot would have disagreed in the year 1272 and about which
they will hardly be brought to agree even now. Old precedents of homage and release
from homage were being treasured on either side of the border and were soon to be
brought into debate. But the utmost claimed for the English king was a feudal
overlordship, and En glish law, as English law, had no power north of the Tweed.
Nevertheless, we may doubt whether a man who crossed the river felt that he had
passed from the land of one law to the land of another. In the first place, for some
while he would have known himself to be under a law settled and put in writing by a
joint committee of English and Scottish knights, the law of the marches, which
decided that whenever a charge of felony lay between Englishman and Scot there

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 142 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

must be trial by battle:—he would have known himself to be under a true international
law.208 But suppose him served with a writ. He might notice the name of Henry
where he was accustomed to see Alexander, or the name of some Scottish burgh in the
place of the familiar Westmonasterium; but nothing else in the writ would seem
strange. If the proper names be omitted, we shall hardly now tell a Scottish charter of
feoffment from an English, and the few Scottish records of litigation that have come
down to us from the thirteenth century might have been written by the clerks of
Robert Bruce, the chief justice of England. Of what went on beyond the Forth it is not
for us to hazard a word, but for long ages past the law that prevailed between Forth
and Tweed must have been very like the law that prevailed between Tweed and
Humber. And then, if Frankish feudalism in the guise of a Norman army had
conquered England, it had almost as effectually, though in more peaceful guise,
conquered whatever of Scotland was worthy of conquest. On the whole, for a long
time past the two nations, if two nations we must call them, had been good friends;
the two kingly families had been closely allied. Many a great baron can hardly have
known to which nation he belonged. The concentrated might of the English kingship,
the imperious chancery, the exact and exacting exchequer, were ideals for the Scottish
king; the English baron may well have yearned for franchises and regalities that were
denied to him but enjoyed by his Scottish peers. The problem of the Regiam
Maiestatem, the Scottish version of Glanvill’s book, we must not try to solve; but it
seems clear enough from abundant evidence that, at the outbreak of the war of
independence, the law of Scotland, or of southern Scotland, was closely akin to
English law.209 That it had been less romanized than English law had been is highly
probable: no Bracton had set it in order by the method of the Summa Azonis. That it
was less uniform than was English law is also highly probable; the Scottish kingship
was not so strong as was the English, and in Scotland there were ethnical differences
impeding the progress of a common law. These seem to be the main causes which,
when enforced, during the struggle for independence, by a loathing for all that was
English, sever the stream of Scottish from that of English legal history. Romanism
must come sooner or later; the later it comes the stronger it will be, for it will have
gone half way to meet the medieval facts.210 Uniformity, if it cannot be evolved from
within, must be imported from without. Thus in the end Roman law is received in
Scotland as subsidiary and academic law.

A comparison of the legal systems of various states as they were Precocious maturity
at some remote point of time will always be a difficult task, even of English law.
for one who knows the history of each separate system. But if we
could look at western Europe in the year 1272, perhaps the characteristic of English
law which would seem the most prominent would be its precocity. Its substance was,
to say the least, as modern and enlightened as was that of the systems with which it
could be profitably compared. It had suppressed some archaisms which might still be
found in France or at any rate in Germany. It knew nothing of the wergild save as a
trait of Welsh barbarism; at the pope’s bidding it had abolished the ordeal; it was
rapidly confining the judicial combat and the oath with oath-helpers within very
narrow limits. But we would speak rather of its form than of its matter. The great
charter, the provisions of Merton and Marlborough, the minor ordinances, these in
1272 constituted what we must here call a large body of enacted law. And if in one
sense England was never to be a “country of the written law,” it had become

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 143 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

preeminently the country of the written record. Every right, every remedy must be
made definite by writing; if it cannot find expression in some chancery formula, it
must cease to exist. Then, again, English law is becoming the law of one court, or of a
small group of intimately connected courts, the law of Westminster Hall, the law that
in its full perfection is known only to some dozen men, the king’s justices. Every
right, every remedy, is being sharpened and hardened by the ceaseless activity of a
court which in the course of a year decides thousands of cases, the greatest and the
smallest, coming to it from all corners of the land.

Uniformity is thus secured, and even a certain simplicity, for Characteristics of
some parts of our common law, notably the law of status, must, English law.
if we have regard to continental systems, be called surprisingly
simple. Closely connected with its uniformity is another distinctive trait:—in England
the law for the great men has become the law for all men, because the law of the
king’s court has become the common law. For example, the primogenitary rules of
inheritance are rapidly spreading downwards from their native home among the
military fees through all the subjacent strata, and the one “formal contract” of English
law can be made only by those who can write or hire others to write for them.
Certainty also has been attained; Bracton’s hands are far less free than are the hands
of Philip Beaumanoir or Eike of Repgau; at every moment he must be thinking of the
formulas in the chancery’s register. English law is modern in its uniformity, its
simplicity, its certainty; it is modern also in the amount of Romanism that it has
absorbed. In Germany the theoretical sanctity of Justinian’s texts has as yet borne
little fruit in practice; in northern France the new Roman jurisprudence is still lying on
the surface and hardly beginning to mix with the traditional customs, while in
England it has already done a great work, and almost all the work that it will ever do.
But all these modern excellences are being purchased at a price which may be heavy.
The judges can no longer introduce much that is new; they know nothing of any
system but their own; Roman law has lost its glamour. All now depends upon those
who will wield the legislative power in this country, upon the “sovereign one” or the
“sovereign many.” A vigilant, an enlightened, an expert legislator may be able to keep
this rigid formulary system in harmony with the ever changing necessities of
mankind, introducing new “forms of action” and (for this will be equally necessary)
ruthlessly abolishing all that is obsolete. But unless we are to have this continuous
legislative activity—and we can hardly have it without despotism—the omens for the
future of English law are not very favourable. It may easily become a commentary, an
evasive commentary, on antique writs and statutes. It will circumvent by tortuous
paths the obstacles that it cannot surmount. Archaic institutions which the rationalism
of the thirteenth century had almost destroyed, wager of battle, wager of law, will live
on until the nineteenth, moribund but mischievous. It may become an occult science, a
black art, a labyrinth of which the clue has been lost.

But now, having brought down our general sketch of the growth of English law to the
accession of Edward I., “the English Justinian,” we may turn to an examination of its
rules and doctrines as we find them in the age of Glanvill and the age of Bracton.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 144 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[Back to Table of Contents]

BOOK II

THE DOCTRINES OF ENGLISH LAW IN THE EARLY
MIDDLE AGES

CHAPTER I

Tenure
How best to arrange a body of medieval law for the use of Arrangement of this
modern readers is a difficult question. Of the two obvious book.
methods each has its disadvantages. On the one hand, if we were
to adopt the arrangement which would be the best for a code or digest of our modern
law, though we might possibly succeed in forcing the old rules into new pigeon-holes,
we should run a great risk of ignoring distinctions which our ancestors saw, and a yet
greater risk of insisting on distinctions which for them had no existence. On the other
hand, were we to aim at such an arrangement as a medieval lawyer would have
adopted, the result would be to hide those matters which interest us behind the
intricate mass of procedural rules which interested him. The nature of both these
dangers may be explained by a few words.

The arrangement of Bracton’s treatise will for a moment seem Possible methods of
one that is familiar enough to every lawyer; it is the most famous arrangement.
of all schemes. Following the Institutes, he treats of Persons,
Things, Actions. But if we may take the number of folios given to each of these topics
as an indication of its importance in his eyes,
we find that the relation between them may be expressed by the (1)The medieval
figures 7: 91: 356.1 Nor is this all. It is to his “law of actions” scheme of law.
that we must often look for substantive English law. To a high
degree in his treatment of “persons,” to a less, but marked, degree in his treatment of
“things,” he is dependent on Azo and Roman Law. It is only as he approaches the law
of “actions” that we begin to know that he is giving us practicable English law and not
speculative jurisprudence. As to Glanvill, the whole of his book is, we may say,
devoted to the law of actions; he plunges at once into an account of the writ of right;
and such arrangement as the Leges Henrici have, puts jurisdiction and procedure in
the forefront. That characteristic mark of ancient jurisprudence, the prominent place
given to what we sometimes speak of as “adjective law,” the apparent subordination
of rights to remedies, is particularly noticeable in our own case, and endures until
modern times: and naturally, for our common law is the law of courts which gradually
acquired their jurisdiction by the development and interpretation of procedural
formulas. Still, though we shall have to say much about the “forms of action,” we
need not introduce the rules of property law as though they were but subsidiary to the
law about assizes, writs of right and actions of trespass.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 145 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

The danger that would be run were we to follow the other of the (2)The modern
two courses may be illustrated by reference to that division of scheme.
law into “public” and “private” which seems eminently well
suited to be among the first outlines of any institutional work on modern law. Bracton
knew of the distinction and could notice it as a matter of scholastic learning; but he
makes little use of it.2 He could hardly have used it and yet dealt fairly with his
materials. Feudalism, we may say, is a denial of this distinction. Just in so far as the
ideal of feudalism is perfectly realized, all that we call public law is merged in private
law: jurisdiction is property, office is property, the kingship itself is property; the
same word dominium has to stand now for ownership and now for lordship. Again,
the theory urged by a modern writer,3 that “public law” is but a department of the
“law of persons,” however inapplicable to modern states, may sometimes be applied
with advantage to the middle ages. Any such conception as that of “the state” hardly
appears on the surface of the law; no line is drawn between the king’s public and
private capacities, or it is drawn only to be condemned as treasonable. The king, it is
true, is a highly privileged as well as a very wealthy person; still his rights are but
private rights amplified and intensified. He has greater rights than any other lord; but
it is a matter of degree; many lords have some “regalities”; the Earl of Gloucester has
many, and the Earl of Chester more. Certainly it would be easy for us to exaggerate
the approach made in any country, more especially in En gland, to the definite
realization of this feudal ideal; but just in so far as it is realized, “public law” appears
as a mere appendix to “real property law” modified in particular cases by a not very
ample “law of persons.”

Now albeit we cannot adopt either of these two methods to the Our own course.
neglect of the other and must consider both medieval lawyers
and modern readers, we need not work without a plan. In any body of law we are
likely to find certain ideas and rules that may be described as elementary. Their
elementary character consists in this, that we must master them if we are to make
further progress in our study; if we begin elsewhere, we are likely to find that we have
begun at the wrong place. Only some experience of the particular body of law that is
in question will direct us to the proper quarter; but as regards the law of the feudal
time we can hardly do wrong in turning to the law of land tenure as being its most
elementary part. We shall begin therefore by speaking of land tenure, but in the first
instance we shall have regard to what we may call its public side; its private side we
may for a while postpone, though we must not forget that this distinction between the
two sides of property law is one that we make for our own convenience, not one that
is imposed upon us by our authorities. From land tenure we shall pass to consider the
law of personal condition. The transition will be easy, for the broadest distinction
between classes of men, the distinction between freemen and men who are not free, is
intricately connected with land tenure, in so much that the same word villenagium is
currently used to denote both a personal status and a mode of tenure. Then we shall
turn to the law of jurisdiction, for this again we shall find to be intertwined with the
land law; and along with the law of jurisdiction we must examine “the communities of
the land.” Having dealt with these topics we shall, it is hoped, have said enough of
political structure and public affairs, for those matters which are adequately discussed
by historians of our constitution we shall avoid. Turning then to the more private
branches of our law, we shall take as our chief rubrics, “Ownership and Possession,”

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 146 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

“Contract,” “Inheritance” and “Family Law,” while our two last chapters will be
devoted, the one to “Crime and Tort,” the other to “Procedure.” We are well aware
that this arrangement may look grotesque to modern eyes; since, for example, it
thrusts the law of persons into the middle of the law of property. Our defence must be
that, after many experiments, we have planned this itinerary as that which will
demand of us the least amount of repetition and anticipation, and therefore enable us
to say most in the fewest words. We shall speak for the more part of the law as it
stood in the period that lies between 1154 and 1272. This will not prevent us from
making occasional excursions into earlier or later times when to do so seems
advisable, nor from looking now and again at foreign countries; but with the age of
Glanvill and the age of Bracton, we shall be primarily concerned. Again, we shall be
primarily concerned with the evolution of legal doctrines, but shall try to illustrate by
real examples some of the political and economic causes and effects of those rules
that are under our examination. We have not to write a practical hand-book of
medieval law, nor, on the other hand, have we to describe the whole of medieval
life.—But an abstract discourse about method is seldom very profitable. Therefore,
without more ado, we turn to the law of land tenure and begin with its fundamental
dogma.

§ 1.

Tenure In General
Every acre of English soil and every proprietary right therein Derivative and
have been brought within the compass of a single formula, which dependent tenure.
may be expressed thus:— Z tenet terram illam de . . . domino
Rege. The king himself holds land which is in every sense his own; no one else has
any proprietary right in it; but if we leave out of account this royal demesne, then
every acre of land is “held of” the king. The person whom we may call its owner, the
person who has the right to use and abuse the land, to cultivate it or leave it
uncultivated, to keep all others off it, holds the land of the king either immediately or
mediately. In the simplest case he holds it immediately of the king; only the king and
he have rights in it. But it well may happen that between him and the king there stand
other persons; Z holds immediately of Y, who holds of X, who holds of V, who holds .
. . of A, who holds of the king. Let us take one real instance:—in Edward I.’s day
Roger of St. German holds land at Paxton in Huntingdonshire of Robert of Bedford,
who holds of Richard of Ilchester, who holds of Alan of Chartres, who holds of
William le Boteler, who holds of Gilbert Neville, who holds of Devorguil Balliol,
who holds of the king of Scotland, who holds of the king of England.4 A feudal
ladder with so many rungs as this has is uncommon; but theoretically there is no limit
to the possible number of rungs, and practically, as will be seen hereafter, men have
enjoyed a large power, not merely of adding new rungs to the bottom of the ladder,
but of inserting new rungs in the middle of it. The person who stands at the lower end
of the scale, the person who seems most like an owner of the land, and who has a
general right of doing what he pleases with it, is said to hold the land in demesne; Z
tenet terram in dominico, or in dominico suo.5 We suppose that he holds it of Y; in
that case Y is the lord (dominus) of Z, and Z is the tenant (tenens) of Y. But Y again is

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 147 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

said to hold the land; he holds it however not in demesne but in service (tenet terram
illam, non tamen in dominico sed in servitio); and Y again must hold it of
someone—let us say of X —whose tenant he will be, who will be his lord, and who
also will be said to hold the land in service. Ultimately we shall reach the king; A, or
some other person, will hold the land immediately of the king and be his tenant in
chief (in capite). Every person who stands between the king and him who holds in
demesne, every mesne lord or mesne, is both lord and tenant, lord as regards those
who stand below him, tenant as regards those who stand above.6

Before attempting to analyze this notion of dependent and Universality of
derivative tenure, let us first observe how universally it has been dependent tenure.
applied.7 Not only has every acre of land been brought within its
scope, so that the English lawyer cannot admit even a bare possibility of land being
holden of no one, but the self-same formula has been made to cover relationships
which have little in common. An Earl of Chester, who may at times behave like a
sovereign prince, holds his county palatine of the king; the cottier, who like enough is
personally unfree, holds his little croft of some mesne lord, or of the king himself.
Even when of late a new mode of cultivating the soil has made its appearance and
lords have let land to farmers for terms of years at substantial money rents, this new
relationship has been brought within the old formula: the lessee holds the land of the
lessor. Even when the tenant has no rent to pay, no temporal service to perform, even
when the land has been devoted to God and the saints and is possessed by a religious
house in free alms, still the formula has been found equal to the occasion: the
religious community holds the land of the donor. We see at once therefore that the
formula must be very elastic, that the notion of tenure must be in the highest degree
an abstract notion. In England tenure is no mark of a class, and we may say the same
of “feudal” tenure.

The term feodum, which in Anglo-French is represented by fe, Feudal tenure.
fie, fee and in English by fee, is one of the words which came in
with the Conqueror, and perhaps for a short while it carried about with it a sense of
military or noble tenure; but very soon it was so widely used as to imply no more than
heritability.8 This is its settled sense in the thirteenth century. To say of a tenant that
he holds in fee (tenet in feodo) means no more than that his rights are inheritable. He
does not hold for life, he does not hold for a term of years, he does not hold as
guardian of an heir, or as one to whom the land has been gaged as security for money;
he holds heritably and for his own behoof.9 But nothing more is implied as to the
terms of his holding, the relation between him and his lord. His duties to his lord may
be onerous or nominal, noble or humble, military or agricultural, but if his rights are
heritable, then he holds in fee and the land is feodum suum, at all events if his tenure
has about it no taint of villeinage.10 Thus we cannot, as continental writers do, treat
feudal law as distinct from the ordinary law of the land, a law to be administered by
special courts, a law which regulates some but not all of the proprietary rights that
men have in land. We can hardly translate into English the contrast which Germans
draw between Lehnrecht and Landrecht. Our Landrecht is Lehnrecht; in so far as
feudalism is mere property law, England is of all countries the most perfectly
feudalized. But this truth has another aspect:—our Lehnrecht is Landrecht; feudal law
is not a special law applicable only to one fairly definite set of relationships, or

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 148 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

applicable only to one class or estate of men; it is just the common law of England.
That extensive application of the feudal formula (Y tenet in feodo de X) which is
characteristic of England, and which perhaps was possible only in a conquered
country, must have impaired its intensive force.11 If it has to describe the relation
between the king and the palatine earl, the relation (slight enough in England)
between the pious founder and the religious house that he has endowed, the relation
between the lord of a manor and the tenants who help to plough and reap his fields,
the mere “cash nexus” between a lessor and a lessee who has taken the land heritably
at a full money rent, it cannot mean very much. But this collection of the most diverse
relationships under one head will have important effects; the lower “tenures” will be
assimilated to the higher, the higher to the lower; the “feud” must lose half its
meaning by becoming universal.12

It is clear then that of dependent or of feudal tenure in general, Analysis of dependent
little can be said: but still some analysis of it is possible. We may tenure.
at least notice that it seems to be a complex of personal rights
and of real rights. On the one hand, the lord has rights against his tenant, the tenant
rights against his lord: the tenant owes services to his lord, the lord, at least normally,
owes defence and warranty to his tenant. On the other hand, both lord and tenant have
rights in the land, in the tenement, the subject of the tenure.13 The tenant in demesne,
the tenant on the lowest step of the feudal scale, obviously has rights in the land,
amounting to a general, indefinite right of using it as he pleases. But his lord also is
conceived as having rights in the land. We have not adequately described his position
by saying that he has a right to services from his tenant. Of him as well as of his
tenant it may be said that he holds the land, not indeed in demesne but in service, that
the land is his land and his fee, and even that he is seised, that is, possessed of the
land.14 What has been said of the demesne tenant’s immediate lord, may be said also
of that lord’s lord; he also has rights in the land and the land is in some sort his. This,
when regarded from the standpoint of modern jurisprudence, is perhaps the most
remarkable characteristic of feudalism:—several different persons, in somewhat
different senses, may be said to have and to hold the same piece of land. We have
further to conceive of the service due from the tenant to his lord as being a burden on
the tenement. It is service owed by the tenement. This idea is so deeply engrained in
the law that the tenement is often spoken of as though it were a person who could be
bound by obligations and perform duties: hides and virgates must send men to the
war, must reap and mow and do suit of court; “these two half-hides ought to carry the
king’s writs whenever they come into the county.”15 But the vast liberty that men
have enjoyed of creating new tenures and sub-tenures gives us wonderful
complications: the obligation of the tenement has to be kept distinct from the
obligation of the tenant. The tenement may be burdened with military service, and yet,
as between lord and tenant, the lord and not the tenant may be bound to do it: all the
same the land itself is burdened with the duty and the lord’s overlord may have his
remedy against the land.

To take a simple case:—The king has enfeoffed A to hold by Obligations of the
military service; A can now proceed to enfeoff B (whether he can tenant and of the
do so without the king’s leave is a question which we postpone), tenement.
and may enfeoff B by some quite other service; B for example is

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 149 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

to pay A a money rent. Now as regards the king, the land is burdened with and owes
the military service, the king can enforce the service by distraining the land for its
performance, that is, by seizing any chattels that are found on it, which chattels will
probably belong to B, or (at least in some cases) by seizing the land itself. But A and B
on the occasion of the feoffment, though they cannot destroy the king’s right or free
the land from the military service, may none the less, as between themselves, settle
the incidence of that service: A may agree that he will do it, or the bargain may be that
B is to do it, besides paying his money rent to A. The terminology of Bracton’s day
and of yet earlier times neatly expresses the distinction between the service which the
tenant owes to his immediate lord by reason of the bargain which exists between
them, and the service which was incumbent on the tenement whilst it was in the lord’s
hand.
The former is intrinsec service, the latter forinsec service; the Intrinsec and forinsec
former is the service which is created by, which (as it were) service.
arises within, the bargain between the two persons, A and B,
whose rights and duties we are discussing; the latter arises outside that bargain, is
“foreign” to that bargain; nothing that the bargainers do will shift it from the land,
though, as between themselves, they can determine its incidence. Suppose that A has
undertaken to discharge this burden, then if the king attacks the land in B’ s hand, B
will have a remedy against A; there is a special form of action by which such remedy
is sought, the action of mesne (breve de medio), very common in the thirteenth
century; A who is mesne (medius) between the king and B is bound to “acquit” B of
this “forinsec service,” to hold him harmless against the king’s demands.16 And then,
if B enfeoffs C, the problem will reappear in a more complicated shape; some new
service will perhaps be created; for instance C, who is a parson, is to pray for the soul
of B’ s ancestors; but there are two other services incumbent on the land, the rent that
B owes to A, the military service that A owes to the king, and in one way or another
those services must be provided for. As between themselves, B and C can settle this
matter by the terms of their bargain, but without prejudice to the rights of A, and of
the king. It is no impossibility that Edward should hold in villeinage of Ralph, who
holds in free socage of the Prior of Barnwell, who holds in frankalmoin of Earl Alan,
who holds by knight’s service of the king.17 Just as at the present day one and the
same acre of land may be leasehold, copy-hold and freehold—for there is no land
without a freeholder—so in the past one and the same acre might be holden by many
different tenures. It owed many and manifold services, the incidence of which, as
between its various lords and tenants, had been settled by complicated bargaining.18

Little more could at this moment be said of tenure in general—an Classification of
abstraction of a very high order. Efforts, however, had been tenures.
made to classify the tenures, to bring the infinite modes of
service under a few heads, and before the end of the twelfth century the great outlines
which were to endure for long ages had been drawn, though neither in Glanvill, nor
even in Bracton, do we find just that scheme of tenures which became final and
classical. In particular, “fee farm” and “bur-gage” threaten to be coordinate with, not
subordinate to, “free socage”; “tenure by barony” is spoken of as something different
from “tenure by knight’s service”; and in the north there are such tenures as
“thegnage” and “drengage” which are giving the lawyers a great deal of trouble. Still,
subject to some explanations which can be given hereafter, we may say that in

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 150 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Bracton’s day tenures are classified thus:—they are either free or not free; the free
tenures are (1) frankalmoin, (2) military service, (3) serjeanty, (4) free socage. In this
order we will speak of them.19

§ 2.

Frankalmoin
At the beginning of the thirteenth century an ever-increasing Frankalmoin.
quantity of land was held by ecclesiastics, regular and secular, in
right of their churches by a tenure commonly known as frankalmoin, free alms, libera
elemosina. The service implied by this tenure was in the first place spiritual, as
opposed to secular service, and in the second place it was an indefinite service. Such
at least was the doctrine of later days.20 We may take the second characteristic first.
At all events in later days,21 if land was given to a churchman and there was a
stipulation for some definite service albeit of a spiritual kind (for example a
stipulation that the donee should sing a mass once a year or should distribute a certain
sum of money among the poor), the tenure thus created was called, not frankalmoin,
but tenure by divine service; the tenant might perhaps be compelled to swear fealty to
his lord, and the performance of the service might be exacted by distress or by action
in the king’s courts.22 On the other hand, if the tenant held in frankalmoin, that is, if
the terms of the gift (as was often the case) said nothing of service or merely
stipulated in a general way for the donee’s prayers, then no fealty was due; and only
by ecclesiastical censures could the tenant be compelled to perform those good offices
for the donor’s soul that he had impliedly or expressly undertaken. Perhaps this
distinction was admitted during the later years of the period with which we are now
dealing; but we shall hereafter see that in this region of law there was a severe
struggle between the temporal and the ecclesiastical courts, and very possibly an
attempt on the part of the former to enforce any kind of service that could be called
spiritual would have been resented. The question is of no great importance, because
stipulations for definite spiritual services were rare when compared with gifts in
frankalmoin.23

Here, as in France, the word elemosina became a technical word, Meaning of “alms.”
but it was not such originally. At first it would express rather the
motive of the gift than a mode of tenure that the gift creates. And so in Domesday
Book it is used in various senses and contexts. In some cases a gift has been made by
the king in elemosina, but the donee is to all appearance a layman; in one case he is
blind, in another maimed; he holds by way of charity, and perhaps his tenure is
precarious. To hold land “in charity” might well mean to hold during the giver’s
pleasure, and it may be for this reason that the charters of a later day are careful to
state that the gift has been made, not merely in alms, but “in perpetual alms.”24 Then,
again, in some parts of the country it is frequently noted that the parish priest has a
few acres in elemosina; in one case we learn that the neighbours gave the church
thirty acres in alms.25 There are, however, other cases in which the term seems to
bear a more technical sense: some religious house, English or French, holds a
considerable quantity of land in alms; we can hardly doubt that it enjoys a certain

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 151 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

immunity from the ordinary burdens incumbent on landholders in general, including
among such landholders the less favoured churches.26 And so again in the early
charters the word seems to be gradually becoming a word of art; sometimes we miss it
where we should expect to find it, and instead get some other phrase capable of
expressing a complete freedom from secular burdens.27 In the twelfth century, the
century of new monastic orders, of lavish endowments, of ecclesiastical law, the gift
in free, pure, and perpetual alms has a well-known meaning.28

The notion that the tenant in frankalmoin holds his land by a Spiritual service.
service done to his lord seems to grow more definite in course of
time as the general theory of tenure hardens and the church fails in its endeavour to
assert a jurisdiction over disputes relating to land that has been given to God. The
tenure thus becomes one among many tenures, and must conform to the general rule
that tenure implies service. Still this notion was very old.29 In charters of the twelfth
century it is common to find the good of the donor’s soul and the souls of his
kinsfolk, or of his lord, or of the king, mentioned as the motive for the gift: the land is
bestowed pro anima mea, pro salute animae meae. Sometimes the prayers of the
donees are distinctly required, and occasionally they are definitely treated as services
done in return for the land:30 thus, for example, the donor obliges himself to warrant
the gift “in consideration of the said service of prayers.”31 Not unfrequently,
especially in the older charters, the donor along with the land gives his body for
burial;32 sometimes he stipulates that, should he ever retire from the world, he shall
be admitted to the favoured monastery; sometimes he binds himself to choose no
other place of retirement; often it is said that the donees receive him into all the
benefits of their prayers.33

We have spoken as though gifts in frankalmoin were made to Gifts to God and the
men; but, according to the usual tenour of their terms, they were saints.
made to God. As Bracton says, they were made primo et
principaliter to God, and only secundario to the canons or monks or parsons.34 A
gift, for example, to Ramsey Abbey would take the form of a gift “to God and St.
Benet of Ramsey and the Abbot Walter and the monks of St. Benet,” or simply “to
God and the church of St. Benet of Ramsey,” or yet more briefly “to God and St.
Benet.”35 The fact that the land was given to God was made manifest by appropriate
ceremonies. Often the donor laid the charter of feoffment, or some knife or other
symbol of possession upon the altar of the church.36 Clauses denouncing
excommunication and damnation against all who should disturb the donee’s
possession did not go out of use at the Norman Conquest, but may be found in
charters of the twelfth century,37 nor was it uncommon for a religious house to obtain
a papal bull confirming gifts already made and thereafter to be made, and, whatever
might be the legal effect of such instruments, the moral effect must have been great.38
We are not entitled to treat these phrases which seem to make God a landowner as of
no legal value. Bracton more than once founds arguments upon them,39 and they
suggest that land given in frankalmoin is outside the sphere of merely human justice.

In later days the feature of tenure in frankalmoin which attracts Free alms and
the notice of lawyers is a merely negative feature, namely, the forinsec service.
absence of any service that can be enforced by the secular courts.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 152 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

But some distinctions must be drawn. The king might give land to a religious house
“in free, pure, and perpetual alms,” and in that case not only would no secular service
be due from the donee to the donor, but the land in the donee’s hand would owe no
secular service at all. But tenure in frankalmoin is by no means necessarily a tenure in
chief of the crown; indeed the quantity of land held in chief of the crown by
frankalmoin was never very large. It will be understood that an ecclesiastical person
might well hold lands, and hold them in right of his church, by other tenures. The
ancient endowments of the bishops’ sees and of the greater and older abbeys were
held by knight’s service; the bishop, the abbot, held a barony. Beside this, we
constantly find religious houses taking lands in socage or in fee farm at rents and at
substantial rents, and though a gift in frankalmoin might proceed from the king, it
often proceeded from a mesne lord. In this case the mere gift could not render the land
free from all secular service; in the donor’s hand it was burdened with such service,
and so burdened it passed into the hands of the donee.40 If the donee wished to get rid
of the service altogether, he had to go to the donor’s superior lords and ultimately to
the king for charters of confirmation and release. But, as between themselves, the
donor and donee might arrange the incidence of this “forinsec service” as pleased
them best. The words “in free, pure, and perpetual alms” seems to have implied that
the tenant was to owe no secular service to his lord; but they did not necessarily imply
that, as between lord and tenant, the lord was to do the forinsec service. And so we
find the matter settled in various ways by various charters of donation:— sometimes it
is stipulated that the tenant is to do the forinsec service,41 sometimes the lord burdens
himself with this,42 often nothing is said, and apparently in such case the service falls
on the lord.

Another rule of interpretation appears, though somewhat dimly. Pure alms.
In accordance with later books, we have spoken as though a gift
in frankalmoin, in free alms, always implied that no secular service was due from the
donee to the donor. But the words generally used in such gifts were “free, pure, and
perpetual alms,” and in Bracton’s day much might turn on the use of the word
“pure.”43 Seemingly there was no contradiction between a gift in “free and perpetual
alms” and the reservation of a temporal service, and many instances may be found of
such gifts accompanied by such reservations. This will give us cause to believe that
the exemption from secular service had not been conceived as the core of tenure in
frankalmoin; and if we find, as well we may, that a donor sometimes stipulates for
secular service, though he makes his gift not only in free but even in pure alms, our
belief will be strengthened.44

The key to the problem is given by the Constitutions of Free alms and
Clarendon (1164). Freedom from secular jurisdiction rather than ecclesiastical
freedom from secular service has been the focus of frankalmoin. jurisdiction.
“If,” says the famous document, “a dispute shall arise between a
clerk and a layman, or between a layman and a clerk, concerning any tenement which
the clerk asserts to be elemosina and the layman asserts to be lay fee, it shall be
determined by a recognition of twelve lawful men and the judgment of the chief
justiciar whether (utrum) the tenement belongs to elemosina or belongs to lay fee.
And if it be found to belong to elemosina, then the plea shall go forward in the
ecclesiastical court: but if it be lay fee, then in the king’s court, or, in case both

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 153 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

litigants claim to hold of the same lord, then in the lord’s court. And in consequence
of such a recognition, the person who is seised is not to lose his seisin until it has been
deraigned by the plea.”45 Let us observe how large a concession to the church the
great Henry is compelled to make, even before the murder of Becket has put him in
the wrong. This is all that those avitae leges, of which he talks so frequently, will give
him, and he claims no more. The clergy have established this principle:—All
litigation concerning land held in almoin belongs of right to the ecclesiastical courts.
All that the king insists on is this: that, if there is dispute whether the land be almoin
or no, this preliminary question must be decided by an assize under the eye of his
justiciar. Thus the assize Utrum is established. It is a preliminary process; it will not
even serve to give the claimant a possession ad interim; the possessor is to remain
possessed; it decides not the title to land, but the competence of courts. Here then we
find the essence of almoin as understood in the middle of the twelfth century:—the
land is subject to no jurisdiction save that of the tribunals of the church. Even to
maintain his royal right to decide the preliminary question of competence was no easy
matter for Henry. Alexander III. freely issued rescripts which ordered his delegates to
decide as between clerk and layman the title to English land, or at least the possessory
right in English lands: he went further, he bade his delegates award possession even in
a dispute between layman and layman, though afterwards he apologized for so doing.
The avitae leges, therefore, were far from conceding all that the clergy, all that the
pope demanded.46

They conceded, however, more than the church could The Assize Utrum.
permanently keep. If as regards criminous clerks the
Constitutions of Clarendon are the high-water-mark of the claims of secular justice, as
regards the title to lands they are the low-water-mark. In Normandy the procedure
instituted by Henry, the Breve de Feodo et Elemosina, which was the counterpart, and
perhaps the model, of our own Assisa Utrum, seems to have maintained its
preliminary character long after Henry’s son had forfeited the duchy: that is to say,
there were cases in which it was a mere prelude to litigation in the spiritual forum.47
In England it gradually and silently changed its whole nature; the Assisa Utrum or
action Juris Utrum48 became an ordinary proprietary action in the king’s court, an
action enabling the rectors of parochial churches to claim and obtain the lands of their
churches: it became “the parson’s writ of right.”49 Between the time of Glanvill and
the time of Bracton this great change was effected and the ecclesiastical tribunals
suffered a severe defeat.50

The formal side of this process seems to have consisted in a Defeat of the
gradual denial of the assize Utrum to the majority of the tenants ecclesiastical claims.
in frankalmoin, a denial which was justified by the statement that
they had other remedies for the recovery of their lands. If a bishop or an abbot thought
himself entitled to lands which were with-holden from him, he might use the ordinary
remedies competent to laymen, he might have recourse to a writ of right. But one
class of tenants in frankalmoin was debarred from this remedy, namely, the rectors of
parish churches. Bracton explains the matter thus:— When land is given to a religious
house, though it is in the first place given to God and the church, it is given in the
second place to the abbot and monks and their successors, or to the dean and canons
and their successors; so also land may be given to a bishop and his successors. If then

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 154 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

a bishop or an abbot has occasion to sue for the land, he can plead that one of his
predecessors was seised of it, just as a lay claimant might rely on the seisin of his
ancestor. But with the parish parson it is not so; we do not make gifts to a parson and
his successors; we make them to the church, e.g. “to God and the church of St. Mary
of Dale.”51 True, that if the parson is ejected from possession, he may have an assize
of novel disseisin, for he himself has been seised of a free tenement; but a proprietary
(as opposed to possessory) action he cannot bring. He can have no writ of right, for
the land has not been given to a parson and his successors, it has been given to the
church; he cannot therefore plead that his predecessor was seised and that on his
predecessor’s death the right of ownership passed to him; thus the assize Utrum is his
only remedy of a proprietary kind.52

In another context it might be interesting to consider the meaning The parson and his
of this curious argument; it belongs to the nascent law about land.
“corporations aggregate” and “corporations sole.” The members
of a religious house can already be regarded as constituting an artificial person; the
bishop also is regarded as bearing the persona of his predecessors; the vast temporal
possessions of the bishops must have necessitated the formation of some such idea at
an early time. But to the parish parson that idea has not yet been applied. The theory
is that the parish church itself is the landowner and that each successive parson
(persona ecclesiae) is the guardian and fleeting representative of this invisible and
immortal being.53 It has been difficult to find a “subject” who will bear the
ownership of the lands appropriated to parish churches, for according to a view which
is but slowly being discarded by the laity, the landowner who builds a church owns
that church and any land that he may have devoted to the use of its parson.54
However, our present point must be that legal argument takes this form—(1) No one
can use the assize Utrum who has the ordinary proprietary remedies for the recovery
of land; (2) All or almost all the tenants in frankalmoin, except the rectors of parish
churches, have these ordinary remedies; (3) The assize Utrum is essentially the
parson’s remedy; it is singulare beneficium, introduced in favour of parsons.55 This
argument would naturally involve a denial that the assize could be brought by the
layman against the parson. According to the clear words of the Constitutions of
Clarendon, it was a procedure that was to be employed as well when the claimant was
a layman as when he was a clerk. But soon the doctrine of the courts began to
fluctuate. Martin Pateshull at one time allowed the layman this action; then he
changed his opinion, because the layman had other remedies; Bracton was for
retracing this step, because trial by battle and the troublesome grand assize might thus
be avoided.56 One curious relic of the original meaning of this writ remained until
1285, when the Second Statute of Westminster gave an action to decide whether a
piece of land was the elemosina of one or of another church.57 The assize had
originally been a means of deciding disputes between clerks and laymen, or rather of
sending such disputes to the competent courts temporal or spiritual, and the
Constitutions of Clarendon contain a plain admission that if both parties agree that the
land is elemosina, any dispute between them is no concern of the lay courts.

We have been speaking of the formal side of a legal change, but Meaning of
must not allow this to conceal the grave importance of the frankalmoin in the
matters that were at stake. The argument that none but parochial thirteenth century.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 155 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

rectors have need of the Utrum, and the conversion of the Utrum from a preliminary
procedure settling the competence of courts, into a proprietary action deciding, and
deciding finally, a question of title to land, involve the assertion that all tenants in
frankalmoin (except such rectors) can sue and be sued and ought to sue and be sued
for lands in the temporal courts by the ordinary actions. And this, we may add,
involves the assertion that they ought not to sue or be sued elsewhere. The
ecclesiastical courts are not to meddle in any way with the title to land albeit held in
frankalmoin. To prevent their so doing, writs are in common use prohibiting both
litigants and ecclesiastical judges from touching “lay fee” (laicum feodum) in the
courts Christian; and in Bracton’s day it is firmly established that for this purpose land
may be lay fee though it is held in free, pure, and perpetual alms.58 The interference
of the spiritual courts with land has been hemmed within the narrowest limits. The
contrast to “lay fee” is no longer (as in the Constitutions of Clarendon) elemosina, but
consecrated soil, the sites of churches and monasteries and their churchyards, to
which, according to Bracton, may be added lands given to churches at the time of
their dedication.59 The royal court is zealous in maintaining its jurisdiction; the plea
rolls are covered with prohibitions directed against ecclesiastical judges;60 and it is
held that this is a matter affecting the king’s crown and dignity—no contract, no oath
to submit to the courts Christian, will stay the issue of a writ.61 But the very
frequency of these prohibitions tells us that to a great part of the nation they were
distasteful. As a matter of fact, a glance at any monastic annals of the twelfth century
is likely to show us that the ecclesiastical tribunals, even the Roman curia, were
constantly busy with the title to English lands, especially when both parties to the
litigation were ecclesiastics. Just when Bracton was writing, Richard Marsh at the
instance of Robert Grosseteste was formulating the claims of the clergy:—“He who
does any injury to the frankalmoin of the church, which therefore is consecrated to
God, commits sacrilege; for that it is res sacra, being dedicated to God, exempt from
secular power, subject to the ecclesiastical forum, and therefore to be protected by the
laws of the church.”62 It is with such words as these in our minds that we ought to
contemplate the history of frankalmoin. A gift in free and pure alms to God and his
saints has meant not merely, perhaps not principally, that the land is to owe no rent,
no military service to the donor, but also and in the first place that it is to be subject
only to the laws and courts of the church.63

§ 3.

Knight’S Service
We now turn to military tenure, and in the first place should Military tenure.
warn ourselves not to expect an easy task. In some of our modern
books military tenure has a definiteness and a stability which it never had elsewhere.
An army is settled on the land, is rooted in the land. The grades in “the service”
correspond to, and indeed are, the grades of landholdership; the supreme landlord is
commander-in-chief; each of his immediate tenants is the general of an army corps;
the regiments, squadrons, companies, answer to honours or manors or knight’s fees.
All is accurately defined; each man knows his place, knows how many days he must
fight and with what arms. This “feudal system” is the military system of England

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 156 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

from the Norman Conquest onwards throughout the middle ages; by means of it our
land is defended and our victories are won in Wales and in Ireland, in Scotland and in
France.—When however we look at the facts, all this definiteness, all this stability,
vanish. We see growth and decay: we see decay beginning before growth is at an end.
Before there is much law about military tenure it has almost ceased to be military in
any real sense. We must have regard to dates. Every one knows that the military
tenure of Charles I.’s reign was very different from the military tenure of Edward I.’s;
but this again was very different from the military tenure of Henry I.’s or even of
Henry II.’s reign.

Soon after the Conquest a process begins whereby the duty of Growth and decay of
service in the army becomes rooted in the tenure of land. This military tenure.
goes on for a century; but before it is finished, before the system
of knight’s fees has been well ordered and arranged, the kings are already discovering
that the force thus created is not what they want, or is not all that they want. It may
serve to defend a border, to harry Wales or Scotland for a few weeks in the summer,
but for continuous wars in France it will not serve; the king would rather have money;
he begins to take scutages. This, as we shall soon see, practically alters the whole
nature of the institution. Another century goes by and scutage itself has become
antiquated and unprofitable; another, and scutage is no longer taken. Speaking
roughly we may say that there is one century (1066–1166) in which the military
tenures are really military, though as yet there is little law about them; that there is
another century (1166–1266) during which these tenures still supply an army, though
chiefly by supplying its pay; and that when Edward I. is on the throne the military
organization which we call feudal has already broken down and will no longer
provide either soldiers or money save in very inadequate amounts. However, just
while it is becoming little better than a misnomer to speak of military tenure, the law
about military tenure is being evolved, but as a part rather of our private than of our
public law. The tenant will really neither fight nor pay scutage, but there will be harsh
and intricate law for him about the reliefs and wardships and marriages that his lord
can claim because the tenure is military. Thus in speaking of tenure by knight’s
service as it was before the days of Edward I., we have to speak not of a stable, but of
a very unstable institution, and if of necessity we describe it in general terms, this
should not be done without a preliminary protest that our generalities will be but
approximately true. As to scutage, in the whole course of our history this impost was
levied but some forty times, and we cannot be certain that the method of assessing and
collecting it remained constant. An English lawyer turning to study the history of
these matters should remember that if Littleton had cared to know much about them,
he would have had to devote his time to antiquarian research.64

By far the greater part of England is held of the king by knight’s Units of military
service (per servitium militare): it is comparatively rare for the service.
king’s tenants in chief to hold by any of the other tenures. In
order to understand this tenure we must form the conception of a unit of military
service. That unit seems to be the service of one knight or fully armed horseman
(servitium unius militis) to be done to the king in his army for forty days in the year, if
it be called for. In what wars such service must be done, we need not here determine;
nor would it be easy to do so, for from time to time the king and his barons have

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 157 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

quarrelled about the extent of the obligation, and more than one crisis of constitutional
history has this for its cause. It is a question, we may say, which never receives any
legal answer.65

Even the limit of forty days seems to have existed rather in The forty days.
theory than in practice, and its theoretic existence can hardly be
proved for England out of any authoritative document.66 But we hear of some such
limit in Norman, French and German law, and attempts have been made to trace it
back to the days of the Karlovingian emperors. From the Touraine of the thirteenth
century we have a definite statement. “The barons or men of the king are bound, if
summoned, to follow him in his host and to serve at their own cost forty days and
forty nights with as many knights as they owe him . . . And if the king will keep them
more than forty days and forty nights at their cost, they need not stay unless they will;
but if the king will keep them at his cost for the defence of the realm, they ought by
rights to stay; but if the king would take them out of the realm, they need not go
unless they like, after they have done their forty days and forty nights.”67 But the
force of such a rule is feeble; when in 1226 the Count of Champagne appealed to it
and threatened to quit the siege of Avignon, Louis VIII. swore that if he did so his
lands should be ravaged.68 In England when a baron or knight is enfeoffed, his
charter, if he has one, says no more than that he is to hold by the service of one knight
or of so many knights. When the king summons his tenants to war, he never says how
long they are to serve. The exception to this rule is that they are told by John that they
are to serve for two quadragesims, eighty days, at the least.69 Occasionally in the
description of a military serjeanty, it is said that the serjeant is to serve for forty days,
but to this are often added the words “at his own cost,” and we are left to guess
whether he is not bound to serve for a longer time at his lord’s cost.70 In 1198
Richard summoned a tenth part of the feudal force to Normandy; nine knights were to
equip a tenth; the Abbot of St. Edmunds confessed to having forty knights; he hired
four knights (for his own tenants had denied that they were bound to serve in
Normandy) and provided them with pay for forty days, namely, with 36 marks; but he
was told by the king’s ministers that the war might well endure for a year or more,
and that, unless he wished to go on paying the knights their wages, he had better make
fine with the king; so he made fine for £100.71 In 1277 the knights of St. Albans
served in a Welsh campaign for eight weeks; during the first forty days they served at
their own cost; afterwards the king paid them wages.72 No serious war could be
carried on by a force which would dissipate itself at the end of forty days, and it
seems probable that the king could and did demand longer service, and was within his
right in so doing, if he tendered wages, or if, as was sometimes the case, he called out
but a fractional part of the feudal force.73 We have to remember that the old duty of
every man to bear arms, at least in defensive warfare, was never—not even in
France—completely merged in, or obliterated by, the feudal obligation.74 Just when
there seems a chance that this obligation may become strictly defined by the operation
of the law courts, the king is beginning to look to other quarters for a supply of
soldiers, to insist that all men shall be armed, to compel men of substance to become
knights, even though they do not hold by military tenure, and to issue commissions of
array.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 158 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

But these units of military service, however indeterminate they Knight’s fees.
may be, have become, if we may so speak, territorialized. A
certain definite piece of land is a knight’s fee (feodum militis); another tract is
conceived as made up of five or ten knight’s fees; another is half, or a quarter, or a
fortieth part of a knight’s fee, or, to use the current phrase, it is the fee of half, or a
quarter, or a fortieth part of one knight (feodum quadragesimae partis unius
militis).75 The appearance of small fractional parts of a knight’s fee could hardly be
explained, were it not that the king has been in the habit of taking money in lieu of
military service, of taking scutage or escuage (scutagium), a sum of so much money
per knight’s fee. Without reference to this we might indeed understand the existence
of halves of knight’s fees, for practice has sanctioned the equation duo servientes =
unus miles, two serjeants will be accepted in lieu of one knight;76 but a fortieth part
of the service of one knight would be unintelligible, were it not that from time to time
the service of one knight can be expressed in terms of money. Already in Henry II.’s
reign we hear of the twelfth, the twenty-fourth part of a knight’s fee;77 in John’s reign
of the fortieth;78 and we soon hear of single acres which owe a definite quantum of
military service, or rather of scutage.

To represent to ourselves the meaning and effect of this Varying size of
apportionment is no easy matter. In the first place, we have to knight’s fees.
observe that the term “knight’s fee” does not imply any
particular acreage of land. Some fees are much larger than others. This truth has long
been acknowledged and is patent.79 We may indeed see in some districts, for
example among the knights of Glastonbury, many fees of five hides apiece;80 but in a
single county we may find a hide of land reckoned as a half, a third, a fourth, a fifth,
and a sixth of a knight’s fee.81 In the north of England one baron holds sixteen
carucates by the service of ten knights, while in another barony the single knight’s fee
has as many as fourteen carucates.82 The fees held of the Abbot of Peterborough
were extremely small; in some cases he seems to have got a full knight’s service from
a single hide or even less;83 on the other hand, a fee of twenty-eight carucates may be
found;84 and of Lancashire it is stated in a general way that in this county twenty-four
carucates go to the knight’s fee.85 In one case, perhaps in other cases, the law had
made some effort to redress this disparity: the fees of the honour of Mortain were
treated as notoriously small; three of them were reckoned to owe as much service as
was owed by two ordinary fees.86 Perhaps a vague theory pointed to twenty librates
of land as the proper provision for a knight; but even this is hardly proved.87

Another difficulty arises when we ask the question, what was the Nature of the
effect of this apportionment, and in particular what persons did it apportionment.
bind? Modern lawyers will be familiar with the notion that an
apportionment of a burden on land may be effectual among certain persons,
ineffectual as regards others. Let us suppose that A owns land which is subject to a
rent-charge of £100 in favour of M and a land-tax of £10 per annum; he sells certain
acres to X; A and X settle as between themselves how the burdens shall be borne; they
agree that each shall pay a half, or perhaps one of them consents to accept the whole
burden. Now, allowing that this is an effectual agreement between them, we still have
the question whether it can in any way affect the rights of M or of the king, who have
hitherto been able to treat the whole land as subject to the whole rent-charge and the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 159 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

whole tax. It will not therefore surprise us if we find that the apportionment of
military service was not absolute.

We may begin by considering the relation between the king and The apportionment
his tenants in chief. We have good reason to believe that the between the king and
Conqueror when he enfeoffed his followers with tracts of his tenant in chief.
forfeited land defined the number of knights with which they
were to supply him, and also that he defined the number of knights that were to be
found by the cathedral and monastic churches whose land had not been forfeited. It
would not be true to say that in this way the whole of England was, as between the
king and his immediate tenants, cut up into knights’ fees. From the Conquest onwards
he had immediate tenants who held of him by frankalmoin, by serjeanty, in socage;
still in this manner a very large part of England was brought within the scope of
military contracts or what could be regarded as such. How definite these contracts
were we cannot say, for to all seeming they were not expressed in writing. The only
documentary evidence that the great lord of the Conqueror’s day could have produced
by way of title-deed, was, in all probability, some brief writ which commanded the
royal officers to put him in seisin of certain lands and said nothing about the tenure by
which he was to hold them. And again, in the case of the churches, if we speak of a
contract, we are hardly using the right word; it was in the king’s power to dictate
terms, and he dictated them. Whether in so doing he paid much or any regard to the
Old English law and the ancient land-books, is a question not easily decided, for we
know little of the legal constitution of Harold’s army. The result was capricious. The
relative wealth of the abbeys of Peterborough, St. Edmund’s, St. Albans and Ramsey
cannot have been expressed by the figures 60 : 40 : 6 : 4, which represented their
fighting strength in the twelfth century; St. Albans may have profited by a charter of
King Offa, at which modern diplomatists have looked askance.88 But, at any rate as
regards the forfeited lands of the English nobles, William had a free hand; he could
stipulate for so many units of military service from this count and so many from that
baron. Apparently he portioned out these units in fives and tens. The number of
knights for which a great baron is answerable in the twelfth century is generally some
multiple of five, such as twenty, or fifty. The total number of knights to which the
king was entitled has been extravagantly overrated. It was certainly not 60,000, nor
was it 32,000; we may doubt whether it exceeded 5,000. The whole feudal array of
England would in our eyes have been but a handful of warriors. He was a powerful
baron who owed as many as sixty knights. We are not arguing that William
introduced a kind of tenure that was very new in England; but there seems to be no
room for doubt that the actual scheme of apportionment which we find existing in the
twelfth and later centuries, the scheme which as between king and tenant in chief
makes this particular tract of land a fee of twenty or of thirty knights, is, except in
exceptional cases, the work of the Conqueror.89

At any rate in Henry II.’s day the allotment of military service Honours and
upon the lands of the tenants in chief may be regarded as baronies.
complete. It is already settled that this tenant in chief owes the
king the service of one knight, while another owes the service of twenty knights.
Historians have often observed that the tenants in chief of the Norman king, even his
military tenants in chief, form a very miscellaneous body, and this is important in our

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 160 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

constitutional history; a separation between the greater and the lesser tenants must be
effected in course of time, and the king has thus a power of defining what will
hereafter be the “estate” of the baronage. In Henry II.’s day the king had many tenants
each of whom held of him but one knight’s fee, or but two or three knights’ fees. On
the other hand, there were nobles each of whom had many knights’ fees; a few had
fifty and upwards. Now to describe the wide lands held of the king by one of his
mightier tenants, the terms honour and barony were used. Between these two terms
we can draw no hard line; honour seems to be generally reserved for the very largest
complexes of land, and perhaps we may say that every honour was deemed a barony,
while not every barony was usually called an honour; but this seems a matter settled
by fashion rather than by law; for instance, it is usual to give the name barony, not
honour, to the lands which a bishop holds by military service, though some of these
baronies were very large.90 To mark the inferior limit of the honours and baronies is
not easy. We cannot say that any particular number of knights’ fees was either
necessary or sufficient to constitute a barony; in particular, we cannot accept the
theory current in after times, that a barony contains thirteen knights’ fees and a third,
and therefore is to a knight’s fee as a mark is to a shilling.91 This equation seems to
have been obtained, not by an inductive process, but by a deduction, which started
with the rule that while the relief paid for a single knight’s fee was a hundred
shillings, that paid for a barony was a hundred marks. But neither can we make the
facts square with this theory, nor, as will be seen below, can we treat the rule about
reliefs as being so ancient as the constitution of baronies.92 Nor must we think of the
barony or honour as surrounded by a ring-fence; fragments of it will often lie
scattered about in various counties, though there is some castle or some manor which
is accounted its “head.”

We find it said of a man not only that he holds a barony (tenet The barony or honour
baroniam), but also that he holds by barony (tenet per as a complex of
baroniam). This phrase will deserve discussion hereafter; for the knights’ fees.
present it is only necessary to notice that every military tenant in
chief of the king, whether he has a barony or no, is deemed to owe the service of a
certain number of knights. That number may be large or small. Let us suppose that in
a given case it is fifty. Then in a sense this tenant may be said to hold fifty knights’
fees. But all the land, at least if all of it be held by one title, and every part of it, is
answerable to the king for the fifty knights. This tenant may enfeoff some fifty
knights, making each of them liable to serve in the army; he may enfeoff more, giving
each feoffee but a fractional part of a fee, that is to say, making him answerable for
but a fractional part of one knight’s service; he may enfeoff fewer, making each of
them answerable for the service of several knights; he may retain much land in his
own hand, and look to hiring knights when they are wanted. But, as between the king
and himself, he has fifty knights’ fees; he is answerable, and the land that he holds is
answerable, for the production of fifty men. Every acre in the honour of Gloucester
was liable to the king for the service of some two hundred knights and more. If the
Earl of Gloucester makes default in providing the due number of knights, the king
may distrain throughout the honour, or seize the honour into his hands. The exact
nature of the power which a lord had of exacting service due to him from a tenement
need not be here considered; but the main principle, which runs through the whole
law on this subject, is that the service due from the tenant is due also from the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 161 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

tenement, and can be enforced against the tenement into whosesoever hands it may
come, regardless of any arrangement that the tenant may have made with his
subtenants.

This may be illustrated by the case of lands held in frankalmoin Relativity of the
of a mesne lord, who himself holds by military service. In this knight’s fee.
case something like an exception was occasionally admitted. The
canons of Wroxton held land in frankalmoin of John Montacute; the land was
distrained for scutage; but on the petition of the canons, the sheriff was bidden to
cease from distraining, “because the frankalmoin should not be distrained for scutages
so long as John or his heirs have other lands in the county whence the scutages may
be levied.” This is an exception, and a carefully guarded exception; if the tenant has
given land in frankalmoin, the king will leave that land free from distress, provided
that there be other land whence he can get his service.93 Thus, let us say that a baron
holds twenty knights’ fees, and has twenty knights each enfeoffed of a single fee; the
boundaries between these fees in no way concern the king; the whole tract of land
must answer for twenty knights. An early example of this may be given:—at some
time before 1115 the Bishop of Hereford gave Little Hereford and Ullingswick to
Walter of Gloucester for the service of two knights; Walter gave Ullingswick as a
marriage portion for his daughter Maud free from all knight’s service, and thus, as
between all persons claiming under him, the whole service of two knights was thrown
on to Little Here ford. Thus really “a knight’s fee” is a relative term; what is two
knights’ fees as between C and B, is but part of two as between B and A.94 In the time
of Henry II. when the king was beginning to take stock of the amount of military
service due to him, it was common for a tenant in chief to answer that he confessed
the service of, for example, ten knights, that he had five knights enfeoffed each of a
knight’s fee, and that the other five he provided from his demesne.95 In one case,
even at the end of the thirteenth century, a lord had not carved out his land into
geographically distinct knights’ fees. Somehow or another the Abbot of Ramsey held
his broad lands by the service of only four knights, and we may therefore say that he
had four knights’ fees. But those fees were not separated areas; he had a number of
tenants owing him military service; they chose the four who on any particular
occasion should go to the war, and the others contributed to defray the expense by an
assessment on the hide.96 Thus the statement that a man holds a barony, or a parcel of
knights’ fees, of the king, tells us nothing as to the relationship between him and his
tenants, and does not even tell us that he has any tenants at all.

The military tenant in chief of the crown was as a general rule Duty of the military
bound to go to the war in person. If he held by the service of fifty tenant in chief.
knights, he was bound to appear in person with forty-nine. If he
was too ill or too old to fight, he had to send not only a substitute but also an
excuse.97 Women might send substitutes and so might ecclesiastics.98 The monks of
St. Edmunds thought it a dangerous precedent when in 1193 Abbot Samson in person
led his knights to the siege of Windsor.99 How the nature of this obligation was
affected by the imposition of scutage is a question that we are not as yet prepared to
discuss.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 162 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

We must first examine the position of a tenant who holds by Position of the
knight’s service of a mesne lord, and we will begin with a simple military subtenant.
case. One A holds a mass of lands, it may be a barony or no, of
the king in chief by the service of twenty knights, and B holds a particular portion of
these lands of A by the service of one knight. Now in the first place, B’ s tenement,
being part of A’ s tenement, owes to the king the service of twenty knights; it can be
distrained by the king for the whole of that service. But, as between A and B, it owes
only the service of one knight, and if the king distrains it for more, then A is bound to
acquit B of this surplus service; this obligation can be enforced by an action of
“mesne.”100 On the other hand, B has undertaken to do for A the service of one
knight. The nature of this obligation demands a careful statement:— B is bound to A
to do for A a certain quantum of service in the king’s army. We say that B is bound to
A; B is not bound to the king; the king it is true can distrain B’ s tenement; but
between B and the king there is no personal obligation.101 The king cannot by reason
of tenure call upon B to fight; if somehow or other A provides his twenty knights, it is
not for the king to complain that B is not among them.102 None the less, the service
that B is bound to do, is service in the king’s army. Here we come upon a principle of
great importance. According to the law of the king’s court, no tenant is bound to fight
in any army but the king’s army, or in any quarrel but the king’s quarrel. It might well
have been otherwise; we may see that it nearly was otherwise; we may be fairly
certain that in this respect the law was no adequate expression of the current morality;
still we cannot say that the law of England ever demanded private warfare.103
Indubitably the military tenant often conceived himself bound to fight for his lord in
his lord’s quarrel; but the law enforced no such obligation. True, the obligation which
it sanctioned was one that bound the man to the lord, and in a certain sense bound him
to fight for his lord. It was at the lord’s summons that the man came armed to the host,
and if the lord had many knights, the man fought under the lord’s banner; still he was
only bound to fight in the king’s army and the king’s quarrel; his service was due to
his lord, still in a very real sense it was done for the king and only for the king:—in
short, all military service is regale servitium. It is the more necessary to lay stress
upon this principle, for it had not prevailed in Normandy. The Norman baron had
knights who were bound to serve him, and the service due from them to him had to be
distinguished from the service that he was bound to find for the duke. The Bishop of
Coutances owed the duke the service of five knights, but eighteen knights were bound
to serve the bishop. The honour of Montfort contained twenty-one knights’ fees and a
half for the lord’s service; how many for the duke’s service the jurors could not say.
The Bishop of Bayeux had a hundred and nineteen knights’ fees and a half; he was
bound to send his ten best knights to serve the king of the French for forty days, and,
for their equipment, he took twenty Rouen shillings from every fee; he was bound to
find forty knights to serve the duke of Normandy for forty days, and for their
equipment he took forty Rouen shillings from every fee; but all the hundred and
nineteen knights were bound to serve the bishop with arms and horses.104

As a matter of fact, however, we sometimes find, even in Knight’s service due
England, that knight’s service is due, at least that what is called to a lord who owes
knight’s service is due, to a lord who owes no knight’s service to none.
the king or that more knight’s service is due to the lord than he
owes to the king. One cause of this phenomenon may be that the lord is an ecclesiastic

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 163 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

who has once held by military service, but has succeeded in getting his tenure
changed to frankalmoin by the piety of the king or the negligence of the king’s
officers. The chronicler of the Abbey of Meaux tells us how the abbot proved that he
held all his lands in Yorkshire by frankalmoin and owed no military service, and then
how he insisted that lands were held of him by military tenure and sold the wardships
and marriages of his tenants.105 Since he was not bound to find fighting men, his
tenants were not bound to fight; still their tenure was not changed; he was entitled to
the profitable casualties incident to knight’s service. A similar result might be
obtained by other means. The Abbot of St. Edmunds held his barony of the king by
the service of forty knights; such at least was the abbot’s view of the matter; but he
had military tenants who, according to his contention, owed him altogether the service
of fifty-two knights: or, to put it another way, fifty-two knights’ fees were held of
him, though as between him and the king his barony consisted of but forty.106 The
view taken by the knights was that the abbot was entitled to the service of forty
knights and no more; the fifty-two fees had to provide but forty warriors or the money
equivalent for forty. But in Richard I.’s day Abbot Samson, according to the admiring
Jocelin, gained his point by suing each of his military tenants in the king’s court. Each
of the fees that they held owed the full contribution to every scutage and aid, so that
when a scutage of 20 shillings was imposed on the knight’s fee, the abbot made a
clear profit of £12.107 Bracton says distinctly that the tenant in socage can create a
military subtenure. This, however, seems to mean that a feoffor may, if he chooses,
stipulate for the payment of scutage, even though the tenement owes none to the king.
In such case the scutage may seem to us but a rent capriciously assessed, but
apparently Bracton would call the tenure military, and it would serve to give the lord
the profitable rights of wardship and marriage.108 The extraordinary licence which
men enjoyed of creating new tenures gave birth to some wonderful complications. If
B holds a knight’s fee of A, then A can put X between himself and B, so that B will
hold of X and X of A; but further, the service by which X will hold of A need not be
the service by which B has hitherto been holding of A and will now hold of X. In
Richard’s reign Henry de la Pomerai places William Briwere between himself and a
number of tenants of his who altogether owe the service of 55⁄24 knights or
thereabouts; but William is to hold of Henry by the service of one knight.109 To
“work out the equities” arising between these various persons would be for us a
difficult task: still no good would come of our representing our subject-matter as
simpler than really it is. Lastly, as already hinted, we must not suppose that the barons
or even the prelates of the Norman reigns were always thinking merely of the king’s
rights when they surrounded themselves with enfeoffed knights. They also had their
enemies, and among those enemies might be the king. Still the only military service
demanded by anything that we dare call English law was service in the king’s host. It
would further seem, that Henry II., not without some success, endeavoured to deduce
from this principle the conclusion that if a tenant in chief enfeoffed more knights than
he owed to the king, he thereby increased the amount of the service that the king
could demand from him. Such a tenant in chief had, we may say, been making
evidence against himself: this was the opinion of his royal lord.110

The practice of taking scutages must have introduced into the Scutage.
system a new element of precision and have occasioned a
downward spread of the tenure that was called military. The extent of the obligation

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 164 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

could now be expressed in terms of pounds, shillings and pence; and tenants who
were not really expected to fight might be bound to pay scutage. On the other hand,
the history of scutage is full of the most perplexing difficulties. Before approaching
these we will once more call to mind the fact that scutage is an impost of an
occasional kind, that there never were more than forty scutages or thereabouts.

We are wont to think of scutage as of a tax introduced by Henry Nature of scutage.
II. in the year 1159, a tax imposed in the first instance on the
military tenants in chief by way of commutation for personal service, a tax which they
in their turn might collect from their subtenants. But it seems extremely probable that
at a much earlier date payments in lieu of military service were making their
appearance, at all events in what we may call the outer circles of the feudal
system.111 In no other way can we explain the existence, within a very few years
after 1159, of small aliquot parts of knights’ fees. When it is said that a man holds the
twentieth part of a fee, this cannot mean that he is bound to serve for two days in the
army; it must mean that he and others are bound to find a warrior who will serve for
forty days, and that some or all of them will really discharge their duty by money
payments. We read too in very ancient documents of payments for the provision of
knights112 and of an auxilium exercitus, the aid for a military expedition.113 In
Normandy the equivalent for our scutage is generally known as the auxilium
exercitus.114 In England the two terms seem in course of time to have acquired
different meanings; the lord exacted a scutage from his military, his nominally
military tenants, while he took an “army aid” from such of his tenants as were not
military even in name.115 But what we may call the natural development of a system
of commutation and subscription between tenants in the outer circles of feudalism,
was at once hastened and perplexed by a movement having its origin in the centre of
the system, which thence spread outwards. The king began to take scutages. At this
point we must face some difficult questions.

In what, if any, sense is it true that the military service of the Scutage between the
tenants in chief was commuted into scutage? The king’s ban goes king and the tenant in
forth summoning the host to a campaign. It says no word of chief.
scutage. Can the baron who owes twenty knights sit at home and
say, “I will not go to the war; and if I do not go, no worse can befall me than that I
shall have to pay scutage for my twenty fees, and this indeed will be no heavy burden,
for I shall be entitled to take a scutage from the knights whom I have enfeoffed”—can
the baron say this? Even if he can, we must notice that his self-interested calculations
involve one unknown quantity. It may be that on some occasions the king really did
give the baron an option between leading his knights to battle and paying some fixed
sum. But such was not the ordinary course, at all events in the thirteenth century. The
rate at which the scutage was to be levied was not determined until after the defaulters
had committed their defaults and the campaign was over; the baron therefore who
stayed at home did not know whether he would have to pay twenty marks, or twenty
pounds, or forty pounds. But as a matter of fact, we find that in Henry III.’s day and
Edward I.’s the tenant in chief who does not obey the summons must pay far more
than the scutage; he must pay a heavy fine. No option has been given him; he has
been disobedient; in strictness of law he has probably forfeited his land; he must make
the best terms that he can with the king. Thus in respect of the campaign of 1230, a

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 165 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

scutage of three marks (£2) was imposed upon the knight’s fee; but the Abbot of
Evesham had to pay for his 4½ fees, not £9, but £20; the Abbot of Pershore for his 2
fees, not £4, but £10; the Abbot of Westminster for his 15 fees, not 45 marks, but 100
marks.116 In Edward I.’s day the fine for default is an utterly different thing from the
scutage; in 1304 he announces that he will take but moderate fines from ecclesiastics
and women, if they prefer to pay money rather than send warriors.117 We hear of
such fines as £20 on the fee when the scutage is but £2 on the fee.118 Furthermore it
seems evident that if an option had been given between personal service and scutage,
every one would have preferred the latter and the king would have been a sad loser.
Perhaps it is not absolutely impossible that Henry II. when he took two marks by way
of scutage from each fee, took a sum which would pay a knight for forty days; in
other words, that he could hire knights for eightpence a day.119 But while the rate of
scutage never exceeded £2 on the fee, the price of knights seems to have risen very
rapidly as the standard of military equipment was raised and the value of money fell.
In 1198 the Abbot of St. Edmunds hired knights for Normandy at the rate of three
shillings a day.120 In 1257 the Abbot of St. Albans put into the field an equivalent for
his due contingent of six knights, by hiring two knights and eight esquires, and this
cost him hard upon a hundred marks, while, as between his various tenants, the rule
seems to have been that a knight, who was bound to serve, required two shillings a
day for his expenses.121 At about the same date the knights of Ramsey received four
shillings a day from their fellow tenants.122 We may be sure that the king did not
take from the defaulting baron less than the market value of his military service.

Thus, so soon as our records become abundant, it seems plain The tenant in chief’s
that the tenant in chief has no option between providing his service cannot be
proper contingent of armed men and paying a scutage. The only discharged by
choice that is left to him is that between obeying the king’s call scutage.
and bearing whatever fine the barons of the exchequer may
inflict upon him for his disobedience. Therefore it seems untrue to say that as between
him and the king there is any “commutation of military service,” and indeed for a
moment we may fail to see that the king has any interest in a scutage. If he holds
himself strictly bound by principles that are purely feudal, the scutage should be
nothing to him. From his immediate tenant he will get either military service or a
heavy fine, and we may think that the rate of scutage will only determine the amount
that can be extracted from the undertenants by lords who have done their service or
paid their fines. But this is not so.

We must speak with great diffidence about this matter, for it has The scutage of
never yet been thoroughly examined, and we are by no means undertenants.
sure that all scutages were collected on the same principle. But
from the first the king seems to have asserted his right to collect a scutage from the
“tenant in demesne” who holds his land by knight’s service. There are two conflicting
elements in the impost; it is in part the equivalent for a feudal, a tenurial service; it is
in part a royal tax. The king will regard it now as the one, and now as the other, as
suits him best. He refuses to be a mere lord of lords; he is also a king of subjects. The
undertenant of a mesne lord, if he owes military service, owes a service that is to be
done for the king; the king will, if this seems profitable, deal directly with him and
excuse him from service on his paying money. And so in the thirteenth century the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 166 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

king, while he is exacting military service or fines from his tenants in chief, will also
collect scutage from their military tenants. Theoretically he is not entitled to be paid
for the same thing twice over. If a baron has either produced the requisite number of
knights or compounded for his breach of contract, it is he and not the king who ought
to receive scutage; in the one case he ought to get a scutage from any military tenants
of his who have disobeyed his call to arms, in the other all his military tenants may
have to pay, though he has not given them a chance of going to the war in person.
That this ought to be so, seems to be admitted. Such a baron, having proved that he
fulfilled his contract or paid his fine, will have a royal writ de scutagio habendo,
whereby the sheriff will be ordered to cause him to have the scutage due from his
tenants. Still, before he can get his scutage, he has to obtain something that the king is
apt to treat as a favour. Meanwhile the sheriffs will be taking scutage for the king’s
use from those who are in occupation of lands on which military service is incumbent,
and leaving the various persons who are interested in those lands to settle the
incidence of the burden as best they may. What comes into the king’s hands generally
stays there. But further, in Henry III.’s time, the barons, assuming to act on behalf of
the whole community, will on occasion grant to the king a scutage in respect of some
military expedition that has taken place, and the meaning of this, at least in some
instances, seems to be that in response to the king’s demands, they make over to him
the right to collect and to keep the scutages due from their undertenants, scutages
which the feudal principle would have brought into their own coffers.123 A national
tax is imposed which the undertenants pay to the king. Much will remain obscure
until the exchequer rolls have been carefully analyzed; but this at least seems clear,
that the tenant in chief’s duty of providing an armed force is not commuted into a duty
of paying scutage. Indeed the demand conceded by the Charter of 1215, namely, that
no scutage be imposed without the common counsel of the realm, would be barely
intelligible, if John had merely been giving his tenants in chief an option between
furnishing the due tale of warriors and paying two marks for every fee.124

We must now turn to a simple case and ask a simple question. The military
What was the duty of a man who held by knight’s service of a subtenants.
mesne lord? We will suppose him to hold a single knight’s fee.
In the days before scutage his duty probably was to serve in person if summoned by
his lord to the king’s host; only with a good excuse might he send a substitute;125 but
women and ecclesiastics would do their service by able-bodied representatives.
Failure to perform this duty would be punished by a forfeiture of the tenement.126
But the practice of taking scutages seems to have set up a change, and how far that
change went it is hard to decide. The knights began to allege that they were not bound
to serve, but were only bound to pay a scutage, and only to pay a scutage when their
lords had obtained from the king permission to levy it.127 It would further seem that
many of them made good this assertion by steady perseverance. The lords were often
compelled to hire soldiers because their knights—their knights so called, for many a
tenant by knight’s service was in habit but a yeoman—would not fight. It would even
seem that the tenants as a body got the better in the struggle, and established the rule
that if they did not choose to serve, no worse could happen to them, than to be
compelled to pay a scutage at the rate fixed by royal decree, a sum much less than
they would have spent had they hired substitutes to fill their places. In short, “tenure

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 167 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

by knight’s service” of a mesne lord, becomes first in fact, and then in law, “tenure by
escuage.”128

The stages of this process we cannot trace distinctly, but it was Tenure by escuage.
closely connected with the gradual decline and fall of the feudal
courts. The lord who kept an efficient court of and for his military tenants might in
early days enforce a forfeiture of the tenement for default of service; but the king’s
court seems to have given him little or no assistance, and by degrees the remedies
afforded by the royal tribunal became the standard of English law.129 The process
must have been hastened by the subdivision of knights’ fees. We come across persons
who hold no more than aliquot parts of fees; we find them even in what we may call
the primary circle of feudalism, the circle of tenants in chief; they are common in the
secondary circle. Sometimes a fee preserves a notional integrity though it has become
divided into aliquot parts by subinfeudation or by partition among co-heiresses. The
Abbot of St. Albans confessed to holding six scuta or knights’ fees. Each of these
scuta was divided among several tenants holding of the abbot. When the king
summoned his host, the various tenants of each scutum had to meet and provide a
knight; sometimes they did this by hiring a knight, or two serjeants; sometimes they
elected one of their number to serve and contributed towards his expenses.130 But we
soon come upon small fractional parts, the twentieth part or the fortieth part, of fees,
which fees have no longer any existence as integral wholes. Such fractions could
hardly have come into being but for the practice of taking a scutage in lieu of personal
service, and the tenant’s obligation is often expressed in merely pecuniary terms; the
charter of feoffment says, not that he is to hold the fortieth part of a knight’s fee, but
that when scutage is levied at the rate of 40 shillings on the fee he is to pay a
shilling.131 When the holder of a knight’s fee has cut up a great part of it into little
tenements each owing him some small amount of scutage, the understanding probably
is that he is to do, or to provide, the requisite military service, and is then to take
scutage from his tenants. All this must have tended to change the true nature of the
obligation even of those tenants who held integral fees. If to hold the fortieth part of a
fee merely meant that the tenant had to pay one shilling when a scutage of two pounds
per fee was exacted, the tenant of a whole fee would easily come to the conclusion
that a payment of forty shillings would discharge his obligation. Thus a permanent
commutation into money of the personal service due from the subvassals seems to
have taken place.132

What is more, the right of a mesne lord to take scutage seems The lord’s right to
hardly to have been regarded, at least in the thirteenth century, as scutage.
a right given by the common law. A lord who had done his
service, or made fine for not doing it, could with some trouble to himself obtain a writ
de scutagio habendo, which ordered the sheriff to collect for him the scutage from his
knights’ fees.133 The king is said to grant to the lords their scutage; until the king has
fixed the amount there is nothing that they can collect, and few if any of them
attempted to collect it without obtaining the king’s writs. Indeed it would seem that, at
least in Henry III.’s day, they had no right to collect it. If they did not obtain a grant of
scutage from the king, then the king himself took the scutage from their tenants for his
own use.134 As already said, there is in scutage an element of royal and national
taxation which is incompatible with purely feudal principles.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 168 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Whether the tenant of a mesne lord could insist upon his right to Service instead of
do service in the army instead of paying scutage is a question scutage.
that we are absolved from discussing, for perhaps it was never
raised.135 But as regards that duty of “castle-guard” which was a common incident of
military tenure, the Great Charter lays down the rule that, if the tenant is willing to do
the service in person, he cannot be compelled to pay money instead of doing it.136
However, in the course of the thirteenth century this duty also seems to have been
very generally commuted for money payments.

One more exceedingly obscure process must be noticed. Reduction in the
Somehow or another in the second half of the thirteenth century number of knights’
the tenants in chief succeeded in effecting a very large reduction fees.
in the number of fees for which they answered to the king.137
When, for example, Edward I. called out the feudal host in 1277, his ecclesiastical
barons, who, according to the reckoning of the twelfth century, were holding about
784 fees, would account, and were suffered to account, for but little more than 100,
while some 13 knights and 35 serjeants—two serjeants being an equivalent for one
knight— were all the warriors that the king could obtain from the lands held by the
churches. The Archbishop of York had reduced his debt from twenty knights to five,
the Bishop of Ely from forty to six, the Abbot of Peterborough from sixty to five. The
lay barons seem to have done much the same. Humphry de Bohun offers three knights
as due from his earldom of Essex; Gilbert of Clare, Earl of Gloucester and Hertford,
offers ten knights, with a promise that he will send more if it be found that more are
due. While, however, the lay barons will generally send as many men as they
professedly owe, the prelates do not even produce the very small contingents which
they acknowledge to be due. Now these magnates were not cheating the king, nor
endeavouring to cheat him. It was well known in the exchequer, notorious throughout
Cambridgeshire,138 that the Bishop of Ely, who would confess to but six fees, had
forty at the least. The king was not deceived. The bishop, having sent no knights at
all, had to pay a fine of 240 marks, that is, 40 marks for each of the six fees. Some of
the prelates, we are told, had to pay as much as 50 marks for every fee,139 and yet the
scutage for this war was but two pounds, that is, three marks, on the fee. The
reduction in the nominal amount of fees for which the baron is compelled to answer is
accompanied by an at least proportional increase of the amount that he pays in respect
of every fee.

This change seems to tell us three things. In the first place, it was Meaning of the
impossible for the prelate to get military service out of his change.
military tenants. The practice of subinfeudation, fostered by the
king’s court, had ruined the old system. His fees were now split up into small
fractions, and they were in the hands of yeomen and small squires. Secondly, he was
willing to pay a large sum rather than hire knights. The knight with his elaborate
panoply had become a costly article. In the third place, the king by this time wanted
money more than he wanted knights; if he had money, he could get soldiers of all
sorts and kinds as pleased him best. And so he seems to have winked at the
introduction of a new terminology, for really there was little else that was new.
Provided that the Bishop of Ely paid him £160 for his Welsh campaign, he did not
care whether this was called a fine of six marks for each of forty fees, or a fine of

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 169 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

forty marks for each of six fees; while the bishop, who would hardly find six tenants
willing to fight, prefers the new set of phrases. But then, our already confused system
is further confounded, for the bishop, who has but six fees for the king’s service when
the call is for warriors or a fine, will assuredly assert that he has, as of old, forty fees
when the time comes for him to take a scutage from his tenants, and in this way he
may, at the rate of three marks per fee, recover, if he is lucky and persistent, about
half the sum that he has had to pay to the king. But in truth, the whole system is
becoming obsolete. If tenure by knight’s service had been abolished in 1300, the
kings of the subsequent ages would have been deprived of the large revenue that they
drew from wardships, marriages and so forth; really they would have lost little
else.140

We have next to observe that a lord when enfeoffing a tenant was Military service
free to impose other services in addition to that military service combined with other
which was incumbent on the land. Suppose that B holds a services.
knight’s fee of A; B may enfeoff C of the fee, stipulating that C
shall do the military service and also pay him a rent. Perhaps it was usual that a tenant
who held a whole knight’s fee should have no serious service to perform in addition
to the military service, though, in such a case as we have put, B would often stipulate
for some honorary rent, a pair of spurs, a falcon, or the like. But when we get among
the holders of small plots, we constantly find that they must pay scutage while they
also owe substantial rents.141 A few entries on the Oxfordshire Hundred Roll will
illustrate this. At Rycote, Adam Stanford holds the whole vill of the Earl of Oxford
for half a knight’s fee; he has a number of freeholders holding small plots; they pay
substantial rents and “owe scutage”; one has a virgate, pays 7 s. 6 d. a year and owes
scutage; another holds three acres for the rent of a penny and owes scutage.142 Often
it is said of the small freeholders that beside their rent they owe royal or forinsec
service (debent regale, debent forinsecum)143 and, at least in general, this seems to
mean that they pay scutage and are nominally tenants by knight’s service; for
Bracton’s rule is clear, namely, that if the tenant owes but one hap’orth of scutage
(licet ad unum obolum), his tenure is military, and this rule is fully borne out by
pleadings and decisions.144 This point is important:—the division between tenants in
socage and tenants by knight’s service does not correspond, save in the roughest
manner, to any political, social or economic division. The small yeoman often holds
his little tenement by a tenure which is nominally and legally the same tenure as that
by which the knight holds his manor.145

With the duty of attending the king in his wars was often coupled Castle-guard.
the duty of helping to garrison his castles; more rarely the latter
duty appears without the former. The knights of the Abbey of Abingdon were bound
to guard the king’s castle of Windsor,146 the knights of the Abbey of Peterborough
his castle of Rockingham,147 the knights of the Abbey of St. Edmund his castle of
Norwich. In Henry I.’s day the Bishop of Ely purchased for his knights the privilege
of doing ward within the isle instead of at Norwich.148 Such service was well known
in Normandy149 and France,150 and is mentioned in Domesday Book.151 The forty
or fifty knights of St. Edmunds were divided into four or five troops (constabiliae),
each of which had to guard Norwich castle for three months in the year.152 Often a
tenement owed “ward” to a far-off castle; thus in Cambridgeshire were lands held of

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 170 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

the Count of Aumâle which owed ward to his castle of Craven,153 and lands held of
the Count of Britanny which owed ward to his castle of Richmond.154 We speak as
though these castles belonged to their tenants in chief; but the kings were wont to
regard all castles as in a sense their own, and the duty of castle-guard, like the duty of
service in the host, though due to the lord, was to be done for the king. Before the end
of the thirteenth century, however, payments in money had usually taken the place of
garrison duty.155

While the military system of feudalism is thus falling into decay Thegnage and
there still may be found in the north of England scattered traces drengage.
of an older military system. The Norman milites are already
refusing to do the service to which their tenure binds them, but there are still in the
ancient kingdom of Northumbria thegns holding in thegnage, drengs holding in
drengage, thegns who are nominally bound to do the king’s “útware.” Were these
tenures military or were they not? That was a puzzle for the lawyers. They had some
features akin to tenure by knight’s service, for thegns and drengs had been summoned
to fight John’s battles in Normandy; in other respects they were not unlike the
serjeanties; they were sometimes burdened with services which elsewhere were
considered as marks of villeinage; finally, as it would seem, they were brought under
the heading of free socage. In truth they were older than the lawyers’ classification,
older than the Norman Conquest.156

Above we have made mention of tenure by barony and passed it Tenure by barony.
by with few words; and few seem needed. True, we may find it
said of a man, not only that he holds a barony (tenet baroniam), but also that he holds
by barony (tenet per baroniam), and this may look as though tenure by barony should
be accounted as one of the modes of tenure.157 But so far as the land law is
concerned there seems no difference between tenure by barony and tenure by knight’s
service, save in one point, namely, the amount of the relief, about which we shall
speak below. So far as regards the service due from the tenant, the barony is but an
aggregate of knights’ fees. There is no amount of military service that is due from a
tenant by barony as such; but his barony consists of knights’ fees; if it consists of
twenty knights’ fees he is answerable for the service of twenty knights, if it consists of
fifty knights’ fees, then he must produce fifty. And so, again, with the various
incidents of tenure, aids, wardship, marriage, escheat, all save relief; there seem to be
no special rules for tenure by barony or for the tenure of a barony; it is but tenure by
knight’s service of a certain number of knights’ fees, unless indeed it be—and in
some cases it is—tenure by grand serjeanty. The fact that a certain mass of lands is
deemed a barony has some few legal consequences of a subordinate kind. Always or
generally some castle or some manor is regarded as the head of the barony, and it
would seem that for some fiscal and administrative purposes the whole barony was
treated as lying in the county that contained its head. Then, again, a widow is not to be
endowed with the caput baroniae, and the caput baroniae is not to be partitioned
among co-heiresses.158 Such rules as these may necessitate an inquiry whether a
certain manor is the head of a barony or a single knight’s fee held by a separate
title;159 but they will not justify us in co-ordinating tenure by barony with the other
tenures, such as knight’s service and serjeanty.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 171 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Of course, however, “barony” cannot be treated as a mere matter The baronage.
of land tenure. The barons, together with the earls, have become
an estate of the realm, and to make a man a member of this estate it is not sufficient
that he should be a military tenant in chief of the crown. A line has been drawn which
cuts the body of such tenants into two classes. The question by what means and in
accordance with what principle that line was drawn has been much debated. We shall
probably be near the truth if, in accordance with recent writers, we regard the
distinction as one that is gradually introduced by practice and has no precise theory
behind it.160 The heterogeneous mass of military tenants in chief could not hold
together as an estate of the realm. The greater men dealt directly with the king, paid
their dues directly to the exchequer, brought their retainers to the host under their own
banners, were summoned to do suit in the king’s court by writs directed to them by
name; the smaller men dealt with the sheriff, paid their dues to him, fought under his
banner, were summoned through him and by general writs. Then two rules
emphasized the distinction:—the knight’s fee paid a fixed relief of 100 shillings, the
baron made the best bargain he could for his barony; the practice of summoning the
greater people by name, the smaller by general writs was consecrated by the charter of
1215. The greater people are maiores barones, or simply barones, the lesser are for a
while barones secundae dignitatis, and then lose the title altogether; the estates of the
greater people are baronies, those of the smaller are not; but the line between great
and small has been drawn in a rough empirical way and is not the outcome of any
precise principle. The summons to court, the political status of the baron, we have not
here to consider, while, as regards the land law, it is to all appearance the relief, and
the relief only, that distinguishes the barony from an aggregate of knights’ fees, or
makes it necessary for us to speak of tenure by barony.

When, however, a certain territory had been recognized as a Escheated honours.
barony or an honour, this name stuck to it through all its
fortunes. Honours and baronies were very apt to fall into the hands of the king by way
of forfeiture or escheat owing to the tenant’s treason. When this happened they still
kept their names the honour of Wallingford might have escheated to the king, but it
was still the honour of Wallingford and did not lose its identity in the general mass of
royal rights. Nor was this a mere matter of words. In the first place, the escheated
honour would probably come out of the king’s hands; the general expectation was that
the king would not long keep it to himself, but would restore it to the heir of its old
tenant, or use it for the endowment of some new family, or make it an appanage for a
cadet of the royal house.161 But the continued existence of the honour had a more
definite, and a legal meaning. Normally, as we shall see hereafter, the military tenant
in chief of the king was subject to certain exceptional burdens from which the tenants
of mesne lords were free. A tenant holds of the lord of the honour of Boulogne: that
honour escheats to the king; the tenant will now hold immediately of the king; but is
he to be subject to the peculiar burdens which are generally incident to tenancy in
chief? No, that would be unfair, it would be changing the terms of his tenure. This
was recognized by the practice of the exchequer under Henry II.,162 and the rule was
confirmed by the Great Charter.163 Thus it becomes necessary to distinguish between
those tenants in chief who are conceived as having always held immediately of the
king, and those who hold of the king merely because a mesne lordship has escheated:
in other words, between those who hold of the king as of his crown (ut de corona) and

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 172 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

those who hold of him as of an escheated honour (ut de escaeta, ut de honore, ut de
baronia).164 On the other hand, the relief for a barony having been fixed, two
baronies do not become one merely because they are held by one person; the honour
of Clare, the honour of Gloucester, the honour of St. Hilary and a moiety of Earl
Giffard’s honour meet in the hands of Earl Gilbert; he has to pay for his three and a
half honours a relief of £350.165 An honour or barony is thus regarded as a mass of
lands which from of old have been held by a single title.166

§ 4.

Serjeanty
The idea of a serjeanty as conceived in the thirteenth century is Difficulty of defining
not easily defined. Here as elsewhere we find several different serjeanty.
classes of men grouped together under one heading so that the
bond that connects them is slight; also we find it difficult to mark off serjeanty from
knight’s service on the one hand and socage on the other. The tests suggested by
Littleton are inapplicable to the documents of this age.167 We cannot say that the
duty of serjeanty must be performed by the tenant in his proper person, we cannot say
that “petty serjeanty” has necessarily any connexion with war, or that one cannot hold
by serjeanty of a mesne lord, or that petty serjeanty is “but socage in effect.”168 Even
the remark that “ serjeantia in Latin is the same as servitium ”169 is not strictly true.

Here indeed lies the difficulty:—while every tenure implies a Serjeanty and service.
service (servitium), it is not every tenure that is a serjeanty
(seriantia, serianteria): every tenant owes service, but not every tenant is a servant or
serjeant (serviens), still less of course is every tenant a servus. A single Latin stock
has thrown out various branches; the whole of medieval society seems held together
by the twigs of those branches. Here we have to deal with one special group of
derivative words, not forgetting that it is connected with other groups.170

We may begin by casting our eye over the various “serjeanties” Types of serjeanty
known in the thirteenth century. First we see those forms of owed by the king’s
service which are the typical “grand serjeanties” of later days, tenants in chief.
“as to carry the banner of the king or his lance, or to lead his
army, or to be his marshal, or to carry his sword before him at his coronation, or to be
his sewer at his coronation, or his carver, or his butler, or to be one of the
chamberlains of the receipt of his exchequer.”171 Some of the highest offices of the
realm have become hereditary; the great officers are conceived to hold their lands by
the service or serjeanty of filling those offices. It is so with the offices of the king’s
steward or seneschal, marshal, constable, chamberlain; and, though the real work of
governing the realm has fallen to another set of ministers whose offices are not
hereditary, to the king’s justiciar, chancellor and treasurer, still the marshal and
constable have serious duties to perform.172 Many of the less exalted offices of the
king’s household have become hereditary serjeanties; there are many men holding by
serjeanties to be done in the kitchen, the larder and the pantry.173 Even some of the
offices which have to do with national business, with the finance of the realm, have

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 173 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

become hereditary; there are already hereditary chamberlains of the exchequer who
do their service by deputy.174 We observe that all these offices, if we regard only
their titles, have something menial about them, in the old and proper sense of the
word “menial”; their duties are servitia mansionalia, they are connected with the
king’s household. It may be long since the predecessors in title of these men really
cooked the king’s dinner or groomed the king’s horses: but they glory in titles which
imply, or have implied, that their duties are of this menial kind; nor is it always easy
to say when or whether the duty has become honorary. When the Conqueror gives
half a hide of land in Gloucestershire to his cook,175 it were bold to say that this
tenant did not really roast and boil; and what shall we say of the cook of the Count of
Boulogne?176 Then scattered about England we find many men who are said to hold
by serjeanty and are bound by their tenure to do other services, which are not so
distinctly menial, that is to say, are not so closely connected with the king’s
household. They are bound to carry the king’s letters, to act as the king’s summoners
when the barons of the neighbourhood are to be summoned, to aid in conveying the
king’s treasure from place to place, or the like. Again, and this is very common, theirs
is some serjeanty of the forest, they are chief foresters, or under foresters. The king’s
sport has given rise to numerous serjeanties; men are bound by tenure to keep hounds
and hawks for him, to find arrows for him when he goes a-shooting; and we cannot
say that these are honorary or particularly honourable services: to find a truss of straw
for the king’s outer chamber when he stays at Cambridge, this also is a serjeanty.177
The carpenter, the mason, or the gardener who holds land in the neighbourhood of
some royal castle in return for his work holds a serjeanty.178 But, again, many
serjeanties are connected with warfare. The commonest of all is that of finding a
servant or serjeant (servientem) to do duty as a soldier in the king’s army. Sometimes
he is to be a foot-soldier, sometimes a horse-soldier (servientem peditem, servientem
equitem); often the nature of the arms that he is to bear is prescribed; often he is
bound to serve for forty days and no more, sometimes only for a shorter period; often
to serve only against the Welsh, sometimes to serve only within his own county. It
would be a mistake to think that tenure supplied the king only with knights or fully
armed horsemen; it supplied him also with a force, though probably a small force, of
light horse-men and infantry, of bowmen and cross-bowmen. It supplied him also
with captains and standard-bearers for the national militia; men were bound by their
tenure to lead the infantry of particular hundreds.179 It supplied him also with the
means of military transport, with a baggage train; few serjeanties seem commoner
than that of sending a “serjeant” with horse, sack and buckle for the carriage of
armour and the like.180 It supplied him, to some small degree, with munitions of war;
if one was bound by tenure to find lances, arrows or knives, this was reckoned a
serjeanty.

A man may well hold by serjeanty of a mesne lord. Bracton Serjeanty of mesne
speaks clearly on this point. The tenant of a mesne lord may be lords.
enfeoffed by serjeanty, and the serjeanty may be one which
concerns the lord, or one which concerns the king. Thus, for example, he may be
enfeoffed as a “rodknight” bound to ride with his lord, or he may be bound to hold the
lord’s pleas, that is, to act as president in the lord’s court, or to carry the lord’s letters,
or to feed his hounds, or to find bows and arrows, or to carry them: we cannot
enumerate the various possible serjeanties of this class. But there are, says Bracton,

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 174 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

other serjeanties which concern the king and the defence of the realm, even though
the tenant holds of a mesne lord; as if he be enfeoffed by the serjeanty of finding so
many horse- or foot-soldiers with armour of such or such a kind, or of finding a man
with horse, sack and buckle for service in the army.181

All this is fully borne out by numerous examples. The grand Types of serjeanty
serjeanties of the king’s household were represented in the owed to mesne lords.
economy of lower lords. Thus John of Fletton held land at
Fletton in Huntingdonshire by the service of being steward in the abbot’s hall at
Peterborough;182 at Cottesford in Oxfordshire John White is bound by tenure to hold
the lord’s court twice a year;183 in the same county a tenant of the Earl of Lincoln
must place the last dish before the earl, and shall have a rod from the earl like other
free serjeants.184 The Abbot of Gloucester has tenants who spread his table, who
hold towels and pour water on his hands.185 In the twelfth century the stewardship of
the Abbey of St. Edmunds was hereditary in the family of Hastings, but was executed
by deputy.186 On the whole, however, the prelates and barons seem to have followed
the policy of their royal master and seldom permitted substantial power to lapse into
the hands of hereditary officers; the high steward of a monastery, like the high
steward of the realm, was a man for pageants rather than for business.187 Still such
serjeanties existed. The service of carrying the lord’s letters was not uncommon and
may have been very useful;188 the service of looking after the lord’s wood was
reckoned a serjeanty.189 In various parts of England we find a considerable class of
tenants bound to go a-riding with their lords or on their lord’s errands, and doubtless,
as Bracton suggests, we have here the radchenistres and radmanni of Domesday
Book;190 on some estates they are known as “esquires,” and their tenure is a
“serjeanty of esquiry.”191

But again, there may, as Bracton says, be warlike service to be Military serjeanties
done. A tenant, for example, of the Abbot of Ramsey is bound to held of mesne lords.
find horse, sumpter saddle, sack and fastening pin to carry the
harness of the knights bound for the Welsh war;192 the prior of St. Botolph at
Colchester is bound to the same service by mesne tenure.193 Again, the tenant may
go to the war in his lord’s train to fight, not as a miles but as a serviens; Reginald de
Bracy is bound by the service of serjeanty to follow William de Barentin as a serviens
at William’s cost.194

Now it may be impossible to bring all these very miscellaneous Essence of serjeanty.
tenures under one definition which shall include them, but
exclude knight’s service and socage. However, the central notion seems what we may
call “servantship”; we cannot say “service,” for that word is used to cover every
possible return which one man can make to another for the right of enjoying land.
Obviously in many cases the tenant by serjeanty not only owes “service” in this large
sense, but is a servant (serviens); he is steward, marshal, constable, chamberlain,
usher, cook, forester, falconer, dog keeper, messenger, esquire; he is more or less of a
menial servant bound to obey orders within the scope of his employment. Modern
efforts to define a “servant” may illustrate old difficulties as to the limits of
“serjeanty”; it may be hard to draw the line between the duty of habitually looking
after the king’s bed-chamber and that of providing him with litter when he comes to a

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 175 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

particular manor. But the notion of servantship, free servantship, as opposed to any
form of serfdom, seems to be the notion which brings the various serjeanties under
one class name, and it points to one of the various sources of what in the largest sense
of the term we call the feudal system. One of the tributaries which swells the feudal
stream is that of menial service; it meets and mingles with other streams, and in
England the intermixture is soon very perfect; still we can see that serjeanty has come
from one quarter, knight’s service from another, socage from yet a third, and we may
understand how, but for the unifying, generalizing action of our king’s court, a special
law of serjeanty might have grown up, distinct from the ordinary law of land
tenure.195

As regards the military serjeanties we must remember that in the language of military
affairs serviens had acquired a distinct meaning.
An army is largely made up of milites and servientes, of fully The serjeants in the
armed horsemen, and of men who, whether they serve on foot or army.
on horse, have not the full knightly panoply.196 Now when a
tenant by serjeanty is bound to go to the war as a serviens with horse, purpoint, iron
cap and lance, the difference between his tenure and knight’s service seems to resolve
itself into a mere difference between one kind of armour and another, or one position
in the army and another; and it is possible that a certain ambiguity in the word
serviens, which will stand for servant, and will stand for light armed soldier, may
have attracted within the sphere of serjeanty certain tenures which had about them no
strong trace of what we have called “servantship.” Still originally the servientes of the
army were so called because they were attendants on the milites, whose shields they
carried, and whose esquires they were—for the esquire (scutifer, armiger) of those
times was one who carried the shield or arms of his lord. Thus by one way or another
we come back to the idea of “servantship” as the core of serjeanty.197

Looking back towards the Norman Conquest we run no risk in Serjeanty in
seeing the predecessors of these tenants by serjeanty in the Domesday Book.
servientes of Domesday Book. Near the end of the survey of a
county we sometimes meet with a special section devoted to Servientes Regis. Thus in
Wiltshire after the Terra Tainorum Regis comes the Terra Servientium Regis;198 it is
so in Dorsetshire;199 in Devonshire and Leicestershire the Servientes Regis have a
special section;200 in Oxfordshire we find Terra Minis-trorum Regis,201 and when
elsewhere we meet with Famuli Regis202 we may suppose that this is but another
name for the Servientes and Ministri. We can tell something of their offices. Among
the Wiltshire Servientes are three chamberlains (camerarii), a hoarder (granetarius)
and a cross-bowman (arbalistarius); elsewhere are an archer, an usher, a goldsmith, a
baker, a bedchamber man; near the end of the survey of Hampshire we find a
treasurer, two chamberlains, a hunter, a marshal, a physician and a barber holding in
chief of the king.203 In some cases it is possible to trace the estates of these persons
until we find them definitely held by serjeanty. Again, there can be little risk in
finding the ancestors in law of Bracton’s rodknightes204 and the Abbot of Ramsey’s
ridemanni in the radchenistres and radmanni of Domesday Book. It is true that in the
western counties these radchenistres are occasionally found in large groups; there
may be even twenty of them on a manor;205 but in what was for Bracton the leading
case on serjeanty the abbess of Barking asserted that she had full thirty tenants on one

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 176 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

manor bound to ride about with her wherever she would.206 However, the makers of
Domesday Book were not concerned to specify the terms on which the tenants,
especially the tenants of mesne lords, held their lands; of serjeanties we read little just
as we read little of knightly service. So soon, however, as any attempt is made to
classify tenures, the serjeanties appear in a class by themselves. Glanvill, after
defining the relief payable for knights’ fees and for socage tenements, adds that as to
baronies nothing has been definitely settled, the amount of the relief being at the will
and mercy of the king; the same, he says, is true of serjeanties.207 In 1198 the
distinction was enforced by the great fiscal measure of that year; from the general
land tax the serianteriae were excepted, but they were to be valued and the servientes
who held them were to be summoned to meet the king at Westminster to hear and do
his bidding.208

Other distinctions appear in course of time. Even in Bracton’s Serjeanty and other
day the amount of the relief for a serjeanty was not yet fixed; it tenures.
was to be “reasonable” but no more than this could be said.209
In later days we find it fixed at one year’s value of the land; but how or when this
definition was arrived at we do not know.210 That the serjeant’s relief remains
uncertain long after the reliefs of barons, knights and socagers are fixed is another fact
which points to the peculiar nature of the relationship which had been involved in the
tenure. It was not the mere relation between lord and tenant, or between lord and man,
but was also the relation between master and servant, and, though a feoffment had
been made to the tenant and his heirs, the law was slow to dictate the terms upon
which the lord must receive the heir into his service. Again, we find that a tenement
held by serjeanty is treated as inalienable and impartible. As regards alienation we
shall be better able to speak hereafter, but will premise this much, that the king is
rigorously enforcing the rule that his serjeants cannot without his leave alienate their
land, even by way of subinfeudation, at a time when he is not, or is not systematically,
enforcing the same rule against his other tenants. We have some proof that so late as
John’s reign it was thought that a serjeanty could not be partitioned among co-
heiresses; the eldest daughter would take the whole:211 —this also is an intelligible
rule if we have regard to the “serviential” character of the tenure; a serjeanty must not
be “lacerated.”212 As to the wardship and marriage of tenants by serjeanty there was
much dispute, and in course of time a line was drawn between what were called
“grand” and what were called “petty” serjeanties. To this matter we must return; but
by means of the rules to which allusion has here been made, tenure by serjeanty was
kept apart from tenure by knight’s service on the one hand and tenure by socage on
the other, and even in the middle of the thirteenth century it still had an importance
which is but faintly represented by the well-known sections of Littleton’s book.

§ 5.

Socage
Any tenure that on the one hand is free and on the other hand is Socage.
not spiritual, nor military nor “serviential,” is called tenure in
free socage:—to this result lawyers are gradually coming. Obviously therefore this

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 177 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

term socage will cover a large field; it will include various relationships between men,
which, if we regard their social or economic or even their purely legal aspects, seem
very different from each other. We may look at a few typical cases.

(a) The service which the tenant owes to his lord may be merely Types of socage.
nominal: he has no rent to pay or has to give but a rose every
year just by way of showing that the tenure exists. Such a case may be the effect of
one of various causes. It may originate in what we should call a family settlement: a
landowner sometimes provides for a daughter or a younger son by a gift of land to be
held by a nominal service. Or again, the gift may be a reward to some dependant for
past services, or a retaining fee for services to be rendered hereafter, which services
however are not defined and are not legally exigible. Or again, there may well have
been what in truth was a sale of the land: in return for a gross sum a landowner has
created a nominal tenure. To have put the purchaser in the vendor’s place might have
been difficult, perhaps impossible; so the purchaser is made tenant to the vendor at an
insignificant rent.

(b) Such cases gradually shade off into others in which a substantial rent has been
reserved. We pass through the very numerous instances in which the lord is to receive
yearly some small article of luxury, a sparrowhawk, a pair of gloves, a pair of gilt
spurs, a pound of pepper or of incense or of wax, to other cases in which the rent, if
we cannot call it a “rack rent,” is “the best rent that can reasonably be gotten.” We
thus enter the sphere of commerce, of rents fixed by supply and demand.

Such tenures as these may be found in every zone of the territorial system. The tenant
may be holding of the king in chief; the king has, as we should say, granted perpetual
leases at substantial rents of some of his manors, the lessees being sometimes lay
barons, sometimes religious houses.213 Again, from the Conquest onward, to say
nothing of an earlier time, very great men have not thought it beneath them to hold
church lands at easy rents.214 It is an accusation common in monastic annals that the
abbots of the Norman time dissipated the lands of their houses by improvident grants
to their foreign kinsmen or by taking fines instead of reserving adequate rents. In such
cases these tenants in socage may have other tenants in socage below them, who will
pay them heavier rents. Ultimately we come to the actual occupant of the soil, whose
rent will in many cases represent the best offer that his landlord could obtain for the
land. Occasionally he may be paying more for the land than can be got from the
villeins of the same village.

(c) Sometimes we find in charters of feoffment that the feoffee, besides paying rent, is
to do or get done a certain amount of agricultural labour on his lord’s land, so much
ploughing, so much reaping. The feoffee may be a man of mark, an abbot, a baron,
who will have many tenants under him and will never put his hand to the plough.215
These cases are of importance because they seem to be the channel by which the term
socage gradually spreads itself.

(d) Finally, within a manor there often are tenants bound to pay divers dues in money
and in kind and bound to do or get done a fixed quantity of agricultural service for
their lords. Their tenure is often regarded as very old; often they have no charters

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 178 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

which express its terms.216 Hereafter we shall see that it is not always easy to mark
the exact line which separates them from the tenants in villeinage among whom they
live and along with whom they labour for the lord’s profit. Some of them are known
as free sokemen (sokemanni, sochemanni); but this name is not very common except
on “the ancient demesne” of the crown. Of their position we must speak hereafter, for
it can only be discussed in connexion with the unfree tenures.

Now to all appearance the term socage, a term not found in Gradual extension of
Normandy, has been extending itself upwards; a name the term socage.
appropriate to a class of cultivating peasants has begun to include
the baron or prelate who holds land at a rent but is not burdened with military service.
Of such a man it would seem natural to say that he holds at a rent (tenet ad censum),
and for a century and more after the Norman Conquest it is rare to call his tenure
socage. He is sometimes said to have feodum censuale;
far more commonly he is said to hold “in fee farm.” This term Fee farm.
has difficulties of its own, for it appears in many different guises;
a feoffee is to hold in feofirma, in feufirmam, in fedfirmam,217in feudo firmam, in
feudo firma,218ad firmam feodalem,219 but most commonly, in feodi firma. The Old
English language had both of the words of which this term is compounded, both feoh
(property) and feorm (rent);220 but so had the language of France, and in Norman
documents the term may be found in various shapes, firmam fedium, feudifirmam.221
But, whatever may be the precise history of the phrase, to hold in fee farm means to
hold heritably, perpetually, at a rent; the fee, the inheritance, is let to farm. This term
long struggles to maintain its place by the side of socage; the victory of the latter is
not perfect even in Bracton’s day; the complete merger of fee farm in socage is
perhaps due to a statute of Edward I., though the way towards this end had long been
prepared.222

As to the word socage, a discussion of it would open a series of Meaning of “socage.”
difficult problems about the administration of justice in the days
before the Conquest. These have been discussed elsewhere.223 We must here notice
two points. Bracton believed—erroneously no doubt, but erroneous etymology is a
force in the history of the law—that socage had to do with soc, the French word for a
plough-share;224 tenants in socage therefore are essentially agriculturists, and the
duty of ploughing the lord’s demesne is the central feature of socage. In the second
place, if we turn to the true derivation, we come to much the same result; socage is at
starting the tenure of those sokemen of whom we read in Domesday Book; socage is
an abstract term which describes their condition. Gradually it has been extended and
therefore attenuated until it is capable of expressing none but negative
characteristics:—socage is a tenure which is not spiritual, not military, not serviential.
No similar extension has been given to the word sokeman; in the thirteenth century
many persons hold in socage who would be insulted were they called sokemen; for
the sokemen are a humble, though it may be a well-to-do class.225

That they have been a numerous class we may gather as from Socage in contrast to
other evidence so from this, that socage becomes the one great military tenure.
standing contrast to military tenure, and, as the oppressive
incidents of military tenure are developed, every man who would free his holding

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 179 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

from the burdens of wardship and marriage is anxious to prove that he holds in
socage. To gain this end he is full willing to sink somewhat of dignity; he will gladly
hold by the peasant’s tenure when the most distinctive marks of that tenure are
immunities— no scutage, no wardship, no marriage.226

Thus free socage, when that term has attained its full compass, Socage as the
appears as the great residuary tenure, if we may so speak; it is residuary tenure.
nonmilitary, non-serviential, non-elemosinary. If, however, we
go back to the first half of the twelfth century, we begin to doubt whether we can
strictly insist on the most characteristic of these negative attributes. The army is but
gradually taking its new shape; the sokemen of the Abbot of Peterborough serve along
with the knights.227 In Edward I.’s day the tradition among the Oxfordshire jurors
was that the ancestors of many of the Bishop of Lincoln’s socage tenants were free
sokemen or “quasi sokemen” who served the king in the war for forty days at their
own cost with purpoints, lances and iron caps.228 It is not in the past that we must
look for clear definitions.

Tenure in burgage, if we examine but one specimen of it, may Burgage.
seem to differ in no essential from free socage.229 The service
due from the tenant to his lord is very generally a mere money rent, though there may
be a little ploughing or the like to be done. But if we thus isolate a single tenant from
his fellows, the spirit of burgage escapes us. The tenant is, at least normally, a
burgess, a member of a privileged community, which already aspires to become a
municipal corporation. This is not the place in which to discuss the history of the
boroughs, still we ought just to notice that tenure has been an important element in it.
From a remote time there have been in the greater and older boroughs men who paid
rents for their houses but did no other service. Their tenure becomes distinctive of the
boroughs, and when in later days a manor is to become a borough, the abolition of
labour services and the introduction of burgage tenure is one main feature of the
process.230

Regarded merely as a tenure, the chief characteristic of burgage Burgage and borough
is its subjection to local custom. Other free tenures, socage for customs.
example, may be affected by local custom, but what is
exceptional in their case is normal in the case of burgage. The lord has made over to
the men of the borough his court and the profits of his court; very frequently a royal
charter has conceded that actions for burgage tenements shall not be tried except in
the court of the borough; thus local custom has room within which it can grow and is
not liable to be set aside in favour of common law. It is chiefly within the domain of
private law, it is about such matters as inheritance and dower, that the borough
customs have their say. The point that most concerns us here is their tendency to treat
the burgage tenement as an article of commerce; it is likened to a chattel; not only can
it be disposed of by will, but “it can be sold like a chattel.”

A man might hold of many different lords by many different One man may hold by
tenures. This no one would deny; but some of the classical many tenures.
expositions of “the feudal system” and “the manorial system” are
apt to make the texture of medieval society look simpler than really it was, and we

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 180 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

think it part of our duty to insist that the facts which the lawyers of the thirteenth
century had to bring within their theories were complicated. Therefore let us fix our
eyes on one man. Sir Robert de Aguilon, and see what he held on the day of his death
in 1286. He held lands at Greatham in Hampshire of the king at a rent of 18 s.; he
held lands at Hoo in Kent of the Abbot of Reading at a money rent; he held lands at
Crofton in Buckinghamshire of William de Say by some service that the jurors did not
know; he held a manor in Norfolk of the Bishop of Norwich by the service of a sixth
part of a knight’s fee and by castle-guard; he held a manor in Sussex of the Earl of
Warenne by the service of one knight; he held a manor in Hertfordshire of the king in
chief by the serjeanty of finding a foot-soldier for forty days; he held tenements in
London of the king in chief by socage and could bequeath them as chattels.231 So we
must not think that each man fills but one place in the legal structure of feudalism. In
a remote past this may have been so; but it is not so in the age that defines the various
tenures. Often enough the man who holds of the king in chief will hold also of other
lords; he will hold by knight’s service, by serjeanty, in fee farm, in socage and in
burgage.

§ 6.

Homage And Fealty
Very generally the mere bond of tenure is complicated with Homage and fealty.
another bond, that of homage and fealty; the tenant either has
done homage and sworn fealty, or is both entitled and compellable to perform these
ceremonies. The right and the duty go together; in one particular case it may be the
lord, in another it may be the tenant, who will desire that these solemnities should be
observed, for each of them may thereby gain something.

When we read what the law-books say of these matters, we feel Legal and extra-legal
that they are dealing with institutions, the real importance of effects of homage.
which lies but partly within the field of law. The law of homage
as administered, or even as tolerated, by the king’s court of the thirteenth century is
but a pale reflection of moral sentiments which still are strong but have been stronger.
Glanvill and Bracton seem to lower their voices to a religious whisper when they
speak of homage; it is in this context that Glanvill introduces a word very rare in
English legal documents, the antique word vassallus.232 The ceremony of homage is
as solemn as ceremony can be. But when we ask for the effects of homage, we get on
the one hand some rules of private law about warranty and so forth, rules which may
seem to us of no great importance, and on the other hand some vague though
impressive hints that these legal rules express but a small part of what is, or has been,
the truth.

The ceremony of homage (in some of the older books hominium, The ceremony of
hominatio,233 but usually homagium) is much the same all homage.
Europe over.234 According to Bracton, the tenant puts his hands
between the hands of the lord—this symbolical subjection seems from the first to
have been the very essence of the transaction235 —and says: “I become your man of

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 181 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

the tenement that I hold of you, and faith to you will bear of life and member and
earthly worship [or, as some say, of body and chattels and earthly worship], and faith
to you shall bear against all folk [some add, who can live and die], saving the faith
that I owe to our lord the king.”236 Britton adds that the lord shall then kiss his
tenant;237 Littleton adds that the lord sits, while the tenant kneels on both knees,
ungirt and with his head uncovered; and these we may accept as ancient traits.238
Everything seems done to tell us that the man has come helpless to the lord and has
been received into the lord’s protection.

Homage is “done,” fealty is “sworn,” and it is worthy of The oath of fealty.
observation that the oath is conceived as less solemn than the
symbolic act and can be exacted in many cases in which homage is not exigible. The
tenant now stands up with his hand on the gospels and says: “Hear this my lord: I will
bear faith to you of life and member, goods, chattels and earthly worship, so help me
God and these holy gospels of God”; some add an express promise to do the service
due for the tenement.239 Bracton does not here mention any saving clause for the
faith due to the king; but doubtless this was added.240 The oath of fealty thus omits
the words “I become your man,” a significant omission. Fealty, of course, is the Latin
fidelitas; but it is interesting to notice that on manorial rolls written by clerks who
were no great Latinists, the word becomes feodelitas or feoditas, so close is the
connexion between faith and fee.

The forms that have here been given are those of liege homage Liegeance.
and of fealty sworn to a liege lord. The word liege seems to mean
simple, unconditional, though very likely at a quite early time a false derivation from
the Latin ligare (to bind) began to obscure this.241 The man who has but one lord
does unconditioned homage. If now he acquires a fee from another lord, his homage
must be conditioned, he must save the faith that he owes to his first lord.242 If
tenements held of several lords descend to one heir, his liege homage seems due
either to the lord from whom he claims his principal dwelling-place— cuius residens
et ligius est243 —or to that lord who made the oldest of those feoffments under which
he claims.244 The person to whom liege homage is done is by no means necessarily
the king; but the king has been insisting with ever greater success that there is a direct
bond between him and every one of his subjects; the growth of national feeling has
favoured this claim.245 Not only has he insisted that in every expression of homage
or fealty to another there shall be a saving for the faith that is due to him,246 but he
has insisted that every male of the age of twelve years shall take an oath of fealty to
him and his heirs, an oath “to bear faith and loyalty of life and limb, of body and
chattels and of earthly honour,” an oath which of course makes no reference to any
tenement, an oath which promises a fealty so unconditioned that it becomes known as
the oath of ligeance or allegiance (ligeantia).247 William the Conqueror, it would
seem, had exacted, not only an oath of fealty, but an act of homage from all the
considerable tenants of his kingdom, no matter whose men they were, for so we may
fairly construe the words of the chronicler, “they bowed themselves and were this
man’s men”;248 later kings as well as earlier had exacted the oath of fealty from their
subjects in general. But this is a strong testimony to the force of vassalism. It suggests
that an oath is necessary in order to constitute the relation between ruler and subject;
it suggests that the mere omission of a saving clause might make it a man’s duty to

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 182 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

follow his lord even against the king; it makes the relation between king and subject
look like a mere copy of the relation between lord and vassal. This we can see even if
we look back to the first days of incipient feudalism: “All shall swear in the name of
the Lord fealty to King Edmund as a man ought to be faithful to his lord”;249 the
obligation of man to lord is better known, more strongly felt, than the obligation of
subject to king. At the accession of Edward I. the danger seems past, at least for a
while; the feudal force seems to have well-nigh spent itself; but obviously homage
and fealty, liege homage and liege fealty, have meant a great deal.

In the Leges Henrici we may find the high-water-mark of Vassalism in the
English vassalism. Every man owes faith to his lord of life and Leges Henrici.
limb and earthly worship, and must observe his lord’s command
in all that is honourable and proper, saving the faith due to God and the ruler of the
land; but theft, treason, murder, or anything that is against God and the catholic faith,
such things are to be commanded to none, and done by none. Saving these, however,
faith must be kept to lords, more especially to a liege lord, and without his consent
one may have no other lord.250 If the lord takes away his man’s land or deserts him
in mortal peril, he forfeits his lordship; but the man must be long suffering, he must
bear with his lord’s maltreatment of him for thirty days in war, for year and day in
peace.251 Every one may aid his lord when attacked and obey him in all things
lawful; and so too the lord is bound to help his man with aid and counsel in all things,
and may be his warrant—at least in certain cases—if he attacks or molests
another.252 To kill one’s lord is compared to blasphemy against the Holy Ghost; it is
a crime to be punished by a death cruel enough to seem a fit beginning for the
torments of hell.253 If, on the other hand, the lord slays his man who has done no
wrong, the offence can be paid for with money.254

Bracton defines homage thus:—Homage is a bond of law Bracton on homage.
(vinculum iuris) by which one is holden and bound to warrant,
defend and acquit the tenant in his seisin against all men, in return for a certain
service (per certum servitium) named and expressed in the gift, and vice versa
whereby the tenant is “really” bound (re obligatur) to keep faith to his lord and do the
due service; and such is the connexion by homage between lord and tenant that the
lord owes as much to the tenant as the tenant to the lord, save only reverence.255
Such a definition tends to bring the whole matter within the legitimate province of the
law of contract: there is a bargain about a tenement; the lessee is to do certain
services, the lessor is to warrant the title. Warranty is still an important matter, and the
doing and receipt of homage still have important results in the law about warranty; but
even here the courts are beginning to neglect homage and to lay stress merely on the
relation which exists, whether homage has or has not been done, between a feoffor
and his feoffee. And, as Bracton here hints, the feoffee’s obligation to perform the
services is beginning to be conceived rather as the outcome of a “real” contract than
as an outcome of the act of homage. To this point we may return hereafter, since it
lies within the domain of private law. What had been the public, the political or anti-
political, force of homage may best be seen by comparing passages in the text-books
which deal with the problems which may arise when a man holds different tenements
of different lords and those lords quarrel.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 183 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Such problems were possible even at the beginning of the twelfth Homage and private
century, for a man might hold land of divers lords.256 Glanvill, war.
though he distinctly says that the tenant may have to fight against
his lord at the king’s command, says also that if a man has done divers homages for
his divers fees to divers lords who “infest” each other, and if his chief lord orders him
to go in his proper person against another of his lords, he must obey the command,
“saving the service to that other lord from the fee that is held of him.”257 This can
hardly be read otherwise than as a statement that private warfare may conceivably be
lawful. Bracton dealing with a like case uses more ambiguous words:—If enmities
arise between his different lords, the tenant must in his proper person stand with him
(stabit cum eo) to whom he has done ligeance, while he must stand with his other
lords by attorney.258 There is a great difference between Bracton’s stare cum and
Glanvill’s ire contra. Bracton’s words may be satisfied by supposing a tenant bound
to do suit to the courts of two lords who have quarrelled; he must go in person to the
one court, by attorney to the other. In Britton’s book, however, or at least in some
manuscripts thereof, it is written that the tenant may have to serve one lord “against
the other”;259 and we are hardly entitled to say that this doctrine, even as a legal
doctrine, was of no force. It is probable that even the king’s courts would have held
that the man was justified, or at least excused, in defending his lord and his lord’s
property against hostile attacks, and such defence might easily become defensive
warfare. The great case which proves that Edward I. had the will and the power to put
down private war with a heavy hand, even when it was levied between the most
powerful men of his realm, the case in which he sent an Earl of Gloucester and an
Earl of Hereford to prison, proves also that in the eyes of contemporaries the full
enormity of their offence was found in their having gone on with the war contrary to a
royal prohibition, and that the morality of the time would hardly suffer any severe
punishment to be inflicted upon those of their men who had followed their banners in
ignorance of the king’s command. Such persons, if guilty of homicide, robbery, arson
or the like, might doubtless be dealt with as common criminals; but for the mere fact
that they had gone out with banner displayed, it would be hard to bring to bear upon
them that prerogative procedure which was set in motion in order to crush the
disobedient earls. At any rate, private war was an offence which might be enormously
exaggerated by breach of a royal prohibition.260

The same feeling may be seen in another quarter. That a lord Sanctity of homage.
should make an attack on his man or a man on his lord, even
under the forms of law, is scarcely to be tolerated. If the man will bring an appeal, a
criminal charge, against his lord, he must first “waive the tenement.”261 When a king
is going to declare war upon his barons he first defies them, for there should be no
attack while there is affiance. Henry III. in 1233 defied the Marshal, who then was no
longer his man, but “outside his homage;”262 before the battle of Lewes he defied the
earls of Leicester and Gloucester, who thereupon renounced homage and fealty.263
We can hardly say that all this lies outside the sphere of law, for rebellions and wars
are conducted on quasi-legal principles: that is a characteristic of the time. Bracton
fully admits that a man who holds land both in England and in France may be bound
to aid both kings when they make war on each other; his liege lord he must serve in
person, but none the less he must discharge the service due to his other lord.264

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 184 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

But the most curious limitation to the force of vassalism will be Homage and felony.
found in the fact that a man can hardly “go against” any one at
his lord’s command without being guilty of the distinctively feudal crime, without
being guilty of “felony.” Common law, royal and national law, has, as it were,
occupied the very citadel of feudalism. Whatever may be the etymology of felony
(and of this we shall speak hereafter), there can be no doubt that the word came to us
from France, and that in France and elsewhere it covered only the specifically feudal
crimes, those crimes which were breaches of the feudal nexus and which would work
a forfeiture or escheat of the fief, or as the case might be, of the lordship; for the lord
might be guilty of felony against his man just as the man might be guilty of felony
against his lord. A mere common crime, however wicked and base, mere wilful
homicide, or theft, is not a felony; there must be some breach of that faith and trust
which ought to exist between lord and man. Now it would seem that for a while the
word was used here as well as elsewhere in this restricted sense; in the Leges Henrici
felonia is one among many crimes.265 A little later it seems to cover every crime of
any considerable gravity, and seems to have no reference whatever to the feudal bond,
save in one respect, namely, that the felon’s land escheats to his lord; nay, a charge of
felonia has become an indispensable part of every charge of every crime that is to be
punished by death or mutilation.266 The details of this process are obscure. Possibly
the lords saw no harm in a change which brought them abundant escheats; but an
attack had been made upon vassalism at its very centre. To be true to your lord when
there was any real strain on the feudal bond, to go out with him when he “went
against” some one else, would end, like enough, in your finding that you had
committed a felony. This of course is no superficial change in the use of words; it
bears witness to a deep change in thought and feeling. All the hatred and contempt
which are behind the word felon are enlisted against the criminal, murderer, robber,
thief, without reference to any breach of the bond of homage and fealty.

We can find traces of an older way of thinking. So late as 1225 Feudal felony.
William Blunt brought an action against Roger Gernon
demanding homage, relief and scutage; Roger denied holding of the demandant and
asserted that he held of William Briwere; the demandant replied “with words of
felony”—wickedly and in felony had Roger denied his service and done homage to
another.267 Such a use of the term felonia may have been belated, still felony in its
more modern sense is not the only cause for an escheat. Glanvill speaks briefly:— the
tenant will break the bond of homage if he does anything that may turn to the
disherison of his lord or the disgrace of his lord’s person.268 Bracton’s phrase is
“anything that may turn to the disherison of the lord or any other atrocious injury.”
We cannot prove from decided cases that any delict falling short of a “felony” in the
modern sense of that term, and unconnected with the tenure of the land, would have
been regarded by the king’s courts of the thirteenth century as a cause of escheat; but
it would be rash to deny that the tenant might lose the land by reviling his lord,
particularly if the lord kept a court and the tenant were duly forjudged the land by his
peers; and Bracton distinctly says that any violent laying of hands upon the lord will
cause a loss of the tenement.269 As to the dealings with the tenement which might
work a disherison, lord or tenant might well lose his rights in the land by disavowing
the tenure. In Bracton’s day this principle was being degraded into a mere rule of

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 185 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

property law, one of the complicated mass of rules about warranty and so forth; but
we have just seen how in 1225 such a disavowal was still spoken of as a felony.270

In other quarters we may see that homage has been losing its Homage, by whom
meaning. It has been connected with military tenure. According done and received.
to Bracton it is due if the tenement is held by knight’s service,
even though but one half-penny of scutage be payable; it is due also if the tenure is a
serjeanty, at all events if the serjeanty be one that concerns the king; but it is not due
from tenants in socage, though as a matter of fact they sometimes do it; if the tenure
were villeinage, it would be dangerous to take the tenant’s homage, as this might
imply an enfranchisement.271 Glanvill gives us an important clue when he says that a
woman cannot do, though she may receive homage;272 in Bracton’s day this is
otherwise, a woman may well do homage.273 Homage has implied a willingness to
fight if need be, and even when it had become admitted that women might hold
military fiefs—here in England they seem, as will be remarked hereafter, to have held
such fiefs from the Conquest onwards—they could not say the words which imported
an obligation to risk life itself in the lord’s service.274 But all this was passing away,
and, despite what Bracton says, it seems to have been common for the socage tenant
to do homage.275

The contract was not one-sided. The lord was bound to defend The lord’s obligation.
and warrant his gift. When we hear of “warranty,” we are wont
to think of a mere institute of private law common enough at the present day, the
obligation of a seller to compensate a buyer who is evicted by superior title, and the
covenants for title expressed or implied in our modern purchase deeds appear as the
representatives of the ancient warranty. But the primary obligation of the warrantor in
old times was not that of making compensation. His obligation to give his tenant a
tenement equal in value to that whence he had been ejected was but a secondary
obligation arising upon the breach of the primary obligation, namely, the duty of
defending the tenant in his possession “against all men who can live and die.” If the
tenant was attacked by process of law, he vouched his lord, he called upon his lord to
defend the action, and the lord if he did his duty defended it. Now here we see a great
force at work. Do what we may to make all men equal before the law, a rich man has
and must always have advantages in litigation; he can command the best advice, the
best advocacy. But in the middle ages the advantages of the rich and powerful must
have been enormous. Happy then was the tenant who could say to any adverse
claimant:—“Sue me if you will, but remember that behind me you will find the earl or
the abbot.” Such an answer would often be final. We must understand this if we are to
understand the history of commendation. The owner of land who gives it up to a great
man and takes it back to hold by rent and services receives a “valuable consideration”
for the surrender and submission. This is so even within the sphere of law and
litigation; he has made his hold upon the land secure, for he has at his back a
warrantor whom no one will rashly sue. We must add that he has a lord who may use
carnal weapons or let loose the thunders of the church in defence of his tenant.276

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 186 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

§ 7.

Relief And Primer Seisin
The lord’s rights cannot be summed up by saying that he is The incidents of
entitled to service of one kind or another from his tenant. tenure.
Blackstone in a well-known passage enumerates “seven fruits
and consequences inseparably incident to the tenure in chivalry, viz aids, relief,
primer seisin, wardship, marriage, fines for alienation and escheat.”277 Of all of these
we must speak, but we shall speak of them in a somewhat different order, and in the
course of our discussion we must point out how far they were peculiar to military
tenure.

In the thirteenth century the rights of a person who holds land are Heritable rights in
usually heritable; when he dies the land will descend to his heir. land.
We must not here discuss the canons of inheritance; it will be
sufficient if we notice a few salient points. In the first place, the “heir” of English law
is an essentially different person from the Roman “heres”:—he never claims under a
will. With few exceptions, the broad rule holds good that no one can give rights in
land by his will, and even in those cases in which such rights are thus given the person
who gets them does not get them as “heir.” Only God, says Glanvill, can make an
heir, not man.278 A distinction between land and movables is thus established; even
when the dead man has not bequeathed his movables, the heir as such has no claim to
them. In the second place, one main rule of the law of inheritance is the primogenitary
rule:—among males of equal degree only the eldest inherits. This rule has been
gradually extending itself; once appropriate to the military tenures, it is becoming the
common law for all. Women can inherit even though the tenure be military; they are
postponed to males of equal degree; several women of equal degree will share the
inheritance between them, will be co-heiresses, coheredes. Lastly, though the rights of
a tenant of land are usually heritable, this is not always the case: A may give land to B
merely for his (B’ s) life; on the death of this tenant for life there will be nothing for
his heir; the land will “return” or “revert” to A. But more, to make the rights of the
donee heritable rights, the giver must use words which make this plain; if he merely
gives the land “to B, ” then B is only a tenant for life; he must give it “to B and his
heirs.”279

But the heir, whom we will suppose to be of full age, does not Reliefs.
come to his inheritance without having to pay for it; he has to
pay to his lord—and this is what concerns us here—a relief (relevium, or in earlier
documents relevatio or relevamen). In Glanvill’s day the relief for a knight’s fee is
fixed at 100 s.; for socage land it is one year’s rent; as to baronies and serjeanties,
there is no settled rule; the heir must make the best bargain that he can.280 The
Dialogue on the Exchequer tells us that the relief for the knight’s fee is 100 s.; that for
the barony is in the king’s discretion.281 Excessive reliefs stood foremost amongst
the grievances alleged by the barons in 1215; they asked that the heir should have his
inheritance by “the ancient relief,” which relief was to be defined by the charter. And
by the charter of 1215 it was defined; the heir of an earl’s barony was to pay £100, the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 187 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

heir of a baron’s barony £100, the heir to a knight’s fee 100 s.282 This was repeated
in the charters of 1216, 1217 and 1225; but at some time or another the relief for a
baron’s barony was reduced by one-third, namely, from £100 to 100 marks, and thus
the notion that a barony consists of 131⁄3 knights’ fees was engendered. The change,
however and whenever it was introduced, was sanctioned by the charter of Edward
I.283 Bracton states the law as to earldoms, baronies and knights’ fees in its final
form; the relief for serjeants is still in the discretion of the lords.284 As to socage, he
seems to doubt whether anything that can properly be called a relief is payable; for the
lord has no wardship of the sokeman’s heir, and in general relief and wardship are
connected rights. However, the heir has to make a certain payment (quaedam
praestatio), namely, an additional year’s rent. Then as to fee farm, Bracton says that
no fixed rule has been established; but a reasonable payment should be made, regard
being had to the needs of the lord and the means of the tenant.285 In Normandy the
relief seems to have had much the same history. In the oldest statement of Norman
law the reliefs of counts, barons and knights are mentioned but their amount is not
defined, while tenements that are not held by military service are rated at 5 shillings
for the capital messuage and 12 pence per acre for the land.286 A little later we read
that baronies pay £100 and knights’ fees £15.287 As in England, so in Normandy a
relief was payable by every heir, even though he were the direct descendant of the
dead tenant. This is noteworthy, for, according to a very common French custom, a
relief was only exigible when the land descended to a collateral heir; but in France, as
in England, we often find that one year’s rent, or one year’s profit, of the land, is
deemed the due relief.288

The amount of the due relief is not the only, perhaps not the most Rights of the lord on
important, point that has been in debate. A tenant dies: his heir the tenant’s death.
was living in the same house with him: or his heir was not living
on the tenement but at once presents himself: or his heir has gone to the wars, or has
gone on pilgrimage: or two claimants appear, each asserting that he is heir: or a
stranger intrudes himself into the tenement, setting up a claim as heir, or relying on
some title adverse to the ancestor, or on his strong right arm: what in all these cases
are the rights of the lord? To simplify the question, What is the general notion of the
lord’s right—is he entitled to take the land and hold it until the true heir asks for it,
does homage and pays relief, or is he only entitled to receive the relief having no
concern with the land? There has been a conflict between inconsistent theories
representing inconsistent interests. Already in Glanvill’s day it is settled that if the
heir is in seisin the lord may not turn him out; the heir may resist the lord. Still the
lord is entitled to a certain recognition of the fact that, though the tenement belongs to
the tenant, it belongs also to the lord; he may enter and go through the ceremony of
taking seisin, but he must do no damage.289 Bracton repeats this: in the case just put
the lord may have “a simple seisin” of the land which does not disturb the heir’s
seisin. But other cases must be discussed:—for example, at the ancestor’s death the
heir may be absent, the tenement left vacant. In this case the lord may enter, and then
the heir when he appears must not oust the lord by force; if he does so, the lord will
have an action against him and will be restored to possession. So again, if there are
two rival claimants of the inheritance neither of whom is yet in possession, the lord
may enter and hold the land until one of the two has proved his right.290 We must
remember that if no heir appears, the tenement will belong to the lord for good and

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 188 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

all; also that if there is a dispute between several would-be heirs, the lord’s court is, at
least in theory, the proper tribunal for its decision, and the lord who takes homage
from a pretender runs great risk in so doing: he may have to warrant that pretender’s
seisin, unless he has been careful to declare that the homage is received without
prejudice to the rights of other claimants. A conflict between two sets of proprietary
rights, those of the lord and those of the tenant, is thus complicated by the lord’s
jurisdictional powers. In the struggle which precedes the Barons’ War the grievances
of the tenants who stand low in the feudal scale become audible; and this is one chief
grievance—on the tenant’s death the lord enters the tenement and wastes it; the heir
can get no damages. An attempt to redress this grievance was made by the Provisions
of 1259; a more successful attempt by the Statute of 1267; the heir is to have damages
if the lord does any harm, for if the heir is forthcoming and in possession of the land,
the lord is entitled to no more than “a simple” or as we should say a formal,
“seisin.”291

But here, as in many other cases, the king is outside the common Prerogative rights of
law. This is fully recognized by the Statute of Marlborough the king.
(1267)292 and made yet clearer by the document known as
Praerogativa Regis.293 When a tenant in chief of the crown dies, the king’s escheator
seizes the land and inquires who is next heir (inquisitio post mortem); not until the
heir’s right has been established by inquest, not until he has done homage, and paid,
or given security for, his relief, will he be put in seisin; and if, impatient of delay, he
puts himself in seisin, this will be a mere intrusion upon the king; for the king is
entitled to the primer seisin (prima seisina).294 The machinery for enforcing this
right seems to have been slowly perfected under Henry III.; but there is no room for
doubt that the right itself had been enforced, though perhaps with less regularity, at a
much remoter time.295 On the Pipe Roll of 1130 the reliefs that are mentioned are in
some cases high,296 and the payment of relief is spoken of as though it were a
condition precedent to the enjoyment of the land.297

We are thus brought within seventy years of the Conquest. As to Earlier history of
what had happened in that interval, we have two emphatic reliefs.
declarations. Henry I. in his coronation charter said, “When any
of my barons, earls or others, who hold of me shall die, his heir shall not redeem, or
buy back (heres suus non redimet) his land, as he used to do in the time of my brother,
but shall relieve it with a just and lawful relief; and in like wise the men of my barons
shall relieve their lands from their lords by a just and lawful relief.”298 In the second
place, the chronicler when telling how Rufus kept bishoprics and abbeys vacant and
made profit out of their temporalities, adds that he desired to be the heir of every man
in England hallowed or lay.299 We see then that there already was an idea of a just
and lawful relief, that William Rufus had exceeded its measure, and had in effect
required the heir to purchase his ancestor’s land.300 In order to discover what was the
just and lawful relief, we naturally turn to the Leges of the time, and we find that the
compilers of them consider that the modern relief is but the ancient English heriot
under a new name.

We are told that the ancient heriot (heregeatu, military apparel) Relief and heriot.
had at one time consisted of the horses and arms lent by the lord

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 189 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

to his man which on the man’s death were returned to the lord. In the laws of Cnut it
is said that if by negligence or in consequence of sudden death any one quits this life
intestate, the lord shall take no more of his property than his rightful heriot. The heriot
of an earl is eight horses, four saddled and four unsaddled, four helms, four hauberks,
eight spears, as many shields, four swords and 200 mancusses of gold; that of a king’s
immediate thegn (cyninges þe-genes þe him nyhste syndon) is four horses, two
swords, four spears, as many shields, helm, hauberk and 50 mancusses of gold; that
for a mesne thegn (medemra þegna) a horse and harness, his weapons, and a sum of
money.301 If a man falls before his lord in battle, no heriot is to be demanded.302 We
see from this and from other evidence that it was expected of the thegn that he would
make provision for the heriot in his will. Now it is likely that for a long time before
William’s landing the old theory had ceased to describe the facts; the lord no longer
provided armour for his dependent warriors; he gave them land instead, and very
possibly the horses, arms and money rendered to the lord on his man’s death were by
this time considered as a due paid by the heir in respect of the land. At all events the
Normans had no difficulty in regarding the heriot as a relief. On the first page of
Domesday Book we read how, when a Kentish alodiarius dies, the king has the
relevationem terrae, except on the lands of certain great lords.303 In Berkshire when
a king’s own thegn or knight died he used to leave as a relief to the king all his arms
and one saddled and one unsaddled horse.304 In Nottinghamshire a thegn who has
more than six manors pays £8 for the relief of his land to the king; if he has but six or
fewer, he pays 3 marks to the sheriff;305 a similar rule prevailed in Yorkshire.306 But
the most instructive entry is that which concerns the English (as opposed to the
French) burgesses of Hereford. When a burgess who did service on horseback died,
the king used to have his horse and arms; from one who had no horse the king had
either 10 shillings or his land with the houses. If he died without a will, the king had
all his movables (pecuniam).307 Probably if we could now unravel the knot of the old
English land tenures, we should find that several different “death duties”—to use a
large phrase—proceeding from different principles were becoming intermixed and
consolidated, and that this process was hastened by the Norman Conquest. However,
it is on the basis of Cnut’s law about heriots that the compilers of the Leges attempt to
construct a law of reliefs. The Leges Henrici define the relevationes of the earl, the
king’s thegn and the mediate thegn (mediocris thayni) by translating the words of
Cnut.308 The Leis Williame follow the same model, but add that the relief of the
villein is his best beast, and that a year’s rent is the relief of one who holds land at a
yearly rent.309 Passing by for the moment this mention of the agricultural classes, we
seem entitled to the inference that Cnut’s law appeared as the only measure by which
the “just and lawful relief” of Henry’s charter could be determined. Of any competing
Norman measure we hear nothing. In Normandy, as in England, the relief sometimes
consisted of the dead man’s armour, and was therefore, in the oldest sense of the
word, a “heriot.”310 But that Henry observed, or promised to observe Cnut’s law, we
may not infer; its terms were fast becoming obsolete. Perhaps he considered, and was
justified by Norman law in considering, that, at least in the case of earldoms and
baronies, there was no fixed rule. The reliefs mentioned in the one Pipe Roll of his
reign that has come down to us suggest that he allowed himself a liberal discretion
and paid little regard to the antique rules about heriots.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 190 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

We are thus led to the question whether the followers of the Heritability of fees in
Conqueror who received great gifts of English lands held those the Conqueror’s
lands heritably. It is certain that they did; but this answer may reign.
require qualification and the difficulty of the question should be
seen. As a matter of fact, their heirs in some cases succeeded them, and we even find
women succeeding to baronies and military fees. But the number of tenures existing at
a later day that can be traced back to the Conqueror’s reign by an unbroken thread of
inheritance might easily be exaggerated. The great honours were frequently falling
into the king’s hand by way of escheat. True, that in all or most cases the cause why
the heir did not inherit may have been the treason or felony of his ancestor, or
something that the king chose to treat as such.311 But this practical precariousness of
tenure would check the formation of a law of inheritance applicable to military fees,
and we have to remember that new canons of inheritance, primogenitary canons, were
being evolved. Primogeniture was new in England, perhaps it was not very old in
Normandy; near the end of the twelfth century both in England and in Normandy
some of the most elementary points in the new system were still unsettled.312 Any
uncertainty about the rules of descent would give an opening for the king’s
interference.313 Add to this that the line between office and property is long an
uncertain, fluctuating line. Are the earldoms, the counties, comitatus, to be hereditary;
are the sheriffdoms, the vice-counties, vice-comitatus, to be hereditary; is the comes to
be the successor of the ancient ealdorman; is the sheriff to be like the Norman
viscount?314 And what of the new castles that the king has erected? The very caput
honoris, is it not a royal fortress? Any reminiscence of precarious beneficia that was
latent in Norman law would bear fruit when such questions as these had to be
answered by a conquering king who was building up a kingdom for himself and his
heirs. No doubt his followers believed that they obtained hereditary estates, though we
do not know that they had any warrant for this belief on parchment. But they knew
that their heirs must relieve their lands. What would be the measure and conditions of
the relief, time would show.

And as with the king, so with the mesne lords. The Abbot of Mesne lords and
Abingdon soon after the Conquest enfeoffed knights to fill the heritable fees.
places of the thegns who fell at Hastings, regardless of any rights
that the heirs of those thegns might have. Perhaps they were disinherited on the score
of what was accounted the felony of their ancestors. This, however, is not the defence
relied on by the chronicler of the abbey, who was not without patriotism; the thegns,
he thinks, had little enough right to the possession of lands that had been given to the
church. Then in the days of Rufus one of the new knights died leaving three
daughters; the abbot of the day stoutly denied that there had been any hereditary
feoffment, and at last would only admit the heiresses and their husbands as tenants for
life on their abjuring all heritable rights.315 Dare we say that he was obviously in the
wrong? A historian of law may easily credit his characters with too much foresight;
the truth is that men gave lands and took lands and left the terms of the tenure to be
decided thereafter by the course of events and their own strong wills.316 And so the
feoda of the Norman reigns are indubitably hereditary: the very word is beginning to
imply, even if it does not already clearly denote, heritability; but the lord has rights
and to define them is difficult. The past history of the precaria which became
beneficia, the beneficia which became feoda, the evolution of primogenitary rules, the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 191 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

conquest of England and consequent clash of laws, the ever renewed “treasons” and
“felonies” perpetrated by the barons, all tended to keep the matter in uncertainty, and
when finally the king’s rights emerge into clear daylight, they are large: the heir of the
baron must make the best bargain that he can. To ascribe the law of reliefs and primer
seisins to the covetousness of Rufus and the cunning of Flambard is to look only at
the surface.

The heriot was not suppressed by the relief, though in course of History of the heriot.
time it underwent a transformation. Glanvill tells us that the
freeman who makes a will is bound to “recognize” his lord with the best and principal
thing that he has and then to “recognize” the church.317 Bracton repeats this: the lord
should have the best chattel, the church the second best, or the third best, or it may be
the church is entitled to nothing, for customs vary.318 This will remind us of the gifts
of arms and money made to the king by his thegns in the old days with a request that
their wills may be allowed “to stand.” Elsewhere Bracton calls these testamentary
gifts to the lords “heriots”; he tells us that the lord gets them by grace rather than by
right, that they are regulated by local customs, that they do not touch the inheritance
and that they must not be compared to reliefs. Britton adds that in general they are
paid rather by villeins than by freemen.319 Turning to manorial surveys, we find it
among the commonest of customs that when a tenant in villeinage dies, the lord shall
have the best beast; sometimes a similar due is taken from the goods of the dead
freeholder, and it is to these customary dues that the name “heriot” permanently
attaches itself. Occasionally we still hear of the freeholder’s horse and armour going
to his lord; but far more commonly the tenement that is burdened by a heriot is a
peasant’s holding, the lord gets the best ox, and in this case the term heriot must in the
eyes of the etymologist be inappropriate.320 We may guess that in the heriot of the
later middle ages no less than four ancient elements have met:—(1) the warrior who
has received arms from his lord should on his death return them; (2) the peasant who
has received the stock on his farm from his lord should return it, and if his
representatives are allowed to keep it, they must recognize the lord’s right to the
whole by yielding up one article and that the best; (3) all the chattels of a serf belong
in strictness of law to his lord and the lord takes the best of them to manifest his right;
(4) in the infancy of testamentary power it has been prudent, if not necessary, that the
would-be testator, however high his rank, should purchase from the king or some
other lord that favour and warranty without which his bequests will hardly “stand.”
But at any rate in course of time the heriot is separated from the relief.

If a relief is payable when the original tenant dies and his heir Relief on the lord’s
takes up the inheritance, should not a similar payment be made death.
when the original lord dies? We are told that, in the early days of
the vassalic beneficium, the death of either party to the contract put an end to the
tenancy, and on the continent the new lord on succeeding to his ancestor could often
exact a payment from the tenant.321 A remarkable document has come down to us in
which William Rufus fixes the relevamen which is to be paid to him by the knights of
the episcopal barony of Worcester; Hugh de Lacy is to pay £20, Gilbert FitzTurold
100 shillings, the Abbot of Evesham £30, and so forth. The occasion of the relief
seems this, that the Bishop of Worcester is dead and Rufus chooses to regard himself
as the successor of St. Wulfstan, since the temporalities of the see are in his hand; “for

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 192 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

he would be the heir of every man whether hallowed or lay.”322 This we may regard
as an act of oppression, but the legal excuse for it probably is that a relief is due from
the tenants to their new lord. Of such payments we do not hear much more under the
name of reliefs; but in Normandy one of the regular “aids” payable to the lord was an
aid towards helping him to pay his own relief; half the relief that he had to pay he
might obtain from his tenants by way of aid.323 In England we do not reckon this
among the regular aids, but Glanvill distinctly sanctions the lord’s claim,324 and we
may see that the new bishop or abbot often expected that his knights and other tenants
would “recognize” him handsomely when he entered into possession of his
temporalities.325

§ 8.

Wardship And Marriage
Of great and increasing importance as men grow wealthier and Wardship and
begin to traffic in all manner of rights, are the rights of the lord marriage.
to wardship (custodia, warda) and marriage (maritagium), and
these have been among the chief causes of that classification of tenures which has
come before us.

In Bracton’s day they had reached their full stature. Their nature Bracton’s rules.
may be illustrated by a simple case. A tenant, who has but one
tenement, and who holds it by knight’s service or military serjeanty326 of a mesne
lord, dies leaving as heir a son who is under the age of twenty-one years. The lord will
have the wardship of the land until the heir attains that age or dies without having
attained it. He will take the rents and profits of the tenement for his own use, but
ought thereout to provide for the youth’s maintenance and pay the dead man’s
debts;327 he must not commit waste; if he does so, he forfeits the wardship.328 But,
besides the wardship of the land, he will be entitled to the wardship of the body of the
heir; if the heir escapes from his custody, if another takes the heir from his custody,
this is a wrong to him; by legal process he can compel the restoration of the heir’s
body.329 But further, as guardian of the heir’s body he is entitled to the boy’s
“marriage”; he can sell him in marriage;330 but the marriage must not be of a
disparaging kind.331 The law does not go so far as actively to constrain the ward to
marry the mate provided by the guardian, nor does it declare null a marriage
solemnized without the lord’s consent, though we have a hint that early in Henry III.’s
reign such an union might not have all those legal results that a marriage usually
has.332 The maxim was admitted, strange as this may seem to us, that “marriages
should be free,”333 and the church would neither have solemnized nor annulled a
sacrament at the bidding of the lay tribunals. Still if the ward married without the
lord’s consent, he wronged the lord, and so did any one who took part in procuring
such a marriage.334 Without making any great change in the substantive law, the
Statute of Merton (1236) defined the lord’s right by giving him new and efficient
remedies:— the current of legislation had in this instance set in his favour.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 193 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

If the heir was a woman, the lord’s right of wardship was much Wardship of female
the same; but whether the wardship of a woman was to endure heirs.
until she attained the age of twenty-one, or was to cease when
she attained the age of fourteen, seems to have been a moot point.335 Marriage with
her lord’s consent put an end to the wardship of a woman. But according to old law,
which Bracton regarded as still in force, no woman holding by military service could
lawfully marry without her lord’s consent, and even a father holding by military
service could not in his lifetime lawfully give his daughter in marriage without his
lord’s consent.336 This right the king rigorously enforces over widows who hold of
him in chief; to marry such a widow without the king’s licence is a grave offence.337
The lord’s rights, it will be understood, were proof against any claim on the part of
even the nearest of kin; the heir fell into the lord’s hands even though his mother were
alive. An apparent exception existed when the heir inherited from his mother while
his father was living; but this was hardly an exception, for in this case the father,
according to an opinion that was gradually prevailing, continued in possession of his
late wife’s land, not as guardian of the heir, but in his own right.338

If the dead man held by knight’s service or military serjeanty of Priority among lords.
several mesne lords, each of them got the wardship of the
tenement that was holden of him. As to which of them should have the wardship of
the heir’s body and with it the right of marriage, there was intricate law; the general
rule traced back the titles under which the dead man held the various tenements and
preferred that lord from whom, or from whose ancestors, the most ancient title was
derived; that lord would usually have been, not merely the dead man’s lord, but his
liege lord.339

If the dead man held his one tenement in socage, burgage, or fee What tenures give
farm, or by a non-military serjeanty, his lord had no right to wardship.
wardship or marriage: such was the general rule. As a matter of
fact, however, we find socage tenure subjected to these burdens. This seems to have
been the case throughout the Bishop of Winchester’s barony;340 the dean and chapter
of Hereford claimed wardship of the heirs of all their freehold tenants;341 the
Archbishop of Canterbury, the prior of Christ Church, the monks of Dover claimed
the same right over the heirs of their gavelkinders.342 This Bracton regarded as an
abuse, though one that might be sanctioned by prescription.343 The ordinary rule was
that the guardianship both of the land and of the child should go to the nearest of
those relations who could have no hope of inheriting the land. Thus, in the common
case, when the dead tenant in socage left a son and a widow, the widow would have
the wardship of her son and of his land; she would be “guardian in socage,” for she
never could be his heir. To state the main upshot of the rule—maternal kinsfolk have
the wardship of a paternal inheritance, paternal kinsfolk of a maternal inheritance.344
When the heir attained his fifteenth year, guardianship in socage came to an end.345
If the dead man held one tenement by knight’s service, another by socage, the
wardship of the one would belong to its lord, that of the other to a kinsman of the heir;
as to the wardship of the heir’s body, this and his marriage would belong to the lord of
whom he held by military tenure.346

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 194 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Once more we see the king above the common rules.347 If the Prerogative wardship.
dead man held in chief of the crown by knight’s service or by
grand serjeanty, the king was entitled to the wardship of the heir’s body and to his
marriage, no matter how many other lords there might be, and no regard being had to
the relative antiquity of the various titles by which the tenements were holden: no one
can compete with the king. But further, the king was entitled to the wardship of all the
lands which this dead man held, no matter of whom he held them. Such was the right
of “prerogative wardship,” and a clause in the Great Charter had been necessary to
keep it within these spacious bounds.348 The king was thereby excluded from a
prerogative wardship when the tenement holden in chief of the crown was holden in
socage, burgage, fee farm or by a petty serjeanty. He was also excluded when the
dead man, though a tenant in chief of the king, held not “as of the crown” but “as of
an honour” which was temporarily or permanently in the king’s hands. It is this last
rule that chiefly serves to establish a difference between tenure ut de corona and
tenure ut de honore.349

The guardian’s rights in the person, in the marriage, in the lands The lord’s rights
of the heir are regarded as property; they are saleable, assignable vendible.
rights; large sums are paid for the wardships and marriages of
wealthy heirs;350 indeed so thoroughly proprietary and pecuniary are these rights that
they can be disposed of by will; they pass like chattels to the guardian’s executors.351
In Bracton’s day no distinction in this respect seems drawn between the guardian in
chivalry and the guardian in socage. Neither one nor the other need account to the heir
for the profits of the land; the one like the other can sell the ward’s marriage.352 This
was so until the eve of the Barons’ War, when one of the Provisions of Westminster,
afterwards confirmed by the Statute of Marlborough, laid down the rule that the
guardian in socage must, when the heir has attained majority, account to him or her
for the profits of the land, and is not to give or sell the ward in marriage save to the
profit of the ward.353 This should be had in mind if we are to understand the rights of
the guardian in chivalry. The morality of the twelfth century saw nothing shameful in
the sale of a marriage; the law of the time looked upon guardianship as a profitable
right and would hardly have had the means of compelling a guardian to render
accounts, even had it wished so to do.354

One small point remains to be mentioned. It is the law about Wardship and the
wardships and marriages that gradually divides the serjeanties serjeanties.
into two classes, known as “grand” and “petty.” In the Great
Charter, John was forced to say that he would claim no prerogative wardship in
respect of “any small serjeanty such as that of supplying us with knives or arrows or
the like.”355 The term “small serjeanty” seems one which is not yet technical, and the
nature of those serjeanties which are too trivial to justify the royal claim is indicated
in the rudest manner. In Bracton’s day one opinion would have applied a merely
pecuniary test; a great serjeanty is one that is worth 100 shillings;356 but gradually a
different line seems to have been drawn: the tenant by grand serjeanty must do his
service in person, and his service must not consist of a mere render.357 Another
question was whether tenure by serjeanty of a mesne lord would give the lord
wardship and marriage. Here also a line had to be drawn, but where it should be
drawn was a question between Raleigh and Segrave. The “rodknight’s” serjeanty of

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 195 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

riding with his lord, will this give wardship and marriage? Raleigh decided that it
would; Segrave dissented. Bracton seems inclined to hold that the lord’s rights only
arise when the serjeanty is one which concerns the defence of the realm.358

Looking back from Bracton to Glanvill we see but little change. The law in Glanvill.
In his treatment of these matters Bracton has but revised and
expanded his forerunner’s text.359 The Statute of Merton has at a few points given a
sharper edge to the lord’s rights; the Great Charter has suppressed some abuses which
had grown up under Richard and John, in the main abuses of the prerogatival rights.
To speak of the English lords as groaning under the burdens of wardship and marriage
is hardly permissible;360 we do not hear their groans. In the days of their power, in
1215 and in 1258, they had little to suggest; it was enough that the heir’s land should
not be wasted, that wards should not be married below their station.361 Certainly
there was at one time a tradition that in or about the year 1222 “the magnates of
England granted to King Henry the wardship of their heirs and of their lands, which
was the beginning of many evils in England.”362 This story, however, has not been
traced beyond chronicles which in this context must be styled modern, and as it is
absolutely certain that the king’s right to wardship was much older than Henry III.’s
day, we may well doubt whether there is even a grain of truth in the tale.363 More
important is it for us to notice with many recent writers that Glanvill says nothing
about the lord’s right to the marriage of a male ward; he speaks only of the marriages
of women. This is remarkable, but we cannot adopt the popular opinion that this new
right, if new we must call it, “was based simply on a strained construction of the
general word heredes in a section of Magna Carta.”364 We can trace the sale of the
marriages of boys back to a very few years after Glanvill’s death; in 1193 the Bishop
of Ely, William Longchamp, for 220 marks buys from the king the wardship of
Stephen Beauchamp and the right to marry him wherever he may please.365 Such
transactions are common enough throughout the reigns of Richard and John.
Archbishop Hubert gives 4,000 marks for the wardship and marriage of Robert
Stuteville, though the king reserves a certain veto on the choice of a bride.366 If two
men who have filled the office of chief justiciar invest their money thus, the security
is fairly good. We must suspect that under Henry II. the sale of the male ward’s
marriage was a growing practice. As to earlier days, the one extant Pipe Roll of Henry
I.’s reign shows us the king selling wardships,367 and selling the marriages of
women;368 it seems to show that even the male ward could not lawfully marry
without his lord’s consent.369

Then however in our backward progress we come to the Earlier law.
declaration of Henry I. in his coronation charter:—“If any of my
barons or other men wishes to give his daughter, or sister, or niece, or cousin in
marriage, let him speak with me; but I will neither take anything of his for the licence,
nor will I forbid him to give her away, unless it be to an enemy of mine. And if on the
death of one of my barons or other men he leaves a daughter as heir, I will give her
with her land by the counsel of my barons. If he leaves a widow, who is without
children, she shall have her dower and marriage portion, and I will not give her in
marriage against her will. If she has children, she shall have her dower and marriage
portion while she remains chaste, and I will not give her unless with her consent. And
the wife or some other relative who has the best claim shall be guardian of the land

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 196 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

and of the children. And I bid my barons keep within the same bounds as regards the
sons, daughters and wives of their men.”370 That Henry made these promises is
certain, that he broke them is equally certain; but here again, as in the matter of
reliefs, the question arises whether his promises represent the old law as it stood
before the tyranny of Rufus and Flambard, or whether he is buying support by
relaxations of ancient rules. The question is difficult, for of the Conqueror’s practice
we know little, and of the Norman law of the eleventh century we know, if that be
possible, less.

In later days, Norman law and English law agree; they agree Norman law.
even in some of the minuter details of prerogative wardship, for
as in England no lord can compete with the king, so in Normandy none can compete
with the duke. Perhaps under French dominion some of the worst characteristics of
the Anglo-Norman law were mitigated. In Glanvill’s day the rule that a ward might
not lawfully marry without the lord’s consent was applied in Normandy to male as
well as to female wards; in later statements of the rule we hear only of female
wards.371 From a Norman lawyer, a contemporary of Glanvill, we have, what no
English lawyer gives us, namely, a defence of the law, and a curious defence it
is:—“A fatherless heir must be in ward to some one. Who shall be his guardian? His
mother? No. Why not? She will take another husband and have sons by him, and they,
greedy of the heritage, will slay their firstborn brother, or the step-father will slay his
step-son. Who then shall be the guardian? The child’s blood kinsmen? No. Why not?
Lest, thirsting for his heritage, they destroy him. For the prevention of such faithless
cruelty, it is established that the boy be in ward to one who was bound to his father by
the tie of homage. And who is such an one? The lord of the land who never can
inherit that land in demesne; for heirs of a noble race always have many heirs. Besides
they should be brought up in good houses and honourably educated. Those who are
brought up in their lords’ houses are the apter to serve their lords faithfully and love
them in truth; and the lords cannot look with hatred on those whom they have reared,
but will love them and faithfully guard their woods and tenements and apply the
profits of their land to their advancement.” As to prerogative wardship, the duke, who
is bound to rule all his people, is more especially bound to have a care for the
orphan.372

That this quaint apology is mere nonsense we are not entitled to The Norman apology.
say. There was a strong feeling that to commit the care of a child
to the custody of his expectant heir was to set the wolf to guard the lamb. Fortescue,
when he sang the lauds of the laws of England, made boast of the wisdom of our rules
about socage guardianship. Some French customs managed the matter yet more
prudently, giving the custody of the lands to those who might inherit, the custody of
the child’s person to those who could not inherit from him. Still we cannot regard the
rights of English and Norman lords as instituted for the protection of infant life, or for
the advancement of the ward by education in a “good house,” though here we may see
some set-off for what we are wont to regard as tyrannous exactions. The real question
is whether we are entitled to find the explanation of the English and Norman, and (it
should be added) the Scottish, law of wardship in the ancient history of the precarious
beneficium.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 197 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

The history of the law has been pictured thus:—Gradually the Origin of these rights.
“benefice” lost its precarious character; it became a usufruct for
the tenant’s life; the heirs male of his body, if competent to perform the lord’s service,
acquired first a claim, then a right to succeed him; female heirs, collateral heirs, were
slowly admitted; even an infant heir has a claim to succeed, a claim to succeed
hereafter when he shall be able to serve the lord; meanwhile the lord will hold the
land and train the heir. As to female heirs, if they are to be admitted at all, it is certain
that they must not marry without their lord’s consent. Gradually tenants at will are
making themselves absolute owners. The English and Norman law of the twelfth
century represent a particular stage in this process. In the duchy, in the island
kingdom, under pressure of strong government, customs have crystallized at an early
time, while the financial necessities of the king, the wealth of his subjects, the early
development of commercial ideas, give to the law its most repulsive features:—if any
one has a right in England, that right must be a saleable commodity. When French and
German law become definite in the thirteenth century they represent a later stage in
the transformation of the beneficium; yet further encroachments have been made upon
the lord’s rights, though of their once wider compass there are many memorials. The
lord has a certain influence on the choice of the heir’s guardian; he confers the fief
upon the guardian and sees that his own rights are not thereby impaired; if no kinsman
is forthcoming, then he keeps the fief in his own hands; he has also a word to say
about the marriage of his female tenants. These French and German phenomena find
their best explanation in the law of England and Normandy.373

How far this hypothetical history can be verified in the scanty The precarious
annals of the Norman duchy is a question about which we dare beneficium.
say no more than has been said above.374 There seems however
to be just enough evidence to show that the Conqueror both in Normandy and in
England expected that he would be consulted before any of his female tenants in
chief—he had but few—took to herself a husband, and, as already remarked, the
inheritance of great fiefs, at least where an office was bound up with the land, was not
altogether beyond his control.375 There were cases in his own family which might
support such a claim; had not Richard the Fearless been in ward to his lord King
Louis: had not William himself been claimed by King Henry? Men said so.376 If the
kings of the French had been compelled to abandon all hopes of contesting the
heritability of the great fiefs, they had yielded slowly and reluctantly, and perhaps had
hardly yet brought themselves to acknowledge the full import of the unpleasant
facts.377 The king of the English was to be not less of a king than the king of the
French, and rights of wardship and marriage were necessary to him if he was to keep
any hold upon his feudatories. The use or abuse of such rights for merely fiscal
purposes may begin at a later time; but there the rights were. As to the mesne lords,
they seem to have taken the first opportunity that occurred of asserting similar rights;
in the reign of Rufus the Abbot of Abingdon was already claiming the wardship of an
infant tenant.378 On the whole it seems to us that the old is the true story, and that the
rights of wardship and marriage are, if we look at Europe as a whole, the outcome of a
process which is benefiting the feudatory at the expense of his lord, though it may
also be reducing to the level of feudatories men whose predecessors had no landlords
above them. Unfortunately in England feudalism itself becomes commercial.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 198 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

§ 9.

Restraints On Alienation
In the middle of the thirteenth century the tenant enjoyed a large Historical theories
power of disposing of his tenement by act inter vivos, though this about the power of
was subject to some restraints in favour of his lord. About the alienation.
history of these restraints different opinions have been held. The
old English tradition, represented by Coke, regarded it as a process by which limits
were gradually set to ancient liberty.379 On the other hand, the cosmopolitan
“learning of feuds,” which Blackstone made popular, assumed the inalienability of the
fief as a starting point:—gradually the powers of the tenant grew at the expense of the
lord.380 Of late years a renewed attention to the English authorities has occasioned a
reaction in favour of Coke’s doctrine.381 The evidence deserves a patient
examination, the result of which may be that we shall see some truth in both of the
rival opinions, and come to the conclusion that the controversy has been chiefly
occasioned by an attempt, common to all parties, to make the law of the Norman
reigns more definite than really it was.

Some distinctions must first be drawn. The tenant may desire to Modes of alienation.
alienate the whole, or only some part of the tenement, by
substituting for himself some new tenant who will hold the tenement, or the part so
alienated, of his, the alienator’s, lord; or again, he may desire to add a new rung to the
bottom of the scale of tenure, to have a tenant who will hold the whole or part of the
land of him, and in this case the services for which he stipulates may be different from
those by which he himself holds of his lord;—we have to contrast “substitution” and
“subinfeudation.”382 Now each of these two processes may harm the lord, but the
harm done by the one will, to a lawyer’s eye, be different from that done by the other.
First, however, we have to notice that nothing that the tenant can do without his lord’s
concurrence will remove from the land the burden of that service which is due to his
lord from him and from it. The tenement itself owes the service; the “reality,” if we
may so speak, of the burden can be brought home by means of distress to any one into
whose hands the land may come. But though this be so, an alienation of any kind may
make against the lord’s interest. If a new is substituted for an old tenant, a poor may
take the place of a rich, a dishonest that of an honest man, a foe that of a friend, and
the solemn bond of homage will be feeble if the vassal has a free power of putting
another man in his room. If the substitution affects part only of the tenement, the lord
may suffer in another way, and it is hardly to be supposed that he can be bound by an
apportionment of the service effected without his concurrence, so that instead of being
able to look to one man and six hides for his scutage or rent, he can be compelled to
look to one man and four hides for two-thirds of it, to another man and two hides for
the residue.383 The harm done by subinfeudation is of a different kind. There will
still be the old tenant liable as before; on his death the lord will get a relief or possibly
a wardship and marriage, on his death without heirs, an escheat. These rights will not
be destroyed by the subinfeudation, but their value may be seriously lessened.
Suppose that A enfeoffed B to hold by knight’s service, and that B enfeoffed C to hold
at a rent of a pound of pepper; B dies leaving an heir within age; A is entitled to a

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 199 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

wardship; but it will be worth very little: instead of being entitled to enjoy the land
itself until the heir is of age, he will get a few annual pounds of pepper. And so in
case of an escheat, instead of enjoying the land for ever he may have but a trifling
rent.384 Obviously the case is at its worst when the tenant makes a gift in
frankalmoin; a wardship will now be of no value at all; an escheat will give but a
nominal seignory over a corporation which pays no rent, which never dies, nor
marries, nor commits felony. Still, it is plausible to say with Bracton, that the lord is
not injured; his rights remain what they were, though their value is diminished; he
suffers damnum, but there is no iniuria.385

Also in our investigation we must keep our eyes open to Preliminary
differences between the various tenures. As just said, a gift in distinctions.
frankalmoin, though a very common, is yet an extreme case; it
reduces the value of the feudal casualties to nothing. Tenure by serjeanty again may
require special treatment, for is a servant to alienate the fund which should sustain
him in his lord’s service? Lastly, though pure feudal theory can draw no distinction
between the king and other lords, still we have already seen that the English king has
very exceptional rights within the feudal sphere. Even if no exceptional rules were
applied to him, still his position would be unique. Too often in discussions of
questions about feudal law we are wont to speak of lords and tenants as though they
were two different classes of persons with conflicting interests. Therefore it is
necessary to remember that the king was the only person who was always lord and
never tenant; that his greatest feudatories had one interest as lords, another as tenants;
that the baron, who did not like to see his vassals creating new sub-tenancies, could
not forget that he himself had a lord. The conflict of interests takes place within the
mind of every magnate of the realm, and the result is that the development of definite
law is slow.

This premised, we turn to our history, and first to that part of it which lies within legal
memory; of the earlier time we shall be better able to speak when we have seen its
outcome. Now the main facts of which account must be taken are as follows:

(1) Glanvill nowhere says that the tenant cannot alienate his land Glanvill.
without his lord’s consent, though, as he speaks at some length
of the restraints on alienation that are set by the rights of expectant heirs, he has an
excellent opportunity for saying that the rights of the lord also must be considered.386

(2) The Great Charter of 1217 is the first document of a The Great Charter.
legislative kind that expressly mentions any restraint in favour of
the lord. It says—“No free man shall henceforth give or sell so much of his land as
that out of the residue he may not sufficiently do to the lord of the fee the service
which pertains to that fee.”387 This has all the appearance of being a rule which
imposes a new or defines a preexisting restraint; to read it as mitigating a pre-existing
restraint would do violence to its words. Coke speaks as though its only effect was to
make the excessive gift voidable by the donor’s heir;388 but it certainly could be
avoided by the donor’s lord; this we learn both from Bracton and from a decision on
which he relies.389

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 200 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

(3) Throughout his work Bracton shows a strong leaning in Bracton.
favour of free alienation. As regards subinfeudation, he argues
laboriously that it does no wrong, though it may do damage, to the lords.390 The very
earnestness of his argument shows that he has to combat a strong feeling, still we
must take his opinion as that of the royal court. The rule laid down by the third edition
of the Charter he mentions only in a very casual way, as though it were directed
chiefly, if not solely, against gifts in frankalmoin;391 collections of charters and
collections of pleas from his time seem to show that it produced little effect.392 The
strength of Bracton’s inclination in favour of subinfeudation may be shown by a
passage in which he goes so far as to question the justice of the rule which treated
service as a burden on land. He supposes that A enfeoffs B to hold by a certain
service; and that B enfeoffs C to hold the whole or part of the tenement by a less
service; the rigour of the law, he says, permits A to distrain C for all the service due
from B, but this is against equity.393 Then as to substitutions, he holds that even
when B has done homage to A, nevertheless B may give A a new tenant by enfeoffing
C to hold of A, and C will then hold of A whether A likes it or no.394 Bracton does
not even expressly allow A to object that C is his personal enemy or too poor to do the
service, which is very remarkable, since he does allow that the lord cannot substitute
for himself in the bond of homage a new lord who is the enemy of the tenant, or too
needy to fulfil the duties of warranty.395 He does not even say that the tenant cannot
give a fragment of the tenement to be holden of the lord by a proportional part of the
service, though we may take it that in his opinion the inequitable rigour of the law396
would prevent the tenant and his feoffee from making an apportionment which would
bind the lord.

(4) Just in Bracton’s time alienations in mortmain were Legislation as to
beginning to cause murmurs. The charter of 1217 had struck at mortmain.
certain collusive practices to which the churches had been
privy.397 In 1258 at the Oxford parliament the barons prayed remedy, that men of
religion may not enter the fees of earls and barons and others without their will,
whereby they lose for ever their wardships, marriages, reliefs and escheats.398 In
1259 the Provisions of Westminster ordained that it shall not be lawful for men of
religion to enter the fee of any one without the licence of the lord of whom the land is
holden.399 These Provisions were now law, now not law, as the barons or the king
obtained the mastery. Most of them were reenacted by the Statute of Marlborough in
1267, but not the provision now in question; from which we may gather that the
clergy were influential enough with the king, who was enjoying his own again, to put
off the evil day. But not for long, for in 1279 the Statute De Viris Religiosis,400 after
referring to the Provisions of Westminster as though they were or had been law,401
put a check upon alienations in mort-main. No religious persons were to acquire land;
if they did, the land was to be forfeited to the lord, and he had a brief term given him
for taking advantage of the forfeiture; if he failed to do so, the lord next above him in
the feudal scale had a similar opportunity; and so on up to the king. The statute does
not merely condemn gifts in frankalmoin; the religious are not to acquire more land,
even though they are willing to pay a full rent for it. However, the king and the other
lords, if any, whose interests were concerned could bind themselves to take no
advantage of the statute, and licences to acquire land in mortmain were somewhat
easily obtained.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 201 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

(5) From a comparatively early date we learn that serjeanties Alienation of
were inalienable. Already in 1198 the itinerant justices were serjeanties.
directed to make inquest touching the king’s serjeanties.402 In
1205 John ordered an inquest as to the serjeanties, thegnages, drengages and other
services and lands of the honour of Lancaster, which honour was then in his hands;
the sheriffs were to seize all such as had been alienated since the coronation of Henry
II. without licence from the king or other good warrant.403 This claim was steadily
maintained by Henry III.404 Towards the middle of his reign it was enforced with
retrospective rigour; Robert Passelew was sent through England to “arrent” the
alienated serjeanties, that is to say, to change the tenure from serjeanty into knight’s
service or socage. One instance out of a very large number will serve to show what
was done. Walter Devenish held land by the serjeanty of finding three arrows when
the king should hunt on Dartmoor; he had alienated parts of the tenement to
subtenants, his services were now changed into a rent of three shillings, one-third of
which was to be paid to him by his subtenants.405 That many of the king’s tenants by
serjeanty had alienated parts of their tenements by way of subinfeudation is
instructive: we learn that a restraint on alienation might exist in theory and yet be
much disregarded in practice. Our evidence chiefly concerns serjeanties held of the
king; but we may guess that other lords thought that a similar rule might be applied to
their serjeants; and the serjeants of the honour of Lancaster, whose alienations John
attacked, were not tenants in chief of the crown.

(6) Bracton nowhere says that any special restriction is imposed Special law for the
on the tenants in chief of the crown; the utmost that he does is to king’s immediate
suggest, and this not very definitely, that the Charter of 1217 has tenants.
been construed favourably to the king. The tenant in chief by
knight’s service of the king may not make a gift in frankalmoin, or a feoffment which
reserves a less service than that due to the king.406 But just about the time when
Bracton was writing Henry III. issued an important ordinance. It takes the form of a
writ dated the 15th of July, in the fortieth year of the reign (1256). The king asserts
that it is an intolerable invasion of royal rights that men should without his special
consent enter by way of purchase or otherwise the baronies and fees that are holden of
him in chief. He declares that for the future no one is to do this, and bids the sheriff
seize the land upon which any one enters in contravention of this decree. This writ,
however, remained unknown to our historians until it was published in 1896, and, as
we shall see hereafter, even the lawyers of the fourteenth century seem to have been
ignorant of its existence.407 Perhaps the king did not wish or did not dare to enforce
in all cases the broad rule that he had laid down; the Barons’ War was at hand. The
apocryphal Statute Praerogativa Regis, which may represent the practice of the earlier
years of Edward I., says that no one who holds of the king in chief by knight’s service
may without the king’s licence alienate the greater part of his land so that the residue
is not sufficient to do the service, “but this is not wont to be understood of members
or parcels of the said lands.” It adds that the king has been accustomed to set to rent
(arrentare) serjeanties that have been alienated.408 In 1290 a petitioner says that the
king has a prerogative that those who hold of him in chief cannot give or alienate their
lands without his licence; certainly they cannot alienate all that they so hold.409
Britton states that earls, barons, knights and serjeants who hold of the king in chief
cannot without his licence alienate their fees, but the king may eject the purchasers,

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 202 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

no matter how ancient the alienation, since time does not run against the king.410
Fleta states broadly that no tenements holden of the king can be given without his
assent.411 This becomes the law of after times. Before the end of Edward’s reign both
theory and practice draw a marked distinction between the king and other lords, and
the king is making a considerable revenue out of licences to alienate and fines for
alienations effected without licence.412

(7) The growth of the royal right may be traced also in the Growth of the
articles delivered to the itinerant justices. Already in Richard’s prerogative right.
reign they are to inquire “of the king’s serjeanties, who has them,
and through whom, and how much, and what they are worth.”413 A similar inquiry is
found among the articles of Henry III.’s reign; but, though there were divers other
inquiries about royal rights, wardships, escheats and the like, there seems to have been
none as yet into alienations of lands not holden by serjeanty.414 But in or about 1254
a special commission was issued,415 which was a forerunner of the more famous Quo
Waranto inquiry of Edward I.’s reign, and among the articles, besides that about
serjeanties, there seems to have been one “of knights, freeholders, men of religion or
others, holding land on the king’s demesne by gift or sale of the sokemen or by
provision of the warden or bailiffs,” and another “of men of religion who have entered
the king’s fee so that the king loses wards, reliefs and tallage.”416 The right asserted
is growing more ample; and two years later the king issued the decisive writ. And so
the inquiry becomes more extensive. In 1274 it runs thus:—“of the fees of the king
and of his tenants, who now holds of him in chief, and how many fees each holds, and
what fees were wont to be holden of the king in chief but now are held through a
mesne lord (per medium), and what mesne lord, and when they were alienated, and
how and by whom.”417 Thenceforth this is one of the usual articles of the eyre, and
as such it is given by Fleta and Britton;418 it formed one of the Nova Capitula which
were distinguished from the more ancient articles.

(8) The famous statute of 1290, the Quia Emptores Quia emptores.
Terrarum,419 lies outside our limits, but a word must be said of
it. It declared that every freeman might sell his tenement or any part of it, but so that
the feoffee should hold of the same lord and by the same services, of whom and by
which the feoffor held. In case only a part was sold, the services were to be
apportioned between the part sold and the part retained according to their quantities;
this apportionment was binding on the lord. The statute is a compromise; the great
lords had to concede to their tenants a full liberty of alienation by way of
substitution—substitution even of many tenants for one tenant—and thus incur a
danger of losing their services by the process of apportionment; on the other hand,
subinfeudation with its consequent depreciation of escheats, wardships and marriages
was stopped. Nothing was said about the king’s rights and no one seems to have
imagined that the tenants in chief of the crown were set free to alienate without royal
licence; on the contrary, it is just at the moment when all other tenants are gaining
perfect freedom, that the king’s claim to restrain any and every alienation by his
tenants in chief attains its full amplitude.420

(9) What was the legal basis of this prerogative right? Already in Disputed origin of the
the middle of the fourteenth century the lawyers had no certain prerogative right.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 203 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

answer for this question. The writ of 1256 they seem to have forgotten or but vaguely
remembered and incorrectly dated; also their speculations are obscured and vitiated
by the belief that the Praerogativa Regis was a statute. Already in Edward II.’s day it
was clear that the royal claims were too extensive to be covered by the clause in the
Charter of 1217. In 1325 complaint was made in parliament that the rule applicable to
tenants in chief of the crown was being extended to tenants who held of honours
which had fallen into the king’s hands; the king acknowledged the distinction; as lord
of an honour he had only such rights as were given to all lords by the Charter.421 In
1327 a statute was required to settle that, on an alienation without licence, the king
was entitled only to a reasonable fine and not to a forfeiture of the land.422 In 1341 it
was suggested in court that before the thirtieth year of Henry III. a tenant in chief
might alienate without licence.423 In 1346 it was asserted and denied by pleaders that
before the twentieth year of Henry III. a tenant in chief of the crown could alienate
like any other tenant. The reporter apparently has his doubts and tells us to consider
the date of the Praerogativa Regis.424 In 1352 the question was discussed whether in
Henry III.’s reign the tenant in chief could subinfeudate without licence, and
apparently the decision was to the effect that he could.425 In 1355 the lawyers are
once more debating whether something happened in the twentieth year of Henry III.
to prevent the tenant in chief from subinfeudating.426 Why do they single out the
twentieth or thirtieth year (1235–36, 1245–46) of Henry III. as important? To say with
Coke427 that in the twentieth (or rather in the following) year Magna Carta was
confirmed, is not satisfactory; the same might be said of so many years, and the
Magna Carta of the lawyers’ statute books was the charter of 9 Henry III. (1225),
confirmed by Edward I. To say that they referred the Praerogativa Regis to the
twentieth or thirtieth year of Henry seems impossible, since that enigmatical
document mentions King Edward. Probably they were thinking of the writ of the
fortieth year (1256). The discussion, however, was taken up in parliament, and there
the king’s right was treated as the outcome of the Praerogativa Regis, and was said to
have had its beginning in the reign of King Edward I.428 A declaration of the law was
demanded; but the king desired further information. The question was of practical
importance, for it came to this:—Could the king attack a possessor of land on the
ground of an alienation made without licence in the days of King Henry—or, more
generally, was there any limit of time that could be set to this prerogative right? In
1360 a statute confirmed all subinfeudations made by the tenants in chief under Henry
III. and earlier kings.429 As we can hardly believe that Edward III. gave up any right
to which he considered himself justly entitled, we may infer that the result of repeated
discussions in the courts and in parliament was to date the change in the law at the
accession of Edward I. in 1272, about sixteen years after what we may now regard as
the decisive ordinance.430

On the whole then, we may be inclined to accept, with some Summary as to law
modification, Coke’s theory of this episode. We may believe that after the date of the
the only restraint on the alienation of tenements holden of mesne Charter.
lords that existed after the year 1217 was the somewhat vague
restraint imposed or defined by the charter of that year; that, apart from this, the
tenant might alienate the whole or any part of the land by way of subinfeudation, and
the whole, though perhaps not a part of it, by way of substitution; that the king’s
prerogative right gradually grew out of the right allowed to all lords by the charter,

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 204 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

though it exceeded the words of that compact; that it was first asserted in all its
breadth in the writ or ordinance of 1256, and may not have been stringently enforced
until the accession of Edward I.431 But as to an earlier period, there is much to be
said on the other side; there are the once fashionable arguments drawn from “the
learning of feuds,” while more solid arguments may be derived from English and
Norman deeds.

As regards “the original constitution of feuds” little need here be Older law.
said: it was an old story long before the battle of Hastings. Very
generally the continental vassal could not substitute a new vassal for himself without
his lord’s consent; but commonly he had some power of subinfeudation.432 Wherever
we look in the twelfth century we see differences of practice and in some cases the
law is becoming more favourable to the lords, less favourable to the tenants.433 In
this instance however we have no need to look beyond England and Normandy. For
the period between 1066 and 1217 we have hundreds of English charters,
and at first sight they seem to go the full length of proving that Anglo-Norman
from the Conquest onward no tenant could alienate his land charters.
without his lord’s consent. It so happens also that in Normandy
we can trace this restraint on alienation back to the time when the duke of the
Normans was not yet king of the English.434 The chronicle of Orderic is full of gifts
made to the Abbey of St. Evroul, and in case after case the chronicler is careful to tell
us how the gift was confirmed by the donor’s lord or lords; in seeking confirmation
the monks ascend the scale of tenure and do not stop until they reach the duke.435
Then, after the Conquest, they acquire lands in England; for instance, they acquire
lands from some of the men of the Earl of Chester; they seek the earl’s confirmation
and the king’s. The abbot journeys to England and obtains from the Conqueror a
liberal charter confirming the gifts and confirmations of his barons.436 This is no
solitary phenomenon. Every collection of monastic charters tells the same tale. No gift
is considered safe until it has been confirmed by the king and all who stand between
the king and the donor.437 Often the donor’s lord joins in the gift itself; it is made
annuente domino meo, concedente domino meo; still more often he confirms it after it
has been made. What is more, he sometimes confirms prospectively whatever gifts
any of his men may make to the favoured monastery. For a while we do not hear
much of money being paid for such confirmations; lands are plentiful and lords are
pious; but already in Henry I.’s day men are paying for confirmations,438 and now
and again we read stories which seem to show that a lord would sometimes call in
question a feoffment to which he had not consented.439

But considerable care is necessary in drawing inferences from Discussion of the
these documents. Most of the very early charters that we possess charters.
relate to gifts in frankalmoin, and, when examined, they will
often appear to be confirmations and something more. In royal confirmations it is
common to find words that are not merely confirmatory. Sometimes the king
denounces a penalty, a forfeiture of £10, against any who shall disturb the donees;
often he wills that the donees may enjoy “sake and soke” and other liberties, which, at
least in his opinion, none but he can grant. Then again, words which look merely
confirmatory, demand a careful criticism. For instance if B holds of A by knight’s
service and enfeoffs the abbot of C in free alms, then, when A confirms the gift, we

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 205 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

must be diligent to observe whether he reserves his right to exact the service from the
land, or uses words importing that the land is to be frankalmoin, not merely as
between B and the abbot, but even as regards the confirmer himself. Thus, to take a
real example, when Robert Earl of Gloucester confirms a gift which one of his tenants
has made to St. Peter’s Abbey, he adds “I will that the said monks hold the same
freely, quietly and honourably in frankalmoin for ever.”440 Such words, which are
very commonly found, will in all likelihood debar the earl and his heirs from ever
exacting any service from this land. Indeed in Bracton’s day a lord confirming a
tenant’s gift had to be extremely cautious if he wished to retain the service due from
the land; if B who held of A at a rent of a hundred shillings enfeoffed C at a rent of
one shilling, the mere word confirmo used by A might, if unexplained, deprive him of
ninety-nine shillings a year.441 Again, at least in Norman documents, there is much
to suggest that a subinfeudation effected without the lord’s consent was neither void
nor voidable by the lord so long as the mesne seignory of the donor endured; the
donee’s danger lay in this, that by the donor’s felony or want of heirs this seignory
would escheat and the donor’s lord would then be able to avoid the gift.442 Again, we
must remark that in this context little stress can be laid on confirmations when the
confirmer is the king, for, quite apart from all feudal theory, a royal charter was a very
efficient protection against litigation. When once such a charter was produced by the
person in possession, the king’s justices would stay their hands; they would proceed
no further rege inconsulto.443 We find too that religious houses are not content with
one royal confirmation; they obtain a fresh charter from each successive king, for, be
the law what it may, no prudent man will trust to the king’s respect for his ancestor’s
promises. Lastly, to complete the picture, we may add that the usual practice of the
monasteries was, not to apply to the king whenever they received a gift, but to wait
until they had a considerable number of gifts and then get all of them confirmed by
one instrument.

In the teeth however of the long series of diplomata stretching Conclusions as to the
back to the Conquest, and in Normandy beyond the Conquest, law of the Norman
some of which deal with cases in which the donee is a layman time.
and the confirming lord is not the king, it is quite impossible for
us to hold that the restriction expressed in the charter of 1217 was a new thing, or that
the free alienability of “the fee simple” is the starting point of English law. We must
be content with a laxer principle: with some such idea as this, that the tenant may
lawfully do anything that does not seriously damage the interests of his lord. He may
make reasonable gifts, but not unreasonable. The reasonableness of the gift would be
a matter for the lord’s court; the tenant would be entitled to the judgment of his peers.
The charter of 1217 is a fair, though a vague compromise of conflicting claims. That
it should have been so favourable to the tenants as it was, may fairly surprise us, if we
have regard to other countries, and to the extreme severity of our English law about
reliefs, primer seisins, wardships and marriages.444 But the Norman Conquest must
for a while have favoured “free trade in land.” William, when he conferred the
forfeited estates of English earls and thegns on his French followers, must have
known and intended that there should be some reasonable amount of subinfeudation.
This was absolutely required by the new military system; the count or baron was to
have knights to follow his banner, and the services of knights could only be secured
by feoffments. For a long time it would be possible for the vassals to endow sub-

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 206 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

vassals, for the sub-vassals to endow other sub-vassals, without any loss being
inflicted on the great lords or on the king. We must add to this that for a full century
after the Conquest, despite occasional quarrels, the king was in close league with the
church; as against his too rebellious barons he relied on the prelates, and the prelates
of course desired that men should be free to make gifts to pious uses. And just when
the interests of the church as an acquirer of land were beginning to come into serious
conflict with the needs of the state, the function of declaring the law of England was
being committed to a group of professional lawyers who for several reasons were
likely to favour free alienation. Often they were ecclesiastics; always they were the
king’s servants, and as such inclined to loosen the feudal bond whenever this could be
done without prejudice to their master’s rights. But, besides all this, it seems clear that
merely as jurists, and all considerations of political expediency apart, they were
disposed to concede to every tenant the fullest possible power of dealing with his
land. Just when they were deciding that the common law put no restriction on this
power in favour of the lord, they were rapidly and finally destroying the restrictions
which had existed in favour of the tenant’s expectant heirs. This process will come
before us hereafter, but should be noticed in this context. If the English lawyers are
shutting their ears to the claims of the lords, they are shutting their ears to the claims
of the kindred also, and this just at a time when in Normandy and other countries the
claims of the lord and the claims of the expectant heir are finding a formal recognition
in the new jurisprudence. Whether we ascribe this result to the precocious maturity of
our system of royal justice, or to some cause deep-seated in our national character, we
must look at these two facts together:—if the English law knows no retrait féodal, it
knows no retrait lignager.

As regards the form that alienation took, subinfeudation was Usual form of
certainly much commoner than substitution. Still we find the alienation.
latter at an early date, if not in charters, at least in fines levied
before the king’s court. Not unfrequently in John’s reign one party to the transaction
grants a tenement to the other party to hold “of the chief lords of the fee.”445 It is not
always possible for us to discover the real meaning of such a transaction, as we cannot
always tell whether the fine is the settlement of a genuine dispute, or a mere piece of
conveyancing machinery; but it seems clear that fines were levied with little, if any,
regard for the lord’s interest, and that their effect often was to give him a new
immediate tenant of the whole, or even (for so it would seem) of part only of the
tenement. As regards modes of conveyance less solemn than a fine, had it not been for
Bracton’s distinct assertion, we should probably have come to the opinion that a new
tenant, even of the whole tenement, could not be forced upon an unwilling lord.
Whether we look to collections of charters or to collections of pleadings, we find the
lord’s consent frequently mentioned;446 indeed sometimes the transaction takes the
form of a surrender by the old tenant to the lord and a feoffment by the lord of the
new tenant. When about the middle of the twelfth century Reginald Puer sells land to
Whitby Abbey, he resigns all his right into the hand of Roger Mowbray to the use (ad
opus) of the monks, to whom Roger gives it, putting them in seisin by the same rod
(lignum) by which the resignation had been made.447 When Alexander Buddicombe
sells that fifth part of a knight’s fee which he holds of Hawise Gurney to Thomas
FitzWilliam, he “demises himself” in Hawise’s court and renders the land to her by
the branch of a tree, whereupon she gives seisin to Thomas by the same branch.448

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 207 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Still there are Bracton’s plain words:—albeit the tenant has done homage (and this of
course makes the case extreme) he may put a new tenant in his place, and the lord
must accept him, will he, nill he.449

To sum up the whole of a lengthy argument, the sound General summary as
conclusion seems to be that, in treating the matter as one of to alienation by the
purely English history, we must start not from the absolute tenant.
inalienability of “the fief,” nor from the absolute alienability of
“the fee simple,” but from something much less satisfactory, an indeterminate right of
the lord to prevent alienations which would seriously impair his interests, a right
which might remain in abeyance so long as there was plenty of scope for
subinfeudation and the liberty of endowing churches was not abused, a right on which
the king’s court was seldom if ever called upon to pronounce, since the lord could
enforce it in his own court, a right which was at length defined, though in loose terms,
by the charter of 1217. But very probably the king’s legal position was from the first
exceptional, and it certainly became exceptional in the course of the thirteenth
century; with no text of law to rely upon but the charter, he succeeded, under stress of
pecuniary troubles, in gradually establishing a right which could not be justified by
the terms of that instrument.

That we may be right in taking as the starting point of our law Gifts made by a lord
principles so vague as those just stated, may appear from this, with the consent of
that if we often find a lord confirming his tenants’ gifts, we his court.
sometimes find a lord consulting or professing to consult his
tenants before he makes a feoffment. When Aubrey de Vere gives land to the Abbey
of Abingdon, “all his knights” are said to join in the grant;450 Earl Hugh of Chester
speaks with “his barons” before he makes a similar gift;451 Roger de Merlay when he
endows Newminster does so with the consent of “his men”;452 “the knights” and the
“good men” of the Abbot of Abingdon give their consent to an exchange which he is
making with one of his tenants,453 and so the Abbot of Ramsey by the counsel of his
barons retains the homage of Robert Foliot at the cost of two thousand eels a year.454
Each feudal group strives to be a little state; its ruler and his subjects alike have an
interest in all that concerns its territory. Still this notion, that the lord ought to hold a
parliament before he makes a feoffment, never hardens into law.

But now another question arises. Can a lord dispose of his rights Alienation of a
over a tenant and his tenement without that tenant’s consent? We seignory.
will suppose that A has enfeoffed B who has enfeoffed C, and
ask whether B can, without C’ s concurrence, either put X in his (B’ s) place, so that C
will hold of X who will hold of A, or place X between himself and C, so that C will
hold of X, who will hold of B, who will hold of A. Now here we have to consider two
different difficulties. First there is what we may call the feudal difficulty, that of
giving C a new lord, of holding him bound to serve X when he has contracted to serve
B. Secondly there is a difficulty that is quite unconnected with the nature of the feudal
bond but may be thus stated:—Every gift, every transfer of rights, involves a transfer
of seisin, of possession. When a tenant is to be enfeoffed as a tenant in demesne, then
in order to complete the feoffment it is absolutely necessary that the feoffor should
deliver possession of the land to the feoffee, and this act is performed on the land; the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 208 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

feoffor solemnly puts the feoffee in seisin and then quits the land. But there can be no
such delivery of possession in the case that is under our notice; C is tenant in
demesne; it is not intended that X shall become tenant in demesne; B and X have no
business to go onto the land and disturb C in his possession; what is to be given to X
is not the right to take the fruits of the land but the right to C’ s services. We cannot in
this place discuss this notion that a gift or a transfer of rights involves a transfer of
possession; but it is deeply engrained in the law of the thirteenth century. It would
seem then, that the only mode in which B can complete his gift to X, is by persuading
or compelling C to recognize X as his lord. When such a recognition has taken place,
then we may say that X possesses the object of the transfer; he is seised of C’ s
services, he is also seised of the land “in service” (seisitus in servitio). The two
difficulties then, though in a given case they may conspire, are essentially different;
the difference is brought out by the question: Has B any legal process for compelling
C to accept X as his lord?

According to Bracton, we must distinguish. If C has done Law of attornment.
homage to B, then C may, for good cause, object to having his
homage made over to X. He may object that X is his enemy—a light enmity says
Bracton is not a sufficient cause—or that X is too poor to fulfil the duty of warranty,
or again that homage is indivisible, and that he cannot be bound to do homage to X for
part of the tenement, while he still holds the other part of B; but unless such cause is
shown, C’ s homage can be transferred to X. As regards the service due from the
tenement, as distinct from homage, this can always be transferred, even against the
tenant’s will; the court has a process for compelling the tenant to acknowledge that he
holds of the new lord; it has a process for “attorning,” i.e. turning over, the tenant to
the new lord.455 He gives a case from 1223:— X demanded homage from C, saying
that B had attorned C’ s homage and service to him, X; thereupon C said that he held
nothing of X and that he would not depart from B who was his lord; then B was
summoned and stated that he had made the gift to X; but C still objected that he held
two tenements of B by a single homage and service, only one of which tenements had
been given to X, and that he would not divide his homage; whereupon the court
adjudged that X should have seisin of C’ s service, but that C could not be compelled
to do homage to X. Service, says Bracton, can always, but homage cannot always be
attorned.456

It is somewhat curious, as noticed above, that Bracton should Objections to
allow the tenant to object to his homage being transferred, for he attornment.
does not allow, at least expressly, any similar objection on the
part of a lord whose tenant desires to put a new tenant in his place. Possibly the
necessity for an attornment, which really rested on quite other grounds, kept alive one
side of an ancient rule while the other side had withered. But Bracton is very
favourable to tenants. He holds, for example, that the tenant can always waive or
resign his tenement and so free himself from the duties of service and homage, while
the lord cannot waive the homage or refuse the service, and so free himself from the
duty of warranty; and the tenant may object if any attempt be made to substitute an
insolvent for a solvent warrantor.457

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 209 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

On the whole we have little reason to suppose that the rights of Practice of alienating
the tenants had ever in this country been a serious obstacle to seignories.
alienations by the lords.458 In the charters we find the lords
apparently exercising the fullest power of giving away the homages and the services
of their tenants. If there was any reason to suppose that the tenant would object to
recognizing a new lord, then a fine would be levied, and the tenant would be called on
by a writ known as Per quae servitia to show cause why he should not be
attorned.459 Fines transferring services are quite common; the subject-matter of the
transfer is usually described as the service, or the homage and service of such an
one.460 It would be a mistake to suppose that the lofty feudal ladders that we find in
the thirteenth century, had been always, or even generally, manufactured only by the
process of adding new rungs at their nether ends; new rungs were often inserted in
their middles.

§ 10.

Aids
The duties implied in the relation between man and lord are but Duty of aiding the
slowly developed and made legal duties. There long remains a lord.
fringe of vague obligations. The man should come to the aid of
the lord in all his necessities; the man’s purse as well as his body should be at his
lord’s disposal if the lord is in a strait. Gradually the occasions on which an aid of
money may be demanded are determined. Glanvill mentions the aid which helps a
lord to pay the relief due to his overlord, the aid for knighting the lord’s eldest son and
marrying his eldest daughter; also he raises the question whether the lord may not
demand an aid for the maintenance of a war in which he is concerned; such a demand,
he thinks, cannot be pressed.461 From the Normandy of Glanvill’s time we hear of
the aid for the lord’s relief, for marrying his daughter and knighting his eldest son.462
The charter of 1215 mentioned as the three aids, which the king might take without
the common counsel of the realm, that for redeeming his body, that for marrying his
daughter and that for knighting his son; and such aids were to be reasonable.463 As is
well known, the clause which dealt with this matter appeared in no later edition of the
charter. During John’s reign the prior of St. Swithin’s took an aid from his
freeholders, farmers and villeins for the payment of his debts;464 the Bishop of
Winchester took an aid for the expenses to which he had been put in the maintenance
of the king’s honour and the dignity of the church;465 the Abbot of Peterborough
took an aid to enable him to pay a fine to the king;466 the Earl of Salisbury to enable
him to stock his land.467 Nor do such aids cease with the year 1215; in Henry III.’s
reign the Bishop of Bath took an aid for the support of his knights in the king’s
service.468 In 1217, after a Welsh war, the king’s military tenants who had done their
service received permission, not only to collect the scutage from their knights, but
also to raise a reasonable aid from all their freemen.469 However, the clause
expunged from the charter seems practically to have fixed the law. We learn also that
it was next to impossible for the lords to collect aids without obtaining the king’s writ
and the sheriff’s assistance. That writ would name no sum; the aid was to be
“reasonable.” So late as 1235 we see Henry Tracey, having first obtained the king’s

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 210 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

writ, holding a little parliament of his knights in Devonshire; they grant him an aid of
20 shillings on the knight’s fee for the marriage of his eldest daughter.470 Bracton
speaks of these aids as due rather of grace than of right; they are the outcome of a
personal not of a predial obligation; they are not to be reckoned as “services.”471
This is the ancient theory; but it must already have been obsolescent. A statute of
1275 fixed the rate of the aid to be taken for marrying the eldest daughter and
knighting the eldest son at 20 shillings for the knight’s fee and 20 shillings for 20
librates of socage land,472 and thus in effect destroyed the doctrine of the lord’s need
and the tenant’s gracious help. This statute bound the mesne lords; a later statute was
required to bind the king.473 The constitutional side of the history of aids we need not
here discuss, but the aid is one of the most widely distributed of the feudal
phenomena.474

§ 11.

Escheat And Forfeiture
In the background but ever ready to become prominent stands the Escheat.
lord’s right to escheats. This forms as it were a basis for all his
other rights. The superiority which he always has over the land may at any time
become once more a full ownership of it. Though he has given the land to the tenant
and his heirs, still there may well be a failure of heirs, for the tenant cannot institute
an heir; only God makes heirs; and in this case the land falls to, escheats (excadere) to
the lord. Already in Glanvill’s day a lawyer may sometimes speak of the lord as the
tenant’s ultimus heres;475 but such a phrase hardly expresses the law. When land
escheats the lord’s superiority swells into simple ownership; all along he has had
rights in the land.476 Nor is a failure of heirs the only cause of an escheat. If the
tenant is outlawed or convicted of felony then, after the king has exercised the very
ancient right of wasting the criminal’s land for year and day, the tenement returns to
its lord. A distinction is established between treason and felony; if a tenant commits
treason all his lands, of whomsoever they were holden, are forfeited to the king, while
the felon’s lands escheat to his lord. How far back this distinction can be traced seems
doubtful; but John and his successors apparently insisted upon it when they enriched
themselves by seizing the terrae Normannorum, the English lands of those who
preferred to be Frenchmen rather than Englishmen when the victories of Philip
Augustus forced upon them the choice between two nationalities. As regards felony,
we have seen that the idea implied by that term had been changing; it now stood for
“serious crime,” it had once stood for “breach of the feudal bond.” On the one hand,
the lords had gained; they got escheats if their tenants committed such crimes as
homicide or theft; on the other hand they had lost. By openly disavowing his lord the
tenant might indeed lose his tenement; even in Bracton’s day such a disavowal was
sometimes called felonious,477 and in much later times a disavowal and a consequent
forfeiture might be found in the fact that the tenant had paid his rent, or done his
homage, to a wrongful, instead of to the rightful, claimant of the seignory. But, on the
other hand, the lord seems to have had very little power of ejecting a tenant for the
mere non-performance, even the wilful and protracted non-performance of his
services. This is a matter which requires some examination.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 211 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

In Bracton’s day the lord when the services are in arrear has Lord’s remedies
three courses open to him. (1) We may mention first—though against defaulting
this is not his readiest remedy—an action in the king’s court for tenant.
the recovery of customs and services. This is a laborious action.
It is regarded as proprietary, not possessory. A lord will hardly use it unless there is
some dispute between him and his tenant about the nature or quantity of the services.
In that case it will conclusively establish the lord’s title, and the Action in the king’s
victorious lord will have the sheriff’s aid in distraining for the court.
arrears. But, unless there has been some disavowal of the tenure
on the tenant’s part, there is no action in the king’s court that will give the lord the
land in demesne. Feoffors and feoffees are indeed free to make the express bargain
that if the services are in arrear the feoffor may enter once more on the land and take
it to himself; but we shall see few such bargains made before the middle of the
thirteenth century.478 Such then is our common law, and it is well worthy of remark;
it does not turn out the tenant from the land because he cannot or will not perform his
services. Two statutes of Edward I. were required to give the lord an ampler
remedy:—the action called cessavit per biennium was invented; if the tenant allowed
his services to fall into arrear for two years, the lord might claim the land in
demesne.479 There can, we think, be little doubt that this new action was borrowed
immediately from the canon law and mediately from the legislation of Justinian. It is
one of the very few English actions that we can trace directly to a foreign model.480

(2) The lord’s handiest remedy is that of distraining his tenant to Distress.
perform the services that are in arrear. This means that, carefully
observing certain rules as to when and where and what he may seize, he takes the
chattels that are found upon the tenement and keeps them until the tenant either
tenders the arrears or finds security to contest in a court of law the justice of the
seizure. The idea of distress (districtio) is that of bringing compulsion to bear upon a
person who is thereby to be forced into doing something or leaving something
undone; it is not a means whereby the distrainor can satisfy the debt that is due to him.
He may not appropriate the namium, the thing that he has taken, nor may he sell it; he
must keep it as a gage (vadium) so that the person from whom it has been taken may
be constrained to perform his duty. This right to distrain for services in arrear is in the
latter half of the thirteenth century a right that is freely exercised by every landlord,
and he exercises it although he has as yet taken no judicial proceedings of any kind
against his tenant. Nevertheless, we may see much to make us think that this power of
extra-judicial distraint is not very old. Bracton speaks as though it were still usual for
a lord to obtain a judgment in his own court before he distrains a tenant into the
performance of his services; and we may see that in his day some lords were still
taking this course.481

(3) This leads us to speak of the possibility of proceedings being Proceedings in the
taken in the lord’s own court for the exaction of the rent or the lord’s own court.
expulsion of the defaulting tenant. It is possible that at one time
the non-performance of services was regarded as a sufficient cause of forfeiture.
Against any disseising of the tenant “without a judgment,” there had for a long time
past been a strong feeling; it finds utterance in the most famous words of the Great
Charter. But probably the lord who kept a court was entitled to demand of it a

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 212 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

judgment “abjudicating” from the tenement a tenant who, after sufficient warnings,
would not render his due service.482 However, it seems that our king’s court will not
sanction so strong a measure. The most that it permits the lord to do is this:—after
distraining the tenant by his chattels, the lord may obtain from his seignorial tribunal a
judgment authorizing him to distrain the tenant by his land. This obtained, he can
seize the land into his own hand, but only by way of distress, only as a mere gage
(simplex namium), and as a mode of coercing the tenant into the path of duty. He may
take no fruits from the land, he may make no profit of it, he must ever be ready to
give it up if the tenant will satisfy all just demands.483 Even this is possible only to
the lord who is great enough to keep up an efficient court for his freeholders. In
England the aboriginal weakness and rapid degeneration of the feudal tribunals, and
the dominance of a royal court which does not love seignorial justice secure to the
freeholding tenant a very tight grip on the land. At the end of Henry III.’s reign he is
too well off. If he chooses to let the land “lie fresh,” to keep no distrainable chattels
on it, his lord is powerless. An action must be borrowed from the canonists in order
that he may be constrained to fulfil his engagements or be turned out of his
tenement.484

However, in the thirteenth century the possibility, never very remote, that the land
would escheat, was, when coupled with the power of distress, a quite sufficient
manifestation of the idea that the land, though it was the tenant’s, was also the lord’s.
The tenant’s interest in it might at any time expire and leave the lord’s interest
subsisting.

We are now in a position to foresee that of the four great free Survey of the various
tenures one is destined to grow at the expense of the rest. For a tenures.
moment it might be thought that the trenchant statute of 1290,
the Quia emptores terrarum, would stereotype the tenures for ever. To some extent
this is true in law but only to some extent. Even after the statute a new tenure might
sometimes be created. Every feoffment made by a tenant in frankalmoin in favour of a
layman would create a tenure between the donee and the donor’s lord which could not
be frankalmoin, since the donee was a layman, and which was reckoned a tenure in
socage; thus in a perfectly regular way socage would grow at the expense of
frankalmoin.485 We have seen also that in the course of the thirteenth century many
of the serjeanties were deliberately commuted for less archaic tenures, in some cases
by the consent of both parties, still more often against the tenant’s will: he had put
himself into the wrong by alienating without the king’s licence, and the king exercised
the right of “arrenting the serjeanty.”486 But we will here speak of changes less
definitely made. When once it was established that the little serjeanties gave the king
no prerogative wardship, “petty serjeanty” came to be regarded as but “socage in
effect.”487 A similar cause gave rise to the doctrine that tenure of a mesne lord is
never tenure by serjeanty;488 the rights of a mesne lord to the wardship and marriage
of his tenant by serjeanty seem to have become doubtful, and to have finally
disappeared, and by this time the term socage already covered so heterogeneous a
mass of tenures that it could be easily stretched yet a little further so as to include
what Bracton would certainly have called serjeanties.489 Again, there can be little
doubt that a very large number of military tenures became tenures in socage, and this
without anyone observing the change. In Bracton’s day the test of military tenure is

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 213 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

the liability to scutage, and, as already said, the peasant or yeoman very often had to
pay it; if he had not to pay it, this was because his lord had consented to bear the
burden. In Edward I.’s day scutage was becoming, under his grandson it became,
obsolete. There was nothing then in actual fact to mark off the services of the yeoman
who was liable to pay scutage as well as to pay rent, from those of the yeoman who
was free even in law from this never collected tax. The one was theoretically a
military tenant, the other was not; in the one case the lord might have claimed
wardship and marriage, in the other he could not; but then we have to observe, that, if
the tenant held at a full or even a substantial rent, wardship and marriage would be
unprofitable rights. The lord wanted rent-paying tenants; he did not want land thrown
on his hands together with a troop of girls and boys with claims for food and clothing.
Thus, scutage being extinct, wardships and marriages unprofitable, mere oblivion
would do the rest; many a tenure which had once been, at least in name, a military
tenure would become socage. Thus socage begins to swallow up the other tenures,
and preparation is already made for the day when all, or practically all, tenants will
hold by the once humble tenure of the sokemanni.

§ 12.

Unfree Tenure
The tenures of which we have hitherto spoken are free tenures. Freehold tenure.
To free tenure is opposed villein tenure, to the free tenement the
villein tenement, to the freeholder (libere tenens) the tenant in villeinage. This is the
contrast suggested by the word “free”; but the terms “free tenement” and “freeholder”
are becoming the centre of technical learning. We may well find that a man holds land
and that there is no taint of villeinage or unfreedom in the case, and yet that he has no
freehold and is not a freeholder. These terms have begun to imply that the tenant
holds heritably, or for life. Perhaps we shall be truer to history if we state this doctrine
in a negative form:— these terms imply that the tenant does not hold merely at the
will of another, and that he does not hold for some definite space of time: a tenant at
will is not a freeholder, a tenant for years is not a freeholder. Such tenancies as these
are becoming common in every zone of the social system, and they imply no servility,
nothing that is inconsistent with perfect freedom. Thus, for example, King John will
provide for his foreign captains by giving them lands “for their support in our service
so long as we shall think fit,” and in such a case this tenancy at will by a soldier is
from some points of view the best representative of the beneficia and feoda of past
centuries.490 But now-a-days such tenancies are sharply contrasted with feoda; the
tenant has no fee and no free tenement. And so again we may see a great man taking
lands for a term of years at a money rent; he has done nothing in derogation of his
freedom; the rent may be trifling; still he is no freeholder.

A full explanation of this phenomenon, that a man should hold Technical meaning of
land, and hold it not unfreely, and yet not hold it freely, cannot “freehold.”
be given in this context since it would involve a discussion of the
English theory of possession or seisin. But we must not fail to notice that the term
“free tenement” has ever since Henry II.’s day implied possessory protection by the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 214 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

king’s court. This is of great moment. From our statement of the relation between the
freehold tenant and his lord we have as yet omitted the element of jurisdiction. The
existence of this element our law fully admitted and at one time it threatened to
become of vital importance. It was law that the lord might hold a court of and for his
tenants; it was law that if A was holding land of M and X desired to prove that he and
not A ought to be M’ s tenant, M’ s court (if he held one) was the tribunal proper to
decide upon the justice of this claim; only if M made default in justice, could X
(perhaps after recourse to all M’ s superior lords) bring his case before the king’s
court. This principle of feudal justice is admitted, though its operation has been
hampered and controlled; in particular, the king has given in his court a possessory
remedy to every ejected freeholder. Every one who can say that he has been
“disseised unjustly and without a judgment of his free tenement” shall be restored to
his seisin by the king’s justices. Thus the term “free tenement” becomes the pivot of a
whole system of remedies. Clearly they are denied to one who has been holding
“unfreely,” who has been holding in villeinage; but a doctrine of possession now
becomes necessary and has many problems before it. What if the ejected person was
holding at the will of another? Perhaps it is natural to say that, albeit he occupied or
“detained” the tenement, still he was not possessed of it. At any rate this was said.
The tenant at will tenet nomine alieno; possidet cuius nomine possidetur; eject the
tenant at will, you disseise (dispossess) not him, but his lord, and his lord has the
remedy. And what of the tenant for years? The same was said. He holds on behalf of
another; eject him, you disseise that other. Such was the doctrine of the twelfth
century; but already before the middle of the thirteenth the lawyers had discovered
that they had made a mistake, that the “termor” or tenant for years deserved
possessory protection, and they invented a new action for him. The action however
was new, and did not interfere with the older actions which protected the seisin of free
tenement; it was too late to say that the termor had a free tenement or was a
freeholder. This episode in our legal history had important consequences; it rules the
terminology of our law even at the present day and hereafter we shall speak of it more
at large: it is an episode in the history of private law. In the thirteenth century the
main contrast suggested by the phrase “free tenement” was still the villein tenement,
and tenure in villeinage is intimately connected with some of the main principles of
public law; indeed from one point of view it may be regarded as a creature of the law
of jurisdiction, of the law which establishes courts of justice and assigns to each of
them its proper sphere.

The name “villeinage” at once tells us that we are approaching a Villeinage as tenure
region in which the law of tenure is as a matter of fact and as status.
intertwined with the law of personal status: “villeinage” is a
tenure, it is also a status. On the one hand, the tenant in villeinage is normally a
villein; the unfree tenements are held by unfreemen; on the other hand, the villein
usually has a villein tenement; the unfreeman is an unfree tenant. Then a gain, the
villanus gets his name from the villa, and this may well lead us to expect that his
condition cannot be adequately described if we isolate him from his fellows; he is a
member of a community, a villein community. The law of tenure, the law of status,
the law which regulates the communal life of vills or townships are knotted together.
Still the knot may be unravelled. It is very possible, as Bracton often assures us, for a
freeman to hold in villeinage, and thus we may speak of villein tenure as something

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 215 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

distinct from villein status. Again, as we shall hereafter see, the communal element
which undoubtedly exists in villeinage, is much neglected by the king’s courts, and is
rather of social and economic than of legal importance.

We may suppose therefore that the tenant in villeinage is a Villein tenure.
freeman. What then are the characteristics of his tenure?491 Now
in the first place we may notice that it is not protected in the king’s courts. For a
moment perhaps there was some little doubt about this,
some chance that Pateshull and Raleigh would forestall by two Unprotected by the
long centuries the exploits ascribed to Brian and Danby, and king’s courts.
would protect the predecessor of the copyholder even against his
lord.492 This would have been a bold stroke. The ready remedy for the ejected
freeholder laid stress on the fact that he had been disseised of his “free” tenement,
and, however free the tenant in villeinage might be, his tenement was unfree. A quite
new remedy would have been necessary for his protection; the opportunity for its
invention was lost, and did not recur until the middle ages were expiring.493 It was
law then, that if the tenant in villeinage was ejected, either by his lord or by a third
person, the king’s court would not restore him to the land, nor would it give him
damages against his lord in respect of the ejectment. He held the land nomine alieno,
on his lord’s behalf; if a third person ejected him, the lord was disseised. Before the
end of the thirteenth century, the king’s courts were beginning to state their doctrine
in a more positive shape:—the tenant in villeinage is in our eyes a tenant at will of the
lord.494

The shade of meaning which such words bear at any given Want of remedy and
moment is hard to catch, for this depends on the relation between want of right.
the king’s courts and other courts. At a time when the feudal
courts have become insignificant, denial of remedy in the king’s court will be
equivalent to a denial of right, and to say that the tenant in villeinage is deemed by the
king’s court to hold at his lord’s will is in effect to say that the lord will do nothing
illegal in ejecting him. At an earlier time the royal tribunal was but one among many
organs of the law, and the cause for our wonder should be that it has undertaken to
protect in his possession every one who holds freely, not that it has stopped at this
point and denied protection to those who, albeit freemen, are doing what are deemed
villein services. We have but to look abroad to see this. By its care for every
freeholder, though he were but a socage tenant with many lords above him, our king’s
court would gradually propagate the notion that those whom it left uncared for were
rightless. But this would be an affair of time. Even in the thirteenth century, the
freeholder could not always bring a proprietary action before the royal tribunal
without the help of some legal fiction, and in Bracton’s day men had not yet forgotten
that the royal remedies which were in daily use were new indulgences conceded by
the prince to his people.495

As a matter of fact, tenure in villeinage is protected, and if we Protection of villein
choose to say that it is protected by “positive morality” rather tenure by manorial
than by “law properly so called,” we are bound to add that it is courts.
protected by a morality which keeps a court, which uses legal
forms, which is conceived as law, or as something akin to law.496 The lord has a

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 216 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

court; in that court the tenant in villeinage, even though he be personally unfree,
appears as no mere tenant at will, but as holding permanently, often heritably, on
fairly definite terms. He is a customary tenant, custumarius, consuetudinarius; he
holds according to the custom of the manor. Were we Germans, we might say that he
holds under Hofrecht, the law of the manor, though his rights are not recognized by
Landrecht, the general law of the realm. This we cannot say; the manorial custom
very rarely, if ever, dignifies itself with the name of law; but still it is a custom which
has been and ought to be enforced by a court, enforced if need be by compulsory
processes which will eject the wrongful in favour of the rightful occupant. The tenant
in villeinage does not scruple to say that he is seised of the land de iure “according to
the custom of the manor,”497 though his lord may be seised of it according to the law
of the king’s courts. Such evidence as we have goes to show that, when his lord was
not concerned, he was well enough protected in his holding. The rolls of manorial
courts bear witness to a great deal of litigation concerning the villein tenements; it
seems to be conducted with strict regularity; the procedure does not err on the side of
formlessness; it is rigid, it is captious; the court is no court of equity which can
overlook a pleader’s blunder and do natural justice; it administers custom. No doubt
there are cash transactions between the lord and the litigants; the lord has procedural
advantages for sale; but then so has the king. There is nothing disgraceful, nothing
illegal, in buying the right to have an inquest, a good inquest, nor even in promising
an augmented price if the verdict be favourable. Then as to the case between lord and
tenant, the tenant cannot sue the lord in the lord’s court; the tenant in villeinage
ejected by the lord has no remedy anywhere. But is this, we may ask, a denial of legal
right? The king disseises the Earl of Gloucester; the earl has no remedy, no remedy
anywhere; yet we do not deny that the honour of Gloucester is the earl’s by law or
that in disseising him the king will break the law.

A good proof that the lords in general felt themselves bound Evidence of the
more or less conclusively by the terms of the customary tenures “extents.”
is to be found in the care they took that those terms should be
recorded. From time to time an “extent” was made of the manor. A jury of tenants,
often of unfreemen, was sworn to set forth the particulars of each tenancy and its
verdict condescended to the smallest details. Such extents were made in the interest of
the lords, who were anxious that all due services should be done; but they imply that
other and greater services are not due, and that the customary tenants, even though
they be unfreemen, owe these services for their tenements, no less and no more.
Statements to the effect that the tenants are not bound to do services of a particular
kind are not very uncommon.

As characteristics of villein tenure we have therefore these two Attempt to define
features:—it is not protected by the king’s courts; in general it is villein tenure.
protected by another court, the court of the lord, though even
there it is not protected against the lord. Still as a matter of legal theory we cannot
regard these features as the essence of the tenure. We should invert the order of logic
were we to say that this tenure is villein because the king’s justices treat it as a mere
tenure at will; rather they treat it as a mere tenure at will because it is a villein, an
unfree, tenure. We must look therefore in this as in other cases to the services which

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 217 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

the tenant performs, if we are to define the nature of his tenure. He holds in villeinage
because he performs villein services.

A brief digression into a domain which belongs rather to The manorial
economic than to legal history here becomes inevitable. The arrangement.
phenomena of medieval agriculture are now attracting the
attention that they deserve: here we are only concerned with them in so far as some
knowledge of them must be presupposed by any exposition of the law of the thirteenth
century.498 Postponing until a later time any debate as to whether the term manor
bore a technical meaning, we observe that this term is constantly used to describe a
proprietary unit of common occurrence:—the well-to-do landholder holds a manor or
many manors. Now speaking very generally we may say that a man who holds a
manor has in the first place a house or homestead which is occupied by himself, his
bailiffs or servants. Along with this he holds cultivable land, which is in the fullest
sense (so far as feudal theory permits) his own; it is his demesne land. Then also, as
part of the same complex of rights, he holds land which is holden of him by tenants,
some of whom, it may be, are freeholders, holding in socage or by military service,
while the remainder of them, usually the large majority of them, hold in villeinage, by
a merely customary tenure. In the terms used to describe these various lands we notice
a certain instructive ambiguity. The land that the lord himself occupies and of which
he takes the fruits he indubitably holds “in demesne”; the land holden of him by his
freehold tenants he indubitably does not hold “in demesne”; his freehold tenants hold
it in demesne, unless indeed, as may well be the case, they have yet other freeholders
below them. But as to the lands holden of him by villein tenure, the use of words
seems to fluctuate; at one moment he is said to hold and be seised of them in
demesne, at the next they are sharply distinguished from his demesne lands, that term
being reserved for those portions of the soil in which no tenant free or villein has any
rights. In short, language reflects the dual nature of tenure in villeinage; it is tenure
and yet it is not tenure. The king’s courts, giving no protection to the tenant, say that
the lord is seised in demesne; but the manorial custom must distinguish between the
lands holden in villeinage and those lands which are occupied by the lord and which
in a narrower sense of the word are his demesne.499

We have usually therefore in the manor lands of three kinds, (1) The field system.
the demesne strictly so called, (2) the land of the lord’s freehold
tenants, (3) the villenagium, the land holden of the lord by villein or customary tenure.
Now in the common case all these lands are bound together into a single whole by
two economic bonds. In the first place, the demesne lands are cultivated wholly or in
part by the labour of the tenants of the other lands, labour which they are bound to
supply by reason of their tenure. A little labour in the way of ploughing and reaping is
got out of the freehold tenants; much labour of many various kinds is obtained from
the tenants in villeinage, so much in many cases that the lord has but small, if any,
need to hire labourers. Then in the second place, these various tenements lie
intermingled; neither the lord’s demesne nor the tenant’s tenement can be surrounded
by one ring-fence. The lord has his house and homestead; each tenant has his house
with more or less curtilage surrounding it; but the arable portions of the demesne and
of the various other tenements lie mixed up together in the great open fields. There
will be two or three or perhaps more great fields, and each tenement will consist of a

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 218 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

number of small strips, of an acre or half-acre apiece, dissipated about in each of these
fields.500 These fields are subjected to a common course of agriculture, a two-field
system or a three-field system, so that a whole field will lie idle at one time, or be
sown with winter seed or, as the case may be, with spring seed. After harvest and until
the time for tilling comes, the lord and the tenants turn their beasts to graze over the
whole field.

Then we further notice that the various tenements, at least those The virgates.
held in villeinage, are supposed to be of equal extent and of
equal value, or rather to fall into a few classes, the members of each class being equal
among themselves. Thus it is usual to find a number of tenants in villeinage each of
whom is said to hold a virgate or yard of land. Each of them has his house and the
same number of strips of arable land; each of them does precisely the same service to
his lord. Then there may appear a class of half-virgaters, each of whom does about
half what is done by a virgater; and there may be classes which have smaller
tenements but which yet have some arable land. Then, most likely, there will be a
class of cottagers without any arable; but the cottage and croft of one of them will be
regarded as equal to the cottage and croft of another and will provide the lord with the
same services. And we sometimes seem to see that the distribution of the arable strips
is so arranged as to equalize the value of the various tenements. All the virgates are to
be equal in value as well as equal in acreage so far as is possible. One virgater must
not have more than his share of the best land. The strips have been distributed with
some regularity, so that a strip of B’ s virgate will always have a strip of A’ s to the
right and a strip of C’ s to the left of it. Then again, the manor will probably comprise
meadow land and pasture land. Each virgate may have a piece of meadow annexed to
it, the meadow being treated as an appurtenance of the arable land; or again, some of
the meadows may be divided each year by lot between the various tenants, and the
lord may have certain strips thereof in one year and other strips in another year;501
but, when the grass has been mown, all the strips will be thrown open to the cattle of
the lord and his tenants. There is also land permanently devoted to pasturage; a right
to turn out beasts upon it is commonly annexed to every tenement or to every
considerable tenement. Lastly, we must just notice that in the lord’s court the manor
has an organ capable of regulating all these matters, capable for example of deciding
how many beasts each tenement may send to the pasture, and, when the rights of the
freehold tenants are not concerned, the decrees and judgments of this court will be
binding, for the king’s courts will give no help to those who hold in villeinage.

Now speaking generally we may say that the services which the Villein services.
tenant in villeinage owes to his lord consist chiefly of the duty of
cultivating the lord’s demesne. Before the thirteenth century is over we may indeed
find numerous cases in which the payment of a money rent forms a substantial part of
his service and he is hardly bound to do more labour than is exacted from many of the
freeholders, some ploughing and some reaping. It is very possible that there are some
classes of tenants now reckoned to hold in villeinage, whose predecessors were in this
same position at a remote time; they are gavel-manni, men who pay gafol, or they are
censuarii, and such their forefathers may have been all along.502 To suppose that in
all cases the system of rents paid in money or in produce has grown out of a system of
labour services is to make an unverified assumption. On the other hand, in very many

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 219 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

cases we can see that the money rent is new. We may see the process of commutation
in all its various stages, from the stage in which the lord is beginning to take a penny
or a halfpenny instead of each “work” that in that particular year he does not happen
to want, through the stage in which he habitually takes each year the same sum in
respect of the same number of works but has expressly reserved to himself the power
of exacting the works in kind, to the ultimate stage in which there is a distinct
understanding that the tenant is to pay rent instead of doing work. But we may for a
moment treat as typical the cases in which the tenant hardly pays anything. Of such
cases there are plenty. The tenant may pay some small sums, but these are not
regarded as the rent of his tenement. They bear English names; sometimes they seem
to have their origin in the lord’s jurisdictional powers rather than in his rights as a
landowner, as when we read of tithingpenny, wardpenny, witepenny; sometimes they
look like a return made to the lord, not for the tenement itself, but for rights over the
wastes and waters, as when we read of fishsilver, woodsilver, sedgesilver. But in the
main the tenant must work for his tenement.

Now the labour that he has to do is often minutely defined by the A typical case of
manorial custom and described in the manorial “extent.” Let us villein services.
take one out of a thousand examples. In the Abbot of Ramsey’s
manor of Stukeley in Huntingdonshire the services of a virgater are these:503 —From
the 29th of September until the 29th of June he must work two days a week, to wit on
Monday and Wednesday; and on Friday he must plough with all the beasts of his
team; but he has a holiday for a fortnight at Christmas and for a week at Easter and at
Whitsuntide. If one of the Fridays on which he ought to plough is a festival or if the
weather is bad, he must do the ploughing on some other day. Between the 29th of
September and the 11th of November he must also plough and harrow half an acre for
wheat, and for sowing that half-acre he must give of his own seed the eighth part of a
quarter: whether that quantity be more or less than is necessary for sowing the half-
acre he must give that quantity, no more, no less: and on account of this seed he is
excused one day’s work. At Christmas time he must make two quarters of malt and
for each quarter he is excused one day’s work. At Christmas he shall give three hens
and a cock or four pence and at Easter ten eggs. He must also do six carryings
(averagia) in the year within the county between the 29th of June and the end of
harvest at whatever time the bailiff shall choose, or, if the lord pleases, he shall
between the 29th of June and the 29th of September work five days a week, working
the whole day at whatever work is set him, besides carrying corn, for he shall carry
but four cartloads of corn for a day’s work. If at harvest time the lord shall have two
or three “boon works” (precationes), he shall come to them with all the able-bodied
members of his family save his wife, so that he must send at least three men to the
work. He pays sheriff’s aid, hundredpenny and wardpenny, namely 6¼ d.

Now the main features of this arrangement we find repeated in Week work and boon
countless instances. The tenant has to do “week work,” as it has days.
been called: to work two or three days in every week during the
greater part of the year, four or five during the busy summer months. Then at harvest
time there are also some “boon days” (precariae, precationes); at the lord’s petition or
boon the tenant must bring all his hands to reap and carry the crops and on these days
the lord often has to supply food; at Stukeley it is bread, beer and cheese on the first

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 220 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

day, meat on the second, herrings on the third. But matters are yet more minutely
fixed. Our Stukeley tenant has to “work” so many days a week; the choice of work
rests with the lord, but custom has fixed the amount that shall be accounted a day’s
work. For instance on the neighbouring manor of Warboys gathering and carrying
three bundles of thorns are regarded as a day’s work.504 At Stukeley if the tenant has
to fell timber, the day’s work is over at noon, unless the lord provides dinner, and then
the work lasts all day. Sometimes it is remarked that a task which counts as a day’s
work can really be done in half a day.505 The exact distance that he must go with his
lord’s wagons in order that he may claim to have performed an averagium is well
known, and, when the lord is bound to supply food or drink, the quantity and quality
thereof are determined. On the Ramsey manors a sick tenant will be excused a whole
year’s work if his illness lasts so long; after the year he must get his work done for
him as best he may. A half-virgater will do proportionately less work, a cottager still
less; thus at Stukeley the cottager works on Mondays throughout the year and on
Fridays also in harvest time.

There is more to be said. Our Stukeley virgater pays “merchet” Merchet and tallage.
as best he may, that is to say, if he wishes to give his daughter in
marriage he must pay money to the lord and the amount that he has to pay is not
fixed. If he has a foal or calf born of his own mare or cow, he must not sell it without
the lord’s leave. If he has an oak, ash or pear-tree growing in his court, he must not
fell it, except for the repair of his house, without the lord’s leave. When he dies his
widow shall pay a heriot of five shillings and be quit of work for thirty days. These
are common features, and the merchet is of peculiar importance, as will be seen
hereafter. Sometimes it is only paid if the girl is married outside the vill; sometimes
the amount is fixed. And so as to selling beasts; occasionally the lord’s right is but a
right of preemption. And then in many cases the villein tenants are liable to be
tallaged, sometimes once a year, sometimes twice in seven years; sometimes the
amount of this tax is defined, sometimes they can be “tallaged high and low” (de haut
en bas). Often they are bound to “suit of mill,” that is to say, they must not grind their
corn elsewhere than at the lord’s mill. About all these matters we sometimes find
rules which set certain definite limits to the tenant’s duty and the lord’s right.506

Such were some of the commonest services due from the holder What is the essence of
of a villein tenement. As yet, however, we have attained to villein tenure.
nothing that can be called a definition of the tenure. To say that it
is a tenure defined by custom but not protected by the king’s courts is no satisfactory
definition, for this, as already said, is to mistake the consequence for the cause. Now
Bracton constantly assumes that everyone will understand him when he speaks of
villein services, but he never undertakes to tell us precisely what it is that makes them
villein, and, when we turn to the manorial extents, we not unfrequently meet with
tenures that we know not how to classify. Apart from the tenants who certainly are
freeholders and the tenants who certainly hold in villeinage, we see here and there a
few men whose position seems very doubtful; we do not like to predict either that
they will or that they will not find protection in the royal courts. We have to
remember that the test which in later days will serve to mark off freehold from
copyhold tenure is as yet inapplicable. No one as yet holds land “by copy of court
roll”; the lords are only just beginning to keep court rolls and it is long ere the court

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 221 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

roll becomes a register of title. If alienations and descents are entered upon it, this is
done merely to show that the steward has received or has yet to collect a fine or a
heriot, and the terms on which a new tenant takes land are seldom mentioned. If from
a modern conveyance of a copyhold tenement we abstract the copy of the court roll
and even the court roll itself, we still have left the intermediation of the lord between
the vendor and the purchaser: the land is supposed to pass through the lord’s hand.
But when dealing with the thirteenth, to say nothing of the twelfth, century, we cannot
make the lord’s intervention a proof of villein tenure. We may well find the
conveyance of a freehold taking in all essentials the form of “surrender and
admittance”; the old tenant yields up the land to the lord, the lord gives it to the new
tenant; the transaction takes place in court; the symbolical rod is employed; no charter
is necessary.507 Indeed when there was to be no subinfeudation but a substitution of a
new for an old tenant, we may well be surprised that this could ever be effected
without a double conveyance. Moreover if we say that the lord can prevent the
alienation of villein, but cannot prevent the alienation of free tenements we still have
not solved the question; to say that a tenement is villein because it cannot be alienated
without the lord’s consent is to put the cart before the horse.

Nor again can we find the solution in the phrase “to hold at the “The will of the lord.”
will of the lord.” If for a moment we take this phrase merely to
denote that the tenure is unprotected by the king’s court, we are brought once more to
the fruitless proposition that it is unprotected because it is unprotected. If, on the other
hand, we take the phrase to imply that there is no court which protects the tenure, or
that the lord can at any moment eject the tenant without breach of any custom, then, to
say the least, the great mass of villein tenures will escape from our definition. Tenures
which really are tenures “at will,” unprotected by any custom, are to be found, and
that too in high places, but then they are in general carefully distinguished from the
villein tenures. In the extents and manorial rolls of the thirteenth century it is rare to
find that the tenants in villeinage are said to hold at the will of the lord.508 Still when
we turn, as we now must, to find the element in villein services which makes them
villein, this phrase “at the lord’s will” must again meet us.

That a tenure which compels to agricultural labour is unfree, this Villeinage and labour.
we certainly cannot say. The philology of the time made
ploughing service the characteristic feature of socage,509 and often enough a
freeholder had to give his aid in ploughing and reaping his lord’s demesne; nor can
we say for certain that he could always do his work by deputy, for the duty cast upon
him was sometimes such as could not well be delegated, in particular that of riding
after the labourers “with his rod” and keeping them up to their work.510 There is
nothing servile in having to do such a duty in person. In general, no doubt, the
freeholder only aids his lord’s agriculture during a few weeks in the year; he helps at
the “boon works” but does no “week work”; still it is difficult to make the distinction
between freedom and unfreedom turn upon the mere amount of work that has to be
done. If there is no villeinage in labouring ten days in the year why should there be
any villeinage in labouring three days a week? On the whole our guides direct us not
to the character, nor to the amount of the work, but to its certainty or uncertainty.511
The typical tenant in villeinage does not know in the evening what he will have to do
in the morning.512 Now this, when properly understood, is very generally true of the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 222 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

tenants who are bound to do much labour, to do “week work.” They know a great deal
about the amount of work that they will have to do in each year, in each week, on
each day; they know, for example, that the custom exacts from them three and no
more “works” in every week, that Tuesday is not a work day, that if they are set to
ditch they must ditch so many perches before the “work” will be accomplished, that to
drive a cart to one place is “one work,” to another place “two works”; they know
whether when set to thresh they can stop at nones or must go on to vespers. Still there
is a large element of real uncertainty; the lord’s will counts for much; when they go to
bed on Sunday night they do not know what Monday’s work will be: it may be
threshing, ditching, carrying; they cannot tell. This seems the point that is seized by
law and that general opinion of which law is the exponent: any considerable
uncertainty as to the amount or the kind of the agricultural services makes the tenure
unfree. The tenure is unfree, not because the tenant “holds at the will of the lord,” in
the sense of being removable at a moment’s notice, but because his services, though
in many respects minutely defined by custom, cannot be altogether defined without
frequent reference to the lord’s will. This doctrine has good sense in it. The man who
on going to bed knows that he must spend the morrow in working for his lord and
does not know to what kind of work he may be put, though he may be legally a
freeman, free to fling up his tenement and go away, is in fact for the time being bound
by his tenure to live the same life that is led by the great mass of unfreemen. Custom
sets many limits to his labours; custom sets many limits to theirs; the idea of
abandoning his home never enters his head; the lord’s will plays a large part in
shaping his life.

This then seems to have been the test usually applied by the Definition of villein
king’s court. If the labour services are “uncertain,” the tenure is services.
unfree; and it is a test which condemns as unfree the great bulk
of the tenures which obliged men to perform any considerable amount of agricultural
labour for their lord, because, however minutely some particulars of those services
may be defined, there is generally a spacious room left for the play of the lord’s will.
Thus the test roughly coincides with another:—labour service is not necessarily
unfree, but a service which consists of much labour, of labour to be done all the year
round, is almost of necessity unfree; for almost of necessity the tenant will be bound
to obey, within wide limits, whatever commands the lord or the lord’s bailiff may give
him. Thus to hold land by “fork and flail,” by work done day by day, or week by
week on the lord’s demesne, is to hold in villeinage.513

Other tests are in use. Any service which stamps the tenant as an Tests of villein tenure.
unfreeman, stamps his tenure as unfree; and in common opinion
such services there are, notably the merchetum. Now among the thousands of entries
in English documents relating to this payment,
it would we believe be utterly impossible to find one which gave The merchet.
any sanction to the tales of a ius primae noctis.514 The context
in which this duty is usually mentioned explains at least one of the reasons which
underlie it. The tenant may not give his daughter (in some cases his son or daughter)
in marriage—at least not outside the manor,—and he may not have his son ordained,
and he may not sell horse or ox, without the lord’s leave:—the stock on the tenement
is not to be diminished. No doubt a subjection to this restraint was regarded as very

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 223 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

base, and sometimes it is described in vigorous words which express a freeman’s
loathing for servility:—“he must buy, he must make ransom for, his flesh and blood.”
This is intelligible; a payment for leave to give one’s daughter in marriage or for leave
to send one’s son to school, naturally suggests bondage, personal bondage, bondage
which is in one’s blood. It is constantly used as a test of personal serfage and a
fortiori of unfree tenure. Bracton will just allow that the man who has to pay a
merchet need not be a bondman; it may in a given case be an incident of unfree tenure
rather than of personal servility. However, though this test was commonly applied, we
cannot say that it was conclusive even of the unfreedom of the tenure. In
Northumberland there certainly were lords of manors, lords of entire vills, who paid
merchet,515 and then we have to remember that in Scotland, at least according to the
Regiam Maiestatem, every woman, were she noble, were she serf, paid “merchet,”
paid it in kine (an earl’s daughter paid twelve cows),516 while in Wales a similar
payment was made on the marriage of every girl.517 Very possibly several different
payments originating at different times, perhaps among different races, and expressive
of different ideas have been fused together; but in England the merchet is generally
regarded as a base payment, a mark, though not a conclusive mark, of personal
unfreedom.518

Other tests are at times suggested. The duty of serving as the Other tests of villein
lord’s reeve whenever the lord pleases, the liability to be tallaged tenure.
“high and low,” these also are treated as implying personal
bondage.519 If the tenement descends to the youngest son instead of to the eldest son
or to all the sons, the inference is sometimes drawn that it is not free. On the whole,
however, our books constantly bring us back to the “uncertainty” of the service as the
best criterion of villein tenure. Certainty and uncertainty, however, are, as we have
seen, matters of degree. In few, if any, cases is there no custom setting bounds to the
tenant’s duty of working for his lord; in most cases many bounds are set; the number
of days in every week which he must spend on the demesne is ascertained; often the
amount of any given kind of labour that will pass for a day’s work is determined; but
yet there is much uncertainty, for the tenant knows not in the evening whether in the
morning he will be kept working in the fields or sent a long journey with a cart. We
need not be surprised therefore if in the thirteenth century “freehold” and
“villeinhold” are already becoming technical ideas, matters of law; jurors who can
describe the services are unwilling to say whether they are free or unfree, but will
leave this question for the justices.520 And next we have to note that though labour
service, indefinite or but partially defined labour service, seems to be the original
essence of villein tenure, this does not remain so for long. When once it has been
established that a tenement is unfree, that tenement will not become free, at least in
the eyes of lawyers, even though the services are modified or transformed. Without
any definite agreement, a lord begins to take money instead of exacting labour, and
gradually it becomes the custom that he shall take money, and a precisely fixed sum
of money, in lieu of all the week-work. This change does not give the tenant a
freehold, a right in the land which the king’s courts will protect; something far more
definite would be required for that purpose, an enfranchisement, a feoffment. Thus it
falls out that a tenant who according to the custom of the manor pays a money rent
and does no more labour for his lord than is owed by many a freeholder, may still be
no freeholder but a tenant in villeinage; he still is protected only by custom and in the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 224 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

view of the royal justices is but a tenant at will. Then gradually what has been called
“the conveyancing test” becomes applicable. Dealings with villein tenements are set
forth upon the rolls of the lord’s court; the villein tenement is conceived to be holden
“by roll of court,” or even “by copy of court roll,” and the mode of conveyance serves
to mark off the most beneficial of villein-holds from the most onerous of freeholds;
the one passes by “surrender and admittance,” the other by “feoffment.” In Henry
III.’s time this process which secured for the tenant in villeinage a written, a
registered title, and gave him the name of “copyholder,” was but beginning, and it is
possible that in some cases the lord by taking money instead of labour did as a matter
of fact suffer his tenants to become freeholders; but probably he was in general
careful enough to prevent this, for him undesirable, consequence, by retaining and
enforcing a right to some distinctively servile dues. But our definition of villein tenure
must be wide enough to include cases in which there has been a commutation of
labour service into rent, and on the whole we may do well in saying that villein tenure
is the tenure of one who owes to his lord in respect of his tenement “uncertain” labour
services, or who (by himself or his predecessors) has owed such services in the past,
or who is subject to distinctively servile burdens such as merchet, arbitrary tallage, or
the duty of serving as reeve. This we believe to be the main idea; but we must receive
it subject to two remarks, namely, that, as so often said, “uncertainty” is a matter of
degree, and that in some cases a tenure which all along had been tenure at a money
rent may have been brought within the sphere of villeinage by some untrue, or at all
events unverified, theory as to its past history. Here as elsewhere law has done its
work of classification by means of types rather than by means of definitions.521

To fix in precise words the degree of binding force that the lords Binding force of
in their thoughts and their deeds ascribed to the manorial custom manorial custom.
would be impossible. Generalizations about the moral sentiments
of a great and heterogeneous class of men are apt to be fallacious, and, when a lord
pays respect to a custom which cannot be enforced against him by any compulsory
process, it will be hard for us to choose between the many possible motives by which
he may have been urged; provident self-interest, a desire for a quiet life, humane
fellow-feeling for his dependants, besides a respect for the custom as a custom may
all have pulled one way. There is some evidence to show that the mere reverence for
the custom as a custom grew weaker during the thirteenth century. When early in that
age the king’s justices were considering whether they would not protect the villein
tenant against his lord,522 they must have felt that the custom was very like law. On
the other hand, when they had definitely abandoned this enterprise, the lords must
have been more and more tempted to regard the custom as but a revocable expression
of their own wills.523 Certainly the lawyers began to use language which must have
suggested to the lords that they might eject their tenants whenever they pleased.524
On the whole, however, the two clauses of the formula which is in after times to
describe the position of the copyholder, grew into definiteness side by side:—the
tenant in villeinage holds “at the will of the lord,” but “according to the custom of the
manor.”

Our task is the more difficult because fully developed copyhold Treatment of villein
tenure, even as it exists in the nineteenth century, allows that tenure in practice.
there are many acts and defaults by which a tenant may forfeit

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 225 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

his tenement. Now a strict definition of these causes of forfeiture only appears late in
the day; little of the kind is to be found in the “extents” of the thirteenth century.
Seldom, if ever, were the lords brought to acknowledge that the causes of forfeiture
were definable. Many admissions against their own interests the “extents” of their
manors may contain; they suffer it to be recorded that “a day’s work” ends at noon,
that in return for some works they must provide food, even that the work is not worth
the food that has to be provided; but they do not admit that for certain causes and for
certain causes only may they take the tenements into their own hands.

As a matter of fact, it is seldom of an actual ejectment that the Ejectment of villeins.
peasant has to complain. If he makes default in his services, he in
general suffers no more than a small amercement; seldom does it exceed six pence.
Even if he commits waste, if, for example, he lets his house go out of repair, he
generally has full warning and an opportunity for amending his conduct before the
lord takes the extreme measure of ejecting him. An extreme measure it was, for
tenants were valuable; then as now “it paid to be a good landlord.” Two motives, and
perhaps two only, might make a lord wish to clear the cultivators from his land; he
might wish to fill their place with beasts of the chase or with monks. Happily for the
peasantry, rights of sporting were franchises which had to be purchased from the king,
while we may hope that the pious founder dealt generously with his tenants. One of
the stories which best illustrates the nature of their customary rights tells how when
Henry II. was founding the Carthusian priory of Witham in Somersetshire he cleared
the villeins off the land, but gave each of them the choice of becoming free or
receiving a tenement in any royal manor that he might choose. But the holy Hugh was
not content with this, he made Henry pay compensation to the villeins for their
houses; nor did he stop there; they must be allowed to carry away the materials,
though for these they have already received a money equivalent.525 At an earlier date
an Earl of Lincoln, clearing the ground for Revesby Abbey, had given the
dispossessed rustics a choice between freedom and other tenements.526

What the tenant in villeinage had to fear was not so much Increased services.
arbitrary ejectment as an attempt to raise his rent, or to exact
from him new and degrading services which would make him an unfreeman. We
cannot altogether acquit the lords of such attempts. The fact that the services
described in the later “extents” seem heavier than those described in the earlier, the
fact that the debasing merchetum seems to become far commoner as time goes on,
these facts are not very cogent, for the extents become more minute and particular and
we seldom can be quite sure that what is expressed in the later documents was not
implied in the earlier.527 We cannot so easily dispose of the evidence that late in the
thirteenth century large masses of the tenants believed and sought to prove that their
lords had broken the custom and imposed new burdens upon them. They sought to
show in case after case that they were living on the ancient demesne of the crown, and
that therefore they were protected against any increase of services. Generally they
failed; Domesday Book was produced and proved that they had no right to claim the
king’s help. The fact remains that they had hoped to prove that the lords were
breaking the custom. To this we must add that in many of these cases the lord was a
religious house.528 Now there is plenty of evidence that of all landlords the religious
houses were the most severe—not the most oppressive, but the most tenacious of their

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 226 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

rights; they were bent on the maintenance of pure villein tenure and personal
villeinage. The immortal but soulless corporation with her wealth of accurate records
would yield no inch, would enfranchise no serf, would enfranchise no tenement. In
practice the secular lord was more humane, because he was more human, because he
was careless, because he wanted ready money, because he would die. Still it is to the
professed in religion that we may fairly look for a high theory of justice, and when we
find that it is against them that the peasants make their loudest complaints, we may be
pretty sure that the religion of the time saw nothing very wrong in the proceedings of
a lord who without any cruelty tried to get the most that he could out of his villein
tenements. We may well doubt whether the best morality of the time required him to
regard the villein services as fixed for good and all, or as variable only by means of
some formal agreement such as never could have been made had but one tenant
refused his consent. The process of commutation, which in the end was to give the
copyholder his valuable rights, was set going by the lord’s will; he chose to exact
money instead of labour, and, if he took but a fair sum, he was not to be condemned.
We cannot contend therefore that the lord’s will was fettered by rigid custom, or that
any man conceived that it ought to be so fettered. On the other hand, as we shall soon
see, there is in the king’s treatment of his peasants, the men of “the ancient demesne,”
a convincing proof that the just landlord was expected to pay heed to the custom and
not to break through it save for good cause.

Had the tenant in villeinage heritable rights? Of rights Heritable rights in
recognized by the king’s courts we have not to speak; but the villein tenements.
manorial court frequently admitted that his rights were heritable,
at least as against all but the lord. Often a claimant comes into court and declares in
set terms how he is the rightful heir and how some one else is wrongfully withholding
his inheritance. Thus, for example: “John of Bagmere demands against John son of
Walter of Wells one virgate of land with the appurtenances in the vill of Combe as his
right according to the custom of the manor, and therefore as his right, for he says that
one John of Bagmere his grandfather died seised thereof as his right according to the
custom of the manor, and from that John the right descended according to the custom
of the manor to his son William, the demandant’s father, whose heir the demandant is
according to the custom of the manor.”529 This is just the formula which a man
would use in the king’s court were he claiming a freehold inheritance, save that at
every turn reference is made to the custom of the manor; according to the custom
inheritance is a matter of strict right as against all but the lord. The documents are
much more chary of admitting that as against the lord the heir has any rights. On the
death of a tenant a heriot becomes due, usually the best beast or best chattel or a fixed
sum of money; but this is regarded less as a “relief” to be paid by an heir than as a
payment due out of the dead man’s estate, and if an “extent” speaks of the heir at all,
this is in general to tell us that he must “do the lord’s will,” or must “redeem the land
at the will of the lord.”530 The court rolls seem to show that as a matter of fact heirs
were admitted on fairly easy terms, the lord taking an additional year’s rent or the
like, and the pleadings in which hereditary right is asserted against others than the
lord testify to a strong feeling that the villein tenements are heritable; still as against
the lord the heir has rather a claim to inherit than an inheritance. The records of this
age but rarely say that a tenant is admitted “to hold to him and his heirs,” generally
they say no more than that the lord has given the land to A. B. When, as would

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 227 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

generally be the case, the tenants were personally unfree, the lord would have run
some danger in talking about their heirs, for lawyers were saying that the serf could
have no heir but his lord and drawing thence the deduction that a serf might be
enfranchised by unguarded words.531 This may be the reason why early court rolls,
when they do expressly allow that a new tenant is to have transmissible rights, do so
by speaking not of his heirs but of his sequela. This is not a pretty word to use of a
man, for it is the word that one uses of pigs and the like; the tenant is to hold to him
and his brood, his litter.532 We shall better understand the nature of the heir’s right
against the lord, a right to inherit if the lord pleases, if we are persuaded that in many
a case the inheritance was not very valuable. Certainly in the fourteenth century there
were lords who would but too gladly have found heirs to take up the villein tenements
at the accustomed services.533 We may hardly argue thence to an earlier time; but no
doubt the services were often as good a return for the land as could have been
obtained. A strong man with strong sons might do them and thrive; the weak and
needy could not, and were removed with the full approbation of the other men of the
vill, whose burdens had been increased by the impotence of their fellow-labourer.

Further the lord took care that the tenements should not be Unity of the tenement.
broken up among co-heirs. Often the tenant’s widow enjoyed the
whole tenement during her life or until she married a second time without the lord’s
leave.534 Often the customary rule of inheritance gave the land to the dead man’s
youngest son, and this was accounted a mark of villein tenure.535 Perhaps in some
cases the family kept together, and the son who was admitted as tenant was regarded
as representing his brothers; but this must have been a matter of morals rather than of
law or of enforceable custom. By one means or another the unity of the tenement was
preserved and it is rare to find it held by a party of co-heirs. Exceptions there
doubtless were, but on the evidence afforded by the “extents” and the Hundred Rolls
it is hard to believe that in the thirteenth century the lords held themselves bound by
custom to admit the heir on his tendering a fixed fine.536 “Precarious inheritance,” if
we may use such a term, was of common occurrence in all zones of society. The
baronial relief had but lately been determined; the tenant by serjeanty still relieved his
land “at the will of the lord.” We know too that in later days the heir of a copyhold
tenant very often had to pay an “arbitrary” fine, while in other cases lords have
succeeded in proving that the successors of the villein tenants were but tenants for
life.537

Of the alienation, of the sale and purchase, of villein tenements Alienation of villein
we read little. We may be sure that this could not be effected tenements.
without the lord’s leave; the seller came into the lord’s court and
surrendered the land into the steward’s hand, who thereupon admitted the new tenant
and gave him seisin. The new tenant paid a fine; often it would be one year’s value of
the tenement. But in this region there seems to have been but little custom, and we
may be fairly certain that the lords of this period did not allow that new tenants could
be forced upon them against their will. If the tenant attempted to alienate the tenement
without the lord’s leave, this was a cause of forfeiture;538 if he attempted to make a
lease of it, this, if not a cause of forfeiture, subjected him to an amercement.539

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 228 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Finally we must note that the tenant in villeinage was usually Villein tenure and
regarded as an unfreeman, a bondman, villanus, nativus, servus. villein status.
That a freeman should hold in villeinage was possible, and up
and down the country there may have been many freemen with villein tenements;
what is more, there likely enough were many men whose status was dubious. This is
one of the most remarkable points in villeinage; villein tenure is of far greater
practical importance than villein status. To prove that a man was personally unfree
was, as we shall see in the next chapter, a difficult matter, and a case in which a lord
had in his own interest to undertake this proof was not very common. So long as the
tenant did not make up his mind to quit hearth and home, leaving the means of his
livelihood behind him, the lord had seldom to fall back upon an assertion of personal
bondage in order to get what he wanted. If the tenant was refractory the lord could
distrain him, could take the tenement away for a time or for good and all. For all this
however, the “extents” of the thirteenth century show that in the estimation of their
lords—and, we must add, of their neighbours,—the holders of unfree tenements were
as a general rule unfreemen. This is apparent in “extents” to which the tenants
themselves pledge their oaths; it is plain upon the face of the Hundred Rolls. The
juries of different hundreds may choose different phrases; but in one way or another,
either by using such terms as nativus and servus, which imply personal unfreedom, or
by laying stress on the payment of the merchet, they generally show that in their
opinion the case of a freeman holding in villeinage is uncommon and may fairly be
neglected by those who are dealing with large masses of men.

§ 13.

The Ancient Demesne540
The king is a great landowner. Besides being the supreme lord of The ancient demesne
all land, he has many manors of his own; there is a constant flow and the other royal
of lands into and out of the royal hands; they come to him by estates.
escheat and forfeiture, they leave him by gifts and restorations.
Now a distinction is drawn among the manors that he has. Some of them constitute, so
to speak, the original endowment of the kingship, they are that ancient demesne of the
crown which the Conqueror held when the great settlement of the Conquest was
completed and was registered in Domesday Book.541 What has fallen in since that
time is not considered as so permanently annexed to the kingly office; it is not
expected of the king that he will keep in his own hands the numerous honours,
baronies and manors with which felony and treason and want of heirs are constantly
supplying him; rather it is expected that he will give these away again. On the other
hand, he ought not to dissipate the old demesne manors. He does give them out, and
that too to be held of him heritably, but often he reserves a substantial money rent;
they are to be held of him in “fee farm.” This is hardly a matter of law; all the king’s
manors are the king’s to give upon what terms he pleases; still his ancient patrimony
is regarded as more closely bound up with his office than are those mere windfalls
which now and again come to his hands.542

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 229 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

But in law also the distinction is important. We are accustomed Immunities of the
to define a “franchise” as a portion of royal power in the hands ancient demesne.
of a subject, so that to speak of the king as having franchises
would be a contradiction in terms. Nevertheless in early history the king appears as
the first of all franchise holders, the first in point of greatness and the first, it well may
be, in point of time. The king’s estates are (to borrow a word from abroad)
“immunities,” perhaps the oldest of all immunities; they stand outside the normal,
national system of justice, police and finance. Inside them there prevails a royal,
which is also a seignorial, justice, and which remains distinct from the ordinary
justice of the realm, even when that is done in the king’s name. The tenants on the
ancient, the permanent, manors of the crown enjoy many “liberties” which flow from
the king’s rights, they are to a very high degree exempt from all justice, save that
which is done among them by a court which they constitute and which is presided
over by a royal bailiff, exempt to a very high degree even from the justice of the
king’s “courts of common law” when those courts have come into existence. They
know little of the sheriff; they have not to attend the moots of the shire or the
hundred; they need not serve as jurors; wherever they go they pay no toll; they are not
taxed like other folk; on the other hand they are liable to be tallaged by the king. The
king profits by these immunities; his manors are governed from within; the cultivators
of his demesnes cannot be distracted from their duties to him.543 He attracts men to
his land; the serf who lives there unclaimed for year and day is privileged against
recapture.

When new manors come to the king’s hands they do not enjoy Once ancient
these immunities. On the other hand, when the king gives away demesne, always
in fee farm or otherwise one of the ancient manors, the donee ancient demesne.
takes it with all its privileges. This we may say is an illustration
of a general rule of law:—the escheat of a mesne lordship should leave unaltered the
rights and duties of those who are the subjects of that lordship, and if a lord puts a
mesne between himself and his tenant, that tenant should neither gain nor lose by the
change. Thus, once ancient demesne, always ancient demesne. The tenants who have
been free of toll but liable to tallage should still be free of toll but liable to tallage,
though the king has ceased to be and the Prior of Barnwell has become their
immediate lord.

All this would make the ancient demesne of importance in the Peculiar tenures on
history of political arrangements, in the history of the franchises, the ancient demesne.
of justice, police and finance, though here the franchises and
immunities enjoyed by the king’s estates would have to take their place beside the
very similar franchises and immunities enjoyed by the estates of other privileged
persons. But we do not at once see why there should be any form of land tenure
peculiar to the ancient demesne. However, such a form of land tenure there is.

Briefly stated, the phenomenon which deserves investigation is The problem stated.
this:—On the ancient demesne there is a large class of persons
whose economic and social position is much the same, if not quite the same, as that of
the ordinary holders in villeinage, but who are very adequately protected by law, or by
custom which has all the force of law, in the enjoyment of their tenements. This

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 230 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

protection is given to them by two remedies specially adapted to meet their case; the
one is “the little writ of right close according to the custom of the manor,” the other is
the writ of Monstraverunt. We will speak first of these remedies and then of the class
for whose sake they exist.

The “little writ of right close” is not unlike the “great writ of The little writ of right.
right patent.” This latter is the ordinary proprietary remedy for
one who thinks that he ought to hold land by free tenure of a mesne lord. The writ
patent is directed by the king to the mesne lord; it bids him “hold full right” (plenum
rectum teneas) to the demandant and adds a threat that if he is remiss, the king’s
sheriff will interfere.544 The lord then, if he has a court, holds a court, and justice can
there be done to the demandant, though there are several ways in which the case can
be withdrawn from his tribunal and removed first into the county court and then into
the king’s court. Now the little writ is a similar writ. It is directed by the king to the
bailiffs of the manor545 —this will be so whether the king is himself the immediate
lord of the manor or whether it is in the hands of a mesne— and it bids the bailiffs do
full right to the demandant “according to the custom of the manor.”546 It contains no
threat of the sheriff’s interference, and this may be the reason why it is a “close writ”
and not a “patent writ,” since no one but the recipient, who is not a public official, is
required to act upon it. Thereupon the court of the manor proceeds to hear and is fully
competent to determine the cause. Still it acts under surveillance. If it is going wrong,
the sheriff can be sent with four knights of the county to watch its proceedings,547
and there are means by which the matter can be brought before the king’s central
court.548 This writ, we say, is in use both when the manor is in the king’s hand, so
that the demandant is claiming to hold immediately of him, and also when the manor
has been given to a mesne lord. In the latter case the lord himself may be the
defendant. So long as the king is the immediate lord, there can be no writ against the
lord; of course not; but the would-be tenant of a few acres on the ancient demesne is
in this respect no worse off than the mightiest of the barons; he who would get justice
out of the king must petition for it in humble wise. But when the manor has been
given to a subject, then the writ will lie against him; he can be required to do justice in
a case in which, if the complaint be true, he himself is the evil doer. This is a
remarkable point. The Abbot of Ramsey holds the manor of King’s Ripton, which is
part of the ancient demesne. Joan of Alconbury thinks that she ought to hold eight
acres which are in the abbot’s hand. The abbot is summoned once, twice, thrice and
then distrained once, twice, thrice, to appear in his own court and answer her
demand.549

Now so long as the manor is in the king’s hand, the case of the Meaning of the little
persons of whom we are speaking may not seem to differ writ.
radically from the case of villein tenants. Any one who claims to
hold in villeinage is likely to get good enough justice in the lord’s court, provided that
his opponent be not the lord. The difference may seem to be merely procedural. When
a man claims villein land in an ordinary manor, he proceeds without any writ;
ordinary lords do not keep chanceries; when he claims unfree land (for so we will for
the moment suppose it to be) in a manor of which the king is the immediate lord, and
which is regarded as part of the permanent endowment of the crown, he must use a
writ. This is but a detail. For a moment we may even feel inclined to say that there is

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 231 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

nothing in the distinction but that love for parchment and wax which is natural to a
government office. Even when it is added that the court of a manor on the ancient
demesne acts under the supervision of the courts of common law, we may find
analogies for this on the estates of prelates and other great lords. Such a lord
sometimes has a central court, an “honorial” court, which controls the doings of his
manorial courts; the so-called courts of common law, it may be said, are the king’s
central court, the court of the great honour of England. Still, though there may be
some truth in these suggestions, they must not be suffered to conceal a really
important distinction. In the case of the ancient demesne, even while the manor is
immediately subject to the king, the consuetudo manerii is put on a level with the law
of the realm; it is enforced by the highest of all tribunals; indeed it is lex et
consuetudo manerii.550 Nor is the mere use of a writ of no importance; it solemnly
sanctions the custom. We have far more reason for saying that the distinction between
“great” and “little,” between “close” and “open” than that the distinction between
“writ” and “no writ” is trivial. But when the manor goes out of the king’s hand, then
there is a truly abnormal state of affairs; the king compels the lord to do justice to
claimants of land who yet claim no freehold. A climax is reached when the lord
himself has to answer in the manorial court and submit himself to its process.

This is not all. The little writ serves the turn of a man who claims The Monstraverunt.
land according to the custom of the manor; but the tenants of
whom we are speaking are protected, and protected collectively, against any increase
of their services. This is very plain when the manor is in the hands of a mesne lord. If
he attempts to increase the customary services, some of the tenants, acting on behalf
of all, will go to the royal chancery and obtain a writ against him. Such a writ begins
with the word Monstraverunt.551 The king addresses the lord:—“ A, B and C, men of
your manor of X, which is of the ancient demesne of the crown of England, have
shown us that you exact from them other customs and services than those which they
owe, and which their ancestors did in the time when that manor was in the hands of
our predecessors, kings of England; therefore we command you to cease from such
exactions, otherwise we shall order our sheriff to interfere.” The lord being deaf to
this command, another writ is sent compelling him to come and answer for his
disobedience before the king or before the justices of the Bench. When the case
comes before the royal court, the complainants have in the first place to show that the
manor is part of the ancient demesne; Domesday Book is used for this purpose as a
conclusive test. Then, if this fact is proved or admitted, there arises the question
whether the lord has exacted unaccustomed services, and if this is answered against
him, it is adjudged that he shall do so no more. Here then we see a class of tenants
who are not freeholders, but who are fully protected in the king’s court against their
lord. Of course if the manor is in the king’s hand, there is no place for this
procedure.552 Still if the tenants allege that they are being oppressed by the king’s
bailiffs, they can present a petition to the king and the matter will be investigated in
the exchequer.553

And now we may ask, who are the persons for whose sake these The classes of tenants.
remedies exist. Bracton in a classical passage tells us that on the Bracton’s statement.
king’s demesne there are several kinds of men. In the first place
there are serfs or born bondmen who were (i.e. in the persons of their ancestors) serfs

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 232 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

before the Conquest, at the Conquest and after the Conquest, and to this day they
perform villein services and uncertain services and they are bound to do whatever is
commanded to them, provided it be lawful and right. And at the Conquest there were
freemen who freely held their tenements by free services or free customs, and, when
they were ejected by the mighty, they came back and received the same tenements to
hold in villeinage by doing servile works, but certain and specified works; and they
are called glebae ascriptitii and none the less are they freemen, for, albeit they do
servile works, still they do these, not by reason of personal status, but by reason of
their tenure; and for this reason they cannot bring the assizes of novel disseisin or
mort d’ancestor [the freeholder’s possessory remedies], for their tenement is
villeinage, though privileged villeinage; they can only bring the little writ of right
according to the custom of the manor; and for this reason are they called glebae
ascriptitii, for they enjoy the privilege of not being removed from the soil so long as
they do their right services—no matter to whose hands the king’s demesne may come;
nor can they be compelled to hold their tenements against their will. Then there is
another set of men on the king’s manors who hold of the demesne by the same
customs and villein services as the above, and they do not hold in villeinage nor are
they serfs, nor were they such at or before the Conquest, but they hold under covenant
which they have made with the lord, and some of them have charters and some have
not, and, if they are ejected from their tenements, they shall (according to some) have
the assize of novel disseisin, and their heirs shall have the assize of mort d’ancestor.
And there are other sorts of men in the king’s manors and demesnes, who there, as
might be the case elsewhere, hold freely in free socage or by military service under
some modern feoffment made since the Conquest.554

Whereas then on ordinary manors we have, according to legal Bracton’s statement
theory, but two tenures that must for our present purpose be discussed.
distinguished, on the ancient demesne we have at least three.
There are freeholders of the common kind, holding in free socage or by military
service, and they require no special remedies. There are serfs holding in absolute
villeinage. But between them there is a class of tenants whom Bracton oddly enough
calls glebae ascriptitii because they cannot be ejected from their holdings; they are
freemen; they can leave their tenements when they will; they hold by villein services,
but services which are certain; they use the little writ of right. Lastly there is a class to
which we may be allowed to give the name of “conventioners.”555 They differ from
the ascriptitii rather in the origin of their holding and in the nature of their remedies
than in the substance of their rights and duties. The ascriptitii are supposed to trace
the origin of their class back to the Conquest; they hold by customary tenure; the
“conventioners” hold under modern agreements, and it is arguable that, though they
do villein services, they have the ordinary remedies of freeholders.

In another and equally well known passage we hear of the same A second statement.
four classes. Bracton is speaking now without special reference
to the ancient demesne, and remarks that villeinage may be either absolute or
privileged. Absolute villeinage is the tenure of one who, be he free or be he serf, is
bound to do whatever is commanded him, and does not know in the evening what he
must do in the morning. Then there is a villeinage which is not so absolute; as when
land is granted by covenant to a freeman or a serf for fixed, though villein, customs

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 233 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

and services. If such a “conventioner” is ejected, Bracton (disallowing the opinion
which would give him the freeholder’s assizes) holds that his proper remedy is an
action on the covenant. Then, says he, there is another kind of villeinage which is held
of the king from the Conquest of England, which is called villein socage, and is
villeinage though privileged villeinage; for the tenants of the king’s demesnes have
this privilege that they may not be removed from the soil so long as they can and will
do their due service, and these “villein sokemen” are properly called glebae
ascriptitii; they do villein, but fixed and specified, services. Lastly, he once more
remarks that in a royal manor there may be knights and freeholders, holding by
military service or by free socage.556

These freeholders we may dismiss from our minds; they have The four classes of
and they require no peculiar remedies; indeed, the term “ancient tenants.
demesne” having begun to imply peculiar remedies, we find it
contrasted with “freehold,” and in a judgment of Edward I.’s reign we are told that the
lord of the manor, be he the king or no, can change “ancient demesne” into “freehold”
by enfeoffing a tenant;557 after such a feoffment the tenement is no longer ancient
demesne, but “is at the common law.”558 The case also of the “conventioners” we
may for a while postpone, for it is not very important, though it is very curious. There
remain two classes of tenants: those who hold in absolute villeinage and those who in
Bracton’s terms hold in privileged villeinage, or in villein socage, and who are villein
sokemen and “ascript to [i.e. irremovable from] the soil.” It is the men of this last
class who use the little writ of right.

Such is the legal doctrine, and at some points it corresponds well The theory borne out
with what we can learn of actual arrangements. On an ordinary by practice.
manor we rarely find more than two classes of tenants that can be
called legal classes. We may find more than two economic classes:—in the common
case there will be a class of virgaters, a class of half-virgaters, a class of crofters and
cotters, and there may well be a class of tenants who pay rents and do but little labour,
while other classes must do “week work”—we find censuarii as well as operarii.
Also, as already said, we may find some tenants (but hardly classes of tenants) about
whose tenure we may doubt whether it be freehold or no. Still in general there is a
clear dichotomy; there are freeholders and then there is one other great class. The
latter may be called by different names according to the taste of the jurors; its
members may be termed servi, nativi, bondi, villani, custumarii, consuetudinarii; but
legally their tenure is always the same; they hold according to the custom of the
manor but their tenure is unrecognized by the king’s courts. When, however, in
turning over the Hundred Rolls we come upon a manor of the ancient demesne, we
often see a more elaborate stratification, and in particular we read of sokemen; and
conversely when we see this more elaborate stratification and discover sokemen, we
can usually learn that we are on the ancient demesne. Thus at Soham in
Cambridgeshire, besides ordinary freeholders, there are free sokemen, bond sokemen,
and villani, and at Fordham there are ordinary freeholders, sokemen and villani.559
We hardly need the testimony of Domesday Book: Saham manerium Regis,
Fordeham dominica villa Regis.560 In Huntingdonshire at Brampton there are
freeholders, free sokemen, and bond sokemen, at Alconbury numerous sokemen;561
the natural inference may be verified in Domesday Book.562 No one could look

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 234 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

through the Oxfordshire surveys without singling out the manor of Bensington563
with its many liberi sokemanni, who are kept apart from its libere tenentes, and
inferring that it was a manor of no ordinary kind. It is so with the court rolls. To say
nothing of the “little writs of right” which are stitched to their membranes, the rolls of
a manor on the ancient demesne are distinguished by entries which show that land is
freely bought and sold,564 and if in the Hundred Rolls we are told that the custumarii
of Chesterton have sold their half-virgates, we hardly need look to see whether
Chesterton be not dominica villa Regis.565

We have, however, no little difficulty in marking off Bracton’s Difficulty of
“absolute villeinage” from his “privileged villeinage.” His test is classifying the
the “certainty” or “uncertainty” of the services due from the tenants.
tenant. But, as we have already seen, there lurks an ambiguity in
these simple terms. If by saying that a tenant owes servitia certa et nominata, we
mean that the terms of his tenure are defended by legal remedies, remedies the
administration of which either belongs to, or is at least supervised by, the highest
court in the land, then we are treading a vicious circle: the remedies are given because
the services are certain, the services are certain because the remedies are given. If, on
the other hand, we look at the nature of the services, and say that they are certain if
they can be defined without any reference to the lord’s will, then we exact too much
from those who are to claim the law’s protection. The men of King’s Ripton in
Huntingdonshire used the little writ of right, they used the Monstraverunt, they
distrained their lord, the Abbot of Ramsey, to answer them in the manorial court; but,
according to an “extent” made by their representatives, they were bound to work one
day a week all the year round “at whatever work he commanded them” and three days
a week during August and September. Of them it might well be said that when they
went to bed on Sunday night they did not know what they would have to do on
Monday. In short, here as when we were outside the ancient demesne we come upon a
matter of degree. There is hardly a tenant of whom it can be said that no custom
prevents him from having to do just whatever services the lord may command; on the
other hand, there is hardly a tenant doing any substantial amount of agricultural
labour, of whom it can be said that he has never to attend to the lord’s will; even the
true freeholder must do his boon works in autumn, and the very essence of a boon
work is that, within some spacious limit, described by such a word as “harvest-time,”
it must be done when it is asked for. How low down in the social and economic scale
the protection given by the little writ and the Monstraverunt would go is excellently
shown by the case of Ripton Regis. When pressed in pleading, the tenants admitted
that ever since Henry I.’s day they had been paying arbitrary reliefs, arbitrary tallages,
arbitrary merchet; but still they used the little writ and the Monstraverunt, and, if the
abbot sought to make them work two days a week instead of one, they had their
remedy in the king’s court.566

This being so, the lawyers never seem able to obtain any firm Practical difficulties.
hold for their theory. They can repeat that there are three classes
of tenants, freemen, villeins and sokemen; but how to draw the line between mere
villeinage and the socage tenure of ancient demesne is a difficult problem.567 It is not
as though we had merely to fix the distinction at some one point in a single scale of
degrees; there are many scales as well as many degrees. Besides the scale of

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 235 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

agricultural labour with its infinite particulars, there are the scales of tallage, of relief,
of heriot, of merchet. Even if, following Bracton, we say that the sokeman should at
least be personally free and free to quit his tenement, the men of King’s Ripton will
appeal against our judgment, for at least they do all that freemen ought not to do
according to legal theories. They pay arbitrary tallage, arbitrary merchet, they cannot
have their sons ordained, they may not leave the manor without the lord’s licence; and
yet, when all this has been proved against them, they go on using the little writ of
right and distraining their lord.568 Our law never surmounted these difficulties until
tenure in villeinage was protected by the king’s court under the name of copyhold
tenure, and the line between common copyhold and the privileged villeinage of the
ancient demesne had become of little significance. Even then many a curious, if
unimportant, problem was left for lawyers to fight over.

On the other hand, to mark off the tenure of the sokeman, which Sokemanry and
is sometimes called “sokemanry,”569 from the freehold tenure socage.
known as free socage was no easy task: the very words that we
employ in stating the problem show that this was so. The question whether “the
customary freeholders” who appear in our later books were really freeholders and as
such entitled to vote in the election of knights of the shire, the question which
required for its solution, not merely the learning of a Blackstone, but the authority of
an act of parliament,570 was a question prepared of old. The sokeman on the ancient
demesne cannot usually be accounted a freeholder; the liberi sokemanni are marked
off in the “extents” from the libere tenentes; they use the little writ of right: they
cannot use the great writ or the possessory assizes which speak of seisin of free
tenement. But is this so always? There is extant an elaborate opinion given by a
lawyer of Edward I.’s day, one Aunger of Ripon, and it is found in so many
manuscripts that certainly it must have been considered very sound and useful.571 He
says that, according to his masters, there are three cases in which a tenant, who holds
part of the soil of the ancient demesne, may use the assize of novel disseisin. The first
is the case of a freeholder who holds in an ancient demesne manor, and this we may
pass by. The second is where one of the sokemen has enfeoffed some free “outsider”
(liber homo extrinsecus) and this feoffee has been left undisturbed for a while by the
lord; if after this he is ejected by the lord or any other, he can bring the assize. This
case is quite intelligible because if my villein makes a feoffment, I must eject the
feoffee at once or not at all, since otherwise he will be able to bring the assize against
me:572 —for the law of the thirteenth century is rigorous against self-help. But
thirdly, if any “outsider” ejects a sokeman, the latter can bring the assize; this must be
so (argues Aunger) for if someone ejects my mere villein, that villein by my leave will
be able to recover in an assize; a fortiori we argue to the case of a sokeman whose
estate is superior to that of a villein.573 Thus, according to this remarkable opinion,
the term “free” when applied to a tenement is a relative term—we shall see in the next
chapter that the term “free” when applied to a person is a relative term—for while as
between himself and his lord the sokeman is no freeholder, still as regards all
“outsiders” he can say that he has a free tenement, and, if ejected by them, he can
make good the assertion that he has been disseised de libero tenemento suo. Thus we
see that the perplexing terminology of later days which knows of “customary
freeholds” which are “privileged copyholds,” has a very ancient root. Even the
lawyers of the thirteenth century, or some of them, maintained that for certain

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 236 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

purposes the sokeman had “a free tenement.”574 Nor is this strange, for the class
which was using the little writ of right was miscellaneous. If, on the one hand, it
included men like those of King’s Ripton who were stamped with every common
mark of personal servility, it included on the other hand men who had valuable
interests in tenements, which they sold and mortgaged and settled upon their families
without any interference on the part of their lord. Such men are brought before us by a
judgment of Edward I.’s day; when they sell their lands they do not even surrender
them into the lord’s hand, they make a feoffment as a freeholder would; they make
charters of feoffment, and then the alienation is enrolled in the manorial court; for all
this, however, “no writ runs among them but the little writ of right.”575

We must not here recount the subsequent fate of the tenants on Later theory and
the ancient demesne, nor would this be easy, for it is clear that, if practice.
the law itself did not undergo much change, the terms in which it
was expressed were unstable. But we may note that an opinion grew up that the class
protected by the little writ of right was really a class of freeholders, and then the
inference was drawn that tenants who alienated their tenements, not in the
freeholder’s method by feoffment, but by a surrender into the hands of the lord, could
not use the little writ because they were not freeholders. This doctrine comes to the
front early in the fifteenth century, at a time, that is, when it was no longer capable of
doing much harm to those “sokemen of base tenure” whom it excluded from the
benefits of the little writ, since under the name of copyholders they were on the point
of obtaining a perfectly adequate protection under other writs. But, as already said, the
difficulty was prepared of old.576

And now two questions may occur to us. First, why should there Why is a special
be a peculiar class of customary tenants on those manors which treatment of the
have been in the king’s hand ever since the Norman Conquest? ancient demesne
Secondly, why should the king interfere for the protection of necessary?
customary tenants even when those manors have passed out of
his own hand? The second question is the more easily answered. There has been an
application of a very general rule of law which has come before us on more than one
occasion. It may be thus stated:—the transfer of a lordship from one person to another
should not affect the position of the tenants; as regards them it is res inter alios acta.
When an honour escheats to the king, the tenants of that honour do not become liable
to the special burdens which lie on those who are regarded as having held
immediately of the crown from all time; the honour has still a notional existence for
their benefit. Even so when the king parts with one of his ancient manors and puts a
mesne lord over it, the tenants are neither to gain nor to lose by this transaction; as
regards them, their rights and duties, the manor is still conceived as part of the royal
demesne. A bye motive may secure the observance of this general rule in the case that
is now before us. The king hardly regards these manors as having utterly ceased to be
his, for, to say nothing of a possible act of resumption577 and to say nothing of
escheats and forfeitures, many of these manors are let out to the mesne lords at
substantial rents; they are held at “fee farm” and the king is concerned to see that the
security for his rent is not impaired. It would be impaired were the tenants ill treated.
This point, of importance in social history, is brought out by many actions for “waste”
sued by wards against their guardians; the guardian has not merely cut down trees and

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 237 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

pulled down houses, but he has “destroyed,” “exiled” or impoverished the villeins.578
Still the desire to keep well stocked and well managed the manors which supply the
king with his fee farm rents, can serve but to give a little additional force to a general
rule of law. It is a rule which cuts both ways. If we find tenants eagerly contending
that they are on the privileged soil, we may also find, though hardly so often, a lord
affirming that his manor is on the ancient demesne while the tenant denies this. The
special law for the old patrimony of the king will profit now one and now the other
party to the tenure.579

We come then to the main question. Why on those manors which The king preserves an
have never left the king’s hand is there a large class of tenants old settlement.
such as are hardly to be found elsewhere, a class of “sokemen,”
holding in “privileged villeinage” ? All the evidence that we have conspires to tell us
that there has been less change on these manors than elsewhere, and that the
phenomenon before us is an unusual degree of conservatism. In the first place, the
very name of “ancient demesne” shows us that the law supposes itself to be
conservative. It is maintaining the Conquest settlement. To decide the question
whether a manor be ancient demesne or no, it will go back far beyond all ordinary
terms of limitation and prescription, far beyond “the beginning of legal memory”; it
will be content with no evidence save that of the great survey. Nay in theory the
ancient demesne gained its specific quality before Domesday Book was made. The
lawyers of the fourteenth century had some doubts as to the exact moment of time at
which the manor must have been in the king’s hand in order to make it ancient
demesne for good and all, and the rule of evidence that they had adopted, namely that
no testimony was admissible save that of Domesday Book, must have tended to cause
some little confusion; still on the whole they think that the privileged manors are “the
manors of St. Edward.”580 In this, though hardly in any other, context they will go
behind the Norman Conquest. In the second place, Bracton regards these sokemen as
an ancient race; it holds its lands under a great concession made to it soon after the
Conquest. If new settlers come onto the ancient demesne, whatever rights they may
gain under agreements made with their lords, they are not sokemen nor entitled to the
peculiar privileges of sokemen. This theory, however difficult of application two
centuries after the Conquest, was no idle theory; we are constantly reminded that the
special characteristics of the ancient demesne, if they inhere in certain tenements,
inhere also in “the blood of the sokemen.” Thus when the men of Tavistock have
recourse to a Monstraverunt, it is objected that many of them are adventitii.581 Thus
the men of King’s Ripton hold themselves to be a privileged race; even the ordinary
rules of inheritance must yield when the choice is between a claimant who is not “of
the blood of the vill” and one who is.582 Thus again, Aunger of Ripon treats the little
writ of right as a remedy which has place only where both parties are born sokemen,
or where one is a born sokeman and the other the lord; against an extrinsecus or
forinsecus there may be an assize.583 Thirdly, without examining at any length the
terminology of Domesday Book, we can say at once that the ancient demesne manors
of the thirteenth century have preserved, while other manors have lost, some features
which in the Conqueror’s survey are by no means peculiar to the royal villages; it is
on the ancient demesne that we find more than one legal class of tenants who are not
freeholders; it is on the ancient demesne that we find large groups of tenants still
rejoicing in the ancient name of sokemen.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 238 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Why has the king here shown himself as a conservative? Why the king protects
Certainly we cannot answer that it is in the nature of kings to be his tenants.
conservative or solve the problem by an allusion to the inertness
of a government bureau. In matters of law the royal power has been the great
disturbing force, the king has been the radical reformer. Of course it is well to observe
that on a royal manor there hardly can be any of those “half-rights” (if such a term
may be invented) that may exist elsewhere. The custom of a royal manor, if the king
recognizes it at all, must stand on much the same level as the law of the land; it will
be administered by royal officers, and in the last resort it will be administered by royal
officers who happen to be the judges of the supreme court of law. Still the king
suffers this, and holds himself bound to suffer it, and his judges, for example,
Bracton, say that he is bound to suffer it, say that the sokemen are irremovable so long
as they do their services, say that their services are servitia certa et nominata. What
we have to attribute to the king in a special degree is no mere inertness, nor is it
enlightened self-interest (for this we should look to the monastic rather than to the
royal estates) but it is a respect for custom, an acknowledgment that the rules
administered in his manorial courts have all the force of law. Perhaps it is no paradox
that he keeps the custom best because there can be no talk of his being forced to keep
it. Another lord will draw a firm line between the rights of his freehold tenants, which
he can be compelled to observe, and the rights, if such they are to be called, of his
customary tenants, which he can ignore with impunity, and, as a remedy in the king’s
supreme court is more and more regarded as a touchstone of every would-be right, he
will begin to reason that there is no right where there is no compulsion. It is otherwise
with the king. If he ejects his sokeman, no action will lie against him; none will lie
against him if he disseises the palatine earl. In either case the person wronged can but
petition for right; in either case the wrongdoer must answer for his act before the one
tribunal competent to try him; he must appear before the throne of God. Morally the
king can never be as irresponsible as is another lord of a manor, just because legally
no bounds, or no definite bounds, are set to his irresponsibility. Men will not easily
distinguish between his two capacities. If a landlord, he is still the king, the supreme
judge over all men, the fountain of justice; he has sworn to do justice; the abbot, the
baron, the knight have taken no such oath. We may add that the king is bound to
maintain the laws and customs of “the glorious king St. Edward his predecessor.”
Should he not then begin at home? It is as the tenants of St. Edward that the men of
the ancient demesne claim his protection.584

Speaking generally we have said that outside the ancient Customary freehold.
demesne all the tenures of the non-freeholding peasantry are in
law one tenure, tenure in villeinage. This is the doctrine of the lawyers of the
thirteenth century, and on the whole it is well borne out by the manorial “extents.”
Economically considered there are many modes of peasant tenure, for the tenement
may be large or small, the agricultural services may be light or heavy, “week work”
may be exacted or money may be taken; but just as the modern lawyer makes
“leasehold tenure” cover such economically different things as a lease of a house in
London and a lease of a farm, a lease for a year and a lease for a thousand years,
beneficial leases and leases at rack rent, so all these modes of peasant tenure can be
brought under one head. The legal quality which they have in common and which
keeps them together, is, we may say, their customary quality; they are not protected

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 239 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

by the law of the king’s courts, but they are protected, more or less perfectly, by the
customs administered in the manorial courts. Legally they form one tenure, because in
all cases the kind of protection that they receive is the same. In this quality there are
no degrees, or none that can be fixed with legal precision. Of course there are good
and bad landlords, landlords who respect the custom, landlords who break it,
conservative landlords and improving landlords; but all this is no matter of law. What
we do not see is that one and the same landlord in one and the same manor admits that
he has divers classes of non-freeholding tenants, which differ from each other in the
validity of their tenure; what we do not see is a “privileged” beside an “absolute”
villeinage. Still there are exceptions, and perhaps, were they all collected, they would
form a considerable mass: in particular if the documents concerning Kent, East Anglia
and Northumbria were patiently examined. In a cartulary of the twelfth century, in the
Black Book of Peterborough, we still find on one and the same manor various classes
of tenants bearing the names which are familiar to all who read Domesday Book.
There are large groups of sochemanni who are kept well apart from the villani, but
who very probably could not have made good a claim to be considered as freeholders
in the king’s court.585 Even in the Hundred Rolls we may, though as a rarity, find a
class of sokemen marked off from the freeholders on the one hand and the tenants in
villeinage on the other, though the manor is not on the ancient demesne. It is so at
Swavesey in Cambridgeshire. When Domesday Book was made Count Alan held it,
and it is still held by Ellen de la Zouche “as of the honour of Britanny.” She has
freehold tenants, a group of villani who hold de villenagio, a group of cotters; but
besides these a group of sokemanni who hold sokelond.586 In the north the “tenants
in drengage” are severed from the freeholders and from the “tenants in bondage”;587
and, if the Kentish “gavel-men” succeeded in making “gavelkind” a freehold tenure,
and in some respects a privileged freehold tenure, since peculiarly cheap and easy
remedies for its protection were allowed them, their tenure was still spoken of as
though it were not absolutely “free”; it may be contrasted with “frank fee” just as the
tenure of the king’s sokemen may be contrasted with “frank fee.”588

To this we must add that modern courts of law have from time to Customary freehold in
time been puzzled by the appearance before them of classes of modern times.
tenants seeming to occupy a middle state between that of
freeholders and that of copyholders. They are said to hold “according to the custom of
the manor,” but not “at the will of the lord”; they convey their tenements sometimes
by surrender and admittance in the lord’s court, sometimes by a deed of bargain and
sale followed by an admittance; often they are subject to some of the usual burdens of
copyhold tenure. They have come sometimes from manors which formed part of the
ancient demesne, sometimes from other manors; in particular they have often come
from a part of England in which, if Domesday Book be the final test, there can be no
ancient demesne, namely, from the northernmost counties. Now it would be foolish to
argue that the ancestors in law of any given group of such tenants enjoyed in the
thirteenth century a condition superior to that of the ordinary tenants in villeinage.
The full formula which is supposed to describe the tenure of the copyholder—“to hold
at the will of the lord according to the custom of the manor”—is seldom found on the
earliest court rolls. Any set of early court rolls is likely to show many variations in the
phrases used about one and the same set of tenements, and in any particular case the
omission of all allusion to the will of the lord from the formula which became current

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 240 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

in the manorial court or the steward’s office, may be of recent origin and the outcome
of an accident. An example may show how rash such inferences may be. The Dean
and Chapter, successors of the Prior and Convent, of Durham have (it is said) no
copyholders, having succeeded in proving that their peasant tenants held only for life
and without any right of renewal. The Bishop of Durham has, or lately had, plenty of
copyholders. But in all probability the explanation of this difference is to be found in
what from our point of view are comparatively modern times. The convent, like many
other religious houses, took steps to prevent its villein or “bondage” tenements from
being heritable in fact; the “corporation sole” was less far-sighted than the
“corporation aggregate.”589 And again, the modern cases which introduce us to
“customary freeholders” seldom tell us of more than one class of customary tenants
on the manor that is in question:—on that manor there are no tenants who are said to
hold “at the will of the lord.” Still when all the modern evidence is taken in the mass,
it supports the inference that we should have drawn from the state of the ancient
demesne. That inference is that the very general absence in the thirteenth century of
any class of tenants mediate between the freeholders, who enjoy full and immediate
royal protection, and the customary tenants, who (as men are beginning to say) hold at
the will of the lord, is of late origin, the effect of legal rules and legal theories rather
than of ancient economic facts.

With its newly centralized royal justice, the law of the thirteenth No place for a tenure
century has no place for the sokeman. Even when he is preserved between freehold and
on the royal demesne, it hardly knows how to deal with him, can villeinage.
hardly decide whether he is a freeholder, thinks that he may be a
freeholder as regards some and not as regards others. Outside the ancient demesne it
proposes the dilemma, “Protected by the king or not protected by the king, and if not
protected by him, then held at the will of the lord.” But if we strive to go behind the
amazing activity of the king’s court, as behind a new thing, if we think of the
freeholder as having to go in the first instance to his lord’s court and hardly able as a
matter of fact to get much further, then the edge of the dilemma is blunted. That the
application of this logical weapon did some immediate harm to the higher classes of
peasants can hardly be doubted. Our legal terminology does indeed suggest that not a
few of them, in particular not a few of the sokemen, fell at once on the right side of
the line. How else can it happen that “free socage” became the name of a free tenure,
a tenure by which even in Bracton’s day barons and knights are well content to hold?
But, on the whole, the doctrine of the lawyers seems to have been that any
considerable amount of labour service must be villein service, must make the tenure
unfree and unprotected, because it cannot but be service which in many particulars
will be done at the will of the lord. Such a doctrine must have condemned many a
sokeman of the twelfth century to hold in villeinage.

But of the past history of those tenures which are not freehold we The “conventioners.”
must not speak in this place, for, however sharply the lawyers
may contrast the two, villein tenure is, as a matter of fact, closely connected with
villein status, a topic which will come before us in the next chapter. We have,
however, yet to say a few words about a class of tenants who passed under our notice
when we were transcribing Bracton’s account of the ancient demesne. Marked off
from the “privileged villeinage” of the sokeman stands the tenure of certain adventitii,

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 241 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

who, though they perform services similar to those of the sokemen, do not belong to
that privileged race. They are regarded as “outsiders” who have recently come to the
manor, who have taken tenements under agreements (conventiones), who must
perform agricultural services and who are protected by law; but their title to
protection is given them not by the custom of the manor, but by the terms of the
agreement; we have called them “conventioners.”590 Bracton’s own opinion seems to
be that their rights are not “real” rights; on the contrary, they are personal, contractual
rights, to be enforced not by possessory or proprietary actions but by an action on the
covenant. However, he admits that others thought differently, would have allowed
these men the possessory assizes and therefore, for this would follow, would have
treated them as freeholders. Bracton’s doctrine about this matter represents, so we
may guess, rather a passing inclination than a settled practice. Two great causes made
against its perdurance. In the first place, the theory that the sokemen were a privileged
race, that the privilege ran, if we may so speak, rather in their blood than in their
tenure, though we may find many traces of it, could not be permanently maintained.
The day for racial laws was past, and as a matter of practice no barrier could be kept
up between the natural progeny of the sokemen and these “adventitious”
conventioners. In the second place, the whole tendency of English land law was
setting strongly in favour of the principle that any one who has a right to be in the
occupation of land has a right in the land, and whilst in occupation has a true
possession of the land. This is seen most clearly in the treatment of tenants for terms
of years. For a short while an attempt had been made to treat them as having rights,
but merely personal, contractual rights; but, before Bracton wrote, the attempt had
broken down, and the termor was considered as possessing the land and as having
rights in it. And so with these conventioners:—Bracton’s suggestion is very
interesting, especially because he thinks that even an unfreeman may have a remedy
upon a covenant against the covenantor; but we cannot find that it struck deep
root.591 On the whole, outside the ancient demesne, the law maintains the dilemma,
“Freehold, or unprotected by law”; while even on the ancient demesne, “Freehold,
Absolute Villeinage, Privileged Villeinage (Sokemanry)” exhaust all the possible
cases.

Thus at the end of this prolonged account of the law of tenure we Conclusion.
are brought back to a remark with which we started. Everywhere
we see at first sight a simplicity that is truly marvellous. All the variegated facts of
landholdership have been brought under the sway of a single formula, “the formula of
dependent tenure,” and the only modes of tenure which the law distinguishes are very
few. If the reader does not think that our law is simple, he should look abroad or he
should look at the facts which our law has endeavoured to master. Has endeavoured to
master, we say, for it has not succeeded at every point in its grand undertaking. It has
dealt rudely with the facts, it has neglected many a distinction of great social and
economic importance, it has driven its trenchant dilemmas through the middle of
natural classes and athwart some lines of customary morality; but it has been bold and
strong and therefore simple.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 242 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER II

The Sorts And Conditions Of Men
Of the divers sorts and conditions of men our law of the Law of personal
thirteenth century has much to say; there are many classes of condition.
persons which must be regarded as legally constituted classes.
Among laymen the time has indeed already come when men of one sort, free and
lawful men (liberi et legales homines) can be treated as men of the common, the
ordinary, we may perhaps say the normal sort, while men of all other sorts enjoy
privileges or are subject to disabilities which can be called exceptional. The lay
Englishman, free but not noble, who is of full age and who has forfeited none of his
rights by crime or sin, is the law’s typical man, typical person. But besides such men
there are within the secular order noble men and unfreemen; then there are monks and
nuns who are dead to the world; then there is the clergy constituting a separate
“estate”; there are Jews and there are aliens; there are excommunicates, outlaws and
convicted felons who have lost some or all of their civil rights; also we may here
make mention of infants and of women, both married and unmarried, even though
their condition be better discussed in connexion with family law, and a word should
perhaps be said of lunatics, idiots and lepers. Lastly, there are “juristic persons” to be
considered, for the law is beginning to know the corporation.

But if for a while we fix our attention on the lay order, it may seem to us that, when
compared with the contemporary law of France or at any rate of Germany, our law of
status is poor: in other words, it has little to say about estates or ranks of men. Men
are either freemen or serfs; there is not much more to be said. When compared with
tenure, status is unimportant.

This much we might learn from the history of a technical term. Status and estate.
Our modern English writers on jurisprudence are constantly put
to shifts for a word which shall translate the Latin status and frequently have to leave
it untranslated; estate would make us think of rights in land, and condition also has
hard work to do in our law of property and of obligations. The fate in England of the
word status or estate is very curious. Bracton could still sharply oppose it to rights in
land. A favourite maxim of his is that a man’s free or villein tenure of a tenement does
not affect his free or villein estate.1 But very soon after his death we hear of a man
having a status in fee simple or a status for life, and though such a phrase as “the
three estates of the realm” may endure, and our church may bid us pray “for all estates
of men,” still the English lawyer when he hears of estates will think first of rights in
land, while the English layman will, like enough, think of land itself, of fields and
houses. This means that our land law has been vastly more important than our law of
ranks. And so it is at an early time; we read much more in the law-books of tenants by
knight’s service, serjeanty, burgage, socage, than of knights, serjeants, burgesses and
sokemen; nay, even the great distinction between bond and free is apt to appear in
practice rather as a distinction between tenures than as a distinction between persons.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 243 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

§ 1.

The Earls And Barons
Our law hardly knows anything of a noble or of a gentle class; all The baronage.
freemen are in the main equal before the law. For a moment this
may seem strange. A conquered country is hardly the place in which we should look
for an equality, which, having regard to other lands, we must call exceptional. Yet in
truth it is the result of the Conquest, though a result that was slowly evolved. The
compiler of the Leges Henrici would willingly have given us a full law of ranks or
estates of men; but the materials at his command were too heterogeneous: counts,
barons, earls, thegns, Norman milites, English radknights, vidames, vavassors,
sokemen, villeins, ceorls, serfs, two-hundred men, six-hundred men—a text writer can
do little with this disorderly mass. But a strong king can do with it what he pleases; he
can make his favour the measure of nobility; they are noble whom he treats as such.
And he does not choose that there shall be much nobility. Gradually a small noble
class is formed, an estate of temporal lords, of earls and barons. The principles which
hold it together are far rather land tenure and the king’s will than the transmission of
noble blood. Its members have political privileges which are the counterpart of
political duties; the king consults them, and is in some sort bound to consult them, and
they are bound to attend his summons and give him counsel. They have hardly any
other privileges. During the baron’s life his children have no privileges; on his death
only the new baron becomes noble.

The privileges of the earl or the baron are, we say, extremely Privileges of the
few. Doubtless from of old every freeman was entitled to be barons.
judged by his peers:2 that is to say, he was entitled to insist that
those who were to sit as his judges should not be of a legal rank lower than his own.
Under the dominance of the law of tenure this rule would take the form that a vassal is
not to be judged by sub-vassals. So long as the king’s court was a court of tenants in
chief any man would have found there those who were at least his equals, and even in
a county court there would have been barons enough to judge any baron. As the
administration of royal justice gradually became the function of professional lawyers,
the cry for a iudicium parium was raised by the nobles, and in words this was
conceded to them.3 For a long time, however, the concession had no very marked
effect, because the court held coram Rege, though for every-day purposes but a bench
of professional justices, might at any moment assume a shape to which no baron
could have taken exception; even a parliament to which all the barons had been
summoned might still be regarded as this same court taking for the nonce a specially
solemn form. And the meaning of the rule was not very plain. On the one hand, we
hear the assertion that even in civil suits the earl or baron should have the judgment of
his peers,4 on the other hand Peter des Roches, the king’s minister, can say that the
king’s justices are the peers of any man,5 and the very title of the “barons” of the
exchequer forbids us to treat this as mere insolence. And so Bracton gives us no
doctrine as to the privilege of the barons. He does recognize the distinction between
the king’s court of justices and the king’s court of “peers,” but for the sake of a quite
other doctrine, which left but few traces in later law. When there is a charge of

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 244 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

treason, the king himself is the accuser, and life, limb and inheritance are at stake;
therefore it is not seemly that the king, either in person or by his justices, who
represent his person, should be judge; so Bracton throws out the suggestion that the
cause should come before the “peers.”6 We have here no privilege of peerage, but a
special rule for all cases of high treason, based on the maxim that no one should be
judge in his own cause. Under the Edwards the privilege of peerage was gradually
ascertained, as the court of law held coram Rege, which by this time was known as
the King’s Bench, became more utterly distinct from the assembly of the barons. But
in the end the baron had gained very little. If charged with treason or felony, he was
tried by his peers; if charged with a misdemeanour (transgressio), if sued in a civil
suit by high or low, if the king challenged his choicest franchises, there was no special
court for him; he had to abide the judgment of the king’s justices.7 A certain freedom
from arrest in civil causes we may perhaps allow him; but in Bracton’s age arrest in
civil causes was as yet no common event. That the tenant in chief could not be
excommunicated without the king’s leave was a privilege of the king rather than of
the baronage. One other privilege the baron had, but it was of questionable value.
When he was adjudged to be in the king’s mercy, the amount of the amercement was
fixed, or “affeered,” not by his merely “free and lawful” neighbours but by his peers.
For this purpose, however, his peers were found in the “barons” of the exchequer8
and these experts in finance were not likely to spare him.9 There are a few little rules
of procedure which distinguish the noble from the non-noble. Thus we are told that a
summons to court should allow an earl one month, a baron three weeks, a freeman a
fortnight;10 and we may see some traces of a rule which exempts a baron from the
necessity of swearing.11 Even the members of the king’s family are under the
ordinary law, though in their “personal” actions they have the same benefit of
expeditious procedure that is enjoyed by merchants.12 Very different is the case of
the king, who in all litigation “is prerogative.”

§ 2.

The Knights
Below the barons stand the knights; the law honours them by The knights.
subjecting them to special burdens; but still knighthood can
hardly be accounted a legal status. In the administration of royal justice there is a
great deal of work that can be done only by knights, at all events if there are knights
to be had. Four knights, twelve knights, are constantly required as representatives of
the county court or as recognitors. For some purposes mere free and lawful men will
serve, for others knights must be employed. On the whole we may say that knights are
required for the more solemn, the more ancient, the more decisive processes. To
swear to a question of possession, free and lawful men are good enough; to give the
final and conclusive verdict about a matter of right, knights are needed. They are
treated as an able, trustworthy class; but we no longer find any such rule as that the
oath of one thegn is equivalent to the oath of six ceorls. In administrative law
therefore the knight is liable to some special burdens; in no other respect does he
differ from the mere freeman. Even military service and scutage have become matters
of tenure rather than matters of rank, and, though the king may strive to force into

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 245 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

knighthood all men of a certain degree of wealth, we have no such rule as that none
but a knight can hold a knight’s fee. Still less have we any such rule as that none but a
knight or none but a baron can keep a seignorial court.

§ 3.

The Unfree
In the main, then, all freemen are equal before the law. Just The unfree.
because this is so the line between the free and the unfree seems
very sharp. And the line between freedom and unfreedom is the line between freedom
and servitude.13 Bracton accepts to the full the Roman dilemma: Omnes homines aut
liberi sunt aut servi.14 He will have no mere unfreedom, no semi-servile class, no
merely praedial serfage, nothing equivalent to the Roman colonatus.15 All men are
either freemen or serfs, and every serf is as much a serf as any other serf.16 We use
the word serf, not the word slave; but it is to be remembered that Bracton had not got
the word slave. He used the worst word that he had got, the word which, as he well
knew, had described the Roman slave whom his owner might kill. And the serf has a
dominus; we may prefer to render this by lord and not by master or owner, and it is
worthy of observation that medieval Latin cannot express this distinction; if the serf
has a dominus, the palatine earl, nay, the king of England, so long as he is duke of
Aquitaine, has a dominus also, and this is somewhat in the serf’s favour; but still
Bracton uses the only words by which he could have described a slave and a slave-
owner. True that servus is neither the commonest nor yet the most technical name for
the unfreeman; more commonly he is called villanus or nativus, and these are the
words used in legal pleadings; but for Bracton these three terms are interchangeable,
and though efforts, not very consistent or successful efforts, might be made to
distinguish between them,17 and some thought it wrong to call the villeins serfs,18
still it is certain that nativus always implied personal unfreedom, that villanus did the
same when employed by lawyers, and that Bracton was right in saying that the law of
his time knew no degrees of personal unfreedom. Even in common practice and by
men who were not jurists the word servus was sometimes used as an equivalent for
nativus or villanus. The jurors of one hundred will call all the unfree people servi,
while in the next hundred they will be villani.19 In French villein is the common
word; but the feminine of villein is nieve (nativa).20

There are no degrees of personal unfreedom; there is no such General idea of
thing as merely praedial serfage. A freeman may hold in serfage.
villeinage; but that is an utterly different thing; he is in no sort a
serf; so far from being bound to the soil he can fling up his tenement and go
whithersoever he pleases.21 In later centuries certain niceties of pleading gave rise to
the terms “villein in gross” and “villein regardant,” and in yet later times, when
villeinage of any kind was obsolescent, these were supposed to point to two different
classes of men, the villein regardant being inseverable from a particular manor, while
the villein in gross might be detached from the soil and sold as a chattel. The law of
Bracton’s time recognizes no such distinction.22 As a matter of fact and a matter of
custom, English serfage may well be called praedial. In the first place, it rarely if ever

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 246 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

happens that the serfs are employed in other work than agriculture and its attendant
processes; their function is to cultivate their lord’s demesne. In the second place, the
serf usually holds more or less land, at least a cottage, or else is the member of a
household whose head holds land, and the services that he does to his lord are
constantly regarded in practice as the return which is due from him in respect of this
tenement or even as the return due from the tenement itself; such services, as we have
already seen, are often minutely defined by custom. In the third place, his lord does
not feed or clothe him; he makes his own living by cultivating his villein tenement, or,
in case he is but a cottager, by earning wages at the hand of his wealthier neighbours.
In the fourth place, he is seldom severed from his tenement; he is seldom sold as a
chattel, though this happens now and again;23 he passes from feoffor to feoffee, from
ancestor to heir as annexed to the soil. For all this, the law as administered by the
king’s court permits his lord to remove him from the tenement. It could hardly have
done otherwise, for he held in villeinage, and even a freeman holding in villeinage
could be ejected from his tenement whenever the lord pleased without finding a
remedy before the king’s justices. But as to the serf, not only could he be removed
from one tenement, he could be placed in another; his lord might set him to work of
any kind; the king’s court would not interfere; for he was a servus and his person
belonged to his lord; “he was merely the chattel of his lord to give and sell at his
pleasure.”24

But, whatever terms the lawyers may use, their own first Relativity of serfage.
principles will forbid us to speak of the English “serf” as a slave:
their own first principles, we say, for what we find is not a general law of slavery
humanely mitigated in some details, but a conception of serfdom which at many
points comes into conflict with our notion of slavery. In his treatment of the subject
Bracton frequently insists on the relativity of serfdom. Serfdom with him is hardly a
status; it is but a relation between two persons, serf and lord. As regards his lord the
serf has, at least as a rule, no rights; but as regards other persons he has all or nearly
all the rights of a freeman; it is nothing to them that he is a serf.25 Now this relative
serfdom we cannot call slavery. As regards mankind at large the serf so far from being
a mere thing is a freeman. This seems to be the main principle of the law of Bracton’s
day. We must now examine each of its two sides: the serfs rightlessness as regards his
lord, his freedom or “quasi-freedom” as regards men in general. It will then remain to
speak of his relation to the state.

In relation to his lord the general rule makes him rightless. (1)The serf in relation
Criminal law indeed protects him in life and limb. Such to his lord.
protection however need not be regarded as an exception to the
rule. Bracton can here fall back upon the Institutes:—the state is concerned to see that
no one shall make an ill use of his property.26 Our modern statutes which prohibit
cruelty to animals do not give rights to dogs and horses, and, though it is certain that
the lord could be punished for killing or maiming his villein, it is not certain that the
villein or his heir could set the law in motion by means of an “appeal.”27 The
protection afforded by criminal law seems to go no further than the preservation of
life and limb. The lord may beat or imprison his serf, though of such doings we do not
hear very much.28

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 247 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

As against his lord the serf can have no proprietary rights. If he Rightlessness of the
holds in villeinage of his lord, of course he is not protected in his serf.
holding by the king’s courts; but then this want of protection we
need not regard as a consequence of his serfdom, for, were he a freeman, he still
would be unprotected; and then, just as the freeman holding in villeinage is protected
by custom and manorial courts, so the serf is similarly protected.29 His rightlessness
appears more clearly as regards his chattels and any land that he may have acquired
from one who is not his master. As regards any movable goods that he has, the lord
may take these to himself. We hear indeed hints that his “wainage,” his instruments of
husbandry, are protected even against his lord,30 and that his lord can be guilty
against him of the crime of robbery;31 but these hints are either belated or premature;
the lord has a right to seize his chattels. But it is a right to seize them and so become
owner of them: until seizure, the serf is their owner and others can deal with him as
such.32 As a matter of fact we hear little of arbitrary seizures, much of seizures which
are not arbitrary but are the enforcement of manorial customs. The villeins are
constantly amerced and distrained; the lord in his court habitually treats them as
owners of chattels, he even permits them to make wills, and when they die he contents
himself with a heriot.33 So here again, when we look at the facts, the serf’s condition
seems better described as unprotectedness than as rightlessness, though doubtless a
lord may from time to time seize goods without being able to justify the seizure by
reference to custom. Then, if the serf acquires land from some third person to hold by
free tenure, he whose serf he is may seize it and hold it; but until such seizure the serf
is tenant and others may and must treat him as such.

And then we find that all this rightlessness or unprotectedness Serfdom de iure and
exists only where serfdom exists de facto. The learning of seisin de facto.
or possession and the rigid prohibition of self-help have come to
the aid of the serfs. Serfdom and liberty are treated as things of which there may be
possession, legally protected possession.34 A fugitive serf may somewhat easily
acquire a “seisin” of liberty. When he is seised of liberty the lord’s power of self-help
is gone; he can no longer capture the fugitive without a writ; he can no longer take
any lands or chattels that the fugitive may have acquired since his flight.35 He must
have recourse to a writ, and the fugitive will have an opportunity of asserting that by
rights he is a freeman, and of asserting this in the king’s court before justices who
openly profess a leaning in favour of liberty.36 We need not suppose that this curious
extension of the idea of possession is due to this leaning; it is part and parcel of one of
the great constructive exploits of medieval law:—relationships which exist de facto
are to be protected until it be proved that they do not exist de iure. Still the doctrine,
though it had a double edge, told against the lords. Apparently in Bracton’s day a serf
who fled had to be captured within four days; otherwise he could not be captured,
unless within year and day he returned to “his villein nest”:37 a parallel rule gave the
ejected landholder but four days for self-help.38 Of course, however, every absence
from the lord’s land was not a flight; the serf might be living elsewhere and making
some periodic payment, chevagium, head-money, in recognition of his lord’s rights: if
so, he was not in seisin of his liberty. What the Institutes say about domesticated
animals can be regarded as to the point.39

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 248 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Yet another qualification of rightlessness is suggested. More than Covenant between
once Bracton comes to the question whether the lord may not be lord and serf.
bound by an agreement, or covenant, made with his serf. He is
inclined to say Yes. His reasoning is this:—the lord can manumit his serf, make him
free for all purposes; but the greater includes the less; therefore the serf may be made
a freeman for a single purpose, namely that of exacting some covenanted benefit, and
yet for the rest may remain a serf.40 Such reasoning is natural if once we regard
serfdom as a mere relationship between two persons. It does not, however, seem to
have prevailed for any long time, for our law came to a principle which was both
more easily defensible and more hostile to serfdom, namely that if the lord makes a
covenant with his serf, this implies a manumission; he becomes free because his lord
has treated him as free.41 Bracton’s doctrine very possibly had facts behind it and
was no empty speculation, for we do find lords making formal agreements with their
serfs;42 but it ran counter to a main current of English land law. The agreements that
Bracton had in view were in the main agreements relating to the tenure of land, and as
we have already seen,43 our law was strongly disinclined to recognize any contract
concerning the occupation of land which was merely a contract and not a bestowal of
“real” rights: it urged the dilemma—no right to occupy land or some one of the
known forms of legal tenure.

The serf’s position in relation to all men other than his lord is (2)The serf in relation
simple:—he is to be treated as a freeman.44 When the lord is not to third persons.
concerned, criminal law makes no difference between bond and
free, and apparently the freeman may have to do battle with the bond. A blow given to
a serf is a wrong to the serf. It may also give his lord a cause of action against the
striker; but here also the law makes no difference between bond and free. If my serf is
assaulted so that I lose his services or so that I suffer contumely, I have an action for
damages; but it would be no otherwise had the assaulted person been my free
servant.45 So also in defining the master’s liability for wrongful acts done by his
dependants, the same principles as regards authorization and ratification seem to be
applied whether the dependants be free servants or serfs.46 It is rather for the acts of
members, free or bond, of his household (manupastus, mainpast) that a man can be
held liable than for the acts of his serfs.47

Then in relation to men in general, the serf may have lands and The serf’s property.
goods, property and possession, and all appropriate remedies. Of
course if he is ejected from a villein tenement, he has no action; the action belongs to
the lord of whom he holds the tenement, who may or may not be his personal lord;
were he a freeman holding in villeinage he would be no better off.48 But the serf can
own and possess chattels and hold a tenement against all but his lord. This general
proposition may require some qualifications or explanations in particular instances.
We read in the Dialogue on the Exchequer that if the lord owes scutage to the crown
his serf’s chattels can be seized, but ought not to be seized until his own chattels have
been exhausted;49 we read in Bracton that when a lord is to be distrained his villein’s
chattels should be the very first object of attack;50 but in these cases we may say that
the serf, having no proprietary rights against his lord, is treated as having none against
those who by virtue of legal process are enabled to claim what the lord himself could

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 249 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

seize:—the general principle is hardly impaired by such qualifications, and it is a most
important principle.

Still it is not a natural principle. This attempt to treat a man now Relative serfdom.
as a chattel and now as a free and lawful person, or rather to treat
him as being both at one and the same moment, must give rise to difficult problems
such as no law of true slavery can ever have to meet. Suppose for example that a
villein makes an agreement with one who is not his lord; it seems certain that the
villein can enforce it; but can the other contractor enforce it? To this question we have
a definite answer from Britton:51 —a contract cannot be enforced against a villein; if
he is sued and pleads “I was the villein of X when this agreement was made and all
that I have belongs to him,” then the plaintiff, unless he will contradict this plea, must
fail and his action will be dismissed; nor can he sue X, for (unless there is some
agency in the case) the lord is not bound by his serf’s contract. In later times this rule
must have been altered; the plea “I am the villein of X and hold this land of him in
villeinage” was often urged in actions for land, but we do not find the plea “I am the
villein of X ” set up in purely “personal” actions, as assuredly it would have been had
it been a good plea.52 But, even if we admit that a villein may be sued upon a
contract, the creditor’s remedy is precarious, for the lord can seize all the lands and
chattels of his serf, and an action against his serf is just what will arouse his usually
dormant right. Thus the law, in trying to work out its curious principle of “relative
servitude,” is driven to treat the serf as a privileged person, as one who can sue but
cannot be sued upon a contract; and, even when it allows that he can be sued, it can
give the creditor but a poor chance of getting paid and will hardly prevent collusion
between villeins and friendly lords. Again, we see the ecclesiastical courts
condemning the villein to pay money for his sins, fornication and the like, and then
we see the villein getting into trouble with his lord for having thus expended money
which in some sort was his lord’s.53 The law with its idea of relative servitude seems
to be fighting against the very nature of things and the very nature of persons.

Lastly, we should notice the serf’s position in public law. It is (3)The serf in relation
highly probable that a serf could not sit as the judge of a to the state.
freeman, though it may be much doubted whether this rule was
strictly observed in the manorial courts.54 He could not sit as a judge in the
communal courts, though he often had to go to them in the humbler capacity of a
“presenter.” So too he could not be a juror in civil causes; this he probably regarded
as a blessed exemption from a duty which fell heavily on freemen. But in criminal
matters and in fiscal matters he had to make presentments. At least in the earlier part
of the century, the verdict or testimony which sends freemen to the gallows is
commonly that of twelve freemen endorsed by that of the representatives of four
townships, and such representatives were very often, perhaps normally, born villeins.
Such representatives served on coroners’ inquests, and the king took their testimony
when he wished to know the extent of his royal rights.55 In the “halimoots” or
manorial courts the serfs are busy as presenters, jurors, affeerers of amercements, if
not as judges; they fill the manorial offices; the reeve of the township is commonly a
serf. What is more, the state in its exactions pays little heed to the line between free
and bond; it expects all men, not merely all freemen, to have arms;56 so soon as it
begins to levy taxes on movables, the serfs, if they have chattels enough, must pay for

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 250 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

them.57 It is but a small set-off for all this onerous freedom that a serf cannot be
produced as champion or as compurgator; and even this rule is made to operate in
favour of liberty; if a lord produces a serf as champion or compurgator this is an
implied manumission.58 The serfs have to bear many of the burdens of liberty. The
state has a direct claim upon their bodies, their goods, their time and their testimony,
and if for a moment this seems to make their lot the less tolerable, it prevents our
thinking of them as domestic animals, the chattels of their lords.

Having seen what serfdom means, we may ask how men become How men become
serfs. The answer is that almost always the serf is a born serf; serfs.
nativus and villanus were commonly used as interchangeable
terms.59 But as to the course by which serfdom is transmitted from parent to child we
find more doubts than we might have expected.
If both parents are serfs, of course the child is a serf; but if one Servile birth.
parent is free and the other a serf, then difficulties seem to arise.
The writer of the Leges Henrici holds that the child follows the father; but he quotes
the proverb, “Vitulus matris est cuiuscunque taurus alluserit,” and seems to admit that
in practice the child is treated as a serf if either of the parents is unfree.60 Glanvill is
clear that the child of an unfree woman is a serf and seems to think that the child of an
unfreeman is no better off.61 Thus we should get the rule, which had been approved
by the church, namely, that, whenever free and servile blood are mixed, the servile
prevails.62 Bracton, however, has a more elaborate scheme. A bastard follows the
mother; the child of a bondwoman, if born out of wedlock, is a serf; if born in
wedlock and of a free father, then another distinction must be taken; if a freeman
takes a bondwoman to wife and they dwell in her villein tenement, then their
offspring will be born serfs, but if she follows him to “a free couch” then their
children will be born free. So also when a bondman marries a free woman, the
character of the tenement in which they dwell determines the character of their
offspring.63 The influence thus ascribed to the tenement is very curious; it shows that
to keep villein status and villein tenure apart was in practice a difficult matter, even
for a lawyer ever ready to insist that in theory they had nothing to do with each other.
In later days the courts seem to have adopted the simple rule that the condition of the
father is the decisive fact, and to have pressed this rule to the absurd, if humane,
conclusion that a bastard is always born free since he has no father.64

“Mixed marriages” indeed gave a great deal of trouble Mixed marriages.
throughout the middle ages by raising questions as to the rights
and remedies of the husband and wife.65 Ultimately “the better opinion of our books”
was that the marriage of a female serf with a freeman, other than her lord, did not
absolutely enfranchise her, but merely made her free during the marriage.66 In 1302,
however, we find two justices denouncing this doctrine as false, “and worse than
false, for it is heresy”; apparently they think that such a marriage has all the effect of a
manumission; but their opinion did not go undisputed.67 Such a marriage would not
at any rate drag down the freeman into personal servitude, though according to
Bracton the issue of it would be serfs if they were born in the villein tenement. In the
converse case in which a bondman marries a free woman, he of course is not
enfranchised, though Bracton’s doctrine would make their children free if born in her
free tenement. On the contrary, it might be thought that, at all events if she went to

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 251 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

live along with her villein husband in his villein tenement and to bear him villein
children, she herself would be accounted a villein. But this was not the rule. How far
during the marriage she could make good any rights against her husband’s lord (and it
will be remembered that as against all others her husband was a freeman) was very
doubtful; she could not sue without her husband, and if he joined in the action, the
lord would say, “You are my villein.”68 But on her husband’s death she would be
free once more, or rather her freedom would once more become apparent and
operative.69

Faint traces may be found of an opinion that birth in a certain Influence of place of
district or a certain tenement will make the child unfree, or as the birth.
case may be free, no matter the condition of its parents; but,
except in the well-known privilege of Kentish soil, it seems to have found no legal
sanction.70

A person born free rarely becomes a serf. When Bracton speaks Villeins by
of prisoners of war being held as slaves and of a freedman being confession.
reduced to slavery on account of his ingratitude, this is but
romanesque learning.71 We do not in this age hear of servitude as a punishment,
though the Welsh marchers claim the right of selling criminals as slaves,72 and King
John can threaten all men with slavery if they do not take arms to resist an invasion.73
Nor do we any longer hear of freemen selling themselves into slavery. But it is a
principle of law that if a person has once confessed himself the serf of another in a
court of record, he can never thereafter be heard to contradict this assertion, and so
“confession” takes its place beside “birth” as one of the origins of servility. There are
abundant cases in our records which suggest that this talk about confession is not
idle;74 a defendant sometimes seeks to evade a plaintiff’s demand by confessing that
he is the villein of a third person, and thus, even in the later middle ages, men may
sometimes have purchased peace and protection at the cost of liberty.75

Whether prolonged serfdom de facto will generate serfdom de Serfdom by
iure was in Edward I.’s day a moot point. Some justices laid prescription.
down as a maxim that no prescription can ever make servile,
blood that once was free. Others flatly denied this rule, and apparently held that if
from father to son a succession of freemen went on doing villein services, the time
would come when an unfree child would be born to a free father. One opinion would
have condemned to servitude the fifth generation in a series of persons performing
base services, while a Scottish law-book mentions the fourth generation, and a
common form of pleading made a lord assert that he had been seised of the
grandfather and great-great-grandfather of the man whose liberty was in dispute.
Opinion might fluctuate about this question, because procedural rules prevented it
from being often brought to a decision. The general rule as to the means by which free
or servile status could be conclusively proved was that it must be proved per parentes.
If the burden of proof lay on the person whose status was in question, he had to
produce free kinsmen; if it lay on the would-be lord, he had to produce kinsmen of the
would-be freeman who would confess themselves serfs. A mere verdict of the country
might settle the question provisionally and, as we may say, for possessory purposes,
but could not settle it conclusively except as against one who had voluntarily

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 252 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

submitted to this test. The burden of the proof is thrown on one side or on the other by
seisin; the man who is in de facto enjoyment of liberty continues to be free until his
servility is proved; the man who is under the power of a lord must remain so until he
has shown his right to liberty. On the whole the procedural rules seem favourable to
freedom. In Bracton’s day a four days’ flight76 might throw the burden of proof upon
the lord, and he would have to make out his title, not by the testimony of free and
lawful neighbours, who would naturally infer serfdom de iure from serfdom de facto,
but by the testimony of the fugitive’s own kinsfolk as to the fugitive’s pedigree, and
they must confess themselves serfs before their testimony can be of any avail.77 On
the other hand, if a man has been doing villein services, he may as a matter of fact
easily fall into serfage, unless he is willing to run from hearth and home and risk all
upon a successful flight and an action at law. If for generation after generation his
stock has held a villein tenement and done villein services he will be reckoned a
villein, that is, a serf; even his kinsfolk will not dare to swear that he is free. There is
no form of service so distinctively servile that it must needs be ascribed to servile
status and not to villein tenure; even the merchet, which is regarded as the best test,
may sometimes be paid ratione tenementi and not ratione personae;78 but a
prolonged performance of villein services must put a family’s free status in jeopardy.
That this is not so as a matter of law seems the opinion of the highest authorities; but
the fact that a contrary opinion was current both in England and in Scotland may well
make us think that in common life there had been a close connexion between villein
tenure and villein status.79

And now as to manumission:—A lord can easily enfranchise his How serfdom ceases.
serf. He can do so expressly by a charter of manumission; he
does so impliedly by a grant of land to be held freely by the serf and his heirs,
for a serf can have no heir but his lord;80 he does so impliedly Manumission.
by certain acts which treat the serf as free, by producing him in
the king’s court as his champion or his compurgator;81 it is becoming dangerous for a
lord to make any written agreement with his serf.82 There has been a difficulty as to a
direct purchase of liberty. If the serf paid money to the lord for the grant of freedom,
the lord might, it would seem, revoke the grant on the ground that his serf’s money
was his own money. This technical difficulty, for perhaps it was no more, was evaded
by the intervention of a third person who made the purchase nominally with his own
but really with the serf’s money, and the serf having been sold and delivered (the
ownership did not pass until delivery) was then set free by his new owner.83

In Bracton’s day every act of manumission by the lord seems to The freedman.
have conferred full and perfect freedom; the freedman was in all
respects the equal of the free born. This could hardly have been otherwise since, as we
have seen, serfdom was regarded for the more part as a mere relation between two
persons. Glanvill seems to have held a different opinion. He speaks as though the
liberation would make the serf free as regards his former lord but leave him a serf as
regards all other men.84 The chief, if not the only, point that Glanvill had before his
mind when he wrote this, seems to have been that the freed villein could not be
produced as champion or as compurgator. It is possible also that he had in view acts
of enfranchisement which were merely private and would not have denied that there
were solemner methods by which absolute freedom could be conferred. In the Leges

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 253 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Henrici the man who wishes to free his serf must do so in public, “in a church or a
market or a county court or a hundred court, openly and before witnesses”; lance and
sword are bestowed on the new freeman and a ceremony is enacted which shows him
that all ways lie open to his feet.85 Glanvill may have required some such public act
if perfect liberty was to be conferred; but Bracton, who habitually regards serfdom as
a mere relationship, sees no difficulty; the lord by destroying the relationship destroys
serfdom. Here we seem to see a modern notion of relative serfdom growing at the
expense of an older notion of true slavery. To turn a thing into a person is a feat that
cannot be performed without the aid of the state but to make free as against yourself
one who is already free as against all but you, this you can easily do, for it is hardly a
matter of public law.86

A serf will also become free (1) by dwelling for year and day on Other modes of
the king’s demesne or in a privileged town—this is an assertion enfranchisement.
of a prerogative right which peoples the king’s manors and
boroughs;87 (2) by being knighted—knighthood confers but a provisional freedom,
for the knighted serf can be degraded when his servility is proved;88 (3) by entering
religion or receiving holy orders; it is unlawful to ordain a serf—this is forbidden by
canon as well as by temporal law,89 —but, when once ordained, he is free, though his
serfdom revives if he resumes a secular life.90 The lord’s right of action for the
recovery of a serf was subject to a prescriptive term; in 1236 the year 1210 was
chosen as the limit, and this limit was not altered until 1275;91 we have already seen
that his right of self-help the lord lost somewhat easily, though less easily as time
went on.92

Such briefly stated is the English law of villeinage or serfage in Summary.
the thirteenth century. Its central idea, that of the relativity of
serfage, is strange. It looks artificial: that is to say, it seems to betray the handiwork of
lawyers who have forced ancient facts into a modern theory. Slavery is very
intelligible; so is slavery tempered by humane rules which will forbid an owner to
maltreat his human chattel; so again is a praedial serfage, and the ancient laws of our
race compel us to admit that there may be a half-free class, men who are neither liberi
homines nor yet servi;93 but a merely relative serfdom is a juristic curiosity.94 In
defining it we have ever to be using the phrases “in relation to,” “as regards,” “as
against,” phrases which would not easily occur to the unlettered, and law which
allows my serf to sue any freeman but me, even to sue my lord, does not look like a
natural expression of any of those deep-seated sentiments which demand that divers
classes of men shall be kept asunder. Then this idea of relative servitude has to be
further qualified before it will square with facts and customs and current notions of
right and wrong. When a lord allows it to be recorded that on the death of his servile
tenant he is entitled to the best beast, he goes very far towards admitting that he is not
entitled to seize the chattels of his serf without good cause. We hesitate before we
describe the serf as rightless even as against his lord, and, if we infer want of right
from want of remedy, we feel that we may be doing violence to the thoughts of a
generation which saw little difference between law and custom. On the whole looking
at the law of Bracton’s day we might guess that here as elsewhere the king’s court has
been carrying out a great work of simplification; we might even guess that its “serf-

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 254 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

villein,” rightless against his lord, free against all but his lord, is as a matter of history
a composite person, a serf and a villein rolled into one.95

That this simplifying process greatly improved the legal position Retrospect.
of the serf can hardly be doubted.
We need not indeed suppose that the theow or servus of earlier Fusion of villeins and
times had been subjected to a rigorously consistent conception of slaves.
slavery. Still in the main he had been rightless, a chattel; and we
may be sure that his rightlessness had not been the merely relative rightlessness of the
“serf-villein” of later days, free against all but his lord. Indeed we may say that in the
course of the twelfth century slavery was abolished. That on the other hand the villani
suffered in the process is very likely. Certainly they suffered in name. A few of them,
notably those on the king’s manors, may have fallen on the right side of the Roman
dilemma “aut liberi aut servi,” and as freemen holding by unfree tenure may have
become even more distinctively free than they were before; but most of them fell on
the wrong side; they got a bad name and were brought within the range of maxims
which described the English theow or the Roman slave.

Probably we ought not to impute to the lawyers of this age any The levelling process.
conscious desire to raise the serf or to debase the villein. The
great motive force which directs their doings in this as in other instances is a desire
for the utmost generality and simplicity. They will have as few distinctions as
possible. All rights in land can be expressed by the formula of dependent tenure; all
conceivable tenures can be brought under some half-dozen heads; so also the lines
which have divided men into sorts and conditions may with advantage be obliterated,
save one great line. All men are free or serfs; all freemen are equal; all serfs are
equal:—no law of ranks can be simpler than that. In this instance they had Roman law
to help them; but even that was not simple enough for them; the notion of coloni who
are the serfs of a tenement rather than of a person, though it might seem to have so
many points of contact with the facts of English villeinage, was rejected in the name
of simplicity.96 They will carry through all complexities a maxim of their own:—the
serf is his lord’s chattel but is free against all save his lord. They reck little of the
interests of any classes, high or low; but the interests of the state, of peace and order
and royal justice are ever before them.

We have spoken at some length of the “serf-villeins” of the The number of the
thirteenth century, for they formed a very large class. For several serfs.
reasons precise calculations are impossible. In the first place,
tenure is so much more important than status, at least so much more important as a
matter of manorial economy, that the “extents” and surveys are not very careful to
separate the personally free from the personally unfree. In the second place, it is
highly probable that large numbers of men did not know on which side of the legal
gulf they stood; they and their ancestors had been doing services that were accounted
villein, paying merchet and so forth; but this was not conclusive, and if they escaped
from their lord it might be very difficult for him to prove them his “natives.” On the
other hand, while they remained in his power, they could have little hope of proving
themselves free, and if they fled they left their all behind them. In the third place, a
great part of our information comes from the estates of the wealthiest abbeys, and

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 255 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

while admitting to the full that the monks had no wish to ill-treat their peasantry, we
cannot but believe that of all lords they were the most active and most farsighted.
Lastly, we have as yet in print but little information about certain counties which we
have reason to suppose were the least tainted with servitude, about Kent (already in
Edward I.’s time it was said that no one could be born a villein in Kent97 ), about
Norfolk and Suffolk, about the Northumbrian shires. Still, when all is said, there
remain the Hundred Rolls for the counties of Bedford, Buckingham, Cambridge,
Huntingdon and Oxford, and no one can read them without coming to the conclusion
that the greater half of the rural population is unfree. The jurors of various hundreds
may tell us this in different ways; but very commonly by some name such as nativi or
servi, by some phrase about “ransom of flesh and blood” or the like, they show their
belief that taken in the lump those peasants, who are not freeholders and are not royal
sokemen, are not freemen.

Occasionally a man who was born a villein might find a grand Rise of villeins.
career open to him. It was said that John’s trusty captain Gerard
de Athée, whose name is handed down to infamy by Magna Carta, was of servile
birth;98 in 1313 the Bishop of Durham manumitted a scholar of Merton who was
already a “master”;99 in 1308 Simon of Paris, mercer and alderman, who had been
sheriff of London, was arrested as a fugitive villein, after being required to serve as
reeve of his native manor.100

§ 4.

The Religious
Another large part of medieval society is made up of men and Civil death.
women who have “entered religion and become professed,” of
monks, nuns, “regular” canons and friars who have taken vows of poverty and
obedience and quitted this world. Now a transition from the villein to the monk seems
harsh. Bracton however makes it:—the villein being under the power of his lord may,
like the monk, be considered as “civilly dead.”101 From the lawyer’s point of view
the analogy that is thus suggested will not seem altogether fanciful and profitless. It is
not as a specially holy person but as a property-less and a specially obedient person
that law knows the monk. He has no will of his own (non habet velle, neque nolle102
) because he is subject to the will of another, and, though as a matter of religion that
will may be thought of as the divine will expressed in the rule of St. Benet or St.
Bernard, still within the sphere of temporal law it is represented by the will of the
abbot. It could not be suffered that by a mere declaration of his intention to live a holy
life untroubled by mundane affairs a man should shuffle off not only the rights but the
duties that the law has cast upon him; but a vow of obedience is a different matter; it
is not very unlike a submission to slavery.

The fiction of “civil death” seems called in to explain and define Growth of the idea of
rules of law which have been gradually growing up.103 By the civil death.
dooms of Æthelred and of Cnut the cloister-monk is forbidden to
pay or to receive the feud money, that is to say, the money payable by the kindred of a

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 256 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

manslayer to the kindred of the slain, “for he leaves behind his kin-law when he
submits to rule-law”; he ceases to be a member of a natural family when he puts
himself under the monastic rule and enters a spiritual family.104 Already Alfred had
decreed that if I entrust goods to “another man’s monk” without the leave of that
monk’s “lord” and the goods are lost, I must go without remedy.105 At a later time
we find the same principle applied if the monk to whom I have entrusted the goods
denies the receipt of them, and the monk is here classed along with the slave, the wife,
the infant child. These passages presuppose that we cannot sue the monk without his
prelate, his “lord,” and they declare that the monk cannot make his prelate liable for
the safety, or the return, or the price of goods, unless he has been expressly authorized
to do so.106 But it is very doubtful whether in the days before the Conquest or even
for some years afterwards the principle that is hinted at by the term “civil death” was
rigorously enforced. The older and laxer forms of monasticism could not be overcome
by one blow. In Æthelred’s day the cloisterless monk who recked not of the rule but
was trying to make the best of both worlds was well known.107 We find too in
Domesday Book that a monk will sometimes hold land of his house, or of his abbot,
and the state seems to regard him as being the responsible tenant of that land.108

But stricter notions began to prevail and to find expression in the Meaning of civil
term “civil death.” In one large department of law the fiction is death.
elegantly maintained. A monk or nun cannot acquire or have any
proprietary rights. When a man becomes “professed in religion,” his heir at once
inherits from him any land that he has,109 and, if he has made a will, it takes effect at
once as though he were naturally dead. If after this a kinsman of his dies leaving land
which according to the ordinary rules of inheritance would descend to him, he is
overlooked as though he were no longer in the land of the living; the inheritance
misses him and passes to some more distant relative. The rule is not that what
descends to him belongs to the house of which he is an inmate; nothing descends to
him for he is already dead.110 In the eye of ecclesiastical law the monk who became
a proprietarius, the monk, that is, who arrogated to himself any proprietary rights or
the separate enjoyment of any wealth, committed about as bad an offence as he could
commit.111

A fiction, however, which would regard a living man as dead Difficulties arising
must find that limits are set to it by this material world. A monk from civil death.
does wrong or suffers wrong; we cannot treat the case as though
wrong had been done to a corpse or by a ghost. A monk of Ramsey assaults and beats
a monk of Thorney; the law is not content that the injury should go unredressed. As
regards those grave crimes which are known as felonies, the monk is dealt with as
though he were an ordained clerk; he enjoys that “benefit of clergy” of which we must
speak hereafter. For smaller offences, the “misdemeanours” of later law, monks, like
secular clerks, could be tried by the temporal courts and imprisoned.112 As to torts or
civil wrongs, the rule was that the monk could neither sue nor be sued without his
“sovereign.” The man assaulted by a monk would bring his action against that monk
and that monk’s abbot, while, if a monk were assaulted, his abbot and he could bring
the action.113 The abbot seems to have been entitled to receive any compensation that
became due for damage done to the monk, and to have been compelled to make
amends for damage that the monk did. Our law did not say that a monk could not sue

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 257 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

or be sued, it said that he could not sue or be sued without his sovereign. Nor did it
say that a wrong done to a monk was the same as a wrong done to his abbot, or that a
wrong done by a monk was the same as a wrong done by his abbot. It is not all one
whether a monk of Ramsey has beaten a monk of Thorney, or the abbot of Ramsey
has beaten the abbot of Thorney. The maxim Actio personalis moritur cum persona
seems to have been applied as though the two monks were truly personae. The action
died with the offending monk and with the offended. Often enough the analogy
afforded by the law of husband and wife is brought into the debate. A blow given by
John’s wife to Peter’s wife is not the same as a blow given by John to Peter; yet John
may have to pay money because his wife is a striker and Peter may receive money
because his wife has been stricken. If we may judge from the Year Books, a long time
elapsed before accurate rules about this matter were evolved, and perhaps some
questions were still open when the day came for the suppression of the monasteries.
But the main principle that guides our lawyers in this region is, not that the monk is
dead, but that, though he can do wrong and suffer wrong, he has not and cannot have
any property. Problems which in themselves were difficult were made yet more
difficult by the slow growth of the idea that the head of the monastery, though he is a
natural person, is also in a certain sense an immortal, non-natural person, or
“corporation sole,” and is likewise the head of a “corporation aggregate.”114

A monk could make no contract; but he was fully capable of The monk as agent.
acting as the agent of his sovereign, and even in litigation he
would often appear as the abbot’s attorney. A monk might be another man’s executor,
for the execution of testaments is a spiritual matter.115 It would be a mistake to
suppose that monks never took part in worldly affairs. The obedientiaries of a great
abbey must often have been keen men of business, largely engaged in buying and
selling, and the manorial courts of the abbey were frequently held by the cellarer or
some other person who was civilly dead. Whatever the ecclesiastical law may do, the
temporal law does not attempt to keep the monks out of courts and fairs and markets;
it merely says that a monk has not and cannot have any property of his own.

The manner in which the monks were treated by the Abbatial monarchy.
ecclesiastical law we shall not discuss; but the temporal law
seems to have assumed that every monk was the absolute subject of some
“sovereign”—normally an abbot, but in some cases a prior or a bishop.116 Whatever
degree of “constitutional government,” of government in accordance with “the rule”
or the statutes of the order, of government by an assembly, by a chapter, might prevail
within the house, was no affair of the secular power. It treated the sovereign as an
absolute monarch and would hardly be persuaded to step between him and his
subjects. Against him they could urge no complaint. We may indeed suppose that he
might have been indicted for slaying or maiming them; but even in this case he would
have enjoyed the benefit of clergy and been sent for trial to an ecclesiastical court. So
long as he did not deprive them of life or limb he committed no crime of which the
lay tribunals would take any account, and undoubtedly the penances that were
inflicted were sometimes extremely rigorous.117 According to the common law of the
church the monks might appeal from their abbot to the bishop of the diocese, but
some of the great houses were exempt from the bishop’s control and then there was
no help to be had save from Rome. Occasionally the monks would unite to resist their

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 258 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

abbot, and fierce and protracted litigation before the Roman curia would be the
result.118 But the individual monk was helpless; if he escaped from his cloister, the
temporal power would come to the aid of the church and deliver up this “apostate” to
his ecclesiastical superiors.119

Late in the day we hear discussions as to the possibility of the Return to civil life.
dead coming to life. In the fifteenth century lawyers said that,
though the “sovereign” might release the monk from his obedience, none but the pope
could restore him to the world of civil rights.120 Rules about such a point had not
been very necessary, for dispensations from monastic vows had been uncommon. Of
course in a manner the monk came back to legal life if he became the sovereign of a
religious house, still more if, as well he might, he became a bishop; but it may be
much doubted whether the lawyers of the thirteenth century would have seen in this
the new birth of a natural person. They had not drawn any clear line between
“natural” and “juristic” persons, and the monk who was elected to an abbacy became
thereby persona ecclesiae, the human representative of a personified institution. Only
by virtue of papal bull and royal charter could an abbot make a valid will, for “by the
common law an abbot cannot have property or executors.”121 We are not sure that an
abbot could have inherited from a kinsman. The dual personality of a bishop seems to
have been more readily admitted, still, as we shall remark below, there had been much
controversy as to whether a bishop had anything to leave by his will. It is not easily
that lawyers come to think of one man as two persons, or to talk of “official
capacities” and “corporations sole.”

We cannot take leave of the monks without noticing that in Civil death as a
medieval law monasticism is no such isolated phenomenon as it development of the
would be in modern law. Of course the relationship that exists abbot’s mund.
between abbot and monk is not just that which exists between
lord and villein, still less is it that which we see between husband and wife. But to
compare these three relationships together is not the mere fetch of an advocate at a
loss for arguments nor the fancy of a too subtle jurist. As a matter of history they well
may have a common element. They all may be off-shoots of one radical idea, that of
the Germanic mund, a word which we feebly render by guardianship or protection.
Certain it is that our common law of husband and wife curiously reproduces some
features of the law of abbot and monk, and we might understand the legal history of
villeinage and the legal history of monasticism the better if we brought them into
connexion with each other.

§ 5.

The Clergy
Collectively the clergy are an estate of the realm. With this Legal position of the
constitutional doctrine we are not here concerned, nor are we ordained clerk.
called upon to describe the organization of the clerical body; but,
taken individually, every ordained clerk has a peculiar legal status; he is subject to
special rules of ecclesiastical law and to special rules of temporal law. We cannot say

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 259 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

that the clerk is subject only to ecclesiastical, while the layman is subject only to
temporal law. Neither half of such a dogma would have been accepted by state or
church. Every layman, unless he were a Jew, was subject to ecclesiastical law. It
regulated many affairs of his life, marriages, divorces, testaments, intestate
succession; it would try him and punish him for various offences, for adultery,
fornication, defamation; it would constrain him to pay tithes and other similar dues; in
the last resort it could excommunicate him and then the state would come to its aid.
Even the Jews, though of course they were not members of the church, were (at least
so the clergy contended) within the sphere of ecclesiastical legislation and subject to
some of the processes of the spiritual courts.122 In general terms we can say no more
than that the ordained clerk was within many rules of ecclesiastical law which did not
affect the layman, and that it had a tighter hold over him, since it could suspend him
from office, deprive him of benefice and degrade him from his orders. So, on the
other hand, the clerk was subject to temporal law. It had some special rules for him,
but they were not many.

At the end of Henry III.’s reign, with one great and a few petty The clerk under
exceptions, the clerk was protected by and subject to the same temporal law.
rules of temporal law which guarded and governed the layman. If
a clerk was slain, wounded, robbed or assaulted, the wrong-doer would be punished
by the temporal law just as though the injured person had been of the laity. The clerk
could own chattels, he could hold land by any tenure, he could make contracts; the
temporal law protected his possession and his proprietary rights, it enforced his
contracts, without taking any note of his peculiar status. Even when he had to assert
possessory or proprietary rights which belonged to him as the rector or persona of a
church, he had to do this in the lay courts, usually by the very same actions that were
competent to laymen, but sometimes by an action specially adapted to the needs of
parsons.123 We count it no real exception that a clerk who had attained to the
subdiaconate could not marry, for the validity of any marriage was a matter for
ecclesiastical law; and on the other hand, though the canons forbad the clergy to
engage in trade, we are not aware that the lay courts attempted to enforce this rule by
holding that their trading contracts were void. Then the clerk was subject to the
temporal law. All the ordinary civil actions could be brought against him; he could be
sued on a contract, he could be sued for a tort, he could be sued as a disseisor, he
could be sued as one who held what did not belong to him, and this although he was
holding it in the name of his church. Moreover, for any crime that fell short of felony
he could be tried and punished in the common way.

There are a few small exceptions. As a general rule the Exceptional rules
ecclesiastical courts may not take cognizance of an act of applied to the clerk.
violence. If a layman is assaulted, they will be prohibited from
inflicting punishment or penance upon the offender. But violence done to the person
of a clerk is within their competence. As already said it is also within the competence
of the temporal tribunals. He who has assaulted a clerk may be fined or imprisoned
for his breach of the king’s peace; he may be compelled to pay damages for the wrong
that he has done; he may be put to penance for his sin;124 indeed he is already
excommunicate lata sententia, and, except at the hour of death, can only be absolved
by the pope or one who wields papal authority.125 In such a case the clergy do not

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 260 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

care to urge their favourite maxim that no one is to be punished twice for the same
offence. But this is a small matter. In civil causes a clerk enjoys a certain freedom
from arrest,126 but this as yet is of no great importance. On the other hand, the lay
courts have invented a special machinery for compelling the appearance of clerks who
are sued in personal actions. They direct the bishop of the diocese to produce such
clerks, and will proceed against his barony if he is negligent in this matter. For this
purpose the clergy are treated as forming part of his familia —as being within his
mund, we might say,—and the episcopal barony is a material pledge for their
appearance.127 But this again is a small matter, and is far from being a privilege of
the clergy; indeed they vigorously, but vainly, protest against this treatment.128

It remains for us to speak of the one great exception, namely, that Benefit of clergy.
which is to be known for centuries as the “benefit of clergy.”129
It comes to this, that an ordained clerk, who commits any of those grave crimes that
are known as felonies, can be tried only in an ecclesiastical court, and can be punished
only by such punishment as that court can inflict. But we must descend to particulars,
for generalities may be misleading. A clerk is charged with a murder; it is the sheriff’s
duty to arrest him. Probably his bishop will demand him. If so, he will be delivered
up; but the bishop will become bound in a heavy sum, a hundred pounds, to produce
him before the justices in eyre. The bishop can keep him in prison and very possibly
will do so, for, should he escape, the hundred pounds will be forfeited. In the middle
of the thirteenth century it is matter of complaint among the clergy that owing to this
procedure clerks may languish for five or six years in the episcopal gaol without being
brought to trial.130 At last the justices come, and this clerk is brought before them, or
some other clerk, who has not yet been arrested, is indicted or appealed before them.
In the end it comes about by one means or another that they have before them a clerk
indicted or appealed of felony. And now we may follow the words of the enrolment
that will be made:—“And the said A. B. comes and says that he is a clerk and that he
cannot— or, that he will not—answer here. And the official of the bishop of X comes
and demands him as a clerk— or, comes and craves the bishop’s court.” In Bracton’s
day the clerk will thereupon be delivered to the bishop or his officer and no inquest
will be made by the justices touching guilt or innocence.131 But before the end of
Henry III.’s reign the procedure will not be so simple.132 The roll of the court will go
on to say—“Therefore let him be delivered; but in order that it may be known in what
character (qualis) he is to be delivered [or, in order that the king’s peace may be
preserved,] let the truth of the matter be inquired of the country. And the twelve jurors
and the four neighbouring townships say upon their oath, that he is guilty, [or, not
guilty] and therefore as such let him be delivered.” In other words the justices proceed
to take “an inquest ex officio. ” This is not a trial; the clerk has not submitted to it; he
has not pleaded; but a verdict is taken. If this is favourable to the accused, he is
acquitted, at least in so far as a secular court can acquit him; but if the jurors are
against him, then he is delivered to the bishop.133 In the one case his lands and
goods, if they have been seized by the royal officers, are at once restored to him,
unless he has been guilty of flight and has thus forfeited his chattels;134 in the other
case they will be retained until he has been tried, and their fate will depend on the
result of his trial.135 For tried he has not yet been. He will be tried in the bishop’s
court.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 261 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Of what went on in the bishop’s court we unfortunately know Trial in the courts of
very little; but we have reason to believe that before the end of the church.
the century its procedure in these cases was already becoming
little better than a farce. In criminal cases the canon law had adopted the world-old
process of compurgation, and here in England the ecclesiastical courts had never
reformed away this ancient mode of proof. The blame for this should not fall wholly
upon the prelates. Very possibly the lay courts would have prevented them from
introducing in criminal cases any newer or more rational form of trial. Had any newer
form been introduced, it would have been that “inquisitorial” procedure which
historians trace to the decretals of Innocent III.136 In the twelfth century we find an
archdeacon who is accused of poisoning his archbishop directed to purge himself with
three archdeacons and four deacons.137 Lucius III. told the Bishop of Winchester that
he was too severe in investigating the character of compurgators.138 Bishop Jocelin
of Salisbury cleared himself of complicity in the murder of Becket with four or five
oath-helpers.139 Hubert Walter, sitting as archbishop, forbad that more compurgators
than the canonical twelve should be demanded.140 Shortly before this we find the
Bishop of Ely offering to prove with a hundred swearers that he took no part in the
arrest of the Archbishop of York.141 No doubt in theory the ecclesiastical judge was
not in all cases strictly bound to send the clerk to “his purgation.” If there was what
was technically known as an accusatio, a definite written charge preferred by the
person who was injured, the judge might hold that the accusation was fully proved by
the accuser’s witnesses and might convict the accused.142 But the proof required of
an accuser by the canon law was rigorous,143 and, from all we can hear, the common
practice in England seems to have been to allow the clerk to purge himself.
Archbishop Peckham at the instance of Edward I. vaguely ordered that this should not
be done too readily;144 in the middle of the fourteenth century Archbishop Islip made
a not very earnest effort for the same end;145 but the whole procedure was falling
into contempt. Already in certain bad cases the lay courts were forbidding the bishops
to admit the accused clerks to their purgation,146 that is, according to the old theory,
were forbidding that these accused clerks should be tried at all. So early as 1238 we
find the Bishop of Exeter in trouble for having sent to purgation a subdeacon who had
been outlawed on a charge of murder, and, though the clerk has purged himself, he is
compelled to abjure the realm.147 In Edward I.’s day the king’s justices could treat a
canonical purgation with the scorn that it deserved.148

If he failed in his purgation the clerk was convicted and Punishment for
punished. At least in theory there were many punishments at the felonious clerks.
bishop’s disposal. The chief limit to his power was set by the
elementary rule that the church would never pronounce a judgment of blood. He could
degrade the clerk from his orders, and, as an additional punishment, relegate him to a
monastery or keep him in prison for life. A whipping might be inflicted,149 and
Becket, it seems, had recourse even to the branding iron.150 One of the minor
questions in the quarrel between Thomas and Henry was whether an ecclesiastical
court could exile a convicted clerk or compel him to abjure the realm.151 Innocent
III. told the Bishop of London that clerks convicted of larceny or other great crimes
were to be first degraded and then closely imprisoned in monasteries.152 In 1222 a
church council under Stephen Langton seems to have condemned two of the laity to
that close imprisonment which was known as immuration; the culprits had been guilty

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 262 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

of fanatical blasphemy.153 In 1261 the constitutions of Archbishop Boniface required
that every bishop should keep a proper prison, and declared that every clerk convicted
of a capital crime should be kept in gaol for the rest of his life.154 This then was the
punishment due to felonious clerks; we fear that but few of them suffered it.

The privilege was not confined to clerks in orders, for it was What persons were
shared with them by the monks, and there seems no reason for entitled to the
doubting that nuns were entitled to the same privilege, though, to privilege.
their credit be it said, we have in our period found no cases
which prove this.155 On the other hand, it had not as yet become the privilege of
every one who could read or pretend to read a verse in the bible. The justices insist
that ordination must be proved by the bishop’s letters. It is still regarded rather as the
privilege of the church than of the accused clerk; if his bishop does not claim him he
will be kept in prison, perhaps he will be compelled, as a layman would be compelled,
to stand his trial.156 We are not able, however, to indulge the hope that the bishop
allowed the criminal law to take its course unless he had some reason for believing
that the clerk was innocent.157 The plea rolls seem to prove that his official sits day
after day in the court of the justices in eyre and as mere matter of course “demands”
every clerk who is accused; and in every eyre many clerks will be accused of the
worst crimes and their neighbours will swear that they are guilty. By marrying a
second time, or by marrying a widow, the clerk, who thus became bigamus, forfeited
his immunities:—this rule, promulgated by the council of Lyons under Gregory X.,
was at once received in England and a retrospective force was attributed to it by a
statute of Edward I.158

It is probable that already in the thirteenth century a clerk What offences were
charged with high treason, at all events with one of the worst within the privilege.
forms of high treason, such as imagining the king’s death or
levying war against him, would in vain have relied on the liberties of the church.159
There seems even to have been some doubt as to whether counterfeiting the king’s
seal was not a crime so high as to exceed the limits of the clerical immunity.160 At
the other end of the scale the clerk charged with a mere transgressio, a misdemeanour
we may say, enjoyed no exceptional privilege but could be fined or imprisoned like
another man. Henry II. within a very few years after Becket’s death and while the
whole of Christendom was ringing with the fame of the new martyr, was able to insist
with the assent of a papal legate that forest offences were not within the benefit of
clergy,161 and before the end of the next century the lay courts were habitually
punishing the clergy for their transgressiones. However, it should be understood that
the full extent of the clerical claim had been and was that, not merely every criminal
charge, but every personal action, against a clerk was a matter which lay outside the
competence of the temporal tribunal. This claim died hard; it was asserted near the
end of Henry III.’s reign by a constitution of Archbishop Boniface; Bracton had to
treat it with respect, though he rejected it. His doctrine even as to the felonies of
clerks is a curious and we may say a very unclerical one. The king’s court does not try
the accused clerk; but there is no sound principle which prevents its doing so. Still the
appropriate punishment for the felonious clerk is degradation, and this the lay tribunal
cannot inflict. The logical result of this would be that the king’s court should try the
clerk and, should he be convicted, hand him over to the ordinary, not for trial, but for

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 263 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

punishment. However at present this is not the practice.162 Probably it is in
consequence of such reasoning as this that a few years later the king’s justices will not
deliver up a clerk until they have first taken an “inquest of office” as to his guilt.
Thereby they do their best to lessen the harm that is done by an invidious and
mischievous immunity. The criminal will purge himself in the court Christian, but a
jury of his neighbours will have sworn that he is guilty. Further we must remember
that all along the justices insist that, though the clerk is not tried by a secular tribunal,
none the less he can be and ought to be accused before it, and that he can be outlawed
if he does not appear when he has been accused. In this way the criminal law has
some hold over the clerk, though for centuries yet to come the benefit of clergy will
breed crime and impede the course of reasonable and impartial justice.163

Here we might prudently leave “the benefit of clergy,” for to The Constitutions of
speak of its earlier history is to meddle with the quarrel between Clarendon.
Henry II. and Becket. Protesting however that it is not our part to
criticize men or motives or policies, we are none the less bound to state, and if
possible to answer, certain purely legal questions. These are in the main three:—(1)
What was the scheme for the treatment of criminous clerks that Henry proposed in the
most famous of the Constitutions of Clarendon? (2) What was the relation of that
scheme to the practice of his ancestors? (3) What was its relation to the law of the
catholic church as understood in the year 1164?

(1) To the first question our answer will be brief.164 We must Henry II.’s scheme.
admit that historians have read the celebrated clause165 in
various ways; but for our own part we cannot doubt that it means this:—A clerk who
is suspected of a crime is to be brought before the temporal court and accused there;
unless he will admit the truth of the charge, he must in formal terms plead his
innocence; this done, he will be sent to the ecclesiastical court for trial; if found guilty
he is to be deposed from his orders and brought back to the temporal court; royal
officers will have been present at his trial and will see that he does not make his
escape; when they have brought him back to the temporal court, he will
then—perhaps without any further trial, but this is not clear—be sentenced to the
layman’s punishment, to death or mutilation. Henry does not claim a right to try or to
pronounce judgment upon the criminous clerk; on the contrary, he admits that the trial
must take place in the ecclesiastical court; but he does insist upon three principles: (i)
that the accusation must be made in the lay court, which will thus obtain seisin of the
cause and be enabled to watch its further progress; (ii) that royal officers are to be
present at the trial; (iii) that the clerk—or rather the layman, for such he will really
be—who has been deposed from his orders for a crime, can be punished for that crime
by the temporal power.166

To this scheme Becket objected in the name of the church’s law, and it is certain that
he objected, not merely to the first two of these three rules, but also to the third, and
this on the ground that it would punish a man twice over for one offence and thus
infringe the maxim, Nec enim Deus iudicat bis in idipsum.167

(2) We turn to our second question. Did this scheme fairly represent the practice of
Henry I.’s day?

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 264 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

We note that it does not profess to represent the practice of Henry’s scheme and
Stephen’s day. For legal purposes Stephen’s reign is to be past history.
ignored, not because he was an usurper, but because it was a time
of war and of “unlaw.” Sixty years later this doctrine still prevails; a litigant cannot
rely on what happened in Stephen’s reign, for it was not a time of peace.168 Still,
though the son of the Empress is but applying a general doctrine to a particular case,
his pregnant assertion that the constitutions express his grandfather’s customs seems
an admission that those customs had in some particulars gone out of use under his
immediate predecessor.

So sparse is the evidence directly bearing on this question that Henry’s allegations
we gladly catch at any admission made by either of the parties to not contested.
the quarrel, and we may not unfairly urge that in this case
judgment should go by default. Henry did assert repeatedly and emphatically with the
concurrence of his barons and with the approval of many bishops that he was but
restoring the old customs. Becket and his friends, so far as we can see, would not
meet this allegation.169 When one of the martyr’s biographers reminds us that Christ
said, not “I am the custom,” but “I am the truth,” we cannot but infer that on the
question of fact Henry was substantially in the right. The archbishop and his partizans
are fond of speaking of “the so-called customs,” as “pravities” and “abuses”; but they
will not meet the king on his own ground.170

This premised, we look for direct evidence to the reigns of the Earlier law. The
Norman kings. First we read how the Conqueror ordained that no Conqueror’s
bishop or archdeacon should administer the episcopal laws in the ordinance.
hundred court, nor bring to the judgment of secular men any
cause relating to the rule of souls. Such causes the bishops are to decide, not
according to hundred law, but according to the canons and the episcopal laws. The
secular power is to aid the church against those whom she has excommunicated. The
conduct of the ordeal as a specially ecclesiastical process is declared to be the
bishop’s business.171 This tells us little that is to our point. William assumes that all
men know what causes are spiritual, what secular. The only matter on which he
speaks definitely is the ordeal, and here the two powers will cooperate harmoniously;
the bishop will preside at the ceremony, but doubtless the order that sends a man to
the fire or to the water will, at least in very many cases, be the order of the hundred
court. Of any immunity of clerks from secular jurisdiction or temporal punishment
there is no word.

The author of the Leges Henrici is already borrowing from The Leges Henrici.
foreign canonists and we cannot tell how far he is stating
customs that actually prevail in England. He says plainly enough that no accusation,
be it for grave crime, be it for light offence, is to be brought against any ordained
clerk save before his bishop.172 This certainly is at variance with one part of Henry
II.’s claim, for Henry insisted that the first step in a criminal cause should be taken in
the king’s court; but it does not touch the greater question of double punishment.

We turn from general statements to recorded cases. We can find Precedents for the
very few. Most of them may be called “state trials,” and it is not trial of clerks.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 265 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

to state trials that we can trust for impartial applications of medieval law; but
Domesday Book seems to tell of a clerk who was in peril of death or mutilation, for
his body was in the king’s mercy.173 Lanfranc had no difficulty in advising the
Conqueror that he might condemn his half-brother Odo to imprisonment and
disherison on a charge of rebellion and treason, though Odo pleaded an immunity
from secular justice.174 The king, so the great lawyer thought, might distinguish
between the Earl of Kent and the Bishop of Bayeux though these two persons
happened to be one man. But the case is not decisive, for the punishment did not
touch life or member, and very probably Lanfranc could have shown to the
satisfaction of all canonists that the warlike Odo had forfeited every clerical privilege
by his scandalously military life.175 Of the trial of Bishop William of Durham for a
treacherous rebellion against Rufus a long and lively report has come down to us.176
The bishop repeatedly and in strong, clear terms asserted his exemption from
temporal justice:—he should be tried according to the sacred canons in a canonically
constituted court. It will not satisfy him that among his judges there are his own
metropolitan and the Archbishop of Canterbury and many bishops, for they are not
clad in their episcopal vestments, they are mixed up with the lay nobles and are sitting
under the king’s presidency. Lanfranc baffles and defeats him; judgment is
pronounced upon him and pronounced by a layman, Hugh of Beaumont. The bishop
appealed to Rome, but never prosecuted his appeal. Here the sentence merely was that
the bishop’s fief was forfeited, and the severest canonist could not deny that a purely
feudal cause was within the competence of the king’s court, nor perhaps could he
have refuted Lanfranc’s opinion that if, after the judgment of forfeiture, the bishop
would not surrender his fief, he might lawfully be arrested.177 Still less can be made
of King Stephen’s proceedings against Bishop Roger of Salisbury, his nephews and
his son. The king took advantage of an affray between the men of the bishops and the
men of Earl Alan; he impleaded the bishops because their men had broken his peace,
and by way of satisfaction demanded a surrender of their castles. This they refused.
He then imprisoned them, maltreated them in gaol and went so far as to put a rope
round the chancellor’s neck; he thus obtained the desired fortresses. An ecclesiastical
council held by his brother, the legate, cited him; the immunity of clerks was strongly
asserted; the king’s proceedings were condemned, and it is even said that he did
penance for them; also at one time or another he appealed to Rome; but he kept the
castles.178 However, before this Stephen had made a momentous concession: he had
sworn that justice and power over ecclesiastical persons and over all clerks and their
possessions should belong to the bishops; and by this oath he must, so we think, be
taken to have admitted whatever claims of immunity could be fairly made in the name
of canon law.179 Then concerning the treatment of criminous clerks in his reign we
have a valuable story, which John of Salisbury, writing in the name of Archbishop
Theobald, reported to the pope. Osbert, an archdeacon, was accused of having
poisoned Archbishop William of York. The charge was preferred by a clerk who had
been in the service of the dead prelate. It was made in the presence of King Stephen
and the bishops and barons of England. The accuser was ready to prove his case by
the hot iron or the boiling water, by battle, or by any other proof. Osbert relied on his
clerical privilege and refused to be judged by laymen. Pledges were given on both
sides for the further prosecution of the suit; they were given to the king, for the king
insisted that, because of the atrocity of the crime and because it was in his presence
that the accusation had been made, the case was within his jurisdiction. We and our

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 266 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

brethren, says Theobald, protested. Now Stephen is dead and we have had the utmost
difficulty in getting Osbert out of King Henry’s hands. We ordered him to purge
himself; but he has appealed to you.180

From such isolated instances as these it would be impossible to Summary.
extract any definite results for the history of law; but, while they
are not inconsistent with Henry’s allegation about the customs of his grandfather, they
seem to show that the canonical trial, which Henry was willing to grant, had not
always been granted, even by Stephen.181 As to the law that prevailed in England
before the Conquest little is known and little could be profitably said in this context,
for the Conqueror’s ordinance must be treated as the beginning of a new era.182
However, when King Alfred ordains that the man-slaying priest is to be unhallowed
by his bishop and then delivered up from the church, unless his lord will compound
for the wergild, he is laying down one of the main principles for which Henry
contended.183 If we would pursue the question behind the Norman Conquest, it is
much rather the law of France than the law of England that should be studied. At least
in this matter the Conqueror was an innovator, and the terms which he made with
those who were to be the rulers of the English church were terms made by one who
was not an Englishman with those who were not Englishmen. The early history of
clerical privileges on the continent of Europe is a long and a dark tale and one that we
cannot pretend to tell. Henry II.’s scheme was not unlike that which Justinian had
sanctioned.184 In Henry’s day this resemblance was perceived by the learned and was
much in his favour:—he was offering the clergy what the leges, the almost sacred
leges, gave them.185 But the practice which had prevailed in Gaul was connected
rather with the Theodosian Code than with Justinian’s legislation, and under the
Merovingian and Karlovingian kings the Frankish clergy had not been able to obtain
such liberal terms as Henry was willing to concede at Clarendon.186 During the age
which saw the Pseudo-Isidore and his fellows at their work, the age which leads up to
the pontificate of Gregory VII., the clerical claims were advancing. We think it very
possible that Lanfranc would have demanded and the Conqueror conceded the general
principle that the trial of the accused clerk must take place before the spiritual forum;
but we may well doubt whether more than this would have been conceded or even
demanded, whether as much as this could always be obtained. Of what happened
during Stephen’s troubled reign we know too little, but the clerical claims were still
advancing, were taking an accurate shape in the Decretum Gratiani, and it is not
unlikely that Stephen was forced to allow that only before a spiritual court can a clerk
be accused, though from this rule he might hope to maintain some exceptions.187

(3) This leads us to our third question: Was Becket compelled by Henry’s scheme and
the law of the church, as it was understood in the year 1164, to canon law.
reject Henry’s constitution? We must distinguish. There were
two particulars in the plan, to which a canonist bred in the school of Gratian was
entitled and bound to refuse his assent.188 A clerk in orders ought not to be accused
of crime before the temporal judge, and the mission of royal officers to the church’s
court can be regarded as an insult to the church’s justice. We cannot say that these
matters were matters of detail; Henry thought them of grave importance; but they
become insignificant when set beside the question of double punishment. Now as
regards this vital point, Becket propounded a doctrine which, so far as we are aware,

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 267 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

had neither been tolerated by the state nor consecrated by the church. He asserted that
the state must not punish the criminous clerk for that crime for which he has already
suffered degradation. In 1164 a good deal had lately been written about this matter by
the most renowned canonists of the age. We do not say that there was no room for
doubt; there were obscure passages in the Decretum which needed comment; but we
can say that two of the most famous masters of the canon law had considered and
overruled the opinion of St. Thomas, while we can name no writer who had
maintained it. What is more, that opinion, though owing to his martyrdom it was
suffered to do immeasurable mischief in England by fostering crime and crippling
justice, was never consistently maintained by the canonists; had it been maintained,
no deposed or degraded clerk would ever have been handed over to the lay power as a
heretic or a forger of papal bulls. As a general principle of law, Becket’s theory about
double punishment was condemned by Innocent III.; the decree which condemns it is
to this day part of the statute law of the catholic church.189

Curiously enough that point in Henry’s scheme which in the eyes of the canonist must
have seemed the least defensible, was successfully defended. As we have seen, his
successors maintained the rule that clerks can be haled before the king’s justices and
accused of capital crimes. On the other hand, the not uncanonical principle which
would have brought back the degraded clerk to hear a sentence in the royal court was
abandoned. The result was lamentable.

One small matter remains to be noticed. It has sometimes been The murderers of
assumed by English writers that the clergy were willing to admit clerks.
a certain measure of reciprocity, that they were willing that their
own lives should be protected only by ecclesiastical law and ecclesiastical tribunals
and that this is proved by the fate of the archbishop’s murderers. Now it is true that a
clerk was forbidden by the law of the church to go before a lay court and seek a
judgment of blood; but to say this is one thing, to say that the lay murderer of a clerk
is not to be punished by the lay prince is quite another thing, and we are not persuaded
that any one ever said it except when he was in a logical strait. As we read the
chronicles, Henry was blamed by his contemporaries for not having brought the
murderers to justice and put them to death, though it was admitted by some that he
was in a very awkward position:—he would be blamed if he let them escape, he
would be blamed if he punished them, for this would be casting upon them the burden
of a crime of which in common opinion he himself was not guiltless. He thought it
best that they should go to the pope.190 Afterwards he declared that he had been
unable to arrest them.191 It would seem indeed that for a very few years some
English ecclesiastics were driven by the stress of Becket’s logic to say that they would
be content if the murderers of clerks were handed over to the mild judgments of the
church; or perhaps the true story is that this assertion was put into their mouths as a
reductio ad absurdum of their demands by those who, though clerks and bishops,
were the king’s clerks. At any rate very soon after the martyrdom Archbishop
Richard, the martyr’s successor, wrote to three of the martyr’s most deadly foes, who
were by this time three prelates of the English church and the three principal justices
of King Henry’s court, he wrote to Richard of Ilchester, John of Oxford and Geoffrey
Ridel, and told them that the doctrine which would deal thus tenderly with lay
offenders was a damnable opinion and utterly at variance with canon law.192

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 268 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Repudiating the line of argument favoured by his sainted predecessor, he assured his
three suffragans that a layman might be first excommunicated by the church and then
hanged by the state without being punished twice for one offence.193 Henry could
now make terms; he had something to sell. In 1176 a papal legate conceded that he
might punish clerks for breaches of the forest law, and in return the king granted that
the lives of clerks should be protected as well as, or even better than, the lives of
laymen.194

§ 6.

Aliens
When our common law issues from the middle ages both its tests The classical common
of nationality and its treatment of aliens are hardly such as we law.
might have expected them to be.

1. As regards the definition of the two great classes of men Who are aliens?
which have to be distinguished from each other, the main rule is
very simple. The place of birth is all-important. A child born within any territory that
is subject to the king of England is a natural-born subject of the king of England, and
is no alien in England. On the other hand, with some exceptions, every child born
elsewhere is an alien, no matter the nationality of its parents.

The full extent of the first half of this rule was settled in 1608 by the famous decision
in Calvin’s case:—a child born in Scotland after the moment when King James the
Sixth became King James the First is no alien in England.195 The decision was one
which pleased the king and displeased many of his subjects; but no other judgment
could have been given, unless many precedents derived from times when our kings
had large territories on the continent of Europe had been disregarded.

The other half of the rule takes us back to the middle of the fourteenth century. In
1343 a great debate has sprung up among men of the law and others as to the national
character of the children born to English parents in foreign parts. The king seems to
fear that this may touch even the succession to the throne; the prelates and barons
reassure him; there never has been any doubt that the king’s children wherever born
are capable of inheriting from their ancestors. But as regards other children they
hesitate. It is agreed in parliament that children “born in the king’s service,” no matter
the place of their birth, can inherit; but time is short, this difficult matter requires
further discussion, and so it is also agreed that no statute shall be made upon the
present occasion.196 Then in 1350 the debate is resumed. Once more there is a
solemn protest that as to the king’s children there is not and has never been any doubt
at all. For the rest, it is ordained by statute that “children born without the ligeance of
the king, whose fathers and mothers at the time of their birth be and shall be at the
faith and ligeance of the king of England, shall have and enjoy the same benefits and
advantages to have and bear inheritance within the same ligeance as [certain children
in whose favour this rule was being retrospectively applied], so always that the
mothers of such children do pass the sea by the licence and wills of their

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 269 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

husbands.”197 Certain children already born, were then declared capable of
inheriting. The inference which we should draw from the proceedings of 1343 and
1350 is that the parliament thought that it was defining a somewhat debatable point in
the common law, not that it was introducing a new rule. There is very little in the
earlier Year Books that bears on this point: just enough, it may be, to suggest that the
usual forms of pleading threw difficulties in the way of any one born “out of the
king’s ligeance,” and that “the king’s ligeance” was regarded as a geographical
tract.198

2. An alien cannot hold land in England. If the person to whom Disabilities of the
land would descend according to the common rules of alien.
inheritance is an alien, it misses him and passes to some remoter
kinsman of the dead man. If, on the other hand, an alien obtains land by gift, sale,
lease or the like, the transaction is not a nullity, but the king can seize the land and
keep it for himself. Late in the middle ages we hear of a narrow exception:—an alien
merchant may hire a house for the purposes of his trade.199 Also it is said that an
alien may have goods and chattels; he may make a will of them, and, should he die
intestate, they will be administered for the benefit of his kinsfolk. But it is very
noticeable that according to Littleton an alien can bring no action whether real or
personal, and when his great commentator explains this to mean that no alien can
bring a real action, that no alien enemy can bring a personal action, but that an alien
whose sovereign is in league with our own may bring personal actions, we cannot but
feel that this is a bold treatment of a carefully worded text.200

3. Nothing short of a statute can give to an alien all the rights of a Naturalization.
natural born subject; but some of these can be conferred by the
king’s letters patent making the alien a “denizen.” A denizen thus made can hold land,
and he can acquire land by gift, sale or the like, but he cannot inherit, and a child of
his born before the act of denization cannot inherit from him.201

Now there is room for serious doubt whether these rules can be Law of earlier times.
traced far beyond the end of the thirteenth century. Very ancient
law may regard every stranger as an enemy; but it will lay far more stress upon purity
of blood than on place of birth; it will be tribal rather than territorial law. At a later
time the friendly stranger will have no strict legal rights, no rights given him by the
folk-law, but will live under the protection, the mund, of the ruler or some other great
man. There is much in the treatment received by Jews and foreign merchants in the
thirteenth century which suggests this doctrine. But feudalism is opposed to tribalism
and even to nationalism: we become a lord’s subjects by doing homage to him, and
this done, the nationality of our ancestors and the place of our birth are insignificant.
The law of feudal contract attempts for a while to swallow up all other law. In
England, however, a yet mightier force than feudalism came into play. A foreigner at
the head of an army recruited from many lands conquered England, became king of
the English, endowed his followers with English lands. For a long time after this there
could be little law against aliens, there could hardly be such a thing as English
nationality. Even had the king claimed a right to seize the lands of aliens, he would
not have exercised it. Again, the territory within which, according to later law,
subjects would be born to the king of England, was large; under Henry II. it became

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 270 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

vast. It comprehended Ireland; at times (to say the least) it comprehended Scotland; it
stretched to the Pyrenees. Then again, the law even of Bracton’s day acknowledged
that a man might be a subject of the French king and hold land in France and yet be a
subject of the English king and hold land in England. It was prepared to meet the case
of a war between the two kings: the amphibious baron must fight in person for his
liege lord, but he must also send his due contingent of knights to the opposite
army.202 In generation after generation a Robert Bruce holds land on both sides of
the Scottish border; no one cares to remember on which side of it he was born.203
Simon de Montfort obtained the Leicester inheritance; where he was born historians
cannot tell us; it matters not. He obtained the Leicester inheritance though his elder
brother Almaric was living. Almaric was adhering to the French king, the enemy of
our king, and that might be a good reason for passing him by; but Almaric must
solemnly resign his claim before Simon’s can be entertained.204

It is, we believe, in the loss of Normandy that our law of aliens Growth of the law
finds its starting point. In the first place, John seized the lands of disabling aliens.
those of his nobles who adhered to Philip, and preferred to be
French rather than English. This was a forfeiture for treason. At the same time we see
traces of that curious dislike of perpetual disherison which meets us in other quarters.
Some of these lands, the terraeNormannorum, are given to new tenants in fee simple,
but subject to a proviso that they may be taken away again if ever the Normans come
back to their allegiance.205 In the second place, a permanent relation of warfare is
established between England and France. It endures from the beginning of John’s
reign until 1259 when Henry resigned his claim to Normandy. True that during this
long half-century there was very little fighting and there were many truces; but all
along the English theory was that Henry was by right Duke of Normandy and Count
of Anjou, that the king of France was deforcing him of his inheritance, and that the
day would come when the rebellious, or the invaded, provinces would obey their
lawful lord. Thus a man who is living in obedience to the king of France is an enemy.
If, says Bracton, such an one claims land against you, you may except against him;
your exception however is not “peremptory,” it is “dilatory”; it may lose its force
when our king enjoys his own again.206 What he says is fully borne out by recorded
cases from the early years of Henry III. A claimant of land is met, not by the simple
“You are an alien,” but by the far more elaborate “You are within the power of the
king of France and resident in France, and it has been provided by the council of our
lord the king that no subject of the king of France is to be answered in England until
Englishmen are answered in France.”207 Then Matthew Paris tells us how in 1244
Saint Louis, urging that “no man may serve two masters,” insisted that all persons
living in France must make choice between him and Henry, how Henry retorted by
seizing the English lands of the Frenchmen, especially of the Normans, without giving
them any chance of choosing an English nationality, and how Louis treated this retort
as a breach of truce.208

Blackstone is at no loss for reasons why an alien should not hold The king and the
land in England, but when he has to explain why the king should alien.
seize the land which aliens acquire, we feel that he is in
difficulties. He suggests that this forfeiture “is intended by way of punishment for the
alien’s presumption in attempting to acquire any landed property.”209 The truth

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 271 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

seems to be that in the course of the thirteenth century our kings acquired a habit of
seizing the lands of Normans and other Frenchmen. The Normans are traitors; the
Frenchmen are enemies. All this will be otherwise if a permanent peace is ever
established. But that permanent peace never comes, and it is always difficult to obtain
a restoration of lands which the king has seized. France is the one foreign country that
has to be considered in this context; Germans and Italians come here as merchants,
but they have no ancestral claims to urge and do not want English lands, while as to
Scotland, owing to the English king’s claim to an overlordship or to some other
reason, Balliols and Bruces hold land on both sides of the border until a long war
breaks out between the two countries. To us it seems that the king’s claim to seize the
lands of aliens is an exaggerated generalization of his claim to seize the lands of his
French enemies. Such an exaggerated generalization of a royal right will not seem
strange to those who have studied the growth of the king’s prerogatives.210

And so too Bracton’s “dilatory exception” becomes peremptory: Growth of the king’s
“You are an alien and your king is at war with our king” claim to the alien’s
becomes “You are an alien.” An English nation is gradually land.
forming itself. Already there is a cry of “England for the
English.” The king’s foreign favourites are detested; glad enough would Englishmen
be if he would but seize their lands impartially and indiscriminately, and never endow
another alien, be he Norman or Poitevin or Savoyard, with another inch of land. A
trace of this feeling we may see when Bracton says that while the state of war endures
the king cannot enable the alien to bring an action.211 Probably in Edward I.’s day
the law is, not merely that an alien enemy cannot sue, but that an alien cannot acquire
land. A curious story comes to us which is worthy of repetition. A tenant in chief of
the crown died leaving two co-heiresses; King Henry granted the wardship and
marriage of these two young ladies to Elyas de Rabayn; Elyas took one of them to
wife and sent the other to be married beyond the seas so that he might obtain the
whole inheritance. In 1290 her son, though born abroad, claimed his mother’s share;
and claimed it successfully. The court defeated the scheme of the fraudulent guardian,
but declared that its judgment was to form no precedent in favour of other aliens.212
From Edward’s day also we have letters of denization or of naturalization: the two
would hardly as yet be distinguished. Though Elyas Daubeny was born beyond the
seas, the king holds him for a pure Englishman and wills that he shall be held as such
by all men and that he may sue in all courts notwithstanding any “exception” of
alienage.213

The law of Henry III.’s reign has to deal as a matter of fact with The kinds of aliens.
two and only two great classes of aliens. The first consists of
Frenchmen who have claims to English lands. Such claims are in some cases
ancestral, and these, as we have seen, cannot be heard while there is war or an abiding
cause for war between France and England. In other cases the claimants are recipients
of royal favours; they are the king’s half-brothers, the queen’s uncles or the attendants
of these exalted persons; the king gives them lands and, except at a revolutionary
moment, they hold their lands safely; some of them were born in provinces which de
iure (so Englishmen think) belong to the king; all of them by doing homage to the
king become his men, and this must be naturalization enough. The other great class

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 272 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

consists of alien merchants; they do not come here to settle; they do not want land;
they would be well content were they permitted to lodge where they pleased.

Mere common law has little to do with these foreign merchants. The alien merchant.
Their business takes them into the chartered towns. The law
under which they live is a mesh of privileges and of privileges that are hardly
consistent. They themselves will have charters derived from the king; but they will be
living in boroughs which have charters derived from the king, and first and foremost
among the rights for which the burghers long is the right of confining the activity of
foreign merchants within narrow bounds. The conflict goes on with varying fortunes
from century to century. On the whole the king, the prelates and barons support the
merchants; they are useful, they lend money, they lower prices, they will pay for
favours; but often a weak king must give way and yield to the complaints of the
burghers. Already the Great Charter provides that merchants may freely enter and
dwell in and leave the realm; but the same Great Charter confirms all the ancient
liberties and customs of London and the other boroughs, and thus takes away with one
hand what it gives with the other.214 The burghers have a very strong opinion that
their liberties and customs are infringed if a foreign merchant dwells within their
walls for more than forty days, if he hires a house, if he fails to take up his abode with
some reponsible burgher, if he sells in secret, if he sells to foreigners, if he sells in
detail. In Henry III.’s day the struggle is but beginning. It reaches the first of its many
climaxes in 1303 when Edward I. grants the great Carta Mercatoria.215 It will
interest rather the economist than the lawyer, and rather the student of the fourteenth
and fifteenth centuries than the student of earlier times.216

We may perhaps regard Coke’s doctrine that the alien friend is The alien and
protected by “personal actions” as ancient common law. In common law.
Edward I.’s day we even find that an Italian merchant resident in
England, who as a Ghibelline had been ejected from his house in Florence by
victorious Guelfs, hoped to recover damages for this wrong in the courts of the king
of England; he failed, because “it is not the custom of England that any one should
answer in England for a trespass committed in a foreign country in time of war or in
any other manner.”217 The Carta Mercatoria of Edward I., the validity of which did
not pass unquestioned, and statutes of Edward III. secured to aliens the benefit of a
jury composed wholly or in part of aliens.218 In 1454 it is said that a foreign
merchant may hire a house and defend his possession of it by an action of
trespass.219 If we suppose this to have been ancient common law, still it must have
been law which had but little chance of asserting itself; the burghers have steadily
fought against it and very commonly have been successful.220 Littleton’s bold
assertion that an alien can bring no action real or personal may be less open to
exception than his commentator supposed,221 for in Littleton’s day we hear that the
proper court for aliens who have come here under the king’s safe conduct is the Court
of Chancery; “they are not bound to sue according to the law of the land, nor to abide
the trial by twelve men and other solemnities of the law of the land, but shall sue in
the Chancery and the matter shall be determined by the law of nature.”222 This is a
doctrine characteristic of the fifteenth century. But all along it is as men privileged by
the king rather than as men subject to ordinary law, that the foreign merchants get a
hearing. They can seldom make their way to the king’s justices because the courts of

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 273 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

the towns in which they live claim an exclusive cognizance of actions brought against
the burgesses, and when the foreigners do get to the royal courts there is a contest
between privilege and privilege. Probably the king can banish them at any time; his
loyal subjects in the boroughs would not be sorry if he did, for these aliens are always
taking the bread out of the mouths of honest folk. Then, at least in the thirteenth
century, the common belief is that they are all usurers and therefore living in mortal
sin. We are told that in 1240 Henry III. banished the so-called Caursini; but that they
only lay hid for a time, the king conniving at their presence. A little while afterwards
they are acquiring splendid palaces in London; no one dares attack them, for they call
themselves the pope’s merchants; now and again the king will imprison a few, to the
delight of their Jewish rivals; but he is half-hearted. And so there is little common law
for these people.223

Ought we to reckon merchants of all kinds, English and foreign, Has the merchant a
as forming one of the sorts or conditions of men known to the peculiar status?
law? Hardly, though as the historian of our constitution has
shown, they nearly become for political purposes one of the estates of the realm.224
Still they do not become this. Then in private law “merchantship,” if we may make
that word, seems too indefinite and also seems to have too few legal consequences to
permit of our calling it a status. We might illustrate this from modern law. Until lately
no one but “a trader” could be made bankrupt; still we should hardly say that in 1860
“tradership” was a status. There was, so far as we are aware, but this one rule which
marked off the “trader” from the “non-trader,” and a man became and ceased to be a
trader without any solemnity by a process that we may call indefinite, though a court
of law might have had to decide whether at a given moment that process had been
accomplished.

Before the end of the thirteenth century “the law merchant” was The law merchant
already conceived as a body of rules which stood apart from the
common law.225 But it seems to have been rather a special law for mercantile
transactions than a special law for merchants. It would we think have been found
chiefly to consist of what would now be called rules of evidence, rules about the proof
to be given of sales and other contracts, rules as to the legal value of the tally and the
God’s penny; for example, the law merchant took one view of the effect of an
“earnest,” the common law another. These special mercantile rules were conceived as
being specially known to merchants; in the courts of fairs and markets the assembled
merchants declare the law; in Edward II.’s day twelve merchants are summoned from
each of four cities to testify before the king’s bench about a doubtful point in the “lex
mercatoria.” Also these rules are not conceived to be purely English law; they are, we
may say, a ius gentium known to merchants throughout Christendom, and could we
now recover them we might find some which had their origin on the coasts of the
Mediterranean. But this is not the place for their discussion, for we take the law
merchant to be not so much the law for a class of men as the law for a class of
transactions.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 274 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

§ 7.

The Jews226
The Jew came to England in the wake of the Norman Conqueror. General idea of the
That no Israelites had ever dwelt in this country before the year Jew’s position.
1066 we dare not say; but if so, they have left no traces of their
presence that are of any importance to us.227 They were brought hither from
Normandy, brought hither as the king’s dependants and (the word will hardly be too
strong) the king’s serfs. In the first half of the twelfth century their condition was thus
described by the author of the Leges Edwardi in a passage which suggests that among
the regalia to which the Norman barons aspired was the privilege of keeping Jews of
their own:—“It is to be known that all the Jews wheresoever they be in the realm are
under the liege wardship and protection of the king; nor may any of them without the
king’s licence subject himself to any rich man, for the Jews and all that they have are
the king’s, and should any one detain them or their chattels, the king may demand
them as his own.”228 This gives us one of the two main ideas that our law in later
times has about the Jew:—he with all that he has belongs to the king. Bracton puts the
same thought in these words:—“The Jew can have nothing that is his own, for
whatever he acquires, he acquires, not for himself, but for the king; for the Jews live
not for themselves but for others, and so they acquire not for themselves but for
others.”229 The other main idea is one which will not seem strange to us after what
we have said of villeinage. This servility is a relative servility; in relation to all men,
save the king, the Jew is free. He will require some special treatment, for if he is to be
here at all and do any good, he must be allowed to do things that are forbidden to
Christians, notably to take interest on money lent. And courts of justice must pay
some regard to his religion; for example, they must suffer him to swear upon the roll
of the law instead of the gospels; but in general, if his royal master’s interests are not
concerned, he is to be dealt with as though he were a Gentile. A third principle is
accepted—the Jews themselves would desire its acceptance—namely, that when the
interests of neither the king nor any other Christian are concerned, the Jews may
arrange their own affairs and settle their own disputes in their own way and by their
own Hebrew law.230

For about a century and a half they were an important element in The exchequer of the
English history. In spite of the king’s exactions and of occasional Jews.
outbursts of popular fury, they throve. They were wealthy; they
bore an enormous weight of taxation.231 We may say that at times they “financed”
the kingdom; there were few great nobles who had not at one time or another
borrowed money from the Israelite, and paid the two pence per pound per week that
was charged by way of usury. What the great folk did, the smaller folk did also. This
money-lending business required some governmental regulation. In the first place, the
king had a deep interest in it, for whatever was owed to a Jew was potentially owed to
the king, and he would naturally desire to have ready at hand written evidence that he
could use against his debtors. In the second place, this matter could hardly be left to
the ordinary English tribunals. For one thing, they would do but scant justice to the
Jew, and therefore but scant justice to the king, who stood behind the Jew. For another

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 275 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

thing, it is highly probable that the Jewish “gage” was among Englishmen a novel and
an alien institution, since it broke through the old law by giving rights in land to a
creditor who did not take possession. In 1194 therefore an edict was issued about
these Jewish loans.232 In every town in which the Jews lived, an office, as we should
say, was established for the registration of their deeds. All loans and payments of
loans were to be made under the eye of certain officers, some of them Christians,
some of them Jews, and a copy or “part” of every deed was to be deposited in an
“ark” or chest under official custody. A few years later a department of the royal
exchequer— the exchequer of the Jews—was organized for the supervision of this
business.233 At its head were a few “Justices of the Jews.” We hear for a while that
some of these justices are themselves Jews, and all along Jews filled subordinate
offices in the court; and this was necessary, for many of the documents that came
before it were written in the Hebrew language. This exchequer of the Jews was, like
the great exchequer, both a financial bureau and a judicial tribunal. It managed all the
king’s transactions—and they were many—with the Jews, saw to the exaction of
tallages, reliefs, escheats and forfeitures, and also acted judicially, not merely as
between king and Jew, but also as between king and Gentile when, as often happened,
the king had for some cause or another “seized into his hand” the debts due to one of
his Jews by Christian debtors. Also it heard and determined all manner of disputes
between Jew and Christian. Such disputes, it is true, generally related to loans of
money, but the court seems to have aimed at and acquired a competence, and an
exclusive competence, in all causes whether civil or criminal in which a Jew was
implicated, unless it was some merely civil cause between two Hebrews which could
be left to a purely Jewish tribunal. For this reason we can read very little of the Jews
in the records of any other court, and until such rolls of the Jewish exchequer as exist
have been published, we shall be more ignorant than we ought to be.234

The system could not work well; it oppressed both Jew and Vice of the law
Englishmen. Despised and disliked the once chosen people applied to Jews.
would always have been in a society of medieval Christians;
perhaps they would have been accused of crucifying children and occasionally
massacred; but they would not have been so persistently hated as they were, had they
not been made the engines of royal indigence. From the middle of the thirteenth
century onwards the king was compelled to rob them of their privileges, to forbid
them to hold land, to forbid them even to take interest.235 This last prohibition could
not be carried into effect; there was little or nothing that the Jews could profitably do
if they were cut off from lending money. Their expulsion in 1290 looks like the only
possible solution of a difficult problem.

A few more words may be said about their legal condition for it was curious and may
serve to illustrate some general principles of our medieval law.

The Jew’s relation to the king is very much like the villein’s Relation of the Jew to
relation to his lord. In strictness of law whatever the Jew has the king.
belongs to the king; he “acquires for the king” as the villein
“acquires for his lord.” But, just as the lord rarely seizes his villein’s chattels save for
certain reasons, so the king rarely seizes the Jew’s chattels save for certain reasons;
until the seizure has been made, the villein or the Jew is treated as an owner and can

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 276 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

behave as such. Again, as the lord is wont to be content with the customary services,
heriots, merchets and so forth of his villeins and to tallage them only at regular
intervals, so the king, unless he is in some unusual strait, will treat his Jews by
customary rules; for example he will not exact from the heir by way of relief more
than one-third of the inheritance.236 The king respects the course and practice of his
Scaccarium Iudaeorum, the custom of his Jewry, much as the lord respects the custom
of the manor. Again, the king does justice upon and between his Jews, as the lord
does justice upon and between his villeins. The maxim that what is the Jew’s is the
king’s is not infringed when the king after a judicial hearing decides that for a certain
offence a certain Jew must pay a certain sum, and just so the lord keeps in the
background his right to seize all the goods of every villein while his court is
condemning this or that villein to a fine, a forfeiture or an amercement. Again, the
king can grant privileges to his Jews— Henry II. gave them a charter and John a
magnificent charter—without emancipating them or fundamentally changing their
legal condition.237 Lastly the lord when his own interests are not at stake is content
that his villeins should settle their own disputes in their own way under the
supervision of his steward, and so the king is content that, as between Jews, Jewish
law shall be administered by Jewish judges.

The analogy may not be perfect. It is but too possible that in his The Jew’s servility.
dealings with his Jews the king’s rapacity was checked by few
considerations that were not prudential, and that the course and practice of his Jewry
extracted from them the utmost that a farsighted selfishness could allow itself to
demand. The villein was a Christian; the custom of the manor had ancient roots and
was closely akin to the common law. The relation between king and Jew was new, at
least in England, and it was in many respects unique; the Jew belonged to a despicable
race and professed a detestable creed. For all this, the analogy holds good at the most
important point: the Jew, though he is the king’s serf, is a freeman in relation to all
other persons. We call him a serf. We have no direct authority for so doing, for we
have seen no text in which he is called servus; but Bracton has gone very near this
word when he said that what the Jew acquires he acquires for the king. Not only can
the king mortgage or lease his Jewry, his Iudaismum, as a whole,238 but there is one
known case in which an individual Jew was first given by the king to his son and
afterwards enfranchised; donavimus libertati was the phrase used; hereafter in
consideration of an honorary rent of a pair of gilt spurs he is to be free from all
tallages, aids, loans and demands.239

The Jew’s freedom in relation to all others than his master seems The Jew in relation to
to have been amply protected by the exchequer. So far as we can the world at large.
see he found there a favourable audience. He could sue and be
sued, accuse and be accused, and the rules of procedure, which in the main were the
ordinary, English rules, were not unduly favourable to his Christian adversary. He
“made his law” upon the books of Moses; he was not required to do battle; he might
put himself upon a jury one half of which would consist of men of his own race and
creed. He enjoyed a splendid monopoly; he might frankly bargain for interest on his
loans and charge about forty-three per cent per annum.240 Unless we are mistaken,
no law prevented him from holding lands,241 though it is not until late in the day that
he appears as a landholder on a large scale, and when this happens it is a scandal that

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 277 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

cries aloud for removal. He had a house, sometimes a fine house, in the town. His
choice of a dwelling place seems to have been confined to those towns which had
“arks,” or as we might say “loan registries”; he would hardly have wished to live
elsewhere; but there were boroughs which had obtained royal charters enabling them
to exclude him.242 Many lands were gaged to him, but, though we do not fully
understand the nature of these gages, it seems to us that the Hebrew creditor seldom
took, or at all events kept, possession of the land, and that his gage was not conceived
as giving him any place in the scale of lords and tenants. However, late in Henry III.’s
reign it became apparent that the Jews were holding lands in fee and that they had
military tenants below them; they were claiming the wardships and marriages of
infant heirs, and were even daring to present Christian clerks to Christian bishops for
induction into Christian churches.243 This was not to be borne. In 1271 the edict went
forth that they were no longer to hold free tenement, though they might keep their
own houses.244 Some galling restrictions had already been laid upon them at the
instance of the church; they were to fast in Lent; they were to wear distinctive badges
upon their garments; they were not to keep Christian servants or have intercourse with
Christian women; they were not to enter the churches; they were to acquire no more
schools or synagogues than they already possessed.

As between Jew and Jew, if the king’s interests were in no wise Law between Jew and
concerned, Jewish tribunals administered the Jewish law (lex Jew.
Iudaica). Questions of inheritance, for example, do not come
before the ordinary English tribunals, and come but rarely and incidentally before the
exchequer of the Jews. When Hebrew dealt with Hebrew the document, the shetar
(Lat. starrum, Fr. estarre) which recorded the transaction was written in the Hebrew
language and the parties to it, instead of affixing their seals (some Jews had seals),
signed their names.245 Often such a document was executed in the presence of
official witnesses and was sanctioned by an oath upon the law. The precise nature of
the tribunals which did justice between Jews we cannot here discuss; it is a matter for
those who are learned in Hebrew antiquities; but to all appearance they were not mere
boards of arbitrators but courts with coercive power.246 Whether they aspired to
execute their decrees by physical force we do not know; but apparently, like our own
ecclesiastical courts, they could wield the weapon of excommunication, and this
spiritual sword may have been sufficient for the accomplishment of all their
purposes.247 To Gentiles at all events it seemed that the Jews had “priests” and
“bishops” (presbyteri, sacerdotes, episcopi) who did justice among them. Over the
appointment of these officers the king exercised a control, not very unlike that which
he exercised over the appointment of English bishops.248 The Jews of each town, or
of each synagogue, and again all the Jews of England, constituted a communa with
which he could deal as a single whole. He could impose a tax or a penalty upon it, and
leave it to settle as between its various members the final incidence of the impost.

Whether the sojourn of the Jews in England left any permanent Influence of the Jew
marks upon the body of our law is a question that we dare not on English law.
debate, though we may raise it. We can hardly suppose that from
the Lex Iudaica, the Hebrew law which the Jews administered among themselves,
anything passed into the code of the contemptuous Christian. But that the
international Lex Iudaismi249 perished in 1290 without leaving any memorial of itself

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 278 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

is by no means so certain. We should not be surprised to learn that the practice of
preserving in the treasury one “part” (the pes or “foot”) of every indenture which
recorded a fine levied in the royal court, was suggested by the practice of depositing
in an official ark one copy of every bond given to a Jew. Both practices can be traced
to the same year, the year 1194.250 Again, very early in Edward I.’s day we hear that
“according to the assize and statutes of the king’s Jewry, his Jews ought to have one
moiety of the lands, rents and chattels of their Christian debtors until they shall have
received their debts.”251 A few years afterwards, and just before the banishment of
the Jews, a famous statute gave a Christian creditor a very similar remedy, the well-
known writ of elegit, which therefore may be a lasting monument of the Hebrew
money-lender.252 But at any rate we ought to remember the Jew when we make our
estimate of the thirteenth century. Landowners are borrowing large sums, and the
enormous rate of interest that they contract to pay, if it shows the badness of the
security that is offered for the loan—the Jew holds his all at the king’s will and usury
does not run against infants; the security therefore is very bad—shows also the
intensity of the demand for money. Many an ancient tie between men,—the tie of
kinship, the tie of homage—is being dissolved or transmuted by the touch of Jewish
gold; land is being brought to market and feudal rights are being capitalized.

§ 8.

Outlaws And Convicted Felons
We must now glance briefly at certain classes of men who for Outlawry.
their offences or their contumacy are deprived of some of those
rights which their “lawful” neighbours enjoy. Among them we reckon outlaws,
convicted felons and excommunicates.

The history of outlawry can be better told in connexion with the criminal law than in
the present context. Outlawry is the last weapon of ancient law, but one that it must
often use. As has been well said, it is the sentence of death pronounced by a
community which has no police constables or professional hangmen.253 To pursue
the outlaw and knock him on the head as though he were a wild beast is the right and
duty of every law-abiding man. “Let him bear the wolf’s head”:254 this phrase is in
use even in the thirteenth century. But as the power of the state and the number of its
weapons increase, outlawry loses some of its gravity; instead of being a substantive
punishment, it becomes mere “criminal process,” a means of compelling accused
persons to stand their trial. Just in Bracton’s day it is undergoing a further
degradation. In one place he says that recourse can be had to outlawry only when
there is an accusation of one of those crimes which are punished by loss of life or
member. This, no doubt, is the old doctrine, and his whole exposition of the effects of
outlawry is in harmony with it. At a later time he has glossed his text:—there may, he
says, be outlawry even when the offence is no felony but a mere transgressio,
provided that it be a breach of the king’s peace.255 This is important. In course of
time our law is going to know two kinds of outlawry; with allusion to the analogous
process of excommunication we might call them the greater and the less. A man
outlawed on a charge of felony is as one attainted of that felony; while if outlawed for

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 279 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

a misdemeanour or in a civil action (for in the course of the fourteenth century the
process of outlawry spreads rapidly through many of the personal actions) he is in no
such evil plight. But this distinction belongs to the future. The learning of outlawry as
it is in Bracton is still the learning of outlawry for felony.

The outlaw’s life is insecure. In Bracton’s day he ought not to be Condition of the
slain unless he is resisting capture or fleeing from it; but it is outlaw.
every one’s duty to capture him. And out in Gloucestershire and
Here-fordshire on the Welsh march custom allows that he may be killed at any
time.256 If knowing his condition we harbour him, this is a capital crime.257 He is a
“lawless man” and a “friendless man.”258 Of every proprietary, possessory,
contractual right he is deprived; the king is entitled to lay waste his land and it then
escheats to his lord; he forfeits his chattels to the king; every contract, every bond of
homage or fealty in which he is engaged is dissolved. If the king in-laws him, he
comes back into the world like a new-born babe, quasi modo genitus, capable indeed
of acquiring new rights, but unable to assert any of those that he had before his
outlawry. An annihilation of the outlawry would have a different operation, but the
inlawed outlaw is not the old person restored to legal life; he is a new person.259 The
law of forfeiture and escheat for felony is taking an extremely severe form. It is held
that the conviction or the outlawry “relates back” to the moment at which the crime
was perpetrated, so that acts done by the felon in the interim are avoided.260 It is held
that the felon’s blood is corrupt and that a child born to him after the felony is
incapable of inheriting, not merely from him, but from any one else.261 Though we
speak but briefly of outlawry, we are speaking of no rarity; the number of men
outlawed at every eyre is very large; ten men are outlawed for one who is hanged.

§ 9.

Excommunicates
Closely allied to outlawry is excommunication; it is in fact an Excommunication.
ecclesiastical outlawry,262 and, like temporal outlawry, though
once it was the law’s last and most terrible weapon against the obstinate offender, it is
now regarded as a normal process for compelling the appearance in court of those
who are accused. Indeed as regards the laity, since the spiritual courts cannot direct a
seizure of body, lands or goods, those courts must, if mere citations fail to produce an
appearance, at once have recourse to their last weapon. Then, as ordained by William
the Conqueror, the lay power comes to their aid.263 If the excommunicate does not
seek absolution within forty days (this period seems to be fixed already in the twelfth
century264 ), the ordinary will signify this to the king; a writ for the arrest of the
offender will be issued, and he will be kept in prison until he makes his
submission.265

The excommunicate is, says Bracton, a spiritual leper; he can do Spiritual leprosy.
no valid act in the law; he cannot sue; but he can be sued, for he
must not take advantage by his own wrong-doing; one may not pray with him, talk
with him, eat with him.266 The clergy from time to time complain that this precept is

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 280 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

not well observed and that the king is backward in the arrest of excommunicates.267
In spite of the condemnation which had fallen on the Constitutions of Clarendon, our
kings seem to have stedfastly asserted the Conqueror’s principle that their tenants in
chief, at all events their ministers, sheriffs and bailiffs, were not to be
excommunicated without royal licence. Edward I. compelled Archbishop Peckham to
withdraw a general sentence pronounced against those ministers who were remiss in
their duty of capturing excommunicates268 and in 1293 the Archbishop of York made
fine with four thousand marks for having excommunicated the Bishop of Durham; he
had failed to take the distinction between what was done by his suffragan bishop and
what was done by a palatine earl.269 A practice of the lay courts yet more
objectionable to the clergy was that of directing a bishop to absolve an
excommunicate. They did not treat the spiritual courts as inferior courts, they did not
entertain appeals or evoke causes; but still they had to protect their own jurisdiction.
A suit would be instituted in the bishop’s court about some matter, which, according
to the thinking of the king’s justices, did not lie within its sphere; to those justices the
defendant would come for a writ of prohibition; meanwhile he would be
excommunicated, and then the plaintiff and the ecclesiastical judges, when called
before the royal court, would refuse to answer one who was outside the pale of the
church. In such a case it is not an unheard of thing that the lay court should command
the bishop to pronounce an absolution;270 but much the same end may be attained if
the lay court simply ignores a sentence which in its opinion has been obtained in fraud
of its rights.271 On the whole, however, before the end of Henry III.’s reign the two
sets of courts are working together harmoniously. There is always a brisk border
warfare simmering between them, in which, as is natural, the tribunal which has the
direct command of physical force is apt to gain the victory; but this is no longer a
world-shaking conflict between church and state, it is rather a struggle between two
professional classes, each of which likes power and business and has no dislike for
fees and perquisites. In the eyes of the secular lawyers the baronies of the bishops are
a pledge that the censures of the church will not be used so as to deprive the king of
his rights.272 Even an appeal to Rome is duly respected by the lay power—more than
duly respected, some English churchmen may have thought, for thereby the wealthy
excommunicate is often enabled to postpone to an indefinite date the evil day when he
must go to prison or submit himself.273

We have compared excommunication to outlawry; but, at least in Excommunication
this world, the consequences of the temporal were far more and civil rights.
severe than those of the spiritual ban. The excommunicate
forfeited none of those rights which were sanctioned by lay tribunals. He became
incapable of asserting them by action; but the “exception of excommunication” was
only a dilatory, not a peremptory, plea, and the plaintiff might go on with his action so
soon as he had made his peace with the church.274 Despite their adoption of the bold
phrase “The excommunicate can do no act in law,” our secular judges seem to have
thought that they had given sufficient aid to the spiritual power when they had shut
their ears to the funesta vox of the church’s outlaw.275 They stopped short of
declaring that he could not acquire rights or dispose of his property, but those, who
knowing of his condition had dealings with him, were guilty of an offence which the
ecclesiastical courts might punish if they pleased.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 281 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

§ 10.

Lepers, Lunatics And Idiots
This would not be the place in which to speak at any length of The leper.
the legal disability of those who are suffering from mental or
bodily disease; but a few words should be said of lepers and of idiots. Bracton
compares the excommunicate to the leper, and the leper is excommunicate in a very
real sense. He is put outside the community of mankind; the place for him is the lazar
house.276 Not only is he incapable of suing and of making gifts or contracts, but he is
even incapable of inheriting. He still remains the owner of what was his before his
“segregation,” but he cannot inherit.277

Among the insane our law draws a marked distinction; it The idiot.
separates the lunatic from the idiot or born fool.278 About the
latter there is a curious story to be told. In Edward I.’s day the king claims a wardship
of the lands of all natural fools, no matter of whom such lands may be holden. He is
morally bound to maintain the idiots out of the income of their estates, but still the
right is a profitable right analogous to the lord’s wardship of an infant tenant. But
there is reason to believe that this is a new right, or that at any rate there has been a
struggle for it between the lords and the king. If idiocy be treated as similar to
infancy, this analogy is in favour of the lords; at all events if the idiot be a military
tenant, feudal principles would give the custody of his land not to the king, but to the
lord, while of socage land some kinsman of the fool might naturally claim a wardship.
Edward I. was told that by the law of Scotland the lord had the wardship of an idiot’s
land.279 But in England a different rule had been established, and this, as we think,
by some statute or ordinance made in the last days of Henry III. If we have rightly
read an obscure tale, Robert Walerand, a minister, justice and favourite of the king,
procured this ordinance foreseeing that he must leave an idiot as his heir and desirous
that his land should fall rather into the king’s hand than into the hands of his lords.280
The king’s right is distinctly stated in the document known as Praerogativa Regis,
which we believe to come from the early years of Edward I. The same document
seems to be the oldest that gives us any clear information about a wardship of
lunatics.
The king is to provide that the lunatic and his family are properly The lunatic.
maintained out of the income of his estate, and the residue is to
be handed over to him upon his restoration to sanity, or, should he die without having
recovered his wits, is to be administered by the ordinary for the good of his soul; but
the king is to take nothing to his own use.281 Once more we see prerogatival rights
growing, while feudal claims fall into the background; and in the case of lunacy we
see a guardianship, a mund, which is not profitable to the guardian, and this at present
is a novel and a noteworthy thing.282

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 282 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

§ 11.

Women
We have been rapidly diminishing the number of “normal Legal position of
persons,” of free and lawful men. We have yet to speak of half women.
the inhabitants of England. No text-writer, no statute, ever makes
any general statement as to the position of women.283 This is treated as obvious, and
we believe that it can be defined with some accuracy by one brief phrase:—private
law with few exceptions puts women on a par with men; public law gives a woman no
rights and exacts from her no duties, save that of paying taxes and performing such
services as can be performed by deputy.

A very different doctrine is suggested by one ancient rule. A Women in private
woman can never be outlawed, for a woman is never in law. We law.
may well suppose this to come from a very remote time. But in
Bracton’s day it means nothing, for a woman, though she cannot be outlawed, can be
“waived,” declared a “waif,” and “waiver” seems to have all the effects of
outlawry.284 Women are now “in” all private law, and are the equals of men. The law
of inheritance, it is true, shows a preference for males over females; but not a very
strong preference, for a daughter will exclude a brother of the dead man, and the law
of wardship and marriage, though it makes some difference between the male and the
female ward, is almost equally severe for both. But the woman can hold land, even by
military tenure, can own chattels, make a will, make a contract, can sue and be sued.
She sues and is sued in person without the interposition of a guardian; she can plead
with her own voice if she pleases; indeed— and this is a strong case—a married
woman will sometimes appear as her husband’s attorney.285 A widow will often be
the guardian of her own children; a lady will often be the guardian of the children of
her tenants.

The other half of our proposition, that which excludes women Women in public law.
from all public functions, was subject to few if any real
exceptions. In the thirteenth century the question whether a woman could inherit the
crown of England must have been extremely doubtful, for the Empress had never
been queen of England. Queens-consort and queens-dowager had acted as regents
during the absence of their husbands or sons and presided in court and council.286
The line between office and property cannot always be exactly marked; it has been
difficult to prevent the shrievalties from becoming hereditary; if a woman may be a
comitissa, why not a vice-comitissa?287 Ornamental offices, hereditary grand
serjeanties, women are allowed to carry to their husbands and to transmit to their
heirs. So also, when the constitution of the House of Lords takes shape, the husbands
of peeresses are summoned to sit there as “tenants by the curtesy,”288 but peeresses
are not summoned. “The nearest approach to such a summons,” says Dr. Stubbs, “is
that of four abbesses, who in 1306 were cited to a great council held to grant an aid on
the knighting of the prince of Wales.”289

Women in court.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 283 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

In the nineteenth century our courts have more than once considered the question
whether women did suit to the local moots, more especially to the county court, and
have come to what we think the right conclusion.290 Undoubtedly a woman might
owe suit to the hundred or the county,291 or rather (for this we think to be the truer
phrase) the land that she held might owe suit. Also it is certain that some sheriffs in
the latter part of Henry III.’s reign had insisted on the personal attendance of women,
not indeed at the county courts, but at those plenary meetings of the hundred courts
that were known as the sheriff’s turns. But it is equally certain that this exaction was
regarded as an abuse and forbidden.292 We cannot doubt, though the evidence on this
point is rather tacit than express, that women did the suit due from their land by
deputy. Again, we never find women as jurors, except when, as not unfrequently
happened, some expectant heir alleged that there was a plot to supplant him by the
production of a supposititious child, in which case a jury of matrons was
employed.293 To say that women could not be jurors is in this period almost
equivalent to saying that they could not give evidence, but their names sometimes
appear among the witnesses of charters.294 In all actions a plaintiff had to produce a
suit (secta) of persons who in theory were prepared to testify on his behalf; we cannot
find that he ever brought women. One of the actions in which such “suitors” were of
importance was the action for deciding whether a person was free or villein, and here
Britton expressly tells us that a woman’s testimony was not received, “for the blood
of a man shall not be tried by women”; the word of women, we are elsewhere told,
cannot be admitted as proof, “because of their frailty.”295 In the ecclesiastical courts
the rule seems to have been that a woman’s compurgators ought to be women,296 just
as a man’s compurgators ought to be men, but apparently in the king’s court a woman
had to find male oath-helpers.297 In one respect a woman’s capacity of suing was
curtailed by her inability to fight. A rule older than, but sanctioned by, the Great
Charter prevented her from bringing an appeal of felony unless the crime of which she
complained was violence to her person or the slaughter of her husband.298 In these
excepted cases the accused must submit to trial by jury; at an earlier time one or other
of the parties would have been sent to the ordeal.299 In the thirteenth century this
limitation of the right to make criminal charges was already becoming of little
importance, since the procedure by way of appeal (that is, of private accusation) was
giving place to the indictment.

On the whole we may say that, though it has no formulated Summary.
theory about the position of women, a sure instinct has already
guided the law to a general rule which will endure until our own time. As regards
private rights women are on the same level as men, though postponed in the canons of
inheritance; but public functions they have none. In the camp, at the council board, on
the bench, in the jury box there is no place for them.300

We have been speaking of women who are sole, who are Married women.
spinsters or widows. Women who have husbands are in a
different position. This, however, can be best discussed as part of family law, and
under that title we shall also say what has to be said of infants. But here it may be well
to observe that the main idea which governs the law of husband and wife is not that of
an “unity of person,” but that of the guardianship, the mund, the profitable
guardianship, which the husband has over the wife and over her property.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 284 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

§ 12.

Corporations And Churches301
Every system of law that has attained a certain degree of The corporation.
maturity seems compelled by the ever-increasing complexity of
human affairs to create persons who are not men, or rather (for this may be a truer
statement) to recognize that such persons have come and are coming into existence,
and to regulate their rights and duties. In the history of medieval Europe we have to
watch on the one hand the evolution of groups (in particular, religious groups and
groups of burgesses) which in our eyes seem to display all or many of the
characteristics of corporations, and on the other hand the play of thought around that
idea of an universitas which was being slowly discovered in the Roman law-books.

We have become so familiar with the idea of “a corporation Analysis of the
aggregate of many” that we have ceased to wonder at it. When corporation.
we are told by statute that the word “person” is to include “body
politic,” that seems to us a very natural rule.302 Nevertheless, this idea was gradually
fashioned, and when we attempt to analyze it we find that it is an elastic because it is,
if we may so say, a very contentless idea, a blank form of legal thought. Little enough
in common have the divers corporations known to English law: for example, the
Ecclesiastical Commissioners for England; the Dean and Chapter of Ely; the
Chancellor, Masters and Scholars of the University of Oxford; the Mayor, Aldermen
and Burgesses of the Borough of Cambridge; the Governor and Company of the Bank
of England; the Great Northern Railway Company; Styles, Nokes and Company
(Limited). Among “natural persons” the law for a long time past has been able to
single out one class as being normal or typical and to treat other classes as
exceptional; and to this we may add that in course of time some of the exceptional
classes disappear; the noble class disappears, the unfree class disappears. Far
otherwise is it with the “artificial persons” or “group-persons”; we can hardly call one
corporation more normal than another and modern legislation is constantly supplying
us with new kinds. Thus we are not likely to find the essence of a corporation in any
one rule of law. If, for example, an English lawyer would make all turn on the
common seal, he would be setting up a merely English rule as a necessary maxim of
jurisprudence; nor only so, for he would be begging an important question about the
early history of corporations in England. Some again may feel inclined to say that a
corporation must have its origin in a special act of the State, for example, in England a
royal charter; but they again will be in danger of begging a question about ancient
history, while they will have difficulty in squaring their opinion with the modern
history of joint-stock companies. Modern legislation enables a small group of private
men to engender a corporation by registration, and to urge that this is the effect of
“statute” and not of “common law” is to insist upon a distinction which we hardly
dare carry beyond the four seas. Or, to come to a more vital point, shall we demand
that an individual corporator shall not be liable for the debts of the corporation? “Si
quid universitati debetur singulis non debetur; nec quod debet universitas singuli
debent”303 —is not this the very core of the matter? Once more modern legislation
bids us pause:—there is no reason why a statute should not say that a judgment

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 285 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

obtained against a corporation can be enforced against all the lands and all the goods
of every single corporator, and this although the corporation still exists:—in ordering
that this be so, the legislature does not contradict itself.304 Nor again is it only from
modern statute, that we receive this warning; our ancient common law gives us the
same warning in unmistakable terms. If we insist that common law cannot hold the
singuli liable for the debt of the universitas, we shall find little to say about
corporations in any century earlier than the fifteenth.

Hitherto the lesson that we have been taking to ourselves is that Beginnings of
we are not to deny the presence of the idea of a corporation corporateness.
merely because it is not producing all of what we consider its
natural effects. The warning is equally necessary that in remote times we may
somewhat easily discover corporations that never existed. The history of the earlier
part of our own century proves that large commercial enterprises may be conducted
and much done in the way of subordinate government by aggregates of men that are
not incorporated. The law of tenancy in common and joint tenancy, the law of
partnership, these have been found equal to many heavy and novel demands. And
when we turn to a far-off past we may be in great danger of too readily seeing a
corporation in some group of landholders, which, if modern distinctions are to be
applied at all, would be better classed as a group of joint tenants than as a corporation.

The core of the matter seems to be that for more or less Personality of the
numerous purposes some organized group of men305 is treated corporation.
as an unit which has rights and duties other than the rights and
duties of all or any of its members. What is true of this whole need not be true of the
sum of its parts, and what is true of the sum of the parts need not be true of the whole.
The corporation, for example, can own land and its land will not be owned by the sum
of the corporators; and, on the other hand, if all the corporators are co-owners of a
thing, then that thing is not owned by the corporation. This being so, lawyers from the
thirteenth century onwards have been wont to attribute to the corporation a
“personality” that is “fictitious” or “artificial.” Now “person” and “personality” seem
to be appropriate words, and, if they were not at our disposal, we should be driven to
coin others of a similar import.306 The corporate unit has become a subject of rights
and duties. On the other hand, the adjectives which are often used to qualify this
personality are open to serious objection, since they seem to speak to us of some trick
or exploit performed by lawyers and to suggest a wide departure of legal theory from
fact and common opinion. It may at least be plausibly maintained that the subject of
those rights and duties which we ascribe to the corporation is no figment but the
organized group of men, though this group is treated as pure unit. Unless all social
and political organization deserves to be called fictitious, a contract between a
municipal corporation and a joint-stock company is not a relationship between two
fictions; it is a relationship between two groups, but between two groups each of
which is so organized that for the purpose of the matter in hand, and for many other
purposes, it can be treated as an indivisible unit and compared to a man.

One of the difficulties that beset us at this point is that we are The anthropomorphic
tempted or compelled to seek the aid of those inadequate picture of a
analogies that are supplied to us by the objects which we see and corporation.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 286 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

handle. First we picture to ourselves a body made up of men as a man’s body is made
up of members. Then we find ourselves rejecting some of the inferences which this
similitude, this crude anthropomorphism,307 might suggest. For instance, we have to
admit that every “member” may be injured while the whole “body” suffers no injury.
And then perhaps we say in our haste that the corporation which has rights and duties
can be no better than fiction or artifice. But all that is proved by the collapse of such
analogical reasoning is that social organization differs from, if it also resembles, that
organization which the biologist studies; and this should hardly need proof.

Were we to digress to modern times, we might be able to show Is the personality
that the theory which speaks of the corporation’s personality as fictitious?
fictitious, a theory which English lawyers borrowed from
medieval canonists, has never suited our English law very well. It should at all events
be known that on the continent of Europe this doctrine no longer enjoys an undisputed
orthodoxy either among the students of the Roman universitas308 or among the
students of medieval and modern corporations. But here we are dealing with a time
when in our own country the need for any idea of a corporation, whether as persona
ficta or as “group-person,” has hardly become evident.

Now if for a moment we take our stand in Edward IV.’s reign, The corporation at the
when the middle ages are nearing their end, we can say that the end of the middle
idea of a corporation is already in the minds of our lawyers; it ages.
may trouble them,—this is shown by their frequent discussions
about its nature—but still it is there.309 First we notice that they already have a term
for it, namely, corporacion, for which corps corporat and corps politik are
equivalents. Then under this term several entities which have little in common have
been brought: in particular, abbot and convent, dean and chapter, mayor and
commonalty. With such “incorporated bodies” they contrast aggregates of men that
are not incorporated, townships, parishes, gilds.310 They demand that
incorporatedness shall have some definite and authoritative commencement; the
corporation does not grow by nature; it must be made, by the act of parliament, or of
the king, or of the pope,311 though prescription may be equivalent to royal charter.
The rule that the corporation can do no act save by a writing under its common seal
they enforce with severity; it is an anomaly, a concession to practical necessities, that
the commands of the corporation about petty affairs can come to its servants through
less formal channels.312 The corporation is invisible, incorporeal, immortal; it cannot
be assaulted, or beaten or imprisoned; it cannot commit treason; a doubt has occurred
as to whether it can commit a trespass,313 but this doubt (though it will give trouble
so late as the year 1842314 ) has been rejected by practice, if not removed by any
consistent theory.315 We even find it said that the corporation is but a name.316 On
the other hand, it is a person.317 It is at once a person and yet but a name; in short, it
is persona ficta.

The main difficulty that the lawyers have in manipulating this The corporation and
idea is occasioned by the fact that almost every corporation has a its head.
“head,” which head is separately and expressly designated by the Anthropomorphism.
formal title of the juristic person. It is regarded as an anomaly
that at Ripon there should be a corporation of canons without a head;318 normally

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 287 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

there is a head; the ideal person is not the Convent of St. Albans, the Chapter of
Lincoln, the Commonalty of Norwich, but the Abbot and Convent of St. Albans, the
Dean and Chapter of Lincoln, the Mayor, Sheriffs and Commonalty of Norwich. This
keeps alive the anthropomorphic idea. In 1481 a puzzling question arose as to whether
when a dean and chapter brought an action, a juror might be challenged on the ground
that he was brother to one of the canons. An advocate who urges that the juror is “a
stranger to the chapter, for it is a body of such a nature that it can have neither brother
nor cousin,” none the less concedes that peradventure it might have been otherwise
had the juror been brother to the dean.319 Elsewhere the relation between dean and
chapter is compared to that between husband and wife; “the chapter is covert by the
dean as the wife is coverte by her husband.”320 From the same year, 1481, we get
one of the most interesting cases in all the Year Books:321 —The Abbot of Holme
sued the Mayor, Sheriffs and Commonalty of Norwich on a bond, and they pleaded
that when the bond was made the then abbot had got the then mayor in prison and
extorted the bond by duress.322 The lawyers very generally admit that the corporation
itself cannot be in prison or suffer duress, and that it would be no defence to urge that
when the bond was made some few of the citizens of Norwich were (as they generally
would be) in gaol. But then in this case “the head” of the corporation was
incarcerated. “I tell you, Sir,” says counsel for the city,323 “that every body politic is
made up of natural men. And as regards what has been said touching its
inseverability, I do not admit that; for they allow that mayor, sheriffs and commonalty
make up a single body; here then are members, namely, the mayor is one member . . .
the sheriffs another member . . . the third is the commonalty . . . In this case there is an
alleged imprisonment of one of the distinct members named in the title of the
corporation, to wit, the mayor, who is the head and (as in a body natural) the principal
member . . . and if one member of the body natural be restrained or beaten, that is a
restraint or battery of the whole body.” This idea that a corporation consists of head
and members, that every act of the corporation requires the assent of its head, that, if
for a while it is headless, it is capable of no act save that of electing a new head, has
given trouble in more recent times and is perhaps capable of giving trouble even at the
present day;324 it is a relic of what we have called anthropomorphism. In Edward
IV.’s day we are told325 that the Mayor and Commonalty of Newcastle gave a bond
to the person who happened to be mayor, naming him by his personal name. It was
held void, for a man cannot be bound to himself. So long as such a decision for such a
reason is possible, the modern idea of a corporation is not secure; at any rate it is
hampered by an inconsistent and older idea. Still in the Year Books of Edward IV.
that idea is present, nay, prominent, and some important rules of law in which it is
implied have already been settled. In particular it is established that if the corporation
becomes liable upon contract or for tort, this does not give a remedy against the
persons, lands or goods of the corporators; the corporation itself is liable; execution
will be done only on its lands and its goods.

We go back but a little way in the Year Books and the idea that The corporation
we have been watching begins to disappear. The figure of the vanishes as we pursue
ideal person vanishes, or rather it seems at times to become a it.
mere mass of natural persons. One instance will serve to
illustrate this change. So late as 1429 an action of trespass was brought against the
Mayor, Bailiffs and Commonalty of Ipswich and one J. Jabe.326 The defendants

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 288 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

pleaded the marvellous plea that Jabe was one of the commonalty and therefore was
named twice over. If the defendants are found guilty, then (it was urged) Jabe will be
charged twice over; besides he may be found not guilty and the commonalty guilty:
that is to say, he may be found both guilty and not guilty. We do not know how the
case was decided; but it was twice discussed. Incidentally a fundamental question of
corporation law was raised. Suppose that judgment is given against the commonalty,
can the goods of the members be taken in execution? On the whole the judges think
that they cannot, but are not very sure. They make an admission of great importance
to us, namely, that it is the common course in the King’s Bench that if a community
be amerced, the amercement shall be levied from all the goods of the members of the
community.327 The obvious tendency of this admission they seek to avoid by saying
that there is a great difference between the king and anyone else. As we shall hereafter
see this admission was unavoidable; the goods of the members of municipal
communities were constantly treated as liable to satisfy the king for debts due by the
community as a whole. And a mere doubt about the general principle of corporate
liability occurring at so late a date as 1429 is remarkable.328 We have indeed
observed before now that the non-liability of individual corporators for the debts of
the corporation cannot be regarded as of the essence of a corporation. Still unless such
non-liability had been common, the modern idea of a corporation would hardly have
been formed.

In all this there is nothing to surprise us. Surprising it would have Gradual appearance
been had the English lawyers of Bracton’s day obtained a firm of the group-person.
hold of the notion of an universitas. In that case they would have
been ahead of their Italian contemporaries, who had Code and Digest to set them
thinking. It would be a mistake to suppose that what we are wont to consider the true
theory of universitates lay so plainly written on the face of the Roman law-books that
no one could read them attentively without grasping it. The glossators did not grasp it.
Bracton’s master Azo had not grasped it. They were by no means certain about the
difference between the universitas and the societas or partnership. The canonists of
the thirteenth century were just beginning to proclaim that the universitas is a persona
and a persona ficta. Bracton’s contemporary, Pope Innocent IV. (Sinibaldus Fliscus),
has been called the father of the modern theory of corporations. We now begin to hear
the dogma (of which all English lawyers know a vulgar version) that the universitas
can be punished neither in this world nor in the next, for that it has nor soul nor body.
And yet, when these steps had been taken, many an elementary question lay open for
the civilians and canonists.329

This premised, we turn to the law of Henry III.’s day for the, The law of Bracton’s
purpose of hearing what it has to say (1) of corporations in time.
general, and (2) of the more important kinds into which
corporations may be divided. But at once we discover that of corporations in general
little is said, and the law is not dividing corporations into various kinds, thus
proceeding from the abstract to the concrete; rather it is slowly coming to the idea of a
corporation by dealing with corporations (if so we may call them) of very different
kinds.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 289 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

In the first place we can find in our law-books no such terms as The communitas.
corporation, body corporate, body politic, though we may read
much of convents, chapters, and communities. The largest term in general use is
community, commonalty, or commune, in Latin communitas or communa. It is a large,
vague word; in the fourteenth century it is often applied to the English nation, “the
community” or “the commune of the land”; it is applied to the Cistercian order;330 it
is applied to the University of Cambridge, for “in the vill of Cambridge there are two
communes, one of clerks and one of lay men”;331 it can be applied to “the
community of merchants who hold the king’s staple of wools”;332 it was applied to
the “bachelors” of England who in 1259 had joined together to obtain concessions
from the king.333 But we dare not translate it by corporation, for if on the one hand it
is describing cities and boroughs which already are, or at least are on their way to
become, corporations, it will stand equally well for counties, hundreds and townships,
which in the end have failed to acquire a corporate character, and we should be
unwilling to suppose that the corporate character once definitely acquired was
afterwards lost. One term there was (so it may seem to us) capable of binding together
all the groups of men that were personified, namely, the word universitas. But its fate
has been curious and instructive. In our modern languages the Roman term that most
nearly answered to our corporation stands for the corporations of one small class, the
learned corporations that were founded in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries and
others that in later days were fashioned after their likeness. These were in the middle
ages the corporations by preeminence, and if the universities of Oxford and
Cambridge cared to assert that they are the oldest of English corporations something
might be said in favour of their claim. For the rest, the word universitas is of common
use in legal documents; but only in one context, and one which shows how vague a
term it could be. The maker of a charter salutes “All the faithful in Christ,” or “All the
sons of Holy Church,” and then requests their attention by Noverit universitas vestra.
Now the idea of the Church as the mystical body of Christ has had an important
influence on the growth of the law of corporations; it did much towards fashioning for
us the anthropomorphic picture of the many members in one body. Still in days when
the word universitas was put to its commonest use in describing a world-wide,
divinely created organization, it could be of small service to lawyers as an accurate
word of art.

Bracton has a little to say about universitates; it is meagre, it is Bracton and the
vague, it is for the more part borrowed from Azo, but none the universitas.
less it is instructive. In the first place, the cities and boroughs are
the only examples of universitates which occur to him. In the second place, following
the Institutes,334 he admits that there are res universitatis which are to be contrasted
with res singulorum. Thirdly, no definite examples of res universitatis does he give
save those that are given by the Institutes, namely, the theatrum and stadium. The
inference is obvious that, though he allowed the possibility of an universitas holding
land, he knew little of the English city or borough as a landowner; it is not in his
manner to give Roman examples when he can give English, while as to our medieval
boroughs having stadia et theatra, that is nonsense. Fourthly, he knows that if the
English universitas, the city or borough, has but little land and few goods, it has
magnificent libertates, franchises, governmental powers and immunities, and these
are a common subject of litigation. Fifthly, when he speaks of such litigation he

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 290 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

speaks vaguely, and hardly distinguishes between the universitas and the aggregate of
singuli. Sixthly, he nowhere makes an act of royal or public power necessary to the
existence of an universitas. Lastly, he does not bring any ecclesiastical bodies under
this heading; they fall within another form of thought.335

Being unable to find any theory about corporations in general, No law as yet for
we are obliged to descend to the various kinds of corporations: to corporations in
consider, that is, the manner in which the law of the thirteenth general.
century treated those various groups of men which seem to us to
have a more or less corporate existence. They are either ecclesiastical or temporal.

For many centuries before Bracton’s day there have been in Church lands.
England what we may call “church lands.”336 In some sort or
another they have “belonged” to “churches.” But to fashion a satisfactory theory as to
the ownership of these lands has been a task beset by practical and intellectual
difficulties. The scheme of church-property-law which had prevailed in the Roman
world before the German deluge had been a system of centralized and official
administration. All the ecclesiastical property within a diocese was under the control
and at the disposal of a single officer, the bishop of the civitas. His powers were very
large; his subordinates, the diocesan clergy, received the stipends that he allowed
them. Such a scheme was adapted only to an age that was far advanced in commerce
and orderly government, and we may doubt whether it served even as an ideal in
England where the thread of ecclesiastical tradition had been broken. It implies an
easy transmission of wealth and messages from place to place; it was thoroughly civic
and could not be maintained in a world of villages and manors inhabited by rude
barbarians. If there is to be much Christianity in the land, not only must there be
village churches, but the village church must be a proprietary centre, an economically
self-sufficing institution.

Then, as we are beginning to understand, the German has The owned church.
brought with him into the Roman and Christian world the notion
that, if he builds a church upon his land, it is his church. If in the days of heathenry he
had built a god-house on his land, it would have been his god-house, and he would
have made profit out of it.337 This is the origin of ecclesiastical patronage. The right
which from the twelfth century onwards appears as a mere right of patronage, an
advocatio or advowson, is in origin an ownership of the soil upon which the church
stands and an ownership of any lands or goods that have been set apart for the
sustenance of a priest who offers sacrifice at the shrine. By slow degrees, which are
now being traced, this church-founder and his heirs have to be taught that they cannot
do just what they like with their own; and, for example, that they cannot have their
church worked for them by ordained slaves. The bishop will not consecrate the altar
unless a sufficient provision of worldly goods is secured for the priest. The owner or
patron, whichever we call him, must hand over the church and an appurtenant glebe to
the priest by way of “loan.” In modern England it is in this context and this context
only that we still know, though only in name, the “land-loan” of the old Frankish
world: the parson still has a “benefice,” a beneficium. It is long before the founder’s
ownership is whittled down to patronage. We may be fairly sure that the famous ceorl
who throve to thegn-right by “having” five hides of his own land, “church and

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 291 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

kitchen, bell-house and burhgeat,” was conceived to “have” the church in no very
different sense from that in which he “had” the bell-house and the kitchen.338 In
Domesday Book the village church is apt to appear as an owned thing if also as an
owning person: “There are here a church and seven serfs and one mill”: “There are
here a chapel and three serfs and one mill”: “There is one chapel which renders eight
shillings”:339 “Culling the burgess has a church of St. Mary of 26 acres, Leofstan the
priest has a church of St. Augustin of 11 acres, Leoflet a free woman had a church of
St. Laurence of 12 acres.”340 Even Bracton must complain that the layman will talk
of giving a church when he means that he is giving an advowson.341 Hence the
strongly proprietary element that there is in the right of patronage, an element of
which the “religious” take full advantage when they engulf the parish churches in the
property of their minsters. Modern ecclesiastical reformers who would curtail such
rights as the patron still enjoys may fairly say that they are consummating the work of
a thousand years; but they should not talk of “restoration.”342

The early history of church-property in England has never yet The saint as owner.
been written, and we cannot aspire to write it. We do not, for
example, know how the parish church became an owning unit with rights distinct
from those of the bishop and his cathedral church on the one hand and from those of
the founder or patron on the other. But there is a supernatural element in the story.
Great changes take place behind a mystic veil. At least for the purposes of popular
thought and speech, God and the saints become the subjects of legal rights, if not of
legal duties. “God’s property and the church’s twelve fold”:—such were the first
written words of English law. In the old land-books this notion is put before us in
many striking phrases. In the oldest of them the newly converted Æthelbert says, “To
thee Saint Andrew and to thy church at Rochester where Justus the Bishop presides do
I give a portion of my land.”343 The saint is the owner; his church at this place or that
is mentioned because it is necessary to show of which of his many estates the gift is to
form part. If a man will give land to the chief of the Apostles he should give it to St.
Peter and his church at Gloucester, or to St. Peter and his church at Westminster;
Justinian himself had been obliged to establish a rule for the interpretation of
testaments by which the Saviour or some archangel or martyr was nominated heir and
no church or monastery was named.344 The Anglo-Saxon charters and Domesday
Book seem to suppose even a physical connexion between the land given to a saint
and the particular church with which it is, or is to be, legally connected; geography
must yield to law; the acres may be remote from the hallowed spot, nevertheless they
“lie in the church.”345 Just as the earl or thegn may have many manors and a piece of
land remote from the manorial centre may “lie in” or “be of” one of those manors, so
the saint will have many churches each with land belonging to it. Gradually (if we
may so speak) the saint retires behind his churches; the church rather than the saint is
thought of as the holder of lands and chattels. When it comes to precise legal thinking
the saint is an impracticable person, for if we ascribe rightful we may also have to
ascribe wrongful possession to him, and from this we shrink, though Domesday Book
courageously charges St. Paul with an “invasion” of land that is not his own.346 But
how is the church conceived? In the first instance very grossly as a structure of wood
and stone. Land belongs to a church, is an appurtenance of a church, just as other land
belongs to or is appurtenant to some hall or dwelling-house. But, as the saint retires,

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 292 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

the idea of the church is spiritualized; it becomes a person and, we may say, an ideal,
juristic person.

All this while there are human beings who are directing the The saint’s
affairs of the saint and the church, receiving, distributing, administrators.
enjoying the produce of the land. They are the saint’s
administrators; they are the rectores of his church. Some of them, notably the bishops,
since their powers of administration are very large, may be spoken of as landholders;
but still the land which the bishop has as bishop is hardly his own; when he demands
it, he demands it not ut ius suum, but ut ius ecclesiae suae.

Very often in Domesday Book the saint is the landowner; Saint Illustrations from
Paul holds land, Saint Constantine holds land, the Count of Domesday Book.
Mortain holds land of Saint Petroc.347 Leofstan held land under
“the glorious king Edmund.”348 Often a particular ecclesia, or an abbatia, holds land.
Sometimes the land is described as that of the saint, but the church is said to hold
it;349 sometimes this relation is reversed, the land is the land of the church but the
saint holds it.350 Often, again, the land is spoken of as that of the ruler of the church;
this is frequently the case when a bishop is concerned:—the land is the land of the
Bishop of Exeter and the Bishop of Exeter holds it. Still this is no invariable rule; the
church of Worcester, an episcopal church, has lands and St. Mary of Worcester holds
them;351 and it is not the Bishop of Rome, but the Roman church of St. Peter the
Apostle who holds land in Somerset.352 Sometimes the abbey holds land, sometimes
the abbot; sometimes again a distinction is drawn between abbey and abbot; the
demesne manors are held by the church itself, but the manors given to knights are
held of the abbot.353 There are cases (not very many) in which groups of canons are
said to hold lands,354 to hold them in common.355

We have said that the “church” becomes a person. If, however, The church as person.
we ask how the “church” is to be conceived, we obtain very
various answers from canonists, divines and philosophers. Materialism and mysticism
are closely allied. At one moment a theorist will maintain that between the death of a
parish priest and the induction of his successor the possession of the glebe is being
held and retained by the walls of the church;356 at the next moment we hear of the
body or the bride of the Redeemer. With the more exalted of such doctrines the
lawyer has little concern; but he should notice that the ecclesia particularis which
stands on a certain spot is conceived as a part and member of the ecclesia universalis,
for this theory leaves a strong mark on that notion of a corporation, an universitas,
which the canonist propagates. He is by the law of his being a centralizer, and perhaps
will not shrink from the conclusion that, if analysis be carried to its logical limit, the
dominium of all church-property is in the pope. At any rate the will of the ecclesia
particularis, the episcopal or parochial church, is not to be found wholly within it. It
lives a life that is not its own; the life of a “member.”357

Meanwhile the legists, exploring Code and Digest, were slowly The church as
discovering the universitas and endeavouring to mark it off from universitas and
the partnership and the group of co-proprietors. The canonists persona ficta.
seized this new learning and carried it further. The greater

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 293 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

churches had about them a certain collegiateness; there was a group composed of
bishop and canons, or abbot and monks. Here then was an idea that they wanted. The
ecclesia is an universitas, and the universitas is a persona. That they should go on to
add (as Innocent IV. did) that it is persona ficta was not unnatural. The organized
group was distinct from the “church”; its will might not be the church’s will. To this
we must add that the canonist’s law aspired to deal not only with wrong and crime,
reparation and punishment, but also with sin and damnation. In his eyes a person who
cannot sin and cannot be damned can only be persona ficta. So the universitas is not
the organized group, but a feigned substratum for rights. This theory will easily lead
to a denial that a corporation can commit either crime or wrong, and Innocent went
this length; but both practice and theory rejected his doctrine.358 The relationship
between the group and the feigned substratum could never be fully explained. The
leading idea, however, was that the group was not, but only represented, and at times
(if we may so speak) misrepresented, the corporation. How little of corporateness, of
collegiateness, there is in the canonical idea of a corporation is shown by the ease
with which this same idea is extended to a case in which there is no plurality, no
group. Our curious phrase “corporation sole” only appears late in the day and seems
to be exclusively English; but the canonists had come very near to it in their treatment
of the cases in which an ecclesia had but one cleric connected with it; the dignitas or
the sedes or the like could be personified.359 Here, as in the case of a “corporation
aggregate,” there is “fictitious” personality. So the canonist’s corporation is rather a
personified institution than an unified group of men.

With the evolution of these ideas the English temporal courts of The temporal courts
the thirteenth century were not concerned. The canonical theory and the churches.
of the persona ficta was to bear fruit, some good, some bad, in
the English common law of later days; but the internal affairs of the ecclesiastical
groups could seldom or never be brought before the lay tribunals, and at the time of
which we speak municipal growth had hardly reached that stage at which there would
be a crying need for some theory or another of a town’s personality. As yet we hear
nothing in the secular courts of corporations whether aggregate or sole, and though we
hear much of “churches” the lawyers at Westminster have no occasion to analyze the
idea that they are employing.

From their point of view we may look at the churches, and first The parish church.
at the parish church. When the rector dies or resigns his post
there is no breach in the ownership or even in the possession. It is common to find a
rector pleading “I found my church seised of that land.” The theory is well stated in a
judgment of 1307:—A church is always under age and is to be treated as an infant,
and it is not according to law that infants should be disinherited by the negligence of
their guardians or be barred of an action in case they would complain of things
wrongfully done by their guardians while they are under age.360 Here we have a
juristic person, the church, with a natural person as its guardian, and with the patron
and the ordinary to check that guardian in his administrative acts, for some things the
rector cannot do without the consent of patron and ordinary. Had this principle been
held fast, our later law-books would have been relieved of some cumbrous
disputations about “the kind of fee” that a parson has.361

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 294 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

The case of an abbey was less simple in theory, though the The abbatial church.
monarchical character of abbatial rule deprived some speculative
questions of their importance. The ecclesia or abbatia succeeded the saint as the
subject of proprietary rights. But, at least in the view of the king’s courts, the abbot’s
power was almost that of an absolute owner. Already in Domesday Book we see that
it matters little whether one says that the land is held by the church of Ely, the abbey
of Ely, or the abbot of Ely. True that when lands are given to an abbey it is rare to find
no mention of “the convent” or “the monks” as well as of God, the saint and the
abbot. True also that when the abbey lands are alienated the feoffment is usually said
to be made either by the abbot and convent, or by the abbot with the consent of the
convent. For all this, the temporal courts are apt to treat the abbot as the one and only
natural person who has anything to do with the proprietary rights of the abbey. To the
complete exclusion of convent or monks he fully represents the abbey before the law;
he sues and is sued alone.362 A rule of ecclesiastical law forbidding prelates to
dissipate the lands of their churches363 was so far enforced by the temporal courts
that they would give to an abbot an action for recovering lands that had been alienated
by his predecessor without the consent of the convent. But this action was given to the
successor, not to the convent. Had the convent raised its voice, it would have been
told that all its members were dead in law; and even the succeeding abbot could not
get back the land without a law-suit; the alienation was voidable, not void.364 And so
with obligations: the question commonly takes the form “when and how can an abbot
bind his successors?” rather than “when and how can an abbot bind his church or the
convent?” In short, owing to the legal deadness of the monks, the abbey property
seems to be administered by, and represented by (and we may easily pass thence to
possessed by and owned by), the series of successive abbots. In the hands of the
king’s justices even this series is apt to break up into a set of disconnected links, each
of which is a man. Each successive abbot might sue for lands of which the church had
been dispossessed during the abbacy of one of his predecessors; but if a claim for
compensation in respect of some unlawful act, such as an abstraction of the church’s
goods, accrued to one abbot, it died with him and was not competent to his successor.
Actio personalis moritur cum persona, and here the person wronged is dead, for he
was a natural person and could die. To make the law otherwise, a clause in the statute
of 1267 was necessary.365 Thus, though even in the legal notion of an abbey there is
an element that we may call “communal,” an element which is recognized by the
ordinary forms of conveyances and obligations, and sanctioned by the rule that
alienations of land are voidable if made without the consent of the convent, still this
element is by no means prominent, and the abbot’s powers of dealing with property
and of binding the abbey (that is his successors) by contract are limited much rather
by the idea of the church itself as the true subject of rights and duties, than by any
principle that would make him but one among a number of corporators.

The case of a bishop is not essentially unlike that of an abbot. The episcopal church.
True that the lands of the see are very often, from Domesday
Book downwards, spoken of simply as the lands of the bishop; the fact that they
constituted a barony made such language the more natural;366 none the less they
were the lands of his church.367 And in the bishop’s case it is at least necessary to
distinguish the man from the bishop.368 All the abbot’s lands are the abbey lands, but
a bishop may hold lands and goods which in no wise belong to his see; he will have

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 295 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

“heirs” as well as official “successors” and may make a will; occasionally he has a
great private fortune. In recognizing the possibility of one man having, as we should
say, two capacities, a natural and a politic or official capacity, the law made an
important step; there are signs that it was not easily made;369 but the idea of the
church as the true owner of the episcopal lands made this step the easier, for in one of
his two capacities the bishop was no owner but merely a rector or custos. Again, there
was a communal element to be considered. The lands of the see, if they were the lands
of the bishop, were also in some sort the lands of the cathedral convent or chapter, and
this, though it might be a group of monks dead to the law, might also be a group of
secular canons, each of whom was a fully competent legal person. To a small extent
the law recognized the interest of this group; without its consent the bishop could
make no alienation of the church’s lands that would not be voidable by his successor.
Still the members of the chapter had no action if the bishop without their consent
dissipated the wealth of the see, and this shows us that the person wronged by such
dissipation was not a community of which the bishop was the head, but rather the
church, an ideal person, whose guardian he was. He might do nothing to the
disherison of his ward without the advice of his council, his constitutional advisers.

There is, however, within the ecclesiastical sphere a well marked Disintegration of
movement towards individualism; it goes on from century to ecclesiastical groups.
century. The clerical groups begin to divide their property. As a
first stage we may notice the permanent allotment of lands to specific wants of the
group; one manor supplies the monks with food, another with clothing, one in some
sort belongs to the cellarer, another to the almoner, sacrist, vestiary. Such
arrangements, though they seem to have been regarded as solemn and permanent,
were matters of internal economy and, at least as regards the outside world, had no
legal effect: the abbot still represented all the lands and all the affairs of the abbey
before the law. But sometimes, even in a monastic society, the process went further;
often when a bishop’s church was monastic, as for example at Canterbury, Durham
and Worcester, a partition of lands was made between the bishop and the monks, and
even the temporal law took notice of such a partition; the Prior of Canterbury became
the legal representative of one section, if we may so speak, of the now divided
ecclesia of Canterbury.370 Even in the case of an abbey such partitions were
sometimes made, and the Prior of Westminster sued the Abbot.371 When the group
was not monastic but secular the process often went much further; prebends were
created; the bishop held lands in right of his bishopric, the dean in right of his
deanery, the prebendary in right of his prebend.372 Though for ecclesiastical
purposes the group might be organic, it as an unit had little to do within the sphere of
lay justice, and, if we may use the terms of a later day, the “corporation aggregate”
was almost resolved into a mere collection of “corporations sole.”

Still throughout the middle ages there were groups of Communal groups of
ecclesiastics which, as we should say, were corporations secular clerks.
aggregate and which, being composed of seculars, were not
subject to the monarchical rule of an abbot. The number and wealth of such bodies,
and therefore their importance in the history of our law, might easily be exaggerated,
but still they existed, and took part in litigation; suits, for example, are said to be
brought by and against the canons or the dean and canons of a church.373 In these

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 296 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

cases we seem to see all the elements of a corporation aggregate. In the first place,
there is personality; the lands, the affairs, administered by dean and canons, master
and brethren, are the lands, the affairs, of a church or a hospital. In the second place,
the administrators for the time being are a legally organized body, a body which
perdures while its members come and go.374 In the third place, this body transacts
business as a body by means of meetings and votings and resolutions; the motive
power is not (as it is in the case of an abbey) the will of a single man. Our lawyers,
however, learnt from the ecclesiastical groups fewer valuable lessons than we might
have expected. The groups which were compact were despotically ruled, and the
groups which were not despotically ruled were not very numerous nor very wealthy
and seldom came before the courts as organized bodies.

As regards the internal economy of the ecclesiastical groups, our Internal affairs of
common law of the thirteenth century had little to say. Not only clerical groups.
was this a matter for ecclesiastical law, but a deep-seated
reverence for a seal served to adjourn some difficult questions which otherwise must
have come before the king’s courts. A natural person is bound by his seal; he has
himself to blame if some one else, at all events some one whom he has trusted, puts
his seal to a bad use.375 So with the church. If Brother Walter, the sacrist of St.
Edmunds, gets hold of the seal which usually hangs beside the holy bier and therewith
seals a bond for forty marks to Benedict the Jew of Norwich, there is nothing for an
enraged abbot to do but to depose Brother Walter.376 It would seem that normally the
abbot kept the seal and thus could bind the house. In 1321 it was said that many a
priory in England had no common seal; the prior’s seal served all purposes.377

A remarkable attempt was made by Edward I. and his barons to protect the house
against the abbot, not so much in the interest of the monks, as in the interest of pious
founders, who saw their good intentions brought to naught and the fruits of their
donations sent across the sea to the profit of the alien. The common seal, said the
Statute of Carlisle (1307), was to remain in the custody of the prior and four discreet
inmates of the house and be laid up in safety under the privy seal of the abbot. This
statute should be famous, for it was one of the very few illustrations that Coke could
give of his doctrine that a statute may be void for unreasonableness;378 and certainly
it would seem that in 1449 the court took upon itself to call this statute void, partly
because it was self-contradictory (for how can one use a seal at all if it is always
locked up?) but also “because if the statute were observed every common seal might
be defeated by a mere surmise which could not be the subject of a trial.”379 From this
we may gather that the statute had little effect.

The canonists had by this time much to say about the manner in The power of
which legal acts can be done by or on behalf of corporations majorities.
aggregate. They had a theory of duly convened meetings, and a
theory of the powers of majorities. The most noticeable point in their doctrine is that
the will of the universitas was expressed, not necessarily by the maior pars conventus,
but by the maior et sanior pars. Presumably the major was also the saner part, but an
opening was given for dissentients to represent to the rulers of the church (for after all
an ecclesia particularis was but a member of the ecclesia universalis) that the
resolution of the majority was not the will of the church.380 Much of this learning

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 297 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

about corporate acts must have been fairly well known to many educated Englishmen,
including some of the king’s judges, and must have been frequently discussed in the
chapterhouses, for chapters were quarrelsome and the last word about their quarrels
could be said by Italian lawyers. But the influence of all this doctrine upon English
temporal law was as yet indirect and subtle and we have not the knowledge that
would enable us to trace it.

It is in no wise strange that the English lawyers of this age had The ecclesiastical and
not as yet brought the ecclesiastical and the temporal the temporal
corporations under one heading; so different were they. This we communities.
see at once when we have asked the question “What temporal
groups of men are there which can have any claim to be corporate?” and have
answered it by saying “Chiefly counties, hundreds, townships, manors, cities and
boroughs, in a word (since we can coin no better term) land communities. ” The
church, the religious order, the hospital, exists for a definite purpose: for the honour
of a patron saint, the defence of the Holy Land, the relief of lepers. The ideal person
has a permanent ideal will expressed in the rule of St. Benedict or in some foundation
charter. But for what purpose do townships and boroughs exist? Where is the
permanent will of a city to be found? Again, the group of monks or canons is a
voluntary society; of their own free choice and by a definite act men become members
of chapters or convents; but, at least normally, the member of a township can hardly
be said to have chosen to be a member; it may be that he has inherited a tenement; it
may be that he has bought one; but even in the latter case the main thing that he
bought was a tenement, not a place in a community. In these respects the chapters and
convents stood nearer to our modern joint-stock companies than to the medieval
boroughs. The company is a voluntary society and has a definite aim expressed in its
memorandum and articles. But the township or the borough has come into being no
one knows when, and exists no one knows why.

Bracton seems to feel—to feel perhaps rather than to know— The boroughs and
that among these communities a line should be drawn, that cities other land
and boroughs display some phenomenon, some degree of organic communities.
unity, that is not to be found in the open country, that the civic or
burghal community is no mere community but an universitas civiumvel
burgensium.381 But at this point we must for a while break off our discussion. The
question whether and in what sense these land communities or some of them deserve
to be called corporate units can only be approached after we have examined their
structure and functions, and to this examination we must devote another chapter. Only
at its end and, it is to be feared, after many digressions, can we return to the person
who is not a man. That person, if he exists, is implicated in a system of local self-
government.

§ 13.

The King And The Crown

Is there a Crown?

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 298 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

The legal position of the king has been fully discussed by historians of our
constitution, and on the province which they have made their own we do not intend to
trespass. Nor do we think that a chapter on the law of persons is the proper place in
which to collect all or nearly all that can be said of the king. Still there is a question
concerning him to which we are naturally led by what we have recently said about
“fictitious” persons:—Is the king merely a natural person, or does the law see beside
or behind the natural Henry or Edward some non-natural, ideal person, some
“corporation sole”?382

In the sixteenth century our lawyers will use mystical language Sixteenth century
of the king. At times they will seem bent on elaborating a creed theories of the king’s
of royalty which shall take no shame if set beside the Athanasian two bodies.
symbol. The king has a body corporate in a body natural and a
body natural in a body corporate. They can dispute as to whether certain attributes
which belong to the king belong to him in his natural or in his politic capacity. Some
of their grandiose phrases may be due to nothing better than a desire to stand well
with the reigning prince; some of their subtle distinctions may be due to that love of
mystery which is natural to us all; nevertheless we must allow that there were real
difficulties to be solved, and that the personification of the kingly office in the guise
of a corporation sole was in the then state of the law an almost necessary expedient
for the solution of those difficulties. Also we might show that if, on the one hand, this
lawyerly doctrine was apt to flatter the vanity of kings, it was, on the other hand, a not
very clumsy expression of those limits which had gradually been set to the king’s
lawful power and that it served to harmonize modern with ancient law. But we are
now to deal with ancient times, in particular with the thirteenth century. The
metaphysical king, the corporation sole, does not yet exist; the difficulties which are
met by his creation are only beginning to arise.

In the first place, let us notice that a great deal can be done Personification of the
without any personification of the kingly office. The mere kingship not
amount of the business that is performed in the king’s name but necessary.
without his knowledge does not demand any such feat of
jurisprudence as the creation of a new person. The ordinary law of agency is equal to
the occasion. To this we may add that the gulf between the king and the greatest of his
subjects is by no means so wide as it will afterwards become. A great prelate or a
palatine earl will like the king have many high placed officers, stewards, chancellors,
treasurers and the like, who will do many acts in his name, judicial acts and
governmental acts, of which in all probability he will hear no word.

Then again, the rights of the king are conceived as differing from The king’s rights as
the rights of other men rather in degree than in kind. At the intensified private
beginning of Edward I.’s reign this is expressed by lawyers in rights.
their common saying, “The king is prerogative.” As yet the term
prerogative is hardly used except in this adjectival manner. It suggests to us that the
king has the rights which are given to others by the ordinary law, but that we are
likely to find that each particular right is intensified when it is the king’s; the usual
definition of it is exceeded, “for the king is prerogative.” For example, he has the
rights of a feudal lord to wardships and marriages, but in his case these rights are

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 299 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

augmented. If the whole law were written down, we should not be sent to one great
chapter of it to learn the law of the kingship; rather we should see at the end of every
proposition of private law or procedural law some note to the effect that this
proposition must be modified before it is applied to the king’s case. “Prerogativity” is
exceptionality.383

Such is the general conception; and, turning to particulars, we The king and other
shall usually see that the king’s rights can be brought under it. lords.
He has hardly a power for which an analogy cannot be found
elsewhere. If he holds a court of his tenants in chief, his barons will do the like; if he
asks an aid from them, they will ask an aid from their knights; if he tallages his
demesne land, they can exercise a similar right. It is with difficulty that they are
restrained from declaring war. If he prosecutes criminals, this is because his peace has
been broken, and other lords are often proceeding against offenders who have done
them “shame and damage” by breaking their peace. In pardoning a criminal, the king
only waives his rights, and he cannot waive the rights of others; he cannot prevent a
private prosecutor from urging an appeal of felony.384

The kingly power is a mode of dominium; the ownership of a The kingship as
chattel, the lordship, the tenancy, of lands, these also are modes property.
of dominium. We may argue backwards and forwards between
the kingly right and the rights of private landholders. This is the more remarkable in
the case of inheritance, for, as is well known, the notion that the kingship is in some
sort elective is but slowly dying.385 For all this, the king is conceived to hold his
lands by a strict hereditary right, and between his lands and the kingship it would be
hard to distinguish. This is the way in which King Edward asserts his title to land in
Lincolnshire:—“Richard my ancestor was seised thereof in his demesne as of fee, and
from the said Richard, because he died without an heir of his body, the right
descended to a certain King John as his brother and heir, and from him to King Henry
as his son and heir, and from the said Henry to me as his son and heir.”386 Such a
declaration may seem strange, for nothing is said of Arthur, and in Edward I.’s day
the ordinary law of inheritance would have preferred Arthur to John. But this brings
out another point:—We may argue from the whole kingdom to each acre of land. The
problem which was opened by the death of Richard was at that time an unsolved
question—primogenitary rules were as yet new—Glanvill did not know how it should
be answered.387 John obtained the crown. This was a precedent in favour of the uncle
against the nephew, and as such it was treated by Bracton in the case of private
inheritances. The nephew may have the better right, but if the uncle is the first to take
possession, the nephew cannot succeed in an action “because of the king’s case.”388
In Edward I.’s day lawyers know that there is something odd in the king’s pedigree:
we must not argue about it.389 Still the descent of the crown was not so unique a
phenomenon then as it is now-a-days. No one, it may be, would have proposed to
divide England among several co-heiresses, and we cannot say with certainty that a
woman could have inherited the crown; but the question whether the county of
Chester was partible had lately been treated as open,390 while in Scotland not only
was the crown claimed for the Maid of Norway, but Bruce and Hastings urged that the
kingdom was divisible and should be divided between them and Balliol.391

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 300 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Even if we find that the king has some unique rights, rights for The king’s rights can
which analogies will be sought in vain, still they are rights that a be exercised by him.
natural person can exercise. Thus the royal lawyers are bent on
establishing the doctrine that all justiciary powers are derived from the king. In terms
made familiar by the canonists, they assert that the king is the “judge ordinary” of the
whole realm and that all others who administer justice are “judges delegate.”392 They
have difficulty enough in making good this assertion in the teeth of feudal claims; but,
when it is made, it does not attribute justiciary powers to a fictitious person, it
attributes them to a real Henry or Edward. Bracton is in earnest when he says that,
were the king strong enough, he would do all justice in person.393 Far distant is the
thought that the king may not sit as the active president of his own court. King Henry
sits there and important cases will be adjourned if he be not present.394 Justices have
been fined for proceeding in the king’s absence.395 There is something anomalous in
the ascription to a king of powers that he may not lawfully exercise in person,
something which may suggest that our “king” is rather a figment of the law than a
man; but that a man should be able to do by delegate what he may do himself if he
pleases—there is nothing strange in that. Then again, the doctrine that the king’s will
can only be expressed by formal documents, sealed, or signed and countersigned,
does not belong to the twelfth or thirteenth centuries. On the contrary, the king’s will
expressed by word of mouth is more potent than any writ.396

The rule which in later times will be expressed by the phrase The king can do
“The king can do no wrong” causes no difficulty. That you can wrong, but no action
neither sue nor prosecute the king is a simple fact, which does lies against him.
not require that we shall invest the king with any non-natural
attributes or make him other than the sinful man that he is. The king can do wrong; he
can break the law; he is below the law, though he is below no man and below no court
of law. It is quite conceivable that he should be below a court of law.397 In the
second half of the century some lawyers are already arguing that this is or ought to be
the case.398 What is more, a pious legend of Westminster Hall tells how “in ancient
times every writ of right droiturel or possessory lay against the king.”399 The lawyer
who said this in Edward I.’s day was careful to leave the ancient times indefinite;
probably he was referring to the good old days of the Confessor and, like Blackstone
after him, saw “our Saxon ancestors” impleading each other by writs of entry.400 But
the legend grew, and, as legends will, became more definite. In the middle of the
fourteenth century the common belief was that down to the time of Edward I. the king
could be sued like a private person, and a judge said that he had seen a writ beginning
with Praecipe Henrico Regi Angliae.401 If he had seen anything of the kind, it was
some joke, some forgery, or possibly some relic of the Barons’ War. About this
matter there should be no doubt at all. Bracton, no mere text writer, but an
experienced judge of the highest court, says plainly that writs do not run against the
king.402 “Our lord the king cannot be summoned or receive a command from any
one”—this comes from a judgment of the king’s court in 1234.403 “Our court is not
above us and cannot summon nor compel us against our will”—this comes from a
writ tested by Hubert de Burgh in 1223.404 This positive evidence is strong; the
negative evidence is overwhelming. If Henry III. had been capable of being sued, he
would have passed his life as a defendant. In the opinion of many of his subjects he
was for ever breaking the law. Plea rolls from his reign there are plenty, and in the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 301 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

seventeenth century they were jealously scanned by eyes which did not look kindly
upon kings. Where are the records of cases in which King Henry issued writs against
himself? We cannot but believe that Praecipe Henrico Regi is what Francis Bacon
called it, an old fable.405 To this must be added that the king has power to shield
those who do unlawful acts in his name, and can withdraw from the ordinary course
of justice cases in which he has any concern. If the king disseises A and transfers the
land to X, then X when he is sued will say that he cannot answer without the king, and
the action will be stayed until the king orders that it shall proceed. So if the king’s
bailiff is charged with a disseisin done in the king’s name, the justices will indeed
take a verdict about the facts, but they will give no judgment Rege inconsulto.406 Still
all this “prerogativity” is compatible with humanity, and when the king appears as a
plaintiff or submits to be treated as a defendant the difference between him and a
private person is less marked in the thirteenth century than it is in later times. When
he is a plaintiff he will often employ one of the ordinary writs. A defendant, instead of
using what even in Bracton’s day was becoming the proper formula “I cannot answer
without the king,” will sometimes boldly say “I vouch the king to warranty.”407 “In
the pleadings and proceedings of the king’s suits,” exclaims Bacon, “what a garland
of prerogatives doth the law put upon them!”408 This garland is not woven all at once
and some of its flowers were but buds in the days of Henry III. But our main point
must be that there is as yet little in the law of procedure to suggest that the king is
other than a natural person, nothing to suggest that he has two capacities. He enjoys
the same privileges whether the matter under discussion is what we should call “an act
of state” or whether it is a private bargain. And, after all, the grandest of his
immunities is no anomaly. He cannot be compelled to answer in his own court, but
this is true of every petty lord of every petty manor; that there happens to be in this
world no court above his court is, we may say, an accident.

Then again, no line is drawn, at least no marked line, between King’s lands and
those proprietary rights which the king has as king and those crown lands.
which he has in his private capacity. The nation, the state, is not
personified; there are no lands which belong to the nation or to the state. The king’s
lands are the king’s lands; the king’s treasure is the king’s treasure: there is no more
to be said. True that a distinction is made between “the ancient demesne of the crown”
and lands that have come to the king by modern title. The main import of this
distinction is to be found in the strong sentiment—it is rather a sentiment than a rule
of law—that the ancient demesne should not be given away, and that, if it be given
away, some future king may resume it.409 But even here private law affords or has
afforded an analogy. It is only of late years, only since Glanvill wrote, that a tenant in
fee simple has been able utterly to disappoint his expectant heirs by alienating his
land; his power over land which he himself has purchased has been greater than his
power over lands which have descended to him and which constitute the ancient
demesne of his family. The king, who asserts a right to revoke the improvident grants
of his ancestors, is relying on an antique rule of family law, rather than upon any such
doctrine as that kings are trustees for the nation. The idea that a man may hold land or
goods in two different capacities is not easily formed.

We may see this even in the ecclesiastical region. Though here Slow growth of a law
the personality of the saint or of the church makes the distinction of “capacities.”

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 302 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

easier, still in age after age people find much difficulty in marking off office from
property, and in separating the lands and goods which a man enjoys or uses because
he is the ruler of a church from those which, as we should say, belong to him in his
private capacity. On the one hand, it is hard to prevent the ecclesiastical benefice from
becoming hereditary. On the other hand, it is not readily admitted that a bishop or a
parson can have property which is in no sense the property of his church. This
difficulty it is which provides an excuse for that interference by the king with the
goods of dead bishops, which historians are too apt to treat as sufficiently explained
by mere rapacity. An abuse we are willing to call it, but there is an excuse for it. On
the death of the bishop, the king is guardian of the temporalities of the church; the
dead bishop’s goods are the goods of the church.410 This idea is well brought out by
what is told of St. Hugh of Lincoln. He did not approve the new custom that bishops
should make wills. Still he consented to make one lest otherwise his goods should be
seized by the king. Evidently the saintly bishop thought that his goods were his
church’s goods; he made a will in order to defeat, if possible, the all too logical, if
impious, deduction which kings were ready to draw from this pious doctrine.411 King
Stephen had to promise that he would not interfere with the testaments of the bishops,
and that, on the death of a bishop intestate, his goods should be distributed for the
benefit of his soul by the counsel of the church; but then he was also making
something very like a renunciation of his right to a profitable guardianship of the
temporalities of the vacant see.412 His successors seize the goods of intestate bishops
and expect bishops to apply for a licence if they want to make wills. When
Archbishop Roger of York died in 1182, Henry II. enjoyed a windfall of £11,000, to
say nothing of the spoons and salt-cellars. A very just retribution, says the dean of St.
Paul’s, and quotes from his Digest “quod quisque iuris in alterum statuerit, uti debet
eodem iure,” for this Roger had obtained a papal bull enabling him to seize the goods
of any clerk in his diocese who, even though he made a testament, did not before his
death distribute his goods with his own hands.413 The pope was just as bad as the
king in this matter. In 1246 he proclaimed that the goods of all intestate clerks
belonged to him, though in the next year he retired from an indefensible position.414
No doubt the canonists could distinguish well enough between the property of the
church and the property of the prelate; still we can see that this is a lawyerly
distinction; a saintly bishop, like Hugh of Lincoln, will scout it in the interest of his
church, a covetous bishop will make light of it in the interest of himself and his
kinsfolk, a needy king will know how and when it can be profitably ignored.

If these things be done within the ecclesiastical sphere where No lay corporations
dead saints still are active, where the canon law with its Roman sole other than the
traditions prevails, what may we not expect in the temporal crown.
sphere? Far easier for us is it to personify a church, which
actually holds the body, and is guarded by the soul, of the saint, than to personify a
nation, a state. No medieval king is tempted to say “I am the state,” for “ Ego sum
status ” would be nonsense. On the other hand, no one will say to him “This land,
though it may be called your land, is really the land of the state.” And so the king’s
land is the king’s land and there is no more to be said about it. It should be
remembered that in our fully developed common law the king, or crown, is the only
corporation sole of a lay kind. The temporal law of the thirteenth century will aid us
with no analogy if we would distinguish between the king’s private property and his

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 303 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

official property. Often enough has office become property, or rather (for this we
believe to be nearer the truth) rights which older and vaguer law had regarded as half
official, half proprietary, have become definitely proprietary. Earldoms and
serjeanties belong to this category; but we cannot distinguish between the lands which
the earl has as earl and those which he has as man. On the other hand, those offices
which have not fallen into this category do not comprise or carry with them any
proprietary rights of any kind. The shrievalty is an office, but the sheriff as sheriff has
no lands, no goods.415 What is more, trusteeship, at all events a permanent
trusteeship, is as yet unknown to the law and can supply us with no analogy. No form
of legal thought that is at our disposal will enable us to separate the lands of the nation
from the lands of the king.

But at least, it will be urged, the king cannot devise the kingdom Is the kingdom
by his will. No, but the general law is that a landowner cannot alienable?
devise his land by his will: only God can make an heir, not man.
And, after all, this impotence of the king has not been very clearly demonstrated. If
standing in the thirteenth century we ask why on the Conqueror’s death Rufus became
king of the English, while Robert became duke of the Normans, it is not plain that
there is any better answer forthcoming than that the Conqueror, like other lords who
had lands on both sides of the sea, partitioned his estates among his sons. But, as
already said, the fact that land cannot be devised by testament is a sufficient reply to
any who would draw distinctions between kingdoms and other estates. Moreover in
the middle of the thirteenth century it is by no means so clear as a patriotic
Englishman might wish it to be that the king of England does not hold his kingdom of
the pope at an annual rent by virtue of John’s surrender and Innocent’s regrant.416
And, as we saw above, if the king ought to consult his barons before he grants away
any large tract of his kingdom, common opinion has expected that a great baron will
consult his men, or at least profess to consult them, before he makes large grants out
of his honour.417 As to the king’s treasure, it is the king’s treasure and he may do
what he pleases with it, though very likely his successor may find an excuse for
disregarding some or all of his bequests. Edward III. in his will, draws a marked
distinction between the debts that he owes as a private person and the debts that he
owes as a king; his executors are to pay the former, while the latter will fall upon his
heir and successor. We shall hardly find such a distinction in earlier times.418

As yet no king has succeeded to another without there being an The king can die.
interregnum. In the case that is just happening when we make
our survey this interregnum is very short. Edward I. far away in the Holy Land began
to reign on the day, not of his father’s death, but of his father’s funeral.419 But there
is here no legal fiction, nothing that demands any mysterious phrase about the king’s
immortality. Edward I. really reigns, before he is crowned, and Edward II. will really
reign so soon as his father has ceased to breathe. There is less excuse here for a fiction
than there is in the case of a bishop; also there are fewer materials ready to the hand of
the constructive lawyer. The bishop’s throne must be vacant at least for a few days,
and meanwhile the eternally infant church has other guardians, a guardian of its
temporalities, a guardian of its spiritualities. But looking back a little way to cases in
which there has been an interregnum of considerable duration, we see that lawyers
have not been prepared to stop the gap with a metaphysical king, the personified

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 304 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

kingship. When the king dies, his peace dies, and there is no king’s peace until
another king is crowned. The king then who has a peace is a mortal man. The evil
consequences of this principle may have been somewhat lessened by a proclamation
of the peace of one who, though he is not yet king of England, is by hereditary right
lord of England. Still such a shift tells us that the only king known to the law is a
natural person.420

A case has lately occurred which, so we may think, must have The king can be under
put the old theory of the kingship to a severe strain. A child but age.
nine years old was crowned. The coronation of Henry III. was an
important event. It was, if we may so speak, a two-edged event. On the one hand, it
confirmed the doctrine of pure hereditary right; it applied to the kingship the common
land law. On the other hand, it showed that a king capable of ruling was no necessity;
all that a king could do might be done by a regent and a council in the name of an
infant. How William Marshall became “rector regis et regni” is in this context a
question of no great interest. There was a grave national crisis; there was civil war; a
foreign enemy was in the land. Those barons who had not rejected John did the
obvious thing, chose the obvious man as their leader. It was not a time for
constitutional dissertations. What happened during Henry’s minority is of greater
significance. In litigation which touches royal rights the ordinary rule of private law is
applied. An action for land is brought; the person in possession alleges that the king is
his warrantor; the action must remain in suspense until the king is of full age.421
Then, when Henry was of full age, he insisted that all charters granted in his name
during his minority required confirmation, even the Great Charter and the Forest
Charter. He did this we are told by the advice of Hubert de Burgh.422 To exclaim
against his faithlessness, his greed, his imprudence, is far easier than to discover any
then admitted principle of law which would condemn him. Suppose that his guardians
have improvidently alienated some piece of his demesne land, is he not to have the
ordinary right which every infant enjoys on attaining his majority?423 Donations, we
might say, are one thing, laws another, and Magna Carta is a code of laws. But where
and how could the line be drawn? In form the Great Charter was a charter, and
between it and the mere gift of single knight’s fee there was a long and gently
graduated series of charters granting “liberties” of various kinds to individuals and to
larger or smaller classes of men.424 A claim to revoke what is in fact a body of
general laws is one which will set men thinking, and may lead them in the end to
some mystical dogma such as that the king is never under age; but no such dogma has
as yet been fashioned. The king of the thirteenth century is a natural person and may
be “under disability.”

In course of time we see the beginnings of a doctrine of public or Germs of a doctrine
official capacities. Lanfranc hints at it when he suggests that the of “capacities.”
Conqueror, though he may not arrest the Bishop of Bayeux, may
lawfully arrest the Earl of Kent.425 Some progress has been made before the end of
the thirteenth century. In a carefully worded judgment our king’s court declares that
the Bishop of Durham “has a double status, to wit, a temporal and a spiritual status.”
The Archbishop of York has excommunicated the bishop for imprisoning some of his
metropolitan’s men. But to imprison men belongs to the bishop’s temporal status.
Therefore the archbishop has excommunicated not his suffragan bishop but the king’s

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 305 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

tenant in chief and must pay a fine.426 A still more interesting case concerns King
Edward himself. He in his father’s life time was holding the vill of Stamford and was
exercising in it the franchise known as the return of writs. He granted the vill to the
Earl of Warenne. Having become king, he demanded by what warrant the earl
claimed the franchise. The earl replied “By your own gift; you gave me all that you
had in Stamford.” The king’s counsel then pleads that Edward himself had no title to
the franchise, and that, being king, he is bound to resume all rights unlawfully
detached from the crown, even though he himself, while as yet no king, was the guilty
person. “He is now of another estate than he was then and is quasi another person.”
The earl combats this theory—“He is one and the same person that he was when he
made the gift.” Judgment is given for the king.427 Thus the idea of dual personality
may already prevail when the king relies upon it. To enforce it when it would tell
against his interests would be a harder task. And as yet this idea looks very new. If
there is to be a personification, something material, something as visible as a church,
must be personified.

We can see the beginnings, but only the beginnings, of a process Personification of the
which personifies the king’s “crown.” And here it may be crown.
remarked that even in our own day this process has never gone
so far as to modify the formal language of our law. Of course lawyers and judges and
even statutes have now for a long time spoken of the rights of the Crown, have spoken
of the Crown as doing this, that, and the other act. Still in the strictest language of the
law, the language of pleading, the Crown does nothing; it does not sue, it does not
prosecute; the king or queen does it all. A personification of the crown has been
required, not so much by any purely “juristic necessities,” as by constitutional
doctrines which, though they may now-a-days be as well observed as any laws could
be, are none the less no laws. Under the cover of the crown—that “metaphor kept in
the Tower,” as Tom Paine called it—our slow revolution is accomplishing itself. In
the thirteenth century this golden circlet is beginning to be useful. We first hear talk of
it when crimes are committed, not only against the king’s peace, but also against “his
crown and dignity.” Then we hear of rights which are inseverably annexed to the
crown; they indeed make the crown, for the king’s crown is to do justice and keep the
peace.428 This is pleasant doctrine for the king, if it is also a sound doctrine for the
state; it enables him to resume “liberties” which have been alienated from the crown
and check the growth of seignorial justice. In the fourteenth century it is possible to
say that the crown, like a church, is always under age and that no lapse of time will
bar the demands of this quasi infant.429 But as yet to distinguish between the crown
and the king, between the king and the man, is to teach a treasonable doctrine. In
Edward II.’s day that doctrine becomes prominent and charges of holding it are
bandied to and fro. The barons who are leagued against one of the king’s favourites,
Piers Gaveston, are said to hold that allegiance is due rather to the crown than to the
person of the king. A few years afterwards the barons who are leagued against another
of the king’s favourites, the younger Despenser, accuse him of having held this very
doctrine, and, owing to their success, it becomes for all time, to use Coke’s phrase, “a
damnable and damned opinion.” But all this lies in the future.430

We are not contending that the proprietary theory of the Retrospect.
kingship—if we may give that name to the doctrine which we

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 306 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

have been endeavouring to expound—is the most ancient theory, or that it ever fully
expresses all the facts and thoughts and feelings which determine what a king shall be
and what a king shall do. Probably there has been a one-sided development of those
elements in the ancient ideas which have been found capable of legal treatment, while
other elements have been forgotten or extruded from the sphere of law. The Conquest
of England, the strong monarchy, the tyranny (if we please to call it so) which was
founded by the Norman kings, have favoured those and only those notions which
exalt the king and give him a property in his kingdom. Still the phenomenon in
question is not purely English and cannot be explained without reference to the
history of jurisprudence.431 The elements in the old tribal kingship which survived in
the struggle for existence were those which in the then state of legal thought were
capable of being accurately expressed and defined. For vague thoughts, for half
thoughts, the lawyer can find no place. What, for example, is he to make of a title to
the crown which is partly hereditary, partly elective? The elective element cannot be
developed, for no one can define who are the electors, no one as yet has rules about
the powers of majorities. Therefore the elective element must perish or become a
mere form. And so with the king’s lands. Either they belong to him or they belong to
some other person or persons. Say for a moment that they belong to the nation, how
can such a doctrine be enforced when as yet we have no idea, or but the vaguest idea
of official capacities, of trusteeship, of corporations aggregate and corporations sole?
We do not wish to prejudge any debatable questions of early English history, but that
men had clear ideas about these matters in the tenth century and lost them during the
twelfth and thirteenth, those ages of brilliant intellectual progress, is not easily to be
believed. The one general result to which we come at the end of this long and
variegated chapter is that even in Bracton’s day the number of legal ideas is very
small and public law has hardly an idea of its own.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 307 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[Back to Table of Contents]

CHAPTER III

Jurisdiction And The Communities Of The Land
In an exposition of any system of law, ancient or modern, a large Place of the law of
space must be given to the composition and competence of jurisdiction in the
courts. In a statement of modern law, however, we should hardly medieval scheme.
place this topic in the forefront. Courts exist for the purpose of
defining and enforcing the rules of substantive law. But when we are dealing with the
middle ages, we cannot thus regard what we may call the “law of jurisdiction” as
merely subsidiary or “adjective.” It is intertwined with the law of property and the law
of personal status and this in many different ways. In the first place, jurisdiction is a
proprietary right, or the subject matter of proprietary rights, profitable, alienable,
inheritable rights, which are often bound up with the tenure of land. In the second
place, jurisdiction is one of the main ties which keeps society together; the man is
bound to his lord by this as well as other bonds; he is not merely his lord’s man and
his lord’s tenant, but he is also his lord’s “justiciable”; his lord is his “sovereign”; he
owes to his lord not merely service but also suit; and thus once more the law of
jurisdiction is implicated with the land law.1 Turning again to the masses of
unfreemen, we see another connexion between jurisdiction and ownership. If we
examine the rights of the lord over his villein we find it difficult to decide where
ownership leaves off and where jurisdiction begins; we may have to say, either that
the idea of ownership, the master’s ownership of the slave, has been tempered by the
idea of jurisdiction, or that rights of jurisdiction are being converted into rights of
ownership. Again, we have to form the notion of different spheres of jurisdiction, and
this must colour our treatment of important private rights. It is not enough to say that
a man has a right in land: we must add that it is, or is not, a right protected by the
king’s courts, for although it may be ignored there, still it may be protected by other
courts, for example by the court of the manor. Nor is this the result of a mere division
of labour such as at the present day may send petty cases to petty tribunals. The
various courts have their roots in various principles, in various rights, the rights of the
king, of the church, of feudal lords, of ancient communities. Lastly, we have been
compelled to break off our discussion of the “land communities,” as we have called
them, because we could not describe their organization without speaking at some
length of courts, their constitution and competence. In the main the organization of
these communities is justiciary; the shire has a court, the hundred a court, the manor a
court, the borough a court, and in a large measure it is this that makes the shire, the
hundred, the manor, the borough into a communitas. Thus in speaking of jurisdiction
we shall naturally be led to describe the nature of these communities and to consider
why some of them are, while others of them are not, attaining personality.

If we leave out of sight the courts of the church and concentrate The principle that all
our attention upon secular justice, we see at first sight a certain temporal justice
theoretical unity. Who, asks Bracton, ought to be judge in proceeds from the
temporal causes? The king; no one else:—this is the meaning of king.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 308 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

the kingship, that the king should do justice to all. It is want of time and strength that
authorizes and compels him to depute his duties to others. All temporal judges are his
delegates.2 But Bracton was a royal justice, and, though he could easily show that he
and his fellows derived their authority from the king, he does not attempt to prove,
and could hardly have succeeded in proving, that, even in legal theory, all the
jurisdictional powers of the feudal lords were delegated to them by the king. The law
of his time is obliged to distinguish the “regalities” that are delegated from the powers
that have another origin. Easier would it have been to show that as a mere matter of
fact, despite all theories, despite the words of the Great Charter, the king’s court was
mastering all the justice of the land, was subordinating to itself the feudal courts, was
making them insignificant; but in so doing some startling contrasts between facts and
theories would have been disclosed. Even the ancient courts of the shire and the
hundred, courts which had no lords, courts which were presided over by royal
officers, might have occasioned doubts:—could the suitors who made the judgments
in these courts be called the king’s deputies? Bracton takes the easiest of courses, that
of ignoring difficulties; he asserts the broad principle that all temporal jurisdiction is
the king’s, and leaves us to discover how far either facts or legal theories can be
brought under this principle. Still the assertion is important; the principle is not the
mere speculation of a lawyer; it has been making itself good as against other
principles which in part were older, in part were newer, making itself good against
tribalism, communalism, feudalism.

It is not, however, with a discussion of this dogma that all Scheme of the courts.
“ordinary,” i.e. non-delegated, jurisdiction is in the king3 that we
can begin our investigation. We must look at the courts as they exist at the close of
Henry III.’s reign, prefacing any further remarks by a summary statement, which may
show the main outlines of the system, though it will neglect exceptional cases.

For the purposes of temporal justice England is divided into Division of the land.
counties; the county is divided into hundreds; the hundred is
divided into vills or townships.4 The county has a court, the hundred has a court, the
vills or township as such, has no court; but the vill is an important unit in the
administration of the law. Again, the vill is very often coincident with a manor and
the manor has a court.

The county court meets once a month. It is presided over by a The county court.
royal officer, the sheriff, who in some matters is assisted and
checked by elective officers, the coroners. It is attended by suitors (sectatores),
certain freeholders of the shire who are bound to attend it, to do suit (facere sectam)
to it. They are the judges or doomsmen (iudicatores) of the court. It entertains some
of the initial proceedings in criminal cases, but for the more part it is a civil, non-
criminal court; it has an original jurisdiction in personal actions; real actions come to
it when the feudal courts make default in justice; cases are sent down to it for trial by
jury from the king’s court.

The hundred court meets once in three weeks. Normally its The hundred court.
president should be the sheriff or a bailiff to whom the sheriff
has committed the hundred; but many of the hundred courts are in private hands, and,

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 309 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

when this is so, the lord’s steward presides. Freeholders of the hundred owe suit to it;
these suitors are the dooms-men. Its competence seems much the same as that of the
county court, though its powers are confined within narrower geographical limits; but
real actions do not come to it, nor do we hear of actions being transmitted to it by the
king’s court.

Twice a year the sheriff makes a tour or turn (turnus vicecomitis) The sheriff’s turn.
through all the hundreds of the county. He holds each of the
hundred courts and on these occasions many persons besides the ordinary suitors
ought to be present. One of his objects is to hold a view of frankpledge (visus
franciplegii), to see that all persons who ought to be, are in a tithing. For this purpose
strict law might require that all such persons should be present, but often they seem to
be sufficiently represented by the chief pledges (capitales plegii), the heads of their
tithings, the tithingmen (decennarii). The curious organization of frankpledge is
interlaced with the organization of townships and of manors, and the townships also
have to be represented at the sheriff’s turn, each by its reeve and four of its men; for
another object of the turn is that the sheriff may hold what we may call a “police
court.” Presentments respecting crimes and minor offences are there made by the
representatives of the townships and a jury of freeholders. The presentments of minor
offences are disposed of on the spot; presentments of crimes merely serve to initiate
proceedings against the accused who will be tried by the king’s justices. In his “turn”
the sheriff acts as a judge with powers delegated from the king, and seemingly the
suitors of the hundred have nothing to do with the judgments.

This we may say is the national system of local courts, and these Seignorial courts.
courts for want of a better title we may call
“communal”—thereby meaning that the court represents, though it is not elected by, a
communitas. From them we must distinguish courts which in a wide sense of the word
we might call feudal, but which it may be better to call seignorial; they are courts
which have lords. These seignorial courts do not form a system comprising the whole
land, but are dotted about sporadically. We must divide their powers into two classes.
It would seem that the mere fact that a man had tenants gave him a right to hold a
court of and for them.
A court authorized by this principle, which we may call the Feudal courts.
feudal principle, would have, at least over the freehold tenants,
but a purely civil, that is, non-criminal, non-penal, jurisdiction; it would be competent
for personal actions and also for real actions in which freehold lands were demanded;
but the latter could only be begun by a royal writ (breve de recto tenendo) and might
easily be removed from it by a similar mandate. Over unfree persons and unfree
tenements its authority would be more ample; about the title to lands held in
villeinage it would be able to say the last word, it could enforce the manorial custom
and inflict minor punishments upon the villeins. Probably there was nothing in law to
prevent a lord standing high in the feudal scale from holding a single court for all his
tenants, and occasionally we read of the court of a wide-spread honour. Usually,
however, the lord’s court is the court of a single manor and very frequently the manor
is a single vill. The legal theory of later times distinguished between the court for
freeholders and the court for customary tenants, calling the former a court baron, the
latter a customary court; in the court baron, it is said, the freehold suitors (sectatores)

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 310 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

were the judges; in the customary court the lord’s steward was the only judge; but it is
very doubtful whether we can carry back this distinction into the age of which we are
now speaking.

Contrasted with the jurisdictional powers which a lord has Franchise courts.
merely because he is a lord with tenants, stand the franchises,
liberties, royalties (libertates, regalia), powers and immunities which can only be
possessed by those to whom the king has granted them. These franchises were of the
most various orders, ranging from the powers of the palatine earl to those of the lord
of a petty manor who had merely the view of frankpledge and the police jurisdiction
that was incident to it. This last franchise was common, and the court in which the
lord exercised it twice a year was acquiring the name of a leet (leta);
it was a police court for the presentment of offences and for the Leets.
punishment of minor offences; it was coordinate with the
sheriff’s turn. Sometimes the lord had yet higher justice in his hands and might hang
thieves taken in the act of theft; and thus gradually we ascend the scale of “royalties”
which leads up to the palatine earldoms.

The cities and boroughs—vills, that is, which have attained a Borough courts.
certain degree of organization and independence—have courts of
their own. But of these municipal courts very little can be said in general terms; they
are the outcome not of laws but of privileges.

Above all other courts rises the king’s court, which has gradually The king’s court.
been dividing itself into three permanent courts, the King’s
Bench, the Common Bench, the Exchequer. But, besides these permanent and central,
it assumes temporary and local forms. Royal justices are sent into the counties under
divers commissions; it may be to take the assizes (possessory actions) of the county, it
may be to deliver the gaol, it may be as justices in eyre (in itinere) to hold all the pleas
of the county, civil and criminal. In this last case the justices preside over a very full,
solemn and prolonged meeting of the county court. In one way and another, now by
the evocation of causes, now by the invention of new actions, the king’s courts are not
merely reducing all other courts into subordination, but are making them petty courts,
courts for the smaller affairs of the smaller folk.

Such being the main outlines, we may endeavour to fill in certain parts of the picture,
avoiding much repetition of those matters which have been sufficiently discussed by
historians of the English constitution.

§ 1.

The County
Of the origin of the various counties we shall therefore say The county.
nothing;5 but there is one phenomenon which deserves a few
words, namely, the “detached part of a county.” The map of England has never shown
such striking examples of dissipated counties as those displayed by the map of

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 311 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Scotland; still the total number of cases in which a county has had outlying members
is by no means small.6 It seems certain that many of these anomalies are due to very
ancient causes; possibly in a few cases they take us back to the days of intertribal
warfare; more probably they illustrate the connexion between property and
jurisdiction. The lord of a hundred in one had an estate lying in another shire; he
obliged all his men to attend his hundred court; such a proceeding may or may not
have been warranted by some royal charter. Thus Domesday Book includes in
Worcestershire islands which are surrounded by other counties. These islands belong
to the hundred of Oswaldslaw, which belongs to the church of Worcester; but then
these islands themselves belong, in a somewhat different sense, to the same church;
the church is lord of the land, lord also of the hundredal jurisdiction. These “detached
portions of counties” seem to bring before our eyes the struggle between national and
private justice; their small significance in English history and their rapid descent into
the category of petty nuisances show how that struggle was decided.7

Of the county officers, again, we need say but little since The county officers.
constitutional history has taken them under her protection. The
earl, except in the case of the palatine earldoms, has little to do with the government
of the county which gives him his title; even before the beginning of legal memory he
has, we may say, nothing to do with the county, save to be girt with its sword and to
receive a third of its pleas, “the third penny of the county.”8 On the other hand, the
sheriff, who, despite the fact that in Latin he is vicecomes and in French le viscount,
has never been the vice-gerent of the earl, is the governor of the shire, the captain of
its forces, the president of its court, a distinctively royal officer, appointed by the
king, dismissible at a moment’s notice, strictly accountable to the Exchequer.9 A
danger that sheriffdoms would become hereditary offices has been surmounted; at the
end of the thirteenth century a danger (if such we think it) that sheriffdoms will
become elective offices is being surmounted in spite of popular demands which
gradually die out, and pious forgeries which long trouble the stream of legal
history.10 Already before the beginning of the thirteenth century the sheriff is losing
some of his powers; before the end we see the first germs of an institution which is
destined to grow at his expense, the knights assigned to keep the peace of the county
whose successors will be justices of the peace. But the sheriff of this century, still
more the sheriff of the twelfth, is a great man with miscellaneous functions, military
and financial, executive and judicial. Below him in rank and of more recent origin
stand the coroners, or, to give them their full title, the keepers of the pleas of the
crown (custodes placitorum coronae). Normally the county has four coroners who are
elected by the county in the county court. Their origin is traced to an ordinance of
1194. The function implied by their title is that of keeping (custodire) as distinguished
from that of holding (tenere) the pleas of the crown; they are not to hear and
determine causes, but are to keep record of all that goes on in the county and concerns
the administration of criminal justice, and more particularly must they guard the
revenues which will come to the king if such justice be duly done.11

The “county” is not a mere stretch of land, a governmental The county
district; it is an organized body of men; it is a communitas. We community.
must stop short of saying that it is a corporation. The idea of a
corporation is being evolved but slowly, and our shires never become corporations, so

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 312 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

that in later days the term “county corporate” is employed to distinguish certain
municipal boroughs, which have been endowed with the organization of counties,
from the ordinary shires or “counties at large.” With such “counties corporate” we
have not to deal; they belong to another age. But attending only to the “counties at
large,” we notice that the law and the language of our period seem at first sight to treat
them much as though they were corporations, and in this respect to draw no hard line
between them and the chartered towns; the borough is a communitas, so is the county.
It would even seem that under Edward I. the county of Devon had a common seal.12
This may have been an exceptional manifestation of unity; but John had granted to
Cornwall and to Devonshire charters which in form differed little from those that he
granted to boroughs:—if a grant of liberties might be made to the men of a town and
their heirs, so also a grant of liberties, a grant of freedom from forestal exactions, a
grant of the right to elect a sheriff, might be made to the men of a county and their
heirs.13 But the county was apt to find its unity brought home to it in the form of
liabilities rather than in the form of rights. The county was punished for the mistakes
and misdoings of its assembly, the county court.14

In the language of the time this proposition that the county must The county court.
answer for the acts and defaults of the county court appears as a
truism, for it can only be expressed by saying that the county must answer for the acts
and defaults of the county. County and county court are so thoroughly one that the
same word stands for both. Rarely, if ever, do we meet with any such term as curia
comitatus or curia de comitatu; the assembly is the comitatus, and every session of
the assembly is a comitatus; for example, when a man is to be outlawed, a
proclamation commanding him to present himself must be made in “five successive
counties,” that is at five successive sessions of the county court. The actual assembly
of men sitting at a certain time and place is the county; the permanent institution of
which that particular assembly is, as it were, a fleeting representation, is the county;
the county again is a tract of ground; the county is the whole body of persons who
hold lands or reside within that tract, whether they participate in the doings of the
assembly or no. And so with the word shire, which is maintaining its ground
alongside county; if an abbot and his tenants are to be freed from the duty of attending
the county court, it is quite enough to say that they are to be “quit of all shires” (quieti
ab omnibus schiris). What we say of the county is true also of the hundred; our law
Latin has no such term as “the court of the hundred”; the “hundred” is a district, a
body of landholders and residents, a court, the session of a court.

This absolute identity of the county and its court might be Identity of county and
abundantly illustrated from the rolls which describe the county court.
proceedings of the justices in eyre. They come into the county;
the whole county is convened to meet them; the county gives evidence, answers
questions, records its customs, expresses its suspicions, is believed or disbelieved, is
punished. Thus the justices visit Lincolnshire in 1202; the county gives one account of
proceedings which took place in the county, the coroners’ rolls give another account;
the testimony of the latter is treated as conclusive; the justices therefore are on the
point of fining or amercing the county, but the county forestalls their judgment by
offering a sum of £200 to be paid by the county.15 But not merely is the county thus
visited in its home; it has often to appear at Westminster and answer touching its

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 313 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

misdeeds, in particular the miscarriages of justice which have taken place in its court.
A writ of false judgment (de falso iudicio) is brought against the county; thereby the
sheriff is directed to “record” the proceedings that have taken place in the county, that
is to cause those proceedings to be recited or recapitulated in the county court, and
then to send four knights to bear the “record,” written or unwritten, to Westminster.
The knights come there; they bear record, or rather the county bears record through
their mouths, for what they say the county says. The complainant disputes this record
and offers battle; the county maintains the truth of its record and offers to prove it by
the body of a freeman of the county, who—so we fear—is no better than a hired
champion.16 The county must pay for its false judgments.17

The constitution of the body which thus represented, and indeed Constitution of the
was, the county has been the theme of sharp controversies;18 but county court.
it has usually been discussed in its relation to the history of
parliament. Two opinions have prevailed; some would make the county court an
assembly of all the freeholders of the shire, others would make it an assembly of the
tenants in chief. Both of these theories have the merit of being simple, but the demerit
of being too simple to meet the facts disclosed by documents of the thirteenth century.
Of the county court as it was at that time we will first speak, and, this done, we may
be the better able to understand the sparse evidence that comes to us from an earlier
age.19

And first we must notice that of any right of attending the county Suit of court no right
court we read no word. Of the duty of attending it we read much, but a burden.
and obviously this duty was irksome. Men seek for charters
which shall absolve them from it. In the twelfth century immunities of this kind were
frequently granted to religious houses and occasionally to laymen, and, at least in
some cases, not merely the grantees themselves but all their tenants were delivered
from the burden of doing suit to the communal courts.20 Precise calculations about
such a matter are impossible; it must suffice therefore to say that before the beginning
of Edward I.’s reign large tracts of England enjoyed a chartered liberty from this
burden. To chartered we must add prescriptive liberties; to immunities that were
legally valid we must add others that were actually enjoyed. Prelates and barons
“subtracted the suit”—such was the phrase—due from themselves and their tenants
whenever they saw a chance of doing this with impunity, and a long continued
subtraction would ripen into a lawful franchise.

Nor is this cause for surprise. Let us try to picture to ourselves Suit of court is
the position of some petty freeholder whose lands lie on the laborious.
north coast of Devon. Once a month he must attend the county
court; once a month, that is, he must toil to Exeter, and we cannot always allow him a
horse. Even if the court gets through its business in one day, he will be away from
home for a week at least and his journeyings and sojournings will be at his own cost.
When he returns he will have to remember that the hundred court meets once in three
weeks, the manorial court once in three weeks, and that he owes suit to both of them.
Is it credible that all freeholders discharge these duties?

Sessions of the court.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 314 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

In Henry III.’s reign the county court is usually holden once a month. The third
edition of Magna Carta, that of 1217, says that it is not to be holden oftener, but adds
that in counties in which it has not sat so frequently the old rule is to prevail.21 The
Lincolnshire court met every forty days;22 but monthly sessions seem to have been
usual elsewhere; in 1219 the county of Surrey was amerced for holding more frequent
sessions.23 As to the hundred court, an ordinance of 1234 declared that it was to meet
but once in three weeks.24 We thus learn that before 1217 the county courts had
sometimes been holden at intervals of less than a month, while the ordinance of 1234
expressly tells us that in Henry II.’s day the hundred courts and baronial courts had sat
once a fortnight. It is difficult to make these tidings fit into a consistent story with our
earlier evidence. A law of Edward the Elder had said in general terms that every reeve
is to have a moot in every four weeks.25 Edgar commanded that the hundreds were to
meet once a month;26 elsewhere he adds that the burgh-moot shall be held thrice a
year, the shire-moot twice.27 This last rule is repeated by Cnut with the qualification
that the moots are to be held oftener if need be.28 Henry I. ordains that the counties
and hundreds are to sit as they did in the Confessor’s day and not otherwise; if more
frequent sessions are required for any royal business they will be summoned.29 An
exposition of this ordinance, which seems to be the work of a contemporary, declares
it to mean that the shire-moot and burgh-moot are to be holden twice, the hundred-
moot twelve times a year, seven days’ notice being given unless royal business
demands a departure from this rule. To these assemblies are to come all the lords of
lands. Twice a year, however, a specially full hundred court (the sheriff’s turn of later
days) is to be holden, at which all the freemen (liberi) are to be present, whether they
be householders or dependants, in order that the tithings may be examined and found
full.30 To this exposition we must return; for the moment we have only to notice that
the county court is to all seeming held but twice in the year. How to reconcile this
with the state of things existing a century later and presupposed by the Charter of
1217 is a difficult question. Has the burden of suit been multiplied sixfold?

Now that a court with much judicial business will sit but twice a Full courts and
year we can hardly believe. Medieval procedure required that a intermediate courts.
suit should come before the court on many occasions before a
judgment could be given. The parties must appear in person, not by attorney; roads
are bad; simple justice requires that a defendant should have ample opportunity of
appearing before he is treated as contumacious.31 According to the law of the
thirteenth century no man could be outlawed until he was quinto exactus, that is until
his appearance had been demanded in five successive county courts. If we suppose
that the court sat but once in six months, then the process of outlawry, which we may
well suppose to be very ancient, could not be accomplished in less than two years and
a half.32 We can hardly avoid one of two suppositions and perhaps both should be
combined, namely, that in the days before the Conquest the shire-moot had done little
of the ordinary judicial work, this being usually disposed of by the hundred courts,
and secondly that between the solemn half-yearly meetings of the county court, at
which all the suitors were required to be present, there intervened less solemn
meetings attended only by a smaller group of suitors before whom the formal and
preliminary steps in litigation, the “interlocutory proceedings” as we should call them,
could be taken. This latter theory is supported by numerous entries upon the Hundred
Rolls. Just as there are many men who owe suit to the two half-yearly meetings of the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 315 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

hundred court which are known as the sheriff’s turns but owe no suit to the
intervening sessions, so, at least in certain shires, the suitors of the county court fall
into two classes; many are bound to go month by month, while others are bound to go
but twice a year; they go to two meetings which are distinguished as “the great
counties” or “the general counties.”33 The suitors of the manorial courts fall into two
similar classes; some must appear every three weeks, others twice a year.34

But whichever of these two classes we examine, we cannot say The suitors.
that it is constituted either by all the freeholders of the shire or
merely by the tenants in chief. A more complex idea must be introduced, but one
which will not be unfamiliar to us after what we have seen of scutage. Suit to the
county and hundred is a burden incumbent on land. It has taken root in particular
acres. Feoffments and private bargains cannot shift that burden from the land, nor will
they increase the number of suits that are due; but, as between the various persons
interested in that land, they can and will determine who is to do the suit. We will
suppose that A holds a tract of land for which he owes a suit to the county; he enfeoffs
B, C and D with parcels of that land. One suit and no more is due. Probably as regards
the king and his sheriff all four persons are liable for that suit; all or any of them can
be attacked if the suit be not done; but, as between themselves, the terms of the
feoffments decide which of them ought to do it.

We may be pardoned for spending some little time over this Suit is a “real”
doctrine, for it illustrates the complicated texture of medieval burden.
society and the large liberty that men enjoyed of regulating by
private bargains what we might deem matters of public law.

And in the first place we notice that suit to the communal courts is often spoken of as
the whole or part of the service by which a man holds his land; it is mentioned in the
same breath with suit to the lord’s court, rent and scutage.35 A man may hold his land
by the service of finding one doomsman for the hundred court, or may hold it for 9 s.
2½ d. and half a doomsman.36 Then again we find such cases as the following. In the
vill of Bottisham the Earl of Gloucester has some forty freehold tenants; two of them
do suit to the hundred and county courts for the earl and the whole township.37 The
Abbot of Ramsey has a manor at Burwell: the jurors do not know that he does any
service for it except two suits to every county court; but these two are actually done
by two tenants of his; J. A. holds a hide and does one suit, B. B. holds ninety acres
and does the other. Any number of similar instances might be found. As regards suit
to the hundred court, we have yet more explicit tidings. The opinion of the jurors from
whose verdicts the Hundred Rolls were compiled was distinctly this, that suit was a
burden on particular tenements, a burden not to be increased by any subdivision of
those tenements. They complain that the Earl of Surrey who holds the hundred of
Gallow has not observed this rule. There was, for instance, a tenement in South
Creake containing 100 acres; it owed a single suit; it has been divided into 40
tenements and 40 suits are exacted.38 And so, again, if the tenement becomes partible
among co-heiresses, the number of suits, at least in the jurors’ opinion, should not be
increased; the burden should lie on the share of the eldest sister.39

“Reality” of suit.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 316 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Once more, the king sets the law in motion against someone who has “subtracted his
suit.” Now were this duty incumbent on all freeholders, nothing would be simpler
than the king’s case; he would merely have to say “You are a freeholder of the county
and you are not doing suit.” But the king’s advocates do not adopt this easy course;
they make it a matter of seisin. The king demands a suit because he has, or his
ancestors have, been seised of a suit done by the defendant or his predecessors in title.
King Edward I. demands a suit to the hundred court from the Earl of Norfolk and
relies on the seisin of King Henry III. The earl comes and denies the king’s right and
the seisin of King Henry. A jury gives the earl a verdict and he goes quit.40 If the
mere fact that the earl was a freeholder would have made him liable to do suit, the
king’s counsel sadly mismanaged their case. This is but one example from among
many.

Now all this seems inconsistent with the notion that a freeholder The vill as a suit-
as such owes suit. Somehow or another the court, or the owing unit.
king—for it is in the king’s name that the duty must be
enforced— has become entitled to a fixed number of suits, each of which is
incumbent on a certain tract of land. Of the size and nature of these suit-owing tracts
our evidence only permits us to say that there is no uniformity, but that often a whole
vill or manor is represented by a single suitor. It would seem that even “the great
counties” or “general counties” were not very large assemblies, while the court which
met once a month was, at least in some shires, much smaller. Possibly different
opinions as to the nature of the duty prevailed in different counties. In Yorkshire, for
example, where suits exigible from all freeholders would have been an intolerable
burden, the usual attendants at the county court seem to be the stewards of the tenants
in chief.41 But in general the assembly was formed out of miscellaneous elements;
there were tenants by military service and socage tenants, tenants in chief of the king
and tenants of mesne lords, great men and small men. Many of them were knights, the
predecessors of the country gentlemen who for centuries to come will do justice and
manage the county business because they like the work; but there were also yeomen,
holders of but a virgate or so apiece, who went there because they were bound to go
by their tenure; they pay little or no rent because they discharge a duty which
otherwise would fall upon their lords.

At the same time we must not credit the men of the thirteenth Inconsistent theories
century with a thoroughly consistent doctrine as to the “real” of suit.
character of the duty.42 There is a conflict of interests and
therefore a clash of theories. In 1258, when the Barons’ War was at hand, there was
an outcry about suit of court; new-fangled suits are exacted as well to counties and
hundreds as to franchise courts.43 The provision made in answer to this outcry spoke
only of suits due to the courts of the lords and does not seem to touch the county
courts or such of the hundred courts as were not in private hands.44 Among other
points it decides that, when a tenement which owes a suit descends to co-heirs or is
divided by feoffment, no more than one suit is due. This may be the decision of a
question that had been open, and we find that the converse case had been debatable. If
a division of the tenement does not increase the number of suits, the union of several
tenements, we might argue, ought not to decrease that number. But we find it
otherwise decided, “for it is not consonant to law that when two inheritances descend

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 317 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

to one heir, or when one person acquires divers tenements, more suits than one should
be due for these several inheritances or tenements to one and the same court.”45
“Reality” and “personality,” if we may so speak, are contending for the mastery, and
the result which emerges after the days of Lewes and Evesham seems favourable to
the freeholders. When a tenement is divided, the suit is considered as annexed to the
land; when two tenements meet, it is deemed a personal duty. It is not impossible that
early in the fourteenth century the attempt to compel reluctant suitors to attend the
county court was already being abandoned. In the other local courts it was usual to
receive and enrol the “essoins,” that is the excuses for non-attendance, of the suitors
who did not appear. But this, we are told, was not done in the county courts, whence
we may infer that those who did not attend were not at pains to excuse themselves.46
There is much in the later history of parliamentary elections to make us believe that
little trouble was taken to enforce the appearance of those who were bound to come,
and that no trouble was taken to exclude the presence of others.47

Besides the shape that it took once in every four weeks and the The court in its fullest
fuller shape that it took once in every six months, the county form.
court may have taken a yet ampler shape upon great occasions, in
particular when it was summoned to meet the justices in eyre, an event which,
according to the opinion of the suitors of Henry III.’s day, was not to occur more than
once in seven years and which as a matter of fact did not occur much oftener. That the
common immunity “from shires and hundreds” did not discharge its possessors from
having to appear at these grand meetings is clear. It may even be argued that on these
rare occasions all the freeholders of the county had to present themselves. But the
writs which summon these meetings hardly prove this;48 we find some traces of
persons bound by tenure to discharge the suit due from vills and manors even when
that suit is to be done before the justices in eyre,49 and the lists of persons who either
sent excuses for not coming or were amerced for being absent without excuse do not
point to assemblages so large as those which must have come together had every
freeholder of the shire been bound to attend them.

From a time remoter than the thirteenth century we have little The communal courts
evidence; indeed the passage in the Leges Henrici to which in earlier times.
reference has already been made50 seems to tell us all that we
can learn. It gives us a list of the persons who are to attend the shire-moot— episcopi,
comites, vicedomini, vicarii, centenarii, aldermanni, praefecti, praepositi, barones,
vavassores, tungrevii, et ceteri terrarum domini. Of some of the titles here mentioned
an explanation is to be sought rather in France than in England; we may doubt
whether to the writer’s mind they conveyed any precise meaning, whether he meant
much more than that all persons of distinction, all the great, ought to come.51 But
who are the terrarum domini? That they are not merely the tenants in chief may fairly
be argued from the fact that vavassors as well as barons are among them, though we
cannot be certain that either of a baron or of a vavassor any exact definition could
have been given.52 Whether the term “lords of lands” or “owners of lands” was
intended to comprise the humbler freeholders (for example, the considerable class of
persons who appear in Domesday Book as liberi homines), may be doubtful; dominus
is a flexible word; but we have some proof that in Henry I.’s time “small men,” minuti
homines, owed suit to the county court and served as doomsmen.53 Altogether the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 318 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

words of our text are vague; they point to no one clearly established rule, but rather to
a struggle between various principles.54

One principle might be found in personal rank: the rank of a A struggle between
baron, knight, vavassor, thegn. Another in the characters of the various principles.
various tenures: military and non-military, serjeanty and socage.
A third in the grades of tenure, tenancy in chief of the king being contrasted with
mesne tenures. Probably a fourth was already being found in what we take leave to
call mere “realism” and private bargainings; suit is becoming a debt owed by manors
and acres, and those who represent the burdened land may adjust the burden as seems
to them best. If a lord attends, we are told, he thereby discharges all the land that he
holds in demesne.55 Suppose him to make a feoffment of part of this land; why
should a second suit become due? The court is entitled only to such suits as it has
been seised of in the past.

The privilege of doing his suit by attorney to the courts of the Suit by attorney.
county, the trithing, the hundred and to the seignorial courts was
conceded to every freeman by the Statute of Merton in 1236.56 This general
concession we may treat as new, though for a long time past the greater men were
privileged to send their stewards or a deputation of villagers from their villages,57 and
sometimes the tenant who was bound by his tenure to discharge the suit due from the
land was spoken of as the enfeoffed attorney or attorned feoffee of his lord.58 As to
the deputation of villagers, we read nothing of this in documents later than the Leges
Henrici, though, as will be seen hereafter, the reeve and four men of the township
have to attend the sheriff’s turn and the coroner’s inquests, and they must go to the
county court if they have a crime to present. Nor do the Leges Henrici contemplate
their appearance as normal:—if neither the lord nor his steward can be present, then
the reeve, priest and four men may appear and acquit the vill of its suit. Still this
draws our attention to yet another principle that has been at work: the county court
represents not merely all the lands, but also all the vills of the shire, and it is quite in
conformity with this that in the thirteenth century the suit-owing unit of land should
frequently be a vill.59

Perhaps it is this heterogeneous character of the county and Representative
hundred courts which makes it possible for men to regard them character of county
as thoroughly representative assemblies and to speak of them as court.
being the counties and hundreds. They do not represent one well-
defined class or condition of men, and they do represent all the lands of the shire,
franchises excepted. Every landholder who holds his land freely may be deemed to be
present there, if not in person then by someone who represents his land, it may be by
his lord, or it may be by his tenant. At any rate the whole shire, franchises excepted,
seems responsible for the misdoings and defaults of its court, even for those which
take place in the thinly attended meetings that are holden month by month.

The suitors were the doomsmen of the court. The evidence that The suitors as
they bore this English title is indeed slight, but some such term doomsmen.
we must use.60 Occasionally in Latin documents they are spoken
of as iudices, more commonly as iudicatores;61iusticiarii they are not; iudicatores is

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 319 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

a word which serves to distinguish them from ecclesiastical iudices and royal
iusticiarii.62 But whatever may have been their English title, their function is put
before us as that of “making the judgments.” If for a moment we adopt German terms,
we can say that they are die Urteilfinder, while the sheriff or (as the case may be) the
bailiff of the hundred, or the steward of the franchise is der Richter. He is, we may
say, the presiding magistrate; he summons the court, he “holds the court,” he “holds
the pleas,” he regulates the whole procedure, he issues the mandates; but he does not
make the judgments: when the time for a judgment has come he demands it from the
suitors. During the Norman period this seems the constitution of all courts, high and
low. When there is a trial in the king’s court, the king demands a judgment from the
assembled prelates and barons.63 But the gradual intrusion of the sworn inquest, of
the nascent trial by jury, soon begins to transfigure those courts in which the king
presides by himself or his commissioners; justices and jurors begin to take the place
of president and doomsmen, and this process is so rapid that we have now-a-days
some difficulty in describing the ancient courts without using foreign or archaic
terms. Still the communal courts preserve their ancient form. Under Edward I.
Hengham says that if a false judgment is given in the county court, the sheriff ought
not to be punished: “the county, that is, the commune of the county” is to be punished;
therefore, he adds, let the suitors beware. Perhaps in his day some explanation of this
state of things was thought necessary, at any rate he gives one:—sheriffs might err
from partiality or from ignorance; besides sheriffs are sometimes men of little
substance and would be unable to pay an amercement if convicted of a false
judgment. Therefore, says he, it is ordained that the judgment be given by the whole
county.64

That even in the thirteenth century the participation of the suitors A session of the
in the judgments was no mere formality we may learn from county court.
records which give us valuable glimpses of the county courts and
their procedure. In 1226 there was a quarrel between the sheriff of Lincolnshire and
the suitors. The version of the story favourable to the sheriff is this:—One day he held
pleas in the county court from early morn to vespertide and then, since many pleas
remained unheard for lack of daylight, he told the “stewards and knights and others of
the county” that they must come again next morning, hear the plaints and make the
judgments. On the following morning the sheriff took his seat; the knights and
stewards remained outside the house; he bade them come in, hear the plaints and
make the judgments. They refused, and even those who had entered the house left it
saying that the county court should only be holden for one day at a time. Therefore
the sheriff, since he alone could not make the judgments, adjourned the plaintiffs and
defendants to the wapentake courts; seven score cases were left unheard. Then he held
a court for the ten wapentakes of Ancaster, to which came many, both knights and
others; among them Theobald Hauteyn and Hugh of Humby; and, the pleadings
having been heard, the sheriff told the knights to make the judgments. Then Theobald
arose and said that they ought not to make the judgments there nor elsewhere outside
the county court, for he had lately been in the king’s court talking with the
Archbishop and the Earl of Chester and other magnates and he was certain that before
three weeks were out they would have the king’s writ freeing them from these
exactions. Thereupon the sheriff answered that for all this he should not stay his hand
from doing justice to the poor until he received some command to the contrary; and

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 320 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

once more he bade the knights and others make the judgments. They then asked leave
to talk the matter over by themselves and went out. While they were in conference,
Theobald and Hugh came to them, and protested that the sheriff was infringing Magna
Carta and the franchises of the magnates, and advised them to make no judgments.
Then they entered the house, and Theobald as their spokesman said that they were not
bound to make any judgments, and abused the sheriff and demanded his warrant for
holding pleas in the wapentake. The sheriff answered that he thought that he as sheriff
and bailiff of the king had warrant enough, and then departed, his business undone.
Then arose Thomas Fitz Simon, the steward of John Marshall, and said that Hugh was
wrong in demanding the sheriff’s warrant and that it was rather for Hugh to show why
the sheriff should not hold pleas. And then Thomas deemed a doom (et unum
iudicium fecit idem Thomas). “That’s your doom,” was the scornful answer; “we shall
have your lord here presently and will tell him how you behave yourself in this
county.”65

We have told this curious story at length because it illustrates The suitors and the
several points, the constitution of the court by “the stewards, dooms.
knights and others,” the amount of business that it has to do, such
that after a long day’s work a hundred and forty causes must stand adjourned, the
unwillingness of the suitors to do anything that may increase the burden of the suit,
the position of the sheriff as the presiding officer, his incompetence to make
judgments. Over and over again the function of the suitors is defined as that of
making judgments. And it is much rather as “judges of law” than as “judges of
fact”—if into such a context we may introduce these modern terms—that the suitors
are expected to be active. In the seventeenth century John Smyth could boast of the
good justice done by the free suitors of the hundred of Berkeley where “there had not
been in any age any trials by jury.”66 A collection of precedents designed for the use
of the stewards of the manorial courts has come down to us. In most of the
hypothetical cases all is supposed to go smoothly; the plaintiff pleads, the defendant
pleads, and then the steward as a matter of course gives the judgment of the court, to
the effect that there must be an inquest or that the defendant is to bring compurgators
to prove his case. We may indeed read through almost the whole tract without
discovering that the steward has assessors. But in one case the defendant does not
deny the plaintiff’s plaint with adequate particularity. Thereupon the steward bids the
parties retire and addresses the doomsmen:—“Fair sirs, ye who are of this court, how
seemeth it to you that the defendant hath defended this?” A spokesman answers that
the defence was insufficient. The parties are then recalled and the steward informs
them of the judgment of the court.67 Probably in a manorial court the steward would
often have his own way; but a sheriff might find that some of the suitors of the county
knew more law than he did, and our story from Lincolnshire will show that they might
have opinions of their own about the meaning of Magna Carta. To give one more
example:—In Edward I.’s day the palatinate of Chester had fallen into the king’s
hand; the justiciar of Chester was the king’s officer. On one occasion he was
presiding in the palatine court and Ralph Hengham, one of the royal justices of
England, had been sent thither to act as his assessor. An assize of last presentation
came before them; certain usual words were missing from the writ. Thereupon arose
one John of Whetenhall, who was sitting among the doomsmen of the county, and
asserted that the Earl of Chester had delivered to them a register of original writs and

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 321 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

that the writ in the present case conformed to that register. The doomsmen then
demanded an adjournment until the morrow, and then one of them pronounced the
judgment. Hengham declared that the judgment was against law and departed. Thus,
even in the presence of a royal justice, the doomsmen of Chester decided questions of
law.68 On other occasions we find these “doomsmen and suitors” asserting that
before a judgment of their court is evoked to the king’s court, all the barons and their
stewards and all the doomsmen of the county must be summoned to decide whether
they will stand by the judgment or amend it.69

We learn from one passage in the Leges Henrici that if the judges Powers of a majority.
disagreed the opinion of the majority prevailed;70 in another
passage we are told that the opinion which is to prevail is that of the better men and
that which is most acceptable to the justice. The latter text, though not unambiguous,
seems to mean that, if the dooms-men differ about the doom, the sheriff or other
president of the court may adopt the ruling that he thinks best, but should have regard
to the rank and repute of those who have offered their opinions.71 A case would not
necessarily be heard by the whole body of suitors. In the first place, some might be
rejected from the judgment-seat for divers reasons, in particular as not being the
“peers” of the parties; for it is in this context that we first hear the phrase that became
famous at a later time, iudicium parium suorum. Every one is to be judged by his
peers and by men of the same district; there are to be no “foreign judgments,” that is
to say, judgments by strangers; the great man is not to perish by the judgment of those
of lower degree.72 How far this dangerously aristocratic principle was carried we
cannot say; to all appearance the old scheme of estates of men, which recognized such
equations as 1 thegn = 6 ceorls, gave way before feudal influences, while those
influences were not powerful enough to substitute in its stead a classification based on
the various kinds or the various grades of tenure. The small are not to judge the
great:—no more accurate principle can be stated. In the second place, it seems to have
been a common practice, at least in certain districts, for the parties to elect from
among the suitors a few judges to decide their dispute; both parties might agree in
choosing the same men, or the one party would choose half of the whole number, the
other party the other half.73

We may well suppose that the ordinary business of the court was The buzones.
transacted by a small group of active men. Of such a group we
hear something, and the members of it seem to bear the strange name busones or
buzones. Bracton tells us that, when the king’s justices in eyre come into the county
and have proclaimed the object of their mission, they shall go apart, taking with them
some four or six or more of the great folk of the county, who are called the busones of
the county and whose opinions carry weight with the rest, and shall have a colloquy
with them.74 To suggest that in the place of this curious word we should read barones
is easy; but the same word occurs elsewhere. In John’s reign the county of Gloucester
was amerced for a false judgment; the roll which records this adds, “And let the
knights of the county who are wont to take part in false judgments and are buzones
iudiciorum, be arrested.”75 Neither passage would suggest that this title was official,
or more than a cant name for the active doomsmen of the shire-moot; but the context
into which Bracton introduces it may serve to show how the way was paved for the
justices of the peace of a later time.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 322 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

To what we have said above concerning the competence of this Business of the court.
court little can here be added. Seemingly its jurisdiction in
actions for land had become of small importance in the course of the thirteenth
century. It formed a stepping-stone between the feudal court and the royal court, and
he who brought his case thus far meant to carry it further. As regards personal actions,
in Edward I.’s day its competence was restricted within a limit of forty shillings.76
When, how and why this limit was imposed is a difficult question. Possibly we may
trace it to an exposition which the king’s justices had given of the Statute of
Gloucester (1278), though this statute on the face of it seems to favour the local
tribunals, for it merely says that none shall have a writ of trespass in the king’s court
unless he will affirm that the goods taken away were worth forty shillings at the
least.77 But the sum of forty shillings is mentioned at a much earlier time. In the Irish
Register of Writs of John’s day a writ directing the sheriff to hold a plea of debt (in
technical language “a Justicies for debt”) is given with the remark that if the debt be
less than forty shillings this writ can be obtained without gift, that is without payment
to the king, while if the debt is greater the plaintiff must find security to pay the king a
third of the sum that he recovers.78 In a treatise of somewhat later date79 we find the
same rule, but the limiting sum has been raised from forty shillings to thirty marks. In
general a plaintiff who went to the county court to recover a debt did not want any
writ at all, though the royal missive might be useful, since it would urge a dilatory and
not impartial sheriff to do his duty. Perhaps some combination between a rule about
the fees to be paid for writs and the rule laid down by the Statute of Gloucester
produced that limitation of the competence of our local courts which in the end was
their ruin. However, in Edward I.’s day ruin was a long way off; forty shillings was as
yet a good round sum.

One act of jurisdiction, one supreme and solemn act, could be Outlawry in the
performed only in the county courts and in the folk-moot of county court.
London, the act of outlawry. Even the king’s court did not
perform it. The king’s justices could order that a man should be “exacted,” that is, that
proclamation should be made bidding him come in to the king’s peace, and could
further order that in case of his not appearing he should be outlawed; but the
ceremony of exaction and outlawry could take place only in a shire-moot or folk-
moot. And so it is even in our own day, or rather so it would be, had not outlawry
become a mere name.80

In the main the county court is a court of law; but in the middle Governmental
ages jurisdiction is never very clearly separated from functions.
government, and, as has been sufficiently shown elsewhere,81
the assembly of the shire sometimes has fiscal, military and administrative business
before it. It can even treat with the king about the grant of a tax, and ultimately, as all
know, it sends chosen knights to represent it in the parliaments. Still we should have
but little warrant for calling it a governmental assembly. It can declare the custom of
the county, but we do not often hear of its issuing ordinances or by-laws, though, with
the sanction of the justices in eyre, the county of Northumberland, all the freemen
thereof unanimously consenting, institutes a close time for the precious salmon.82
Nor must we endow this assembly with any inherent power of imposing taxes, though
the liability of the county for the repair of certain bridges appears at an early time and

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 323 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

may occasionally have necessitated a vote and resolution. Thus in John’s reign the
Abbot of Lilleshall says that the sheriff and other magnates provided that he should
build a bridge at Atcham and in return might take certain tolls.83 Still in Edward II.’s
reign the communities of Shropshire and Cheshire go to the king for leave to levy a
pavage for the improvement of a ford,84 and, as we shall see below, even the
boroughs did not at this time aspire to much liberty of self-taxation.

Hengham speaks as though the county court was sometimes held Place of session.
in the open air and in out-of-the-way places.85 Usually it was
held in the county town; but in Edward II.’s day the sheriff of Sussex had been
holding it at divers places, and to fix it at Chichester required a royal ordinance.86 In
Henry II.’s reign the county court of Derbyshire was held at Nottingham until the king
established it at Derby on the petition of the Derbyshire folk.87 Some moots may still
have assembled in the open air; the Lincolnshire court sat in doors;88 Earl Edmund
built a great hall at Lostwithiel for the county court of Cornwall;89 but we still hear of
“a green place” in which the court of Essex was holden.90 Apparently in old times the
dooms-men of the court sat upon four benches arranged in a square; what was done in
court was done “within the four benches.”91

§ 2.

The Hundred
The county is divided into hundreds or into wapentakes or into The hundred as a
wards, the term “wapentake” appearing in Yorkshire, district.
Lincolnshire, Derbyshire, Nottinghamshire, the term “ward” in
the northern-most counties. It is well known that the size of the hundred varies very
greatly, but that it varies according to a certain general rule. “Thus Kent and Sussex at
the time when Domesday Book was compiled, each contained more than sixty
hundreds, as they do at present; and in the counties which composed the ancient
kingdom of Wessex, the hundreds are almost as numerous, while the irregularity of
size, and the scattered confusion of the component parts of these ancient hundreds
must have been the result of usurpation or of improvident grants . . . On the contrary,
Norfolk and Suffolk (the East-Anglian counties) maintain a regularity of division still
applicable in many instances to the administration of justice. In the midland counties
the hundreds increase in size, but are not deficient in regularity. In Lancashire (a
county of greater extent than any of the Wessex counties) there are no more than six
hundreds—in Cheshire, seven:—and upon the whole so irregular is this distribution of
territory, that while some of the southern hundreds do not exceed two square miles . . .
the hundreds of Lancashire average at three hundred square miles in area.”92 If we
consider not acreage but a more significant fact, namely, the number of vills in the
hundred, we are brought to similar results. A Kentish hundred will often contain but
two, three or four vills; there seem to be instances in which vill and hundred are
coterminous.93 A “detached part” of a hundred is commoner than a “detached part”
of a county; some hundreds have from a remote time been extremely discrete.

The hundred court.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 324 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

The hundred had a court. According to the Leges Henrici it was held twelve times a
year;94 but in 1234, an ordinance states that in Henry II.’s time it was held at
fortnightly intervals and declares that for the future it is to sit but once in every three
weeks.95 It seems to have been supplied with suitors in the same way that the county
court was supplied:—the duty of suit had taken root in the soil. In some cases the
number of suitors was small. We read that in the wapentake of Bingham in
Nottinghamshire there were but twelve persons who owed suit; each of them had been
enfeoffed to do the suit due from a barony; the baronies of Tutbury, Peverel, Lovetot,
Paynel, Dover, Richmond, Gaunt and Byron were represented each by a suitor, the
baronies of Basset and Deyncourt by two suitors apiece.96 On the other hand so late
as the reign of Charles I. the court of the hundred of Berkeley in Gloucestershire had
four hundred suitors, of whom “seldom or never less than twenty and commonly
many more attended.”97 It was a court for civil, that is non-criminal, causes; but,
unlike the county court, it did not hold plea of lands; thus the actions which came
before it were chiefly actions of debt and trespass. It does not seem to have been in
any accurate sense inferior to the county court: that is to say, no appeal or complaint
for default of justice could be taken from the one to the other.

Those hundreds which had not fallen into other hands were “in Hundreds in the
the king’s hands.” The sheriff seems usually to have let them at king’s hands.
farm to bailiffs; the bailiff presided in the court and after paying
his rent made what gain he could from fees and amercements. Complaints are
frequent that the sheriffs have raised the old rents; the bailiffs who have to pay
advanced rents indemnify themselves by new exactions. In Sussex each hundred
seems to have had a beadle, that is a summoner, who was called an alderman. We are
told in Edward I.’s day that in time past these officers had been elected by those who
paid the hundred-scot; but now, at least in one case, they buy their offices and make a
profit by extortion.98 We hear further that such of the tenants of the barony of
L’Aigle as owed suit to the hundred court paid the sheriff £9. 17 s. 6 d. a year in order
that their suit to the county court might be done for them by the aldermen of the
hundreds, and this new hint as to the actual composition of a shire-moot is
welcome.99

But many of the hundreds had been granted to private persons. Hundreds in private
From 1255 we have an account of the thirty-nine hundreds of hands.
Wiltshire; sixteen and a half were in the king’s hand; twenty-two
and a half were in the hands of others. What is more, in thirteen cases the lord of the
hundred claimed to exclude the sheriff from holding a turn; he himself had the view
of frankpledge throughout the hundred save where this was in the hands of the lords
of manors.100 In 1320 the men of Devon said that almost all the hundreds of their
shire belonged to the magnates.101 In this sense a “hundred” is an “incorporeal
thing”; the lord of a hundred need not be lord or tenant of a single acre of land within
the precinct.

The hundred, like the county, was conceived to be fully Duties of the hundred.
represented by its court. If the court gave a false judgment, the
hundred had to pay for it. And the hundred, like the county, had communal duties and
could be fined for neglect of them. The chief example is the famous murder fine. If a

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 325 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

person was slain and the slayer was not produced, then the hundred was fined, unless
the kinsfolk of the dead man would come and “present his Englishry,” that is to say,
prove him to be an Englishman by birth. The Statute of Winchester (1285) made the
hundred liable for robberies committed within its borders in case the robbers were not
produced.102 On the other hand, we do not in this age hear of the hundred as having
any communal property, though a pasture that was “common” to a whole hundred
may still have existed.103

Twice a year the sheriff makes a progress or “turn” through the The sheriff’s turn.
hundreds, or rather through those which are not in the hands of
such lords as have the right to exclude him. The Leges Henrici tell us how twice a
year a specially full hundred court is to be held for the purpose of seeing that the
tithings are full and that all men are in frankpledge.104 Henry II. by the Assize of
Clarendon ordered the sheriffs to inquire of robbers, murderers and thieves by the
oath of twelve men of each hundred and of four men of each vill, and at the same time
he directed that the sheriffs should hold the view of frankpledge as well within the
franchises of the magnates as without. These purposes are answered by the sheriff’s
“turn” (the word occurs in the charter of 1217)105 —the object of the turn is “quod
pax nostra teneatur et quod tethinga integra sit.” The procedure of the turn at the end
of the thirteenth century was this:—Each vill in the hundred was represented by its
reeve and four men, or each tithing was represented by its tithing-man, or perhaps in
some places both systems of representation prevailed concurrently:—the
representatives would for the more part be villani. Then besides them a jury of
freeholders was wanted. It is probable that in strict theory every freeholder should
have been present, but twelve there had to be. Then the sheriff set before the
representatives of the vills or tithings a set of inquiries known as “the articles of the
view.” The list seems to have varied from place to place and time to time. Its object
was threefold, (1) to see that the system of frankpledge (of which we shall speak
below) was in proper working order, (2) to obtain accusations against those suspected
of grave crimes, in order that the sheriff might capture them and keep them
imprisoned or on bail until the king’s justices should come to hold an eyre or deliver
the gaol (for by this time the sheriff had lost the power of holding pleas of the crown),
and (3) to obtain accusations against those suspected of minor offences in order that
they might be amerced by the sheriff. With this last object in sight the articles
specified many petty misdeeds: hue and cry wrongfully raised, watercourses impeded,
roads diverted, brawls and affrays, breaches of the assize of bread and beer, and so
forth. The representatives of the vills or tithings in answer to these articles made
presentments which were laid before the twelve freeholders, who had power to reject
or supply omissions in them. Upon the presentments thus endorsed by the freeholders,
the sheriff took action, issuing orders for the arrest of those charged with felony and
declaring those charged with pettier misdeeds to be in the king’s mercy. He seems to
have been the only judge in this court,106 but the amercements were “affeered”—
that is to say, the amount to be paid by each person who had fallen into the king’s
mercy was fixed—by two or more of the suitors who were sworn to do the work
justly.107

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 326 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

§ 3.

The Vill And The Township
It seems nearly true, though not quite true, to say that the whole England mapped out
of England is divided into vills: nearly true, for it is commonly into vills.
assumed that every spot of land must lie within some vill: not
quite true, for it may be that there are spots so highly endowed with immunities, so
much outside the ordinary rules of police law and fiscal law, that they are not
accounted to form part of any vill, while in all probability there are some tracts, which
are deemed to belong to two, three, or more vills in common. Even a city or borough
is a vill, or perhaps in some cases a group of vills.108

Of the varying size of the vills it is needless to speak, for in Vill and parish.
general the vill of the thirteenth century is the “civil parish” of
the nineteenth. The parish is originally a purely ecclesiastical district, and during the
middle ages it is no unit in the geography of our temporal law, though from time to
time the secular courts must notice it when disputes arise about tithes and the like.109
In southern England the parish normally coincided with the vill; in the northern
counties the parishes were large; often a parish consisted of a group of vills. In our
modern law the parish has, at least in name, supplanted the vill or township; but this is
due to causes which did not come into play until the Tudor time when the rate for the
relief of the poor was imposed. The law then began to enforce a duty which had
theretofore been enforced by religion and naturally it adopted for this purpose the
geography of the church. Then in course of time other rates were imposed, and the
poor’s rate was taken as their model. Thus the parish became the important district for
most of the purposes of local government. But this victory of the parish over the
township was hardly more than a change of name. The townships of northern England
insisted that, albeit they were not parishes, they ought to be treated as units in the poor
law system, as parishes for the purposes of the poor law, and then by force of
statutory interpretations the old vill got a new name and appeared as the “civil
parish.”110

As the county or hundred may be discrete, so also the vill may be Discrete vills.
discrete and apparently some of our vills were composed of
scattered fragments. In certain parts of Gloucestershire, for example, until scientific
frontiers were established by a modern commission, a parish consisted of a large
number of small strips of land lying intermingled with the lands of other parishes, in
such a way as forcibly to suggest that at some remote time some one agricultural
community split up into several communities, each of which was given a share of land
of every quality.111 A detached portion of a parish lying ten miles away from the
main body is by no means an unknown phenomenon, while of certain parts of the
north of England we are told that the townships are intermixed “so that there is the
most complete jumble which it is possible to conceive.”112 The “extra-parochial
place” finds its explanation in the history of the church; in many cases that
explanation need go back no further than some papal bull of recent date; but when,
lying outside any known ecclesiastical division we find a single acre known as No

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 327 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Man’s Land, and then another small patch bearing the same name which has but two
inhabitants, and then a No Man’s Heath of nine acres,113 we shall be strongly
tempted to believe that as there were extra-parochial places, so also (if we may coin a
new term) there were “extra-villar” places, odds and ends which no township would
acknowledge as its own. So also in our own day some large moors in the north of
England are, or have lately been, deemed to be territory common to several different
townships.114

Besides vills there were hamlets; but the hamlet seems always to Hamlets.
have lain within the boundaries of a vill, and, though the law
might for some purposes take note of its existence,115 still it seems to have been but
rarely treated as more than a mere geographical tract. On the other hand, the vill or
township was no mere part of the earth’s surface, it was a community.116

We have little reason for believing that all our English vills Vill and village.
conformed to a single type, or that their histories had been
approximately identical. But there is a type to which many conformed and which we
must keep before our minds. It is that of the nucleated village with open fields. All the
houses of the vill are collected into one cluster. Around and inside this cluster there
may be many little “closes,” crofts and paddocks; but by far the larger part of the
territory of the vill lies uninclosed by any permanent fences. The arable lies in two,
three or more great “fields,” each of which is cut up into multitudinous strips. These
strips are reckoned to be acres, half-acres and roods. A villager who has in all but
thirty arable acres will have perhaps some forty or fifty strips scattered about in all
parts of the territory. A rude rotation of crop and fallow, the two-course or the three-
course system, is observed, and, so soon as a crop has been garnered, the whole of the
“field” which has borne it is depastured by the cattle of the villagers. Often the
meadows are similarly treated: that is to say, for the purpose of growing a hay-crop
they are enjoyed in severalty, but after the hay-harvest they become pasture for the
beasts of many “commoners.” Then there are permanent pastures which are never
inclosed or enjoyed in severalty but lie open at all seasons. Villages of this kind were
numerous in southern and eastern England. Others there were which did not widely
depart from the same type though they already contained some large closes and some
severed pastures. In the west there was more ring-fenced property, and sometimes the
vill looks like a group of small hamlets which is being kept together merely by legal
and governmental bonds. The questions of remote history that are suggested by the
maps of our villages we must not here discuss or even raise; but in many, perhaps in
most, cases the township or community of the vill cannot but be compacter and in
some sort more communal than is the community of a hundred or a county. Even if
there is no corporate and no common property, there is at least a great deal of
common enjoyment, and the economic affairs of every villager are closely intertwined
with those of his neighbours.117

Modern usage may treat the two words vill and township as Vill and township.
though they were synonymous; but in this respect medieval Latin
was a more accurate language than our own; it distinguished between the villa and the
villata, between the tract of land and the organized body of inhabitants. Doubtless the
English word which answered to the Latin villa was tún, ton, town, a word which in

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 328 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

comparatively modern times we have allowed the larger towns to appropriate to
themselves. We cannot say that the distinction between villa and villata was always,
still it was very generally, observed. If a crime takes place in the villa, the town of
Trumpington, the villata, the township of Trumpington, may get into trouble. And so
in what follows we shall use vill as an equivalent for villa, and township as an
equivalent for villata, thus distinguishing the plot of ground from the community that
inhabits it.118

For the township is a communitas,119 which, even if it has not Duties of township.
rights, certainly has duties. We may reckon up the most
important of them. It ought to attend the court held by the justices in eyre.120 It ought
to attend the sheriff’s turn. It ought to attend the hundred and county courts whenever
it has any crime to present.121 It must come at the coroner’s call to make inquest
when a dead man’s body is found.122 It is bound to see that all its members who
ought to be in frankpledge are in frankpledge. In some parts of the country the
township is itself a frankpledge, a tithing, a borgh, and in this case it is responsible for
the production of any of its members who is accused of crime.123 Apart from this, it
was bound to arrest malefactors; at all events if a person was slain within its
boundaries during the daytime and the slayer was not arrested, it was liable to an
amercement. In the thirteenth century this liability was frequently enforced by the
justices in their eyres; it must be distinguished from the liability of the hundred for the
murder fine and seems to flow from no known act of legislation but to be based on
immemorial custom.124 Again, from of old it was the duty of the township to raise
the hue and cry and follow the trail of stolen cattle. In 1221 the jurors of Bridgnorth
complained to the justices that the sheriff required of them the impossible task of
following the trail through the middle of the town.125 Moreover, it was a common
practice to commit prisoners to the charge of the villata, and then, if the prisoners
escaped, the villata was amerced. So if a malefactor took sanctuary, the neighbouring
townships had to watch the church and prevent his escape.126

Most of these liabilities can be traced back into the reign of Early examples of its
Henry II. A few examples of amercements may be given from duties.
among the many collected by Madox.127 The men of Tixover
are amerced for refusing to swear the king’s assize, the township of Isle for not
making suit after a murderer, the township of Rock for doing nothing when a man was
slain in their vill, the township of Midwinter for receiving a man who was not in
frankpledge, and the township of Newbold for a concealment and for burying a dead
man without the view of the sheriff’s serjeant.

During the thirteenth century the activity of the township was further developed by
legislation. An ordinance of 1233 provided that in every villa watch should be kept
throughout the night by four men at the least.
This was repeated in 1252 and at the same time new provision Statutory duties of
was made for enforcing the assize of arms. The original assize of township.
1181 had not treated the villata as an organized entity; it had
required that individuals should have the armour suitable to their station. The
ordinance of 1252 decreed that in every township a constable or two constables
should be appointed, and a chief constable in each hundred to convene the iurati ad

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 329 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

arma. In 1253 this is supplemented by a provision that arms necessary for the pursuit
of malefactors are to be provided at the cost of the township and are to remain to the
use of the township.128 The whole system of the assize of arms and of watch and
ward was consolidated in 1285 by the Statute of Winchester; the constabulary and the
militia took the form that they were to keep during the rest of the middle ages.129

Again, we see the vill as a district bound to contribute to the Contribution of
fines and amercements which are imposed upon the county and township to general
the hundred, for instance, the murder fines for which the hundred fines.
is liable. In the Hundred Rolls we read numerous complaints
about vills and parts of vills which have been “subtracted” from these duties by lords,
who have or pretend to have immunities. The effect of such subtraction was to
increase the burden that fell on the neighbouring vills. Every extension of the
“franchises” damaged “he geldable,” that is to say, the lands and vills which enjoyed
no privilege.

The township again is constantly brought before us as having had Unjust exactions from
to bear all manner of unlawful exactions. The Hundred Rolls townships.
teem with complaints. Not only have the townships been
amerced, according to their own account unjustly amerced, for the neglect of their
police duties, but the royal officers have refused to do their own duties without being
paid by the townships. Sheriffs will not take prisoners off their hands and coroners
will not suffer them to bury their dead until there had been payment. One typical
instance will be enough. A criminal took sanctuary in the church at Fos-dike; the
township was bound to watch the church until the coroner came; the coroner would
not come for less than a mark; so the township had to watch the church forty days to
its great damage.130

The practice of amercing the township for neglect of its police Miscellaneous
duties may have begotten the practice, which certainly prevailed offences of the
in the thirteenth century, of treating the township as an township.
amerciable unit capable of committing misdeeds of many kinds.
Already in Henry II.’s day the township of Maltby owes four marks for having
ploughed up the king’s highway.131 In 1235 certain townships are to be amerced for
having helped a man to put himself in seisin without waiting for the presence of the
sheriff’s officer; their amercement is to be affeered by other townships.132 On the
Hundred Rolls we may find such entries as the following;—the township of God-
manchester has made a purpresture upon the king’s highway and has appropriated
therefrom the third of a rod; the whole township of Eynesbury has dug in the king’s
highway and obstructed it to the nuisance of the country.133 In one part of
Cambridgeshire the hundredors speak of the townships as communes (communae) and
accuse them of sundry transgressions; the commune of Ely has occupied a fishery
which used to belong to the manor of Soham; the commune of Reach has broken
through the big dike (the Devil’s Ditch), so has the commune of Swaffham Bulbeck,
which also neglects to repair its bridge; the commune of Exning has ploughed up the
waste of Burwell, has obstructed the highway and diverted a watercourse. On the
other hand, Thomas of Bodenham has appropriated land from the commune of

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 330 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Burwell.134 Even an assault and battery may be attributed to a township, for the
whole township of Kennet has beaten and wounded two bailiffs.135

All this seems to set before us the township as a legal entity Organization of the
which has, if not rights, at all events many and multifarious township.
duties, and we might naturally suppose that in order to perform
these duties it must have had some permanent organization: for example, some court
or assembly in which the incidence of these duties could be apportioned among its
members. When however we search for such organization we fail; at least for a while
we seem to fail. Organization we find, but it is manorial; courts we find in plenty, but
they are courts of manors. The township as such has no court, no assembly. And so
with the officers of the township:—the constable is a new officer, his importance lies
in the future, while as to the reeve we only know him in real life as the reeve of a lord,
the reeve of a manor, usually a villein elected by his fellows in the lord’s court,
presented to and accepted by the lord’s steward, compelled to serve the office because
he is not a freeman. We must turn therefore from the township to the manor, but
before that can be reached we must traverse the whole field of seignorial justice. The
facts that we have to study are intricate; the legal principles have tied themselves into
knots; we must pull out the threads one by one.

§ 4.

The Tithing
A good example of this intricacy is afforded by the system of Frankpledge.
frank-pledge. We have had to mention it when speaking of the
sheriff’s turn, and again when speaking of the township’s duties. But also it is closely
connected in many ways with manorial affairs, with the relation between lord and
men. Taken by itself it is a remarkable institution and one that suggests difficult
questions.

And first we may look at the law as stated by Bracton.136 Every The system in century
male of the age of twelve years, be he free, be he serf, ought to xiii.
be in a frankpledge and a tithing (in franco plegio et in decenna).
To this rule there are numerous exceptions according to the varying customs of
different districts. The magnates, knights and their kinsmen, clerks and the like need
not be in frankpledge; the freeholder (in one passage Bracton even says the
freeman137 ) need not be in frankpledge, nor need the citizen who has fixed
property:—his land is equivalent to a frankpledge. Again, instead of being in
frankpledge one may be in the mainpast of another. The head of a household answers
for the appearance in court of the members of his household, his servants, his
retainers, those whom his hand feeds, his manupastus or mainpast —we may use a
very Old English word and say his loaf-eaters.138 They are in his frith-borgh and
need no other pledge.139 But, these exceptions being made, a male of the age of
twelve years or upwards ought to be, and it is the duty of the township in which he
dwells to see that he is, in frankpledge and tithing. If he is accused of a crime and not

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 331 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

forthcoming and the township has failed in this duty, then it will be amerced. If on the
other hand he was in a tithing, then the amercement will fall upon the tithing.

The strict enforcement of these rules is abundantly proved by the Township and tithing.
rolls of the itinerant justices. When an accused person is not
produced, his township is amerced if he was not in a tithing (decenna, theothinga,
thuthinga etc.), and, if he was in a tithing, then that tithing is amerced. But to all
seeming the “tithing” meant different things in different parts of the country. There
can be no doubt that over a large part of England the persons subject to the law of
frankpledge were distributed into groups, each consisting of ten, or in some cases of
twelve or more, persons; each group was known as a “tithing”; each was presided
over by one of the associated persons who was known as the chief-pledge, tithing-
man, head-borough, borsholder, head or elder, that is, of the borh or pledge.140 The
township discharged its duty by seeing that all who were resident within its
boundaries were in these groups. On the other hand, in the southernmost and some
western counties there seems to be a different arrangement:—the vill is a tithing, or in
some cases a group of geographically separated tithings; the tithing is a district, even
the borgha or pledge is a district;141 the tithing-man is the tithing-man of a place, of
a vill or hamlet; the personal groups of ten or a dozen men are not found. In this part
of the country the two duties, which elsewhere we see as two, seem fused into one:
the township discharges its duty of having all its members in frankpledge and tithing
by being itself a tithing and a frankpledge.142 But further, there were large parts of
England in which there was no frank-pledge. In the middle of the thirteenth century
the men of Shrop-shire asserted that within their boundaries no one was in a tithing; at
the end of the century the jurors of Westmoreland declared that the law of Englishry,
of murder fines, of tithing, of frankpledge, of mainpast, did not prevail and never had
prevailed north of the Trent; at any rate it did not prevail in their county. Probably
they drew the line at too southerly a point; but it is, to say the least, doubtful whether
the system of frankpledge extended to any part of the ancient kingdom of
Northumbria.143

The maintenance of this system is enforced, not merely by The view of
amercements inflicted when the township or the tithing has failed frankpledge.
in its duty and a criminal has escaped from justice, but also by
periodical inspections and what we might call “field-days” of the frank-pledges.
Twice a year the sheriff holds in each hundred a specially full hundred court to see
that all men who ought to be are in frank-pledge. These half-yearly meetings we can
trace back to the reign of Henry I.; they may be much older; in course of time they
acquire the name of the sheriff’s “turn.” But though Henry II. in the Assize of
Clarendon (1166) had strictly decreed that this business was to be in the sheriff’s
hands,144 we find in the thirteenth century that there are large masses of men who
never go near the sheriff’s turn. They are the men of lords who rightfully or
wrongfully exercise the franchise that is known as “view of frankpledge”: that is to
say, of lords who in their own courts see that their tenants are in frankpledge and take
the profits which arise from the exercise of this jurisdiction; sometimes they allow the
sheriff to be present, very often they exclude him altogether. Of all the franchises, the
royal rights in private hands, view of frankpledge is perhaps the commonest.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 332 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

The strict theory of the law seems to have required that all the Attendance at the
frankpledges should attend the view; but as a matter of fact it view.
was usual for none but the chief pledges to attend; often however
they had to bring with them a sum of money which was accepted in lieu of the
production of their tithings. Thus a system of representation of the tithing arose and
very naturally it became bound up in intricate combinations with the representation of
the township by its reeve and four men. Especially when the “view” is in private
hands, we often find that the duty of presenting offenders is performed by the chief
pledges, who thus form themselves into a jury. Under the influence of the Assize of
Clarendon, the duty of producing one’s fellow-pledges to answer accusations seems to
have been enlarged into a duty of reporting their offences and making presentments of
all that went wrong in the tithing.

Of the means by which men were “brought into tithings,” into Constitution of
the groups of ten or a dozen, we know very little. Could a youth tithings.
choose his tithing? Could a tithing expel or refuse to admit a
member whose bad character would make him burdensome? The answer to these and
to similar questions seems to be that the men who had to be in tithings were generally
unfreemen. They were brought into tithings by the lord or his steward and they could
not resist.145 We may find a chief pledge paying a few pence to his lord in order that
a certain man, presumably a bad subject, may be removed from his tithing. The chief
pledge seems to have exercised a certain authority over his subordinate pledges; they
owed him some obedience,146 and probably in the southern counties the tithing-man
of the tithing, the borhsealdor of the borh, was also normally the reeve of the vill; but
it is only in legal legends that he has any judicial powers.147

§ 5.

Seignorial Jurisdiction
According to the legal theory of the thirteenth century seignorial Regalities and feudal
jurisdiction has two roots—(1) the delegation of royal powers, rights.
(2) the relation between lord and tenants. Jurisdictional rights are
divided into two classes. On the one hand, there are the franchises and regalities
(libertates, regalia) which, at least according to the opinion of the king’s lawyers, can
only exist in the hands of a subject by virtue of a grant from the crown. On the other
hand, there is jurisdiction involved in the mere possession of a manor or in the mere
fact of having tenants; we may briefly characterize it as being of a civil, non-criminal
kind.148 Bracton in the statement of his general theory of temporal justice seems to
neglect it. In this we cannot follow him. As to the franchises he speaks very
positively. Who can bestow them? The king, and only he, for all justice and judgment,
all that concerns the peace, all coercive power are his. Those things therefore that
concern jurisdiction or that concern the peace belong to no one, but only to the king’s
crown and dignity, and they cannot be separated from the crown, since they make the
crown, for the king’s crown is to do judgment and justice and keep the peace. Such
jurisdictional rights cannot be held by a private person “unless it be given him from

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 333 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

above.” Then he lays down two maxims:—“Iurisdictio delegata non potest
delegari”:—“Nullum tempus occurrit regi.”149

Two very wholesome maxims; but it is clear that they have not Acquisition of the
been observed and we may doubt whether the kings themselves regalities.
have made strenuous efforts to maintain them. Our information
about the franchises must be drawn for the more part from pleadings of Edward I.’s
reign; but these, despite their wealth of detail, are not very satisfactory, or rather
disclose a state of things that is not easily described. Early in his reign Edward began
a vigorous attack upon the franchises. First by means of inquests, the results of which
are recorded on the Hundred Rolls, he ascertained what franchises were actually
exercised, and then he sent out his judges and pleaders to demand by what warrant
(quo waranto) the lords were wielding these powers. His advocates took the highest
ground, propounded extreme doctrines, doctrines which would have destroyed a large
half of the existing “liberties.” But the king did not proceed to extremities; few
judgments were given; he had gained his main object; any further growth of the
franchises was stopped; in 1290 he consented to a compromise. A continuous seisin
for the last hundred years—the coronation of Richard I. was chosen as a limiting
date—was to be a sufficient answer to the inquiry quo waranto.150

Thus we hear no statements of the law which can claim to be Theories of the royal
impartial. On the one hand, we have the doctrines of the king’s lawyers.
law officers, on the other hand, a mass of facts which prove that
these doctrines, if they are not new, have been ignored. Let us see how far the royal
advocates can go. The Bishop of Ely is defending his egregious liberties by charters
of Edgar, the Confessor, the Conqueror, and Henry III. Gilbert Thornton to all his
other objections adds this—“Allow for one moment that all these liberties are
expressly mentioned in the charters, still the king has an action for revoking them,
since he has never confirmed them. As regards the franchises of his crown each
successive king is to be deemed an infant. His case is like that of a church. Each
successive rector can revoke the lands of the church if they have been alienated by his
predecessor.”151 That the franchises are inalienable is constantly asserted. Robert
FitzNicholas took upon himself to grant the view of frank-pledge of two-thirds of a
vill to John Giffard; this, says Thornton, is a cause of forfeiture; he was bound to
exercise the jurisdiction in person and not to give it to another.152 If you urge long
seisin, you aggravate your offence.153 Your usurpation cannot have had an innocent
beginning; every one, says Bracton, must know that these things belong to the
crown.154 It is plain to all, says Thornton, that upon the conquest of England every
jurisdiction was united to the crown:155 —this historical theory is of great use when
Anglo-Saxon charters are propounded. Even if it be allowed that there are cases in
which user can beget title, this concession can only be made in favour of those whose
ancestors came in with the Conqueror; no churchman can take advantage of it.156
And, if it comes to charters, the king is entitled to the benefit of every doubt; he is not
to be ousted of his rights by “obscure and general words.”157 He is the giver and it is
for him to interpret his gift.158 “Liberties” are easily forfeited by abuse or by mere
non-use. The grantee must take the first opportunity that occurs of getting seisin of the
franchise and must maintain his seisin. In Edward I.’s day he loses his right unless he
claims it before the justices in eyre whenever they come round. Unfortunately the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 334 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

forfeited liberties are easily restored in consideration of a sum of money. It is this that
prevents a modern reader from heartily taking the king’s side in the controversy.
Despite all that is said about the inseparability of justice from the crown, the king sells
liberties and compels the purchasers to buy them over and over again.

We may now glance at the franchises, first mentioning briefly Various kinds of
those which have least to do with justice and then speaking more franchises.
at length of the jurisdictional powers.

(i)Fiscal Immunities. The grantees, their men, and their lands are Fiscal immunities.
freed from every imaginable form of taxation, “imperial and
local”—if we may use such modern terms:—from all scots and gelds, danegelds,
neatgelds, horngelds, footgelds, woodgelds, felgelds, scutage, carucage, hidage,
tallage, aids for the king, aids for the sheriff and his bailiffs, wardpenny, averpenny,
hundredpenny, tithing-penny, borghhalfpenny, chevage, headpenny;159 further, from
all indirect taxes:—from passage, pontage, peage, lastage, stallage, vinage, weitage,
toll; further from all fines and amercements imposed upon the shires and the
hundreds, in particular from the murder fine.

(ii)Immunities from personal service. They are freed from Immunities from
military service, “from hosts and summonses to the host,” from personal service.
suit of court, from all shires, trithings, lathes, wapentakes and
hundreds, from jury service, from tithings and frankpledge, from the duty of repairing
castles, parks, roads and bridges, from the duty of carrying the king’s treasure and
victuals, from carriage and summage and navige.

(iii)Immunities from forest law. These are usually the subject of Immunities from
special bargains and are not thrown about with a lavish hand; but forest law.
sometimes the grantees succeed in freeing themselves, their
lands, men and dogs from some or all of the forestal regulations, from the
swainmotes, regards of the forest, amercements of the forest, “waste and assart.”160
The immunities shade off into licences, such as that of keeping eight brachets and a
pair of greyhounds and hunting the fox, the hare and the wild cat in the king’s forest
of Essex.161

(iv)Fiscal powers. The king, it will be remembered, from time to Fiscal powers.
time grants to his tenants the power of taking an aid or a scutage
from their tenants, and, though these imposts may be regarded as feudal services, yet
in practice they cannot be collected without a royal writ, and in course of time even
theory seems to require that the king should have granted his tenants “their scutages”
and given them leave to levy their aids.162 Again, the king can make a permanent
grant of the produce of a tax and of the right to collect it; thus John gave to the Bishop
of Ely and his successors the patronage over the Abbot of Thorney and “the aid of
sheriffs and their bailiffs from all the men and tenements belonging to the said
abbey,” so that the bishops became entitled to the due known as the sheriff’s aid.163
It is by no means improbable that a similar result was sometimes produced by mere
words of immunity. When the king frees an abbey from scots and gelds, do the
tenants, free and villein, of the abbey get the benefit of this exemption purchased by

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 335 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

their lord’s money, or do they not now have to pay to the abbot what formerly they
paid to the royal officers? John had granted that the monks of Ramsey and their
demesnes and all the men of their demesnes should be free of all aids and demands of
sheriffs and reeves and bailiffs;164 but at a later time we find the tenants of the abbey
paying “sheriff’s aid”; doubtless they pay it to the abbot, and thus a tax becomes
something very like a feudal service.165 If we may infer that the same process had
been at work for a long time past, one of the sources of feudalism is here laid bare.166

(v)Jurisdictional powers. A royal charter of the thirteenth Jurisdictional powers.
century very often, though by no means always, declares that the
donee and his heirs are to hold the land with certain rights or powers which are
described by English words. Of such words the commonest are “cum saca et soca et
toll et theam”; often “infangenethef” is added; more rarely “utfangenethef” also;
while in some cases there is a long list.167 The less usual of the words are the more
intelligible; primarily they denote certain crimes, certain punishments, certain modes
of procedure; in the charters they mean that the donee is to have jurisdiction over
these crimes, power to inflict these punishments, power to use these modes of
procedure. Thus he is to have housebreaking, breach of a special peace, waylaying,
receipt of outlaws, the wites for bloodshed, for fighting, for flying from battle, for
neglect of military service, for fornication, for suffering an escape from prison, he is
to have the ordeal and the judicial combat. The list is careful to include just those
crimes which Cnut had declared to be reserved pleas of the crown, those jurisdictional
rights which the king has over all men unless he has seen fit to grant them away by
express words.168 Under the old law a grant accompanied by these words would
seemingly have stripped the king of all jurisdiction, except, it may be, a certain justice
of last resort. And the Norman Conquest made no sudden change; the criminal law
revealed by Domesday Book is of the old type and the pleas of the crown are just
those which are included in the lists that are before us. But during the latter half of the
twelfth century criminal law rapidly took a new shape; the doctrine of felony was
developed, capital punishment supplanted the old wites, and the specially royal
processes of indictment and inquest were introduced. The result seems to have been
that the powers conferred by these old words became antiquated, the very meaning of
the terms became disputable and those who wished for grants of high justice were
compelled to purchase less dubious phrases. The most liberal grants were not
unfrequently qualified by reservations the meaning of which grew ampler as time
went on. The king declares that he reserves nothing for himself “except those things
which belong to the king’s crown,” “except justice of life and member,” “except
murder, treasure trove, rape, and breach of the peace.”169 As the king’s peace
extends itself, as all serious crimes become felonies and deserve punishment of life
and member, the reservation grows at the expense of the grant. Little in the thirteenth
century was to be got out of these ancient words beyond the proceeds of a few minor
offences, scuffles, affrays, fornication. Thus infangenethef might give one power to
hang one’s own thief if caught within one’s own territory, and utfangenethef the
power to hang him wherever caught; but it seems essential that he should be caught
“handhaving or backbearing,” that is, with the stolen goods upon him and that he
should be prosecuted by the loser of the goods. The manorial gallows was a common
object of the country, but under these restrictions it cannot have been very useful.170

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 336 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Now these antique words occur in two different contexts. At first Contrast between
sight we may even say that two formulas which seem to us immunities and
contradictory are used as though they were equivalent. powers.
Sometimes the charter says that the donee is to hold his land with
bloodwite, fightwite and so forth; more often that he is to hold it free and quit of
bloodwite, fightwite and so forth; yet we can hardly doubt that the two phrases mean
the same thing. To declare that a lord is to hold his lands free of bloodwite is to
declare that if blood be shed by his tenants the king will not be entitled to the wite or
fine; this, however, seems regarded as implying as matter of course that the lord will
get the wite, for crimes are not to go unpunished. The principle thus brought out is
one that is of service to us when we are dealing with a time the charters of which are
couched in yet vaguer terms:—to free a lord’s land from royal jurisdiction or from the
exactions which are appurtenant to the exercise of royal jurisdiction is to create a
seignorial jurisdiction. The king’s lawyers sometimes protest against this principle,
protest that a grant of immunity from frankpledge is not equivalent to a grant of view
of frankpledge; but the lords refuse to recognize the distinction and may have history
upon their side.171

But the four commonest words are the most interesting. In the Sake and soke; toll
thirteenth century there is already much doubt as to their and team.
meaning, and among the lawyers we see a strong tendency to
make them mean as little as possible. Thus toll is sometimes the right to take toll,
sometimes the right to be free of toll; but often it is merely the right to tallage one’s
villeins, a right which every lord of villeins enjoys without the need of a royal
grant.172 Then team is taken to mean the brood, the offspring, the “sequela” of one’s
villeins;173 but this we may be sure is a mistake. Apparently it ought to mean the
right to hold a court into which outsiders may be vouched as warrantors, or, to use a
more technical term, the right to enforce a “foreign voucher.” The word sac (or, as we
had better spell it, sake), the Anglo-Saxon sácu, the modern German Sache, means
thing, cause, matter; the glossarists of the thirteenth century have not forgotten this
and refer to the English phrase “for which sake”; in legal language it means a cause, a
matter, an action, or as the Germans say Rechtssache; a grant then of sake should be a
grant—by a very general term—of jurisdiction.174 Most important of all is soke or
soken, which is used as a very large word to denote justiciary rights and the area
within which they are exercised.

The remote history of these terms has been discussed Sake and soke in the
elsewhere.175 Here we have only to observe that in the thirteenth century.
thirteenth century the words sake and soke are regarded as
describing jurisdiction, but jurisdiction of a kind that every lord has although he has
no such words in his charter and although he has no charter from the king. Like the
“general words” common in conveyances of a later date (“together with all easements,
commons” and the like) they only serve to describe rights which the donee would
have though no such words were employed; they give no franchise, they merely point
to the feudal or manorial jurisdiction which every one may have if he holds a manor,
or which every one may have if he has tenants.176 On the whole the prevailing
doctrine seems to have been that sake and soke did nothing, that toll and theam did
nothing, that infangenethef and utfangenethef merely gave the right to hang “hand-

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 337 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

having” thieves, thieves taken “with the mainour” (cum manuopere), while the other
old words could not be trusted to do much, though they might serve to define and
possibly to increase the ordinary powers of a feudal court.177

The serious franchises of a jurisdictional kind were claimed View of frankpledge.
under other words, or still more frequently were claimed by
prescription. As the most serious, though the least exalted, we must reckon “view of
frankpledge and all that to view of frankpledge doth belong”—as the most serious,
because it was extremely common. Occasionally we find a clear grant of “view of
frankpledge,” occasionally a grant of immunity from frankpledge which may or may
not have amounted to the same thing,178 and perhaps a grant of frithsoken, —the
word is not very common—would have the same operation.179 Far more commonly a
lord prescribed for the “view,” and prescribed for it successfully. The right thus
named comprised not merely the right to execute the law of frankpledge and take the
profits thence arising, but also the right to hold twice a year a court coordinate with
the sheriff’s turn, a police court, a court for the presentment of offences and the
punishment of offences that fell short of felony. Towards the end of the thirteenth
century the word leet
(leta)—which seems to have spread outwards from the East Leet.
Anglian counties—was becoming a common name for such a
court, but to the last visus franciplegii remained the most formal and correct of titles.
The lord who had this franchise claimed to swear in a body of jurors—often they were
the chief pledges or heads of the tithings—and to put before them those same “articles
of the view” (capitula visus) which the sheriff employed in his “turn.” The minor
offences were punished on the spot by amercements which went to swell the lord’s
revenue. But probably the pecuniary profit was in the eyes of the lords a small matter
when compared with the power that was thus secured to them. Twice a year the
villagers, bond and free, had to report themselves and tell tales one of another, while
no tale went outside the manor to the ears of jealous neighbours or rapacious officials.
Probably the tenants also were gainers by the franchise; they could manage their own
affairs without the interference of “foreigners.”180

The king’s advocates at times protested that only the tenant of a The vill and the view.
whole vill could enjoy this regality; the view, they say, must be a
view for a vill, a view for a manor will not do, nor may a lord collect in his tithings
tenants from divers vills;181 again, he ought to have at least twelve whole tithings,
twelve chief pledges, so that none may be punished without the oath of twelve.182
These contentions were sometimes successfully urged, and the theory which connects
the view of frankpledge with the organization of a perfect township (villa integra)
may be a clue to past history; but as a matter of fact the franchise had been
subinfeudated and was sometimes exercised over collections of men resident on
various pieces of land geographically detached from each other and connected only by
the fact that they were all holden of the same lord. Thus the view is sometimes
divided between immediate lord and overlord; John Engaine holds manors at Gidding
and Dillington of the Abbot of Ramsey; when the day for the view comes, the abbot’s
bailiff appears, hands to John’s steward the articles of the view, and takes two
shillings out of the proceeds of the day, while John keeps the rest.183 In Rutland the
Prior of the Hospitallers holds the whole vill of Whitwell, he has twelve tenants in

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 338 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Dreystoke, one in Gunthorpe, two in Martinstoke, one in Barnardshill and twelve in
Uppingham, for these he holds a view twice a year at Whitwell and Uppingham;184
tenants from several Bedfordshire villages go to the view held by Humphrey de
Bohun at Kimbolton in Huntingdonshire.185

The lord who has the view of frankpledge usually has also “the The assize of bread
assize of beer,” that is, the power of enforcing the general and beer.
ordinances which from time to time fix the prices at which beer
may be sold; sometimes, but much more rarely, he claims the assize of bread. Out of
beer the lords made some considerable profit. It is common to find manorial jurors
presenting as a matter of course that all the brewers, or rather alewives, of the village
have “brewed against the assize”; whereupon all of them are amerced; and it is
common to find the king’s advocates complaining that the lords inflict pecuniary
amercements upon those hardened offenders who ought by rights to suffer in their
persons by means of pillory and tumbrell. Pillory and tumbrell are the outward and
visible signs of this jurisdiction, just as a gallows is the manifestation of
“infangenethef”; the lord who does not keep proper instruments of justice, proper
iudicialia, is liable to lose his franchise. Express grants of the assize of beer are
uncommon; on the other hand many lords claim it by prescription, while the lords of
Northumberland, Cumberland, Yorkshire and Lincolnshire assert that they are not
even bound to prescribe for it, since it is theirs by the common custom of their
counties.186 We have therefore come upon the line which divides those seignorial
powers which are deemed regalities from those which have their justification in the
mere relation between lord and tenants, and we find it a vague, fluctuating line settled
in some cases by local customs.

Many were the lords who held the view of frankpledge, (the leet High justice.
of later days) and the assize of beer; comparatively few were the
lords who had more exalted jurisdictional powers. Still of such powers we find a
gradually ascending scale. At the top are the two palatinates, the county of Chester,
the bishopric of Durham; but below them stand lordships which are almost palatine
and which leave their mark on the map of England for many centuries. When in 1888
the day has come for remodelling the government of our shires, the liberties of St.
Edmund, of St. Etheldreda of Ely, of St. Peter of Medeshamstead are still
respected.187 These together with the marcherships on the Welsh border are the most
splendid instances. Sometimes the lord exercised the highest justice only within a
small territory immediately surrounding his castle or monastery, a leugata, banlieu,
lowy. Among these powers we may notice the following:

(a)Amerciamenta hominum. The lord has a right to the amercements of his men, even
though those amercements are inflicted in the king’s court. The amercements are paid
into the royal exchequer, and then the lord petitions that they may be paid out to him.

(b)Catalla felonum et fugitivorum. The lord, though he does not try felons, unless they
be handhaving thieves, gets the forfeited chattels of condemned felons and outlaws
which ordinarily would belong to the king. With this is sometimes coupled the right to
hang felons sentenced by the king’s justices.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 339 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

(c)Returnus188brevium. This is a highly valued right. Within the lord’s territory the
“return of writs” belongs to him: that is to say, if the sheriff receives a writ (“original”
or “judicial”) bidding him summon, attach or distrain one resident within that
territory, or seize lands or goods, he must deliver that writ to the bailiff of the liberty
who will execute the precept. Only in case the lord or his bailiff has been guilty of
default and a second writ comes to the sheriff containing the clause “ quod non
omittas propter aliquam libertatem, ” will he be justified in entering the privileged
precinct.

(d) Some lords have, and prescribe to have, coroners of their own—a remarkable fact,
since to the best of our knowledge coroners were first instituted on this side of the
limit of legal memory.

(e) Some lords compel the king’s justices in eyre to come and sit within their
precincts and even to occupy a secondary position. They come there—such at least is
the lord’s theory—merely to see that the lord’s court makes no default in justice; but
the business of the court, even though it consist of pleas of the crown, is conducted by
the lord himself, his bailiffs or justices. Sometimes the lord claims that for the time
being he himself is iustitiarius domini Regis.189

(f) Some lords have a civil jurisdiction within their territories which excludes the
jurisdiction of the king’s courts. If an action concerning anything within the precinct
is begun before the Bench at Westminster, the lord sends a bailiff to “crave
cognizance” of the cause and he is allowed it (petit curiam suam et habet).

Some of the highest powers were claimed by prescription; for High franchises
example, the Archbishop of York declared that he and his claimed by
predecessors had wielded them from time immemorial; not one prescription.
scrap of parchment did he deign to produce. He even claimed to
coin money by prescription.190 And we may state as a general rule that just the very
highest jurisdictional powers were seldom claimed by any other title. Occasionally a
bishop or an abbot would rely on the vague, large words of some Anglo-Saxon land-
book. But this was a false move; the king’s lawyers were not astute palaeographers or
diplomatists, but any charter couched in terms sufficiently loose to pass for one
moment as belonging to the age before the Conquest could be met by the doctrine that
the king was not to be deprived of his rights by “obscure and general words.” For
their markets and fairs, their chases and warrens, for amerciamenta hominum and
catalla felonum the lords have charters; but when they hold all the pleas of the crown,
when they appoint justices and coroners, when they coin money, when they treat the
king’s justices as distinguished visitors to be “accommodated with a seat upon the
bench,” then they prescribe:—they and all their predecessors have done the like; so
they say and so the country says.

But apart from all franchises, a lord has jurisdiction over his The properly feudal
tenants. This he does not claim by royal grant, nor does he jurisdiction.
prescribe for it; in its exercise we cannot call him the king’s
delegate. En glish law of the thirteenth century seems to have admitted the broad rule
that every lord with tenants enough to form a court may, so far as the king is

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 340 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

concerned, hold a court of and for his tenants. We say “so far as the king is
concerned.” Whether a lord enfeoffing a tenant had to stipulate for suit of court if he
wished to oblige the feoffee to serve as a doomsman is a different question. Only late
in the day was that question brought before the royal justices. Some seem to have held
that an express stipulation was necessary if more suit was to be exacted than such as
was necessary to enable the lord to exercise any regal jurisdiction with which he had
been entrusted. Others were of a different opinion. The matter was settled by the
Statute of Marlborough (1267):191 —the lord who exacts suit to his feudal court must
rely upon express stipulation or upon a somewhat brief prescriptive title.192 This,
however, is a matter of comparatively little importance; the greater matter is that mere
tenure gives to every lord, who has the means of exercising it, a jurisdiction over his
tenant; his tenant is his justiciable.

This jurisdiction, if the tenant is a freeholder, is not of a high The feudal court is
order, nor is it very lucrative. It is but a civil jurisdiction, and it is usually a manorial
hampered and controlled by royal justice. What is more, the court.
feudal court is generally a manorial court, a court for a small
district. Even though we cannot at the moment explain the full import of this
proposition, we may dwell on it for a moment. We shall beg no question by saying
that the manor usually is but a small space of ground: small, that is, when we compare
it with the total amount of land which a great noble will hold “either in demesne or in
service.” A rich religious house may have twenty manors in demesne; a lay noble will
not have so many in demesne, but he will have some few in demesne and many more
in service; his honour will consist of a large number of manors scattered about in
divers parts of England; of some few he will be the immediate lord, while others will
be holden of him by his knights. Now the simple principle of feudal justice that we
have lately stated would authorize such a lord to hold a court for his honour, to hold
one court for all his immediate tenants; or, again, if his tenants were widely scattered,
he might hold several honorial courts, one, let us say, for his Kentish tenants, another
in Gloucestershire, another in Yorkshire. And thus between the actual occupant of a
tenement and the king there might stand a whole hierarchy of courts. We have seen
above how between Roger of St. German who held land in Huntingdonshire and the
king there were no less than seven mesne lords.193 The principle which is now before
us would in such a case permit the existence of seven feudal courts. That such was the
law we can hardly doubt; no narrower principle will explain the facts. Very often the
lord of a manor who had a court of his own was himself bound to do suit at his lord’s
court. The petition which the barons presented at the Oxford parliament of 1258
assumes that not seldom three feudal courts tower one above the other. Complaint is
made that the Abbot of Peterborough does not allow his freeholders to hold courts for
their tenants, whereas this is sanctioned by law and custom throughout the realm. The
Prior of Dunstable was compelled to concede that his burgesses might hold courts for
their tenants. Furthermore, it seems to have been a common practice for a wealthy
abbey to keep a court, known as a halimoot, on each of its manors, while in addition
to these manorial courts it kept a central court, a libera curia for all its greater
freehold tenants. And we may now and again meet with courts which are distinctly
called courts of honours. The rule then was, not merely that the lord of a manor may
hold a court for the manor, but that a lord may hold a court for his tenants.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 341 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Nevertheless it must be allowed that in the thirteenth century full advantage was not
taken of the principle. Subinfeudation had gone far indeed and, as said above, the
jurisdiction over freeholders was no longer very valuable; it brought the lord little
money and did not add much to his power. The feudal courts that we see in active
work are for the more part manorial courts, and the affairs with which they are
concerned are mainly the affairs of tenants in villeinage, even the affairs of villeins.
As a matter of fact, feudal jurisdiction seems intimately connected with the entities
known as manors and these manors again seem to be intimately connected with
townships. Still these links exist rather in the world of fact than in the world of law;
the legal principle is the simple principle that tenure implies jurisdiction. The Abbot
of Ramsey may bring to his court at Broughton his freehold tenants from seven
counties; the burgess of Dunstable may hold a court for his tenants.194

Of these feudal,—they will in general be manorial—courts we Jurisdiction of feudal
may now give a brief account; first we will speak of their court.
competence and then of their constitution.

I. Civil Litigation. (i) Personal Actions. They entertain personal actions, at least when
the amount at stake is less than forty shillings; in particular, actions of debt, detinue,
trespass and covenant. This jurisdiction seems to be considered as arising out of the
relationship between man and lord. On the other hand, the action of replevin (de vetito
namii) is royal and few lords claim to entertain it. Perhaps in theory the defendant
ought to be an immediate tenant of the lord, but it is very likely that a lord often
compelled any resident on his land to answer in his court, at all events when there was
between them no lower lord with a court of his own. That the plaintiff also should be
the lord’s man would not be necessary. This jurisdiction was a useful, thriving reality.
We may well find a manorial court which generally has some ten to twenty personal
actions depending before it, and, as we shall see later on, these humble courts seem to
have recognized certain causes of action for which the king’s courts offered no
remedy; they gave damages in cases of slander and libel and possibly they enforced
some agreements to which the king’s courts would have paid no heed.

(ii) Actions for the recovery of freehold land. Since the days of Henry II. the rule had
been that no one could be compelled to answer for his freehold without the king’s
writ.195 On the other hand stood the rule, sanctioned by Magna Carta, that for a true
proprietary action for land admittedly held of a certain lord, that lord’s court was the
proper tribunal, and, though the king’s judges and chancellors gradually impaired the
force of this rule by the invention of new actions which were in effect proprietary,
though they may have been nominally possessory, still throughout the thirteenth
century and even in the fourteenth we hear of a good many actions begun in the feudal
courts by “writ of right.” Very seldom however, unless our books mislead us, were
such actions finally disposed of in those courts; to get them removed first into the
county courts and then into the king’s court was easy, and if the tenant (the passive
party in the litigation) chose to reject the duel and put himself upon the grand assize,
the competence of the lord’s court was at an end. Hengham tells us that in his day the
lords rarely asserted this jurisdiction over freehold land, for they could get little or no
profit out of it.196

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 342 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

(iii) Actions relating to customary or villein tenements. In all matters which concerned
a merely customary title to land the lord’s court was the only competent tribunal, for
of such a title the king’s judges would know nothing. No royal writ was necessary.
Still we see the lord’s court doing strict justice in due form of law; there is no
formless arbitration, there are formal pleadings which are strictly construed. Before
the end of the century pleaders in manorial courts are making use of phrases which
seem to have their origin at Westminster;197 but all along they have been using
technical phrases, tracing the descent of the customary tenement from heir to heir,
alleging “seisin as of right,” alleging the taking of “esplees,” adding however at every
turn “according to the custom of the manor.”198 The justice which the customary
tenants got was strict justice; it was not “equity” on the one hand, but on the other it
was not “the will of the lord.”

(iv) Litigation between lord and man. That the lord could sue his tenant seems plain;
the entries on a court roll largely consist of such as show how the lord’s bailiff made
accusations against the tenants and how the lord recovered damages from them; the
tenants are charged with trespasses, or with breaches of the manorial custom.199 It is
late in the day before we hear any suggestion that such a course of procedure is
inequitable since it makes the lord a judge in his own cause, and even then it is
admitted to be “the common course throughout the land.”200 There is much to show
that in the past one of the main uses of a feudal court had been that it enabled the lord
to compel his tenants to perform their services; this will appear from what has been
said about the law of distress.201 As to the objection that the lord is both judge and
party, that fails, for the lord is not judge; the defendant has the judgment of his peers.
On the other hand, the lord cannot be sued in his court; this is true of him as it is true
of the king. The proper feudal course for one who claims to hold land of X but cannot
get that land is to demand justice from X, and if this demand fails, to go to the court of
X’ s lord. A lord distrained to answer in his own court is the most startling anomaly of
the ancient demesne.

II. Presentments. Even though the lord does not aspire to, or on this particular day is
not exercising, the franchise of view of frank-pledge, he often makes use of a
procedure which involves presentment. Jurors are sworn in, sometimes twelve, but
often less than twelve, to present offences. Perhaps in theory they have no business to
present any offences which touch the king’s peace, such as assaults, since in
adjudicating on these the lord would be usurping a franchise, and ought to confine
themselves to breaches of the manorial custom and invasions of the lord’s proprietary
rights. But it is difficult to maintain or even to draw the line, difficult to prevent a lord
from making his feudal court a police court. Especially is this so when the tenants are
unfree; if the lord amerces a serf for drawing his knife, pilfering his neighbour’s
goods, using bad words, he is after all but demanding money which already is his
own; even if he puts the man in the stocks or turns him out of the vill, this, if it can be
regarded as an act of justice, can also be regarded as an act of ownership. And so we
find that the presentments are miscellaneous:— A has assaulted B;C has abused D; E
is a scolding wife; F’ s daughter has been guilty of fornication and so he owes a
leyrwite; G, a freeholder, is dead and his son owes a relief; H is the lord’s nativus and
has left the manor; J came late to the boon works; K keeps his dung-heap before his
door; L has fished in the lord’s pond; M sells sour beer; N puts more beasts on the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 343 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

pasture than the by-law allows him; O rescued his impounded beasts; and so forth. As
a rule when there is no question touching freehold the accused seems to get little
chance of denying these charges, but is at once amerced; sixpenny and threepenny
amercements are common.

III. Governmental Power and By-laws. Within narrow limits a feudal court might be,
not merely a court of justice, but also an assembly capable of discussing and
arranging the affairs of the tenurial group. To such an assembly the lord would in old
times appeal when he wanted an aid from his military tenants,202 or when he wanted
them, or some of them on behalf of all, to go to the war.203 But among the knights of
an honour there was little communalism; each individual had his rights and duties; the
one could not be impaired, the other could not be aggravated by any resolution of his
peers. As to manorial by-laws we must speak hereafter. Over unfreemen, even over
the freemen who hold unfree lands, such by-laws, being made with the lord’s
approval, would have great power; a breach of them might be punished by a forfeiture
of the tenement; a recalcitrant bondman might be set in the stocks; but to enforce by-
laws against a freeholding freeman was a more difficult matter.

IV. Appellate Jurisdiction. When a great lord had many halimoots and one libera
curia, difficult cases which arose in the former were sometimes reserved for the latter.
But the magnates had aimed at more than this. They had wished for an appellate
jurisdiction, or rather a “jurisdiction in error” over the courts of their tenants. Had the
first principle of feudal justice been allowed free play, their demand must have been
conceded. But it failed. If the court of the lower lord made default in justice, the case
could be removed at once into the county court and thence to the king’s court, and
none but the king’s court could hear a charge of false judgment.204 After a severe
struggle these rules were established; to their operation it is due that in England we
hear little of exalted feudal courts, courts of baronies and honours.

V. Conveyancing Business. In later ages the work of a manorial court will chiefly
consist in witnessing transfers of copyhold land; the court roll will become a register
of title for the copyholders. At the accession of Edward I., however, the practice of
keeping court rolls was still new, and, though from time to time we may hear how a
tenant in villeinage “puts himself upon the roll” by way of proving his title,205 still
on such rolls as we have seen entries of “surrenders and admittances” are so few and
so irregular that we cannot believe that they were of much importance. However, such
power of alienation as the custom of the manor gives to the tenant in villeinage is
often exercised in court. He can only alienate his tenement by surrendering it to the
lord, and, if this is done in open court, the lord’s acceptance of a new tenant will be
witnessed by the men of the court, and their testimony will be useful at a future time.
We have no reason, however, for saying that only in court could a lord give villein
land to a new tenant or concede to a dead tenant’s heir the tenement of his ancestor,
for, according to the law of the king’s court, the land was the lord’s to do what he
liked with. From an ancient demesne manor we may already hear how a tenant who
was too ill to come to court made a surrender to the bailiff out of court to the intent
that the bailiff might make the surrender in court.206 With the transfer of freehold
land the court had in general little to do; the tenants subinfeudated their tenements
without going to the court, and in the thirteenth century they already thrust new

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 344 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

immediate tenants upon their lord without asking for his cooperation;207 still a
careful lord would oblige the manorial jury to present deaths and descents which took
place among his freeholders, in order that he might secure his reliefs, wardships and
marriages. As homage had to be done to the lord in his proper person, it was more
usually done in his house than in the manorial court.

And now as to the constitution of the court. There seems no Constitution of the
reason why the lord should not preside over it in person, and feudal court. The
occasionally an abbot or prior would do this.208 Often the president.
cellarer of the abbey, himself a monk, would hold the courts; but
generally they were held by the lord’s steward. Some abbots and other lords had
allowed the stewardship to become hereditary; they had enfeoffed knights who were
to hold their lands by the serjeanty of stewardship. But before the end of the thirteenth
century the work was falling into the hands of lawyers. Very great lawyers did not
scorn it. A little later, in 1335, we find the prior of Christ Church offering the office of
steward to no less a person than Sir John Stonor, who had been for some years one of
the king’s justices;209 he would not accept, but he was in no wise offended by, the
proposal. And then, when a weighty cause is to be heard in the court of Merstham, the
prior sends down one of his counsel to afforce the court.210 At an earlier time, when
the Abbot of St. Alban’s had quarrelled with his knights, he induced one of the king’s
justices, who had come to deliver the gaol, to preside over the feudal assembly under
the ash tree.211 And, as we have said before, men were beginning to write books
which should teach stewards how to hold plea, and very technical books they are.212

As in the communal so in the feudal courts, the president has The suitors.
doomsmen at his side. When he is making the view of
frankpledge, when (to use the terms of a later day) the court is acting as a “court leet,”
he—like the sheriff in his “turn”—seems to be the only judge: the procedure by way
of presentment is not easily compatible with the action of a body of doomsmen; the
view of frankpledge is a royal franchise, and for the time being the steward is quasi a
royal justice.213 But “in the court baron the suitors are the judges”—this rule is well
maintained throughout the middle ages. At their end it is said that two suitors will
suffice; we may well doubt whether so small a number would have been adequate at
an earlier time.214 Heriet, a justice of John’s reign, seems to have demanded
twelve.215 How far any distinction was drawn in practice between cases which
affected freemen and those which affected unfreemen is a doubtful question.216 In
Coke’s day it was said that the lord of a manor had one court, “a court baron,” for his
freeholders and another court, “a customary court,” for his copyholders, and that in
the latter the lord or his steward was the judge. Now over his unfreemen the lord had,
according to the law of the king’s court, almost unlimited power; short of maiming
them he might do what he liked with them; and every tenant of an unfree tenement
was a tenant at will. Nevertheless in the court rolls and the manuals for stewards
which come to us from the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries we cannot discover two
courts or two methods of constituting the court. Freeholders and serfs are said to owe
suit to the same halimoot, and, so far as we can see, the curia which pronounces
judgment is always the same body. Occasionally distinctions of status are noticed.
When the lord is holding a view of frankpledge, if he has many tenants, he will
sometimes copy the procedure of the sheriff’s turn; the presentments will be made in

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 345 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

the first instance by villani, and will then be revised by a jury of freeholders.217
Sometimes two bondmen will be appointed to affeer the amercements of the bond,
while two freemen will affeer the amercements of the free.218 No doubt, again, a
freeman might have objected if among his dooms-men he saw a serf. No doubt, again,
the theory that the villein tenements were held at the will of the lord was by no means
idle; the lord could not be compelled to accept a new tenant against his will. Still, so
far as we can see, when the lord’s interests were not being actively asserted, the serf
who sued or was sued in the manorial court got the same justice as that which the
freeman got; he got in theory the judgment, not of his lord, but of a body of dooms-
men who were at least his peers. We say that such a judgment he got in theory; in
practice the question became of less and less moment, for trial by jury gradually
forced its way into the manorial courts. In strictness of law the lord could not compel
his freemen to serve as jurors in civil causes; they and the king were agreed that none
but the king should make them swear; but the lord could force his bondmen to swear,
and many a small freeholder would serve rather than quarrel with his lord. At any rate
trial by jury made its way into these courts, and it hardly leaves a place for the
doomsman; indeed in course of time the cry for a iudicium parium is (to the great
distortion of history) supposed to find its satisfaction in trial by jury. Very late in the
day (for we cannot trace this further back than a Star Chamber case of Henry VIII.’s
reign) we hear a doctrine which, if it has any historical warrant at all, suggests that no
lord could hold a court even for his bondmen unless he had free doomsmen, for it is
said that there can be no manor without at least two freeholders owing suit of court.
Interpret this doctrine how we may, we cannot believe it ancient. As to the question
about the use of words we shall speak below; but we do not believe that all the
maneria of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries comprised freeholders. As to the
questions of law, we cannot find that a lord’s jurisdiction over freemen was in any
wise dependent upon his having villein tenants, or that his jurisdiction over his
villeins demanded the existence of freeholders. Very little weight should be ascribed
to the unreasoned, unexplained dictum of the Star Chamber delivered at a time when
the feudal courts were senile and villeinage was all but dead, and yet this dictum
seems to be the only source of the famous doctrine that a manor cannot exist without
two freeholders.219

§ 6.

The Manor
And now at length we may go up against the manor. We may The manor.
make our task the easier if we observe that “the manor” is more
prominent in modern theories than in medieval texts. Bracton rarely uses the term
manerium. Only in one context does he give anything that can be called an
explanation of that word and it explains very little. A person who brings an action for
land must specify the land that he claims. In so doing, he will perhaps use the word
manerium, and therefore it is necessary to note that manors and vills are not all one,
that sometimes a manor and a vill bear the same name, that sometimes a manor
contains several vills, and again that a manor is not the same thing as a mansion.220
But what is the essence of a manerium we are never told. Such records of litigation as

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 346 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

we have in print give us no further help. Sometimes, though not very often, the object
demanded in an action is a manor, and we may find disputes as to whether a particular
tenement is or is not a part, or “a member” of a particular manor. The word is used in
conveyances, and doubts may arise as to what has passed to the donee by a gift of “the
manor of Dale.” But in conveyances the term is much less common than we with our
theories of “a manorial system” might expect. Even when we turn to the Hundred
Rolls and read the detailed descriptions of tenures and tenements, of the groups
formed by lords and tenants, though we may well think that we are reading of manors,
still we may often read through many pages without seeing the word manerium. May
we hope that we have shown, as Bracton showed, that much may be said of the law of
tenure, of status, of jurisdiction, though that word be never employed?

In a sense therefore we must deny that in the thirteenth century Manor not a technical
the word manerium was a technical term, that it could be placed word.
in the same category with villa, feodum unius militis, liberum
tenementum, villenagium. There are reasons for thinking that in a remoter past and
especially in Domesday Book, this term had borne a definite legal sense which was
concerned with the levy of the danegeld.221 Be that as it may, we believe that in the
thirteenth century no strict definition of a manor could have been fashioned. Any
word that is commonly used in the transaction of business is likely to come before the
law-courts and to be discussed by pleaders and judges. A modern court may be called
upon to decide whether a four-roomed cottage was fairly described as “a country
house”; but still, “country house” is not a technical term. In our own day the term
“estate” is used by Englishmen to describe tracts of land; but who can accurately
define its meaning? If we read in a biography that the hero had “an estate in Kent” we
should expect him to have had more than a rood of cabbage-garden; but how much
more? Must there have been a house and some fields? Must he have had land “in
hand”? Must he have had tenant farmers and cottagers? And what of “a country seat”?

In the thirteenth century the term manerium seems to have been Indefiniteness of the
no more precise than the term “estate” (as commonly used by term manor.
laymen) is at the present day. It implied, for example, a certain
geographical extent, neither too small, nor too large, and a certain geographical
continuity; but the requisite size, the requisite continuity could not be defined. A
manor in Cambridgeshire might have a member in Suffolk; a manor in Kent could not
have a member in Northumberland; but the exact degree of discontinuity that would
have rendered the term inappropriate could not be fixed. Modern attempts to define a
manor break down before this difficulty. Most, if not all, of them would suffer or even
compel us to describe many a vast honour scattered about over all England as being a
single manor.222

Therefore to ask for a definition of a manor is to ask for what A typical manor.
cannot be given. We may however draw a picture of a typical
manor, and, this done, we may discuss the deviations from this type.

(1) The typical manor is geographically coincident with a vill; the lord of the manor is
also the lord of the vill; manor and vill have one name; the group of men, which,
when regarded from one point, appears as the villata or township, if regarded from

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 347 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

another point appears as a group of tenants; all persons who have lands in the vill hold
of one and the same lord. This gives unity to the manor, for the township has many
public duties, and the question whether a given acre is part of the vill or whether a
given person is a member of the township is, we may say, a question of public law.
(2) The inhabited and cultivated lands of the manor are divisible into three portions;
the lord holds land in demesne (in the narrowest sense of that term223 ) and on this
stand his house and homestead, and these are sometimes called preeminently the
manerium; then there are lands held of him by freehold tenure, and there are lands
held of him by unfree or customary tenure. The arable portion of the manor usually
lies in two or three great open fields, and the strips which are held by the lord, by the
freeholders, by the customary tenants lie intermingled. There is also pasture land;
much of it is held by the lord in demesne, but over it the tenants have rights of
common. The manor is an economic unit; the lord’s demesne lands in that manor are
to a considerable extent cultivated by means of the labour services which are due from
the tenants. (3) If the lord is a great man with several manors, even though these be
contiguous, the accounts of each are separately kept; very generally each manor will
have its bailiff and its reeve. (4) Lastly, the lord holds a court for the manor; if he is a
great man, besides having a court for each manor, he may hold a central court for all
his principal freeholders, but each manor will usually have a court of its own.

Thus we may regard the typical manor (1) as being, qua vill, an unit of public law, of
police and fiscal law, (2) as being an unit in the system of agriculture, (3) as being an
unit in the management of property, (4) as being a jurisdictional unit. But we have
now to see that hardly one of these traits can be considered as absolutely essential.
The most important is the connexion between the manor and the vill; a consideration
of this we must for a while postpone; but this much may be premised that in very
many instances the manor is not geographically coincident with a vill nor yet with any
group of vills.

We may begin by saying that the manor comprises a house, or at The manor house.
all events a homestead, occupied by the lord, his servants or
lessees. This from the etymologist’s point of view appears as the essence of the
manor. The term manor (manerium) is one of the many words which have their origin
in the Latin verb manere; mansus, mansa (common in the Anglo-Saxon land-books),
mansio, mansura or masura, messuagium are other examples, and it would seem that
each of these has but slowly acquired a shade of meaning peculiar to itself. In our
thirteenth century “manor,” “mansion” and “messuage” are no longer convertible
terms, though “manor” is still occasionally used to signify just the lord’s house or
homestead and no more: the porta manerii is the door of the house or of the court-
yard; the situs manerii is the site of the house together with its curtilage;224 indeed in
France the word manoir seems seldom, if ever, to bear a more extended meaning. Still
the word is commonly used so as to include much more than a house, as, for example,
when Bracton tells us that a chief manor may contain several sub-manors, that a
manerium may be composed of several vills.225

Sometimes a phrase seems to halt between the narrower and the wider meaning and
shows us the relation between the two. When it is written that certain lands “belong
to” such a manor, a connexion legal and economic between them and a certain

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 348 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

building is, or may be, in the writer’s mind. Occasionally the word “hall,” which may
have been common in English speech, is used in the same way— “he owes suit to the
hall (aula) of Horningsheath,” “it is customary land of the hall (aula) of
Packenham.”226

However, we dare not say that it is indispensably necessary that Occupation of the
the manor should include a house occupied by the lord. On a manor house.
strictly personal occupation of course we cannot insist. Many
manors were in the hands of the religious, and neither did the monks live on the
manors, nor was it usual for a bishop or abbot to reside on all his manors in turn; if he
had three or four residences, this was enough; but he might have thirty or forty
manors. The centre of the typical manor is often a homestead or farmyard with but
humble buildings placed under the charge of a bailiff, rather than a fine dwelling for
the lord and his family. But it is doubtful whether we can even insist upon the
homestead. Often we may find that the situs manerii has been let to a tenant at a rent;
we cannot be certain that there are any longer any buildings upon it, and if there are,
they are no longer occupied by the lord or his servants.

A similar doubt must be suggested as to the necessity of land Demesne land.
held in demesne. Undoubtedly it is a normal feature of a manor
that there should be land the fruits (not the rents but the actual fruits) of which come
to the lord’s garners; the unfree, and often the free, tenants assist in the cultivation of
this land, the raising of these fruits; the economist is apt to consider this as the essence
of the manorial arrangement. But suppose that the lord, more or less permanently,
parts with this land in exchange for a rent; has he ceased to hold a manor, to be lord of
a manor, to have the right to hold a court for all the tenants of the manor? To all these
questions we must answer, No, at least if the supposed alienation be no more than a
lease for years. Towards the end of the century it was becoming common for the lord
to let the land that he had held in demesne; but the farmer (firmarius) of the demesne
land did not become lord of the manor, the lessor did not cease to be lord, the tenants
still held immediately of him, he still kept a court for them and took its profits. As to
the effect of more permanent alienations, there may be more doubt, and we must
distinguish a question about the use of words from a question about the existence of
rights. If the lord of a manor enfeoffed another person with all the demesne lands, this
gift, we may be sure, did not necessarily carry with it a lordship over the tenants of
the free and unfree tenements, a right to all their rents and services, a jurisdiction over
them. Men were very free to make what arrangements they pleased. We have, for
example, an instructive verdict concerning the history of a Cambridgeshire vill. The
Earl of Gloucester holds Bottisham of the king. But his predecessors gave “the whole
manor of Bottisham with all lands, demesnes and tenements, villeinages, coterells,
pastures, meadows, mills, franchise of bull and ram and all appurtenances and
easements to two houses of religion, to wit, a moiety to Anglesey Priory and a moiety
to Tonbridge Priory, saving to himself and his successors the free rents of the free
tenants in the same vill, and saving suit of court from three weeks to three weeks, and
saving the homages and reliefs of the free tenants and wardships and escheats and all
pleas.” The result is that the prior of Anglesey has 200 acres and 6 villeins and 5
coterells, the prior of Tonbridge has a like holding, while the earl has some 40
freehold tenants for whom he holds a court; the view of frankpledge for the whole vill

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 349 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

is in his hand.227 Here we have the lord of a manor giving half his demesnes and half
his villein tenements to one priory, half to another, but retaining to himself an
immediate lordship over the freeholders, his right to receive their rents and to hold a
court for them. An endless variety of such arrangements was possible, the only legal
limit being that which would have protected freehold tenants against any aggravation
of their services. Probably, while the labour services of the villeins remained
uncommuted, a lord did not often part with the whole, or nearly the whole, of his
demesne land without giving along with this a right to those services which his
villeins had been accustomed to do on that land; to have done so would have been to
lighten or even to abolish the services; but when those services were commuted into
money dues, there was nothing to prevent the lord conveying away his demesne and
retaining his immediate lordship over the villeins and his right to their rents.

To give positive proof that no freehold tenants were necessary to The freehold tenants.
constitute a manerium is difficult, for, as already said, we may
turn many pages of the Hundred Rolls without seeing that word, and certain it seems
that towards the end of the thirteenth century a lord seldom had many villein tenants
without having just a few freeholders intermingled with them. Still instances may be
found in which a lord has a considerable group of villein tenants with whom no
freeholder is associated. Thus, on the Abbot of Gloucester’s estates we find that in
village after village, in which he has demesne land and many tenants in villeinage and
in which he holds a court with villein suitors, he has no freeholders, or but one
freeholder; yet in these villages he has maneria.228 Again, a comparison between the
surveys of the thirteenth century and the earlier documents seems to show that many
of the freehold tenancies are of modern origin. As regards two of the Abbot of
Peterborough’s manors we may compare the Hundred Roll with the ancient Black
Book. On the “manor” of Alwalton, according to the younger of these documents,
there are two libere tenentes, the one is the parish parson, the other holds but a
messuage with a rood and three acres; the Black Book tells of no freeholders. It is so
also on the “manor” of Fletton; the Black Book mentions no freeholders; the Hundred
Roll mentions two, one of whom gets his land from his grandfather, who was steward
in the abbot’s hall.229 Indeed in the Black Book we come across vill after vill in
which the abbot has many villeins and no freehold tenant. The theory that freehold
tenants are necessary to constitute a manor will allow to some mighty lords of the
twelfth century very few manors indeed.

One limit may perhaps be set to our scepticism:—there must be Tenants in villeinage.
villein tenements, there must at all events be some tenants
holding “of” the manor. As a matter of fact this probably was so. In the then state of
agriculture a tract of any considerable size held in demesne almost of necessity
implied a group of persons whose tenure of other lands obliged them to aid their lord
in his husbandry. Still when we find the word “manor” used, as sometimes it is, to
denote just the lord’s house and homestead, and when we consider the close
connexion that there is between “manor,” “manse,” “mansion,” “messuage,” we may
doubt whether there is any severe rule of fashion, to say nothing of law, about the use
of these terms. Again, we are not able to produce any example from the thirteenth
century of an estate which is called a manor but which has no villein or customary
tenements bound up in it or with it; still we should not be surprised to find that if a

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 350 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

lord enfranchised all his villein tenements he still was said to hold a manor; he might
get a good deal of occasional labour out of his freeholders, so that their lands would
still be knotted to his demesne lands so as to form an economic unit. Nor have we any
warrant for supposing that this state of things could be produced only by
enfranchisement. In the account of eastern England given in Domesday Book it is
possible to find maneria which have no tenants who are below the rank of sokemen,
and some of these manors may still have been “manors” in the thirteenth century,
manors with freehold tenants, but without tenants of a baser kind.

Again, to turn to another point, we hardly dare say that a person The manor court.
who has villein or customary tenants must have a manor or must
have a court. What can we make of the numerous cases in which a man has but three
or four such tenants? Does he hold a court for them? Let us examine the vill of Upton
in Huntingdonshire:— A has a messuage and half a carucate in demesne and the sixth
part of a wood and “the sixth part of one free tenant,” John the Freeman, who pays
him 8 d. and holds one carucate; and A has also one virgate and a half in villeinage
which three villeins hold of him, each of whom pays him 10 s. and merchet, and he
has “the sixth part of two villeins,” and each of them pays him 19 d. for the sixth part
of one carucate; and he has two coterells each of whom pays him 3 s. 8 d., and “half
one coterell” who pays him 10 d., and “the sixth part of two coterells” each of whom
pays him 6 d.: — B and C and D have estates similar to A’ s and there are some other
holdings.230 Whether A would have said that he had a manor we do not know, but we
can hardly believe that he kept a court for his tenants and fractional parts of tenants.
Obviously in this case there has been a descent among co-heiresses: part of the estate
that descended to them has been partitioned, part remains unpartitioned.

But similar results might be caused by subinfeudation. Once upon a time the king held
Great Wilbraham: he gave half of it to Nigel the Chamberlain, who gave half that half
as his daughter’s marriage portion; this quarter of the vill is now held by Robert de
l’Isle, who has 10 customary tenants. Nigel gave away another piece to the Abbot of
Warden; the residue of his moiety descended to his five daughters. Then the king gave
a quarter of the other moiety to one Picot, and the remaining three-eighths to Hubert
de Burgh, who gave them to the Templars. The consequence is that the custumarii of
Wilbraham are divided among many lords, one of whom has but three.231 A case
may be found in which a man has a few freehold tenants and just one customary
tenant (a servus),232 many cases in which he has two or three villeins and two or
three cottagers. In these cases we cannot easily believe that the villeins are protected
by any court or by any custom. When a great lord detaches a few of his customary
tenants to form an endowment for some retainer, they can hardly keep their old
condition; in course of time they must rise or they must fall: their services being
commuted into money, they may make good their claim to be freeholders, or on the
other hand they may become tenants at will in the strictest sense of the term.

To the size of the manor we can set neither an inferior nor a Size of the manor.
superior limit. Occasionally diminutive words are coined to
indicate manors which are of less than the normal size; thus Domesday Book tells us
how the bishop had a maneriolum in Lincoln with one carucate of land and sake and
soke and toll and team;233 and the Hundred Rolls tell us of a manerettum in

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 351 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Devonshire.234 In Domesday Book the word manerium often covers an exceedingly
small quantity of land; the so-called manor is only a peasant’s tenement.235 In the
thirteenth century we shall hardly find the word given to such little estates. On the
other hand, the very largest manors which then meet us have all the appearance of
being old.

Four cases may be mentioned. The ancient demesne manor of Bensington in
Oxfordshire has according to the jurors been vast; Henley-on-Thames, Nettlebed,
Wyfold, Huntercombe, Warborough, Shillingford, Holcombe and Crowmarsh have
been its hamlets, and four hundreds and a half have been appurtenant to it.236 In
Domesday Book Bensington pays the king the large sum of £80 and 100 shillings
“and the soke of four and a half hundreds pertains to this manor.”237 In Suffolk lies
the huge royal “manor” of Lothingland, containing the towns of Gorleston and
Lowestoft, which lie some nine miles apart;238 this represents a great estate held by
Earl Gurth in the time of the Confessor.239 In Lincolnshire the king’s manor of
Castor includes many adjacent villages or parts of them;240 this had been a great
estate of Earl Morcar with 240 sokemen, 24 villani, 28 bordarii.241 The manor of
Taunton Dean covered numerous villages; in the Conqueror’s day it brought the
Bishop of Winchester £154 a year;242 it has become the classical example of manors
abnormally large.

We may probably insist that the unity of the manor implies a Administrative unity.
certain unity in its administration. A lord may have many manors
lying side by side, and yet they are separate manors, because he treats them as
separate. It may, no doubt, be true that the manor generally had one set of open fields
to itself, one set and no more; but exceptions on both sides of this rule must have been
common. Each of the vast maneria of Domesday Book cannot have had just one set of
fields and no more, and some of these vast maneria still existed in the thirteenth
century. On the other hand, when in Cambridgeshire we find several manors in almost
every vill and then look at maps that were made before the inclosure of the open
fields, we shall learn to doubt whether in this part of England the lands of the manor
could, even normally, be brought within a ring fence; they seem to have lain
intermixed in the common fields with the lands of the other manors of the same vill.
The delimitation of one manor from other manors of the same lord seems to be a
matter of convenience: one may become two, two may become one, as the lord
chooses to have his accounts kept, his rents collected, his produce garnered in this
way or in that. At least with the consent of his freehold tenants, a lord may “attorn” a
piece of land to this manor or that, decide that the tenants shall pay their rents at this
house or at that, while as to his villeins, their consent need not be asked.243

On the whole therefore we come to the conclusion that in the Summary.
thirteenth century the word “manor,” like the “estate” of our own
day, was a vague, though common and useful word. Applied to a given instance it
might be definite enough; no one would doubt that certain acres belonged to the
manor of Dale, just as now-a-days it may be notorious throughout the countryside that
certain acres are part of the Dale estate; but to have inquired what it was that gave the
manor of Dale its unity, what made it one manor not two manors (to be called perhaps
Upper Dale and Lower Dale), what were the characteristics a loss of which would

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 352 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

have been fatal to its existence as a single manor, would have been to ask questions
no clear answer to which could have been had, because they would seldom have been
useful questions. They could only arise in a practical form when there was a dispute
as to how much land had passed by some feoffment or lease, and on such occasions
they would be settled by general repute:—the jurors would say that the plot in
question had always, or had never, been accounted part of the manor. In other words,
we are inclined to think that the mere fact that a certain tract of land or a certain
complex of rights was a manerium had no immediate legal consequences. In
particular, it seems to us that the men of the time would generally have argued from
the court to the manor, rather than from the manor to the court, and would have said
“A single court is held for it, therefore it is a manor,” rather than “It is a manor and
therefore it has a court.”

§ 7.

The Manor And The Township
In a famous passage Ordericus Vitalis asserts the identity of the Coincidence of manor
manerium and the villa: —the Bishop of Coutances held by the and vill.
Conqueror’s gift two hundred and eighty “villas quas a manendo
manerios vulgo vocamus,”244 An assumption to the same effect seems to be made by
the writ which ordered the Domesday Inquest; the priest, the reeve and six villani of
every villa are to swear, in the first place how the mansio is called, who held it under
the Confessor, who holds it now, how many ploughs there are in demesne, how many
the men have—and so forth. It is assumed that England is, and has been, held in
villae, that each villa has its mansio. The answering verdicts do not altogether bear out
this assumption. The local names which are used (when they are not names of
counties or hundreds) seem to be with few, if any, exceptions the names of places
which were accounted villae; they are names of villages, and generally there is no
difficulty about finding them as names of villages upon the modern map. Now very
commonly it is true that a single lord holds the whole place which bears one of these
names. The formula used is “ A (name of a tenant in chief) tenet X (place name),” and
we do not find that any person, other than A and tenants of his, holds anything in X.
But this rule is subject to so many exceptions that in some parts of the country it
ceases to be the rule. Such is the case in the neighbourhood of Cambridge. For
example, there are five tenancies in chief in Trumpington and six in Grantchester; no
one therefore could call himself the lord of Trumpington or of Grantchester, save the
king, and he only in the sense in which he was lord of every vill in England. In
documents that are later than Domesday Book we sometimes find the same
assumption, which in French we might express thus: Nulle ville sans seigneur. In the
Leges Henrici245 the priest, reeve and four of the best men of the vill appear as
representatives of the lord. Of what lord? The lord of the vill. The Saladin tithe of
1188 is to be assessed in each parish in the presence of the serjeant and clerk of the
baron. Of what baron? The lord of the parish. For the assessment of the tax of 1198
the presence is required of the lord of each vill or the bailiff of the vill.246 Even the
statute book of the fourteenth century seems sometimes to assume that every vill will
have its lord.247

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 353 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

All this is significant, for it seems to testify to a common belief Coincidence assumed
that normally vill and manor are but two names for one thing: the as normal.
villa of public law is the manerium of property law. In favour of
the assumption that this is the common and typical, we may add that it is the simple
and explicable case. When vill and manor coincide, then we see an organization
which will enable the township to discharge its public duties. It now has a court, in
which a reeve and constable may be appointed and in which all questions relating to
the apportionment of public duties can be decided. We can also see how in this case
the township can have “common” rights, the right for example to turn out beasts on a
common pasture; the soil of that pasture belongs to the lord of the vill and regulations
concerning its use can be made in his court. All will go smoothly, for the communitas
or communa of the township has a governing body, a representative assembly which
meets periodically. Very frequently this case is put before us in the rolls of manorial
courts:—the body of persons who attend the court represent the township and indeed
are the township, and so we read how the villata gives evidence, gives judgments,
makes presentments, makes by-laws.248 The lord’s court in such a case was not
merely the court of a manor, it was the court of a vill, of a township; in English
speech it may often have been called the town-moot or township-moot.249

Such was the simple, and we have seen some reason for calling it This coincidence not
the typical, case. But in many parts of the country it cannot have always found.
been the common case. In the thirteenth century the terms
“manor” and “vill” were not equivalent. The legal principles which shape the manor
are not those which shape the vill. For a moment we may even be tempted to say that
the vill is an unit of public, the manor an unit of private law; the one an unit for police
purposes and fiscal purposes, the other a complex of proprietary rights and of the
mutual obligations which bind lord to tenants and tenants to lord. And there is truth
here. To all appearance the boundaries of the vills are matters of public law, not to be
disturbed by conveyance or contract. New townships cannot be created or old
townships abolished by the lord of the soil, for in so doing he would disarrange the
fiscal, administrative, justiciary scheme of the hundred, the county, the kingdom, and
might aggravate the burdens incumbent on his neighbours.250 The power of making
new vills without licence from above must cease as the centralization of government
and justice becomes more perfect, probably had ceased before the end of the twelfth
century. But the next century was near its end before landowners had lost the power
of creating new manors. The process of subinfeudation went on rapidly; it was
governed by rules of private law; it created new manors. Partition among co-heiresses
was another source of new manors; even in later centuries when legal doctrines had
collected round the word “manor,” and the general theory was that a manor must have
existed from before the beginning of legal memory, it was still admitted that a
partition among co-parceners might make two manors out of one.251 But serviceable
though this general idea may be, this contrast between the units of public and of
private law, we cannot press it home. At least according to our modern ideas, a court
is an institute of public not of private law; but it is rather the manor than the township
that has a court; the township as such has none. Still, though it may be impossible for
us to explain the distinction by any general terms of modern jurisprudence, it
existed.252

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 354 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Bracton expressly tells us that a manor may contain several Nonmanorial vills.
vills.253 The Bishop of Durham seems to have held sixty-seven
vills distributed into ten manors, so that on an average each manor contained more
than six vills.254 Such cases, common in the north, we may at the moment pass by as
raising no great difficulty; the lord may keep but one court for several vills, still there
is a court which can act as a governing body for every vill. Far more perplexing is the
case in which there was no court with authority over the whole vill. Yet such a case
was common. If we may trust our county histories, there are often, at least in the south
of England, two, three or four manors in the same vill. When we have made large
allowances for the vanity of modern landowners, who have liked the sound of the
word “manor,” the case remains common, and, at least in Cambridgeshire, the
Hundred Rolls show that it was common in the reign of Edward I., while Domesday
Book shows that it had been common ever since the Conquest. When there are several
manors in a vill, the names that they bear are often not true local names but family
names, the names of the persons who held them in the thirteenth or some later
century.

There is, however, a difficulty before us when we attempt to Manor and sub-
define the cases that are under discussion. We must in the first manor.
place mark off the instances in which there is a chief manor with
several sub-manors, for in these instances the whole vill may be subject mediately or
immediately to one and the same court, the court of the chief manor. That court will
be attended by the lords of the sub-manors or their representatives and may be able to
act as a governing assembly for a whole vill or for a group of vills.255 But, though it
is hard to fix the limit, we come upon cases which we can no longer describe as
presenting the phenomenon of manor and sub-manor. The difficulty is occasioned by
the vagueness of the term “manor” and the fact that in a certain sense every vill in
England must have a lord who is lord of the whole vill; at all events the king will be
lord of the vill; all the titles of all the landholders may meet at some point short of the
king; the whole vill may belong to the honour of Gloucester; but at any rate they will
meet in the king. Now when in a single vill we find three or four lords each with land
in desmesne, freehold tenants and villeins, and each lord holds immediately of the
king, or traces his title from the king through a different series of mesne lords, and
when we find that the king himself has no demesne land and no villein tenants in or
near the vill, we feel that any talk of chief manor and sub-manors will be out of
place:—the king has no manor there, and no one has a manor which contains the
whole vill. The case is much the same if the titles of the various lords meet in the Earl
of Gloucester; the whole vill forms part of the honour of Gloucester; the lords may be
bound to attend the court, or one of the courts of that honour; but if the earl has no
demesne land and no villein tenants in the neighbourhood, we shall not say that any of
the Earl’s manors comprises this vill. But we have to use vague phrases such as “in
the neighbourhood.” In Oxfordshire Robert Danvers has a considerable estate at
Tetsworth, John Clifford at Milton, Henry de Bruyli at Waterstoke, Jordan Forester at
Ascot, the Abbot of Thame at Affington, Nicholas Segrave at Moreton, William
Quatermains at Weston; each of them has many tenants; most of them have what
according to any definition must be manors; their holdings lie in various vills, some
lying more than five miles from Thame; yet each of them holds “of the manor of
Thame,” which belongs to the Bishop of Lincoln.256 However, we have already said

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 355 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

our say about the verbal question; the point now of importance is that to all
appearance there were many cases in which there was no feudal court that could in
any sense claim authority over the whole vill and many other cases in which the only
feudal unity of the whole vill was due to the fact that every part of it was remotely
held of some great lord and was, or might be, represented in the court of some wide-
spread honour. England was not composed of manors. In many a vill we may find a
few tenements which in the feudal or tenurial system stand far apart from the
tenements with which they are intermixed. Their holders are small people who are the
immediate tenants of the king, or of some magnate who has no other land in that vill
or in its neighbourhood.

How then were the internal affairs of the vill regulated? It may The affairs of the
seem to us that here we ought to detect some organization of the nonmanorial vill.
vill that is not manorial, not feudal, some “township-moot,” or
some intermanorial organization. The township must have a reeve, the township must
send four good men to court, the township must capture felons and keep them in
custody, the township must make all manner of payments, periodic and occasional.
How can these duties be apportioned if there be no court, assembly, governing body
of the vill?

We have looked for such organization in our documents without Permanent
finding it. To say that it must have existed is an expedient from apportionment of the
which at present we shrink. Such evidence as we have points, not township’s duties.
to any village assembly, but to permanent arrangements made
once for all, arrangements under which, at least as between the various manors, lords
of manors and extramanorial freeholders, the communal burdens of the township have
become “real” burdens. Once more we come upon the “realism” of the time; one
manor owes an aliquot share of all imposts exacted from the vill, another manor
another share. The duty of sending representatives to the courts has been permanently
apportioned. To represent Dodford in Buckinghamshire one lord supplies three men,
another the fourth man and the reeve.257 The vill of Thurlby and Morton used to
appear before the justices as an entire vill; but now the Templars “subtract” one man
whereby the king’s business is impeded.258 The fourth part of the vill of Willingham,
namely the fee of Cantilupe, does not make its accustomed suit, to the king’s damage
of 2 d. per annum.259 The township of Abingdon Parva used to come to the eyre and
the sheriff’s turn by four men and the reeve, but now John of Girund withdraws one
man and the Prioress of St. Radegund another, so that but three come.260 Such entries
as these seem to show that the burden of providing the five representatives, like every
similar burden, tended to become a permanent charge on particular acres of land.

And so with the duty of contributing to fines and amercements. Allotment of financial
The aliquot share that each hundred must contribute towards a burdens.
fine imposed on the county is known, and the aliquot share that
each vill must pay to a fine imposed on the hundred is known. Thus it is known that if
a fine is imposed on the hundred of Hoo in Kent, the Abbot of Reading ought to pay
one third of it, “for he stands for a third in the said hundred as the third lord of the
said hundred.”261 What is to happen if he procures a charter exempting his lands
from these fines is not very clear; the men of the hundred hold one opinion, the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 356 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

officers of the exchequer another. So again it is not certain how far these
apportionments are unalterable:—the men of Marshland declare that they ought to
bear one third of the charges cast upon the hundred of Freebridge, while the other men
of Freebridge assert that new assessments should be made from time to time.262 And
so it is within the vill. In an ancient survey of the lands of St. Edmund we read that
the vill of Risby is divided into four parts; the hall of the convent with its men is one
fourth, the land of Ralph Breton another, the land of Norman another, the land of
William and of the sokemen another.263 Thus when we are told that a township
contributes this or that amount to some ancient impost, towards the danegeld, the
sheriff’s aid, the hundred-scot or the like, we must not at once assume that any
organization of the township was requisite for the assessment of this due. These taxes
seem to be radicated in the soil. In the Lincolnshire Hundred Rolls we often read how
“ A. B. has subtracted service due to the king, to wit, the sheriff’s aid from one
carucate, or from six bovates, or from a half-bovate of land, to the king’s damage 20
d., or to the king’s damage 1¼ d. ”264 In the case of some of these dues the men of
the township may have been jointly and severally liable for the whole amount which
is said to be paid by or due from it; still, as between the various parts of the vill, there
was a permanent apportionment. We often hear complaints that the financial affairs of
the township have been disordered by claims of immunity from taxation, and they
show that, if one lord shuffles off his burden, he increases, at least for a time, the
burden of his neighbours. Hugh de Gornay gave one carucate out of his manor of
Houghton to the prior of Dunstable; the tenants of this carucate used to contribute to
the amercements of the township of Houghton; but now they claim franchise under
the king’s charter; the township has been amerced for an escape to the amount of 100
s.; the sum was to be collected rateably according to the extents of lands (per
porciones et extentas terrarum); the prior’s share was 20 s.; he will not pay; but the
vill has to pay instead.265 But, though a gross sum is charged on the vill and the men
of the vill may be jointly and severally liable for the whole sum, still within the vill
the shares of the several tenements have been fixed once and for all.

Such was, we suspect, or in the past had been, the case with the The church rate.
church-rate or its precursor. We here tread on ground every inch
of which has been undermined by bitter controversy; we will traverse it rapidly.266
Whether or no the church-rate has a remote origin, whether it is connected with
ancient church-scots and light-scots, whether, on the other hand, the clergy have
shuffled off a burden which once fell on them, we do not inquire. We think it however
quite plain that in the thirteenth century the general custom of the church of England,
swerving in this from the ius commune of the catholic church, cast the burden of
repairing the nave of the parish church and providing the main part of the
ecclesiastical apparatus, not upon the parson, but upon the parishioners, and that the
lay power left the spiritual tribunals free to enforce this custom by spiritual censures.
But we are by no means satisfied that this custom demanded any permanent
organization of the parishioners, any “vestry” that would meet and grant a rate. So far
as we can see, the burden is a “real burden,” incumbent on land. The ecclesiastical
power can, we take it, deal directly with each individual landowner, can
excommunicate him and procure his imprisonment if he will not contribute his proper
share to whatever expenditure has become necessary for the due repair of the fabric,
and the question of necessity is decided by the ecclesiastical court. The duty of

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 357 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

repairing the parish church is analogous to the duty of repairing the county bridges; it
is planted in the soil and to the soil it has ceded; it is apportioned according to hidage
or acreage. No doubt, the occasional nature of the charge almost compels the rector or
the archdeacon to deal with the parishioners as a body, to call them together and
endeavour to persuade them that a wall is crumbling or that a new missal is wanted.
The parishioners will make terms with him; they may vote him a rate to be assessed in
this way or in that; and very likely, as they will have to pay, they will hire the
workmen and buy the materials. The splendour and costliness of the churches and
their furniture increase very rapidly; the parson’s demands grow heavier and more
frequent. What goes on in the kingdom at large is going on in each parish. Money-
voting vestries became as indispensable to the rector as money-voting parliaments are
to the king. Movable wealth must be brought within the sphere of taxation. To our
minds it would be as rash to argue from the “vestries” or parishioners’ meetings of the
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries to similar assemblies of an earlier time, as it would
be to argue that the commons of the realm were represented in the councils of Henry
II. because they were represented in the parliaments of Edward I. And so with the
church-wardens. We are not persuaded that as a general rule there were church-
wardens in the thirteenth century. They and their legal powers are, to our thinking, the
outcome of two movements, one in the world of fact, the other in the world of legal
thought. If the parishioners are compelled to provide precious books, robes, vessels,
they will naturally desire to have their say about the custody of these articles; parsons
have been known to sell the church plate. Secondly, as we have seen, in the later
middle ages a dead saint or a personified ecclesia would no longer serve as a persona
capable of proprietary and possessory rights. The lawyers are beginning to hold that
the rector is in some sort the owner or tenant of the church-yard and the glebe; they
have to find an owner, at all events a possessor, for what in the past had been the
chattels owned and possessed by a saint or a personified ecclesia; the church-wardens
present themselves as claimants for property and possession.267

A curious glimpse into medieval habits and thoughts is given us Apportionment of
by the history of those royal taxes upon movable goods which taxes on movables.
are becoming common at the end of our period. Upon the face of
the documents which prescribe how the tax is to be levied we see little enough of
“realism.” Every man in England is to pay a fifteenth of his movables and therefore
every man of Littleton must do so. In order to reveal the amount of his wealth, some
of his neighbours must be examined, and for the purpose of the requisite assessment
the vill will be taken as its unit. Four or six men must come from each vill to meet the
chief taxers whom the king has appointed. It is possible that in some of the early
instances these representatives were chosen by their fellow villagers—even this would
not entitle us to imagine any standing assembly of the township—but so soon as the
procedure becomes perfectly clear, the villar representatives are not elected by their
neighbours.268 The king appoints “chief taxers” for the county; they are to cause to
come before them so many men from each vill that they, the chief taxers, may be able
to choose out four or six, who are thereupon to appraise the goods of every man of
their vill.269 Of any sum of money cast upon the vill as a whole we read no word;
each individual man of the kingdom is to pay a fifteenth of his movables. However, in
Edward III.’s reign the effect of repeated taxations is that certain quotas have already
struck root in the soil of the vills. Frequently a township complains that it is assessed

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 358 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

too highly, for it is not so rich as once it was. Arundel has suffered by fire, Frismark
by water; in Bradway there used to live a rich man who paid two-thirds of the taxes,
but now he is dead; men are leaving Derby to live at Nottingham because the burden
of tenths and fifteenths lies heavy on the former town; the men of Newport complain
that the pressure of the fifteenth upon them is increased because the Prior of Newport
has acquired lands in their vill and is free from taxation.270 Now all this means that a
given vill is rated at a certain sum, and that, whenever a fifteenth or a tenth of
movables is payable, the chief taxers insist that a fifteenth or a tenth of that sum must
come from that vill. There is in this case nothing that we can with accuracy call
communal or common liability. The sub-taxers have to apportion this fixed sum
among the men of their vill, and the individual man will be liable only for the amount
which they cast upon him. Still there is a localized allotment of the tax among the
vills. The case is the more instructive because the growth of this system seems but
half recognized. If a township is impoverished by flood or fire or the death of a
wealthy member, it demands a new taxation and seems to regard this as matter of
right. This is a remarkable example of the “realism” of medieval law. Even a tax on
movables cannot live without roots; it must attach itself to the land. We see this
happening in the full light of the fourteenth century to the detriment of the royal
exchequer, which is forced to regard the wealth of England as a fixed quantity. We
may be fairly sure that in earlier days this realism was yet stronger, and where it
prevailed no permanent communal machinery was required for the apportionment of
public burdens.

The student of the middle ages will at first sight see Actions against the
communalism everywhere. It seems to be an all pervading hundred.
principle. Communities rather than individual men appear as the
chief units in the governmental system. A little experience will make him distrust this
communalism; he will begin to regard it as the thin cloak of a rough and rude
individualism. He reads of an action for damages given against a hundred which has
neglected its police duties.271 At first he may think that the hundred as an universitas
has property out of which the damages can be paid. He will soon be persuaded that
this is not so. He next imagines the hundred-moot levying a rate for the payment of a
sum that has been adjudged to be due from the hundred. But, turning to his books, he
finds that there is nothing in the case that ought to be called communal liability; there
is merely a joint and several liability. The person who has been injured picks out two
or three wealthy inhabitants of the district, sues them for the whole sum and recovers
it from them. But at all events (so he may think) these men will be able to claim a
contribution from their fellow inhabitants. No, the burden lies where it originally falls.
This is so until Elizabeth’s day, when for the first time a more equitable and a more
communal principle is introduced, and all the inhabitants are rated for the relief of
those who have suffered for the sins of the hundred.272 What we begin by calling the
permanent charges on the community turn out to be “real” burdens apportioned for
good and all upon manors and virgates and acres of land, while, at least in some cases,
as we have just seen, the occasional charges are distributed by chance.

But (to return to the township) the unity which public law Economic affairs of
demands from it is not the only unity that it displays. Having the nonmanorial vill.
read, for example, in the Hundred Rolls, how in Cambridgeshire

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 359 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

the vill contained two, three, four manors, having verified this in Domesday Book,
having seen for instance how ever since the Conquest there have been five tenancies
in chief in Trumpington, six in Grantchester, we turn to maps which show that very
often these manors were not continuous tracts of land. Each village has its great open
fields; the fields take their names from the villages, not from the manors; the lands of
the various manors lie intermixed in the fields. Now this we cannot treat as a mere
geographical fact. Cultivation of the common fields implies a system of agriculture
which must in some degree be communal. To this we must add that in the thirteenth
century rights of pasture are far more commonly attributed to the men or the
community of a vill than to the tenants of a manor. In some cases it must have been
difficult enough to say to whom belonged the soil of the waste land over which these
rights were exercised. If a manor coincides with the vill, there is no difficulty; the lord
of the manor owns the waste land; and again if there is a chief manor coincident with
the vill, then the lord of the chief manor owns the waste, or such parts of it as have not
been allotted in severalty to the various sub-manors. But, as we have seen, these cases
do not exhaust all possibilities or all realities. There might be four or five manors in
the vill between which there was no subordination: each lord might trace his title up
to the king along a different feudal thread. We may take as an instance the vill of
Gamlingay in Cambridgeshire, not because it is abnormally elaborate, but because it
attracted Nasse’s attention.273 “The whole township (villata not villa) of Gamlingay
has twelve score acres of common pasture and heath.” According to the jurors the
whole township came to King Stephen by way of escheat, and out of it he enfeoffed
three men, namely the predecessor of John Avenel, the predecessor of William of
Leicester, and the predecessor of Hugh of Babington, besides which he gave a certain
tenement to his steward Walkelin which has now come to the Abbot of Sawtrey. John
Avenel has a well-marked manor with demesne, customary tenants and many
freeholders, who have other freeholders under them. The same is true of Hugh of
Babington. William of Leicester sold his part to Walter of Merton, and it has gone to
endow his house of scholars at Oxford; they have demesne land and many freehold
tenants. All these tenements are accounted to belong to the honour of Boulogne; but
there is yet another tenement with a hide of land which Richard of Edensore holds of
the honour of Gloucester.274 Who then owned those twelve score acres of pasture
and heath over which “the whole township of Gamlingay” had rights of common?
Perhaps this question has never yet been considered by the lords or tenants of
Gamlingay. So long as certain land is regarded as doomed for ever to be pasture land,
and so long as every one knows how many beasts he may turn out on it, the question
as to the ownership of the soil does not arise. We must not be quick to say that in the
past the township of Gamlingay has owned this soil; far truer may it be to say that the
idea of ownership had never been applied to it. But we are now dealing with the
thirteenth century, and our present point must be that in Gamlingay we see no court,
no assembly, capable of dealing with this waste. We do not see it in our documents.
Shall we say that none the less it must be there?

Before we give an affirmative answer we ought to observe that Intercommoning vills.
there were many cases in which two, three, or more vills
intercommoned. Of such cases we read much in the thirteenth century, but they grow
ever rarer as time goes on.275 Sometimes the boundaries of vills were uncertain;
between lay a waste over which the cattle roamed indiscriminately and no one could

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 360 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

fix the spot where the territory of one vill left off and that of another began.276 Now,
when we see this, we do not feel compelled to suppose that there was some permanent
“intervillar” organization, some assembly in which the several townships met each
other to regulate the affairs of the common. So when there are several manors in one
vill; the rights of the various lords in “the common of the vill” seem regarded as
having been determined once for all by the terms of their feoffments, and, if there is to
be any new regulation of them, this is accomplished, not by the action of any court or
assembly, but by a treaty. Each lord can represent himself and his villeins; his
freeholders give their consent. Such treaties were not unknown. The Abbot of
Malmesbury wished to enclose part of a great moor called Corsgrave. Twelve deeds
were necessary for this purpose. By one the lord of Foxley “on behalf of himself and
all his men of servile condition” released his right of common; by the others various
freehold tenants of Foxley released their rights.277 As to the customary course of
agriculture, that needs no regulation; it maintains itself, as it will maintain itself in the
eighteenth century when the manorial courts are perishing. As yet men do not wish to
break through it. What could one do with one’s scattered strips of land if one set the
custom at naught? They must lie profitless.278

But that the township had and needed little permanent Return to the
organization we shall better understand if we return to the case in manorial vill.
which a vill and a manor are coincident. Here at first sight we
may seem to see an effective organization; the vill is no mere administrative district;
the township is a “village community.” Certainly this is so; the township is a
communa, a communitas, and this village community has a moot, a court and
assembly of its own; the communitas villae is the communitas halimoti. Still under the
influence of modern theories about “archaic” facts we might exaggerate the amount of
communalism or even of self-government which exists in the township.

This will become apparent if we examine the rights that are Rights of common.
known as rights of common. Here if anywhere we ought to see
the communalism of the township at its strongest. The houses and arable acres, it may
be said, are by this time owned in severalty, though a man’s ownership of his arable is
still subject to the rights of the township which are expressed in the programme of
agriculture, the two-course system, or the three-course system; but the waste land with
its pastures and woods and waters belongs to the township as a whole. True, it may be
added, a lord has now assumed to himself the rights or many of the rights of the
village corporation; legal theory supposes that the waste belongs to him; but then the
members of the township, free and unfree, still enjoy this waste in common and
regulate its enjoyment in their moot. Remove the lord, who is an aftergrowth, the
township appears as a landowning community.

But does our evidence point this way? Let us take the case of the Rights of common
freeholders, which should be comparatively undisturbed by the and communal rights.
effects of seignorial dominion. Are their rights “of common” in
any sense communal rights? Of course there is just this element of community about
them:—they are rights to be enjoyed in common. A right of common is a right to
enjoy something along with someone else, to turn out one’s beasts on a pasture where
the beasts of the lord and of one’s fellow-tenants feed, to take sticks from a wood, turf

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 361 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

from a moor, fish from a pond in which others are entitled to do similar acts. But, for
all this, the right may be an individual’s several right, a right that he has acquired by a
several title, a right that he can enforce against his fellow-commoners, a right that he
without aid from his fellow-commoners can enforce against strangers, a right over
which his fellow-commoners have little or no control.

Such really are the freeholder’s rights. At a later time our law The freeholder’s
definitely laid down the rule that the freehold tenant of a manor rights.
is entitled to “common appendant,” which is defined as “the right
which every freehold tenant of a manor possesses, to depasture his commonable
cattle, levant and couchant on his freehold tenement anciently arable, in the wastes of
the manor.”279 To entitle himself to this right, a man merely has to show that he is a
freehold tenant of the manor; he has not to show that this right has been granted by
the lord to him or to his predecessors, nor has he to show that he has gained it by
long-continued use. With common appendant is contrasted “common appurtenant.” If
a man claims some right which exceeds or swerves from the definition of common
appendant, then he must make a title to it by grant or prescription. Such is the case,
for example, if he would turn onto the waste beasts that are not commonable,
donkeys, goats, swine or geese, if he would turn onto the waste more oxen or horses
than are “levant and couchant” on his tenement, or if he would claim common in
respect of land that is not “ancient arable.” Now, it has, so we think, been sufficiently
shown that the terms in which this distinction is expressed are pretty modern; an
accurate discrimination between “appendancy” and “appurtenancy” belongs rather to
Littleton’s day than to Bracton’s.280 Also it must be confessed that the substance of
the distinction hardly appears in Bracton’s text. His doctrine is that these rights of
common are iura in re aliena and are to be gained either by grant or by adverse user,
though he seems to admit a class of cases, not very easily definable, in which it is
unnecessary for a claimant to prove any such title.281 On the whole, however, a
comparison of charters of feoffment with manorial surveys will bring us to the
conclusion that in substance the distinction between appendancy and appurtenancy,
between rights of common which require specific description and rights of common
which arise whenever a tenement is given, unless they be excluded by negative words,
is very old.282

But, be this as it may, the freeholder’s right of common is his The freeholder and
several right, as much his several right as is his tenancy of his the community.
house. His “seisin” of this right is fully protected by the king’s
court, protected by a similar action to that which guards his seisin of his house; the
assize of novel disseisin is supplemented by an assize of common. It seems fairly
clear that before the Statute of Merton (1236) any single freeholder who had a right of
common could prevent his lord from subtracting from that right any part of the land
over which it had been exercisable.283 That statute gave the lord a right to “approve,”
that is, to make his profit of,284 and hence to enclose, to subtract, the waste land,
provided that he left sufficient pasture for the commoners. How did matters stand
before the statute? The individual freeholder addresses his lord and his
fellows:—“True it is that the waste is superabundant; true that I am only entitled to
turn out four oxen on it; true that if half of it were enclosed I should be none the
worse off; true that all of you wish the enclosure made; true that I am

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 362 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

selfish:—nevertheless I defy you to enclose one square yard; I defy you severally; I
defy you jointly; you may meet in your court; you may pass what resolutions you
please; I shall contemn them; for I have a right to put my beasts on this land and on
every part of it; the law gives me this right and the king protects it.” This is not
communalism; it is individualism in excelsis.

Over the freeholder the manorial court has little power; for him it Freedom of the
is a court of law (though very generally he can evade its action freeholder.
and go straight to the king’s court), but it is hardly a
governmental assembly. He is very free of custom, he is very free of by-laws. The
following brief record tells us much:—In 1223 Richard of Beseville and Joan his wife
brought an assize of novel disseisin against Peter of Goldington and thirty-six others
for land in Ravensthorpe. “And all of them come and confess that the tenement is the
free tenement of Richard and Joan, but they [Richard and Joan] were not able to
cultivate that tenement that year, for in that year the field lay fallow, and because
contrary to the custom of the vill the plaintiffs cultivated that tenement, these
defendants pastured the corn when it had sprouted.” Richard and Joan are not at pains
to deny the custom; they abide the judgment of the court. “And therefore it is
considered that the said Richard and Joan remain in their seisin and that Peter and the
others be in mercy.”285 We would willingly know more of this case; but on the face
of it we seem to read that a freeholder cannot be compelled by mere custom to allow
his neighbours to pasture their beasts on his land, and that, to say the least, “there
cannot be a custom for inhabitants as such to have a profit a prendre in the soil of
another.”286 To justify his act each of the defendants should have prescribed for a
right of pasture, and prepared himself to prove that he and his predecessors had
enjoyed such right time out of mind. But to require this is to deny the title of the
community, to make each member of it plead and prove his own title; what is more, it
is to require of him a difficult task. And so with the force of by-laws; what we read
will make us think that against the freeholder they are weak. In the name of a custom
or by-law the “community” of a Nottinghamshire township turn their beasts onto the
land where the parson has grown a crop; they are told that this is manifestly wrongful
and not to be supported by any by-law; they must pay damages.287 Some small
power of regulating the rights of common belonging to the freeholders we may allow
to the manorial court and its by-laws, but to all seeming it was small.288

But the cases of freeholders holding land within a manor if they are important, and by
no means uncommon, are (it may be said) not sufficiently numerous to disturb the
reign of communalism.
The freeholder, though he is in the township, is hardly of the Communalism among
township; he does not share all the communal burdens; he is not the villeins.
“at scot and lot” with the township.289 The “community of the
vill” is generally a body of men whom the lawyers call serfs, who have been reduced
to something that is very like serfage by the action of their lords, and these men, who
must be treated as the normal shareholders in the village, form a community, a
commune, something that might not unfairly be called a corporation.

Certainly there is truth in this. Between the various members of The villein
the village community which is also a villein community there is community.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 363 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

a strong bond of economic interdependance. Not only do they cooperate when they
are tilling the lord’s demesne, but in all probability there is cooperation in the culture
of their own holdings. Very seldom will the peasant be able to plough his strips
without the aid of his neighbours; he will not have oxen enough.290 In some manors a
tenant is bound by the express terms of his tenure as entered upon the court rolls to
discharge, not only the duties which he will owe to the lord, but also the duties which
he will owe to his neighbours;291 and we may find a man forfeiting a tenement
because he will neither dwell in it nor cultivate it nor “do any neighbourliness to his
neighbours”:292 that is to say, he will take no share in the communal duties. In
accordance with this idea we find that the lord treats the community of the vill as an
entity that has duties towards him. It is constantly falling into his mercy for breach of
duty; it is amerced for coming late to court, for committing waste, for damaging his
crops, for not cleansing the pond, for not selling him poultry, for not having a
common pinder, for not repairing the sheepfold, the mill, the smithy, when
commanded to do so.293 All the tenants of the vill owe one mark for an axletree
delivered to them and lost by their default.294 The lord sells the herbage of his land to
the tenants of the vill, he leases the demesne land to them as a body. The community
contracts with him and with others. The community of the vill of Monkton, except T.
T. and W. T., is compelled to pay damages to W. S. for damage done in his corn.295
On the other hand, Fair John has broken a covenant with the community of the vill of
Wolviston by not paying the shepherd his salary, to the damage of the community, 6
s. 8 d.296 All manner of commands are given to the community, and the community
itself makes all manner of by-laws (byrlawes, bileges).297 To mark off the sphere of
the commands issued by the lord or his steward from that of the by-laws made by the
community would be hard: as hard as to mark off the sphere of royal ordinances from
that of parliamentary statutes.298 The lord is a constitutional king, and, when there is
to be drastic and permanent legislation, he acts with the counsel and consent of his
court; but still over the villeins and the villein tenements he is every inch a king. If the
common is to be stinted, the consent of the court will be obtained; but a simple
injunction will serve to tell all the tenants that they are not to keep geese in the
vill,299 not to buy beer save at the lord’s brewhouse,300 not to sell growing
crops,301 that they must offer their fish and poultry to the lord before they look for
other purchasers,302 that they must find beds for his officers,303 that they must not
associate with John Lollis, who has made too free with his knife,304 that they must
not sue in other courts,305 that they must not throw about such words as nativi or
rustici, though nativi and rustici they assuredly are.306 Indeed here lies the legal
possibility of all this communal organization of the township’s economy. When the
freeholders are left out of sight, it appears as a mass of villeins, or at any rate as a
mass of men holding their lands by villein tenure. Let one of them rebel against the
community, its customs or its by-laws, his body, it may be, is safe against
imprisonment or exile (exile from the vill is by no means uncommon),307 but his land
is at the lord’s mercy and will be taken from him, the community sanctioning and
applauding the punishment.308

In dealing with freeholders one must be careful, otherwise they The freeholders and
will be off to the king’s court, which shows little favour to the village.
restrictive customs and by-laws, which will not open its doors to
the community as such, but will make each individual asserter of communal rights

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 364 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

answer why he has entered on another man’s soil or impounded another man’s cattle.
Of course there can be no talk of enforcing against freeholders the mere commands of
the lord, even though they be backed by the common assent of the township, at all
events when such commands have nothing to do with the tenement. The freeholder
may sell fish and poultry to whom he pleases; he may associate with John Lollis if he
pleases, provided that John be a lawful man; it will be difficult to make him take his
corn to the common mill,309 impossible to make him lend the steward his bed. But
further, as we have already seen, it will be by no means easy to diminish his right of
pasture or to prevent him from cultivating his land when and how he chooses if he can
do this without trespass. When injunctions are laid upon the vill, when by-laws are
made for the vill, the freeholders must be treated as exceptions. It is ordained that no
tenant of the vill of Ferry Hill shall put horses in the oxen’s pasture, save the four
liberi, each of whom may put there the horse on which he rides.310 All the tenants of
the same vill, except the four liberi, are amerced because they refused to have a
common reaper appointed for them by the lord’s officer.311 The mill fell into disre-
pair. In 1366 order was given to distrain the free tenants to repair it, while all the other
tenants were ordered to repair it by the next court day. In 1368 the freeholders, despite
all orders for distraining them, had not done their share of the work; the customary
tenants had done theirs.312 But of the exceptional position of the freeholders we have
said enough; over the customary tenants, especially if they are unfreemen, the village
court has great power, for it is the lord’s court. The lord can treat them as a
community because he can treat them as villeins.

Still it would be easy for us to overestimate the communalism Communalism and
that there is in the vill, even when there are no freeholders to be collective liability.
considered. In the first place, we must notice that mere collective
liability for transgressions implies little communalism, little permanent organization,
while it certainly does not imply, though it does not exclude, the idea of corporate
unity. If the vill can be fined and amerced for neglect of duties owed to the state or to
the lord, so also the county and the hundred can be fined and amerced for false
judgments, for murders, for robberies; but yet it has no common purse, no property.
The county community has no property; the hundred community has no property. So
likewise the township normally has no property. When a judgment for damages, fine
or amercement is given against it, this “it” at once becomes a mere mass of
individuals who are jointly and severally liable for the whole amount, while, as
between themselves, their proper shares are settled by the system of commensurable
tenements; all virgaters pay equally, all cottagers equally.

Even when the manor is farmed by the villeins, as is sometimes The community as
the case, we may overstate the degree of communalism that there farmer.
is in the arrangement. Sometimes the king lets one of his manors
to the men of that manor;313 sometimes other lords do the same. The lease in such a
case seems generally to have been a lease at will; but there may have been some
places with no pretensions to be called boroughs where the men of the vill farmed the
vill in fee. Sometimes the lease, if such we must call it, seems to have comprised all
the sources of revenue that the lord had in the manor, sometimes some of these were
excepted out of it. Thus the Prior and Convent of Worcester have a manor at Hallow;
“the court” with the appurtenances, and two carucates of the demesne have been let to

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 365 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

the villeins at a corn rent together with the meadows and casualties and heriots and
the villeinage,314 though the convent still retains in its hand a barn, a moor, some
meadow and some arable land. But we must not jump to the conclusion that the villani
are carrying on the cultivation of the demesne land as “a joint stock affair” by means
of beasts and implements which belong to them in common or to a corporation of
which they are the members. At Hallow the arable part of the demesne which has
been handed over to them seems to be broken up into physically distinct shares, each
of which is held by an individual villanus at a several rent. The upshot of the
arrangement seems to be this:—the villagers, instead of being placed under a bailiff of
the lord’s choosing, are given the right to elect their own firmarius, and to him each
pays the rent due from his ancient villein tenement and also the rent due in respect of
any part of the quondam demesne that he has taken, and out of these rents, the profits
of the court, and such casualties as heriots, the elected farmer must pay “the farm” of
the manor.315 The lord obtains the joint and several guarantees (if we may use so
definite a term) of all his tenants for the whole “farm.” If the farmer cannot pay the
rent, the lord can attack all or any of the tenants; if on the contrary the farmer
occasionally makes more than the “farm,” very likely he keeps the surplus to himself
or possibly it is expended in festivity; if a surplus becomes normal, then the rents of
the individual tenants will perhaps be reduced. But the lords, we may be sure, took
good care that these ventures should not be very profitable.

But, to return to the usual case in which there is no farming, we The manorial custom
see that the rights given by the manorial custom are, at least for gives several rights
the more part, several rights given to individuals. The tenant in not communal rights.
villeinage holds his house and his virgate by a title that is in no
sense communal, and to this tenement are annexed rights of pasture, customary rights
of pasture; he enjoys them, not because he is an inhabitant of the vill, but because they
are annexed as appurtenances to the tenement that he holds. He transmits an
inheritance to his heir as the freeholder does, nor, so far as we can learn, does custom
give the court much power to regulate these rights. When a statement of them is made
and enrolled, it generally professes to be, not a new ordinance, but an ancient custom,
and the function of the by-laws that are made is, at least in theory, rather that of
confirming and sanctioning old, than that of introducing new rules, though new rules
can be made from time to time about minor matters.

Looking at the vill from the outside, contrasting it with other Rights of the
vills, men naturally use phrases which seem to attribute rights to township disappear
the community as a whole. The township of Sutton, or the when examined.
community of the vill of Norton, is said to pasture its or their
cattle (often enough the verb that follows villata is in the plural number) over a
particular moor. But just so a sheriff’s bailiff will be charged by jurors with taking the
beasts of the vill of Weston. The township as a community has no beasts; the beasts
that have been taken belonged in severalty to certain individual men.316 Even so with
the rights of pasture; on analysis they are found to be the rights of certain individual
men; they are exercised in common, but they are several rights.

Lastly, when, as may sometimes happen, the ownership of a tract Co-ownership and
of land seems to be attributed to a community, we have still to corporate property.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 366 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

face that difficult question which has of late been exercising the minds of continental
historians:—Have we before us a corporate unit or have we merely a group of co-
owners?317 England affords but few materials for an answer to this important
question, for anything that even by a stretch of language could be called a communal
ownership of land, if it had ever existed, had become rare and anomalous before the
stream of accurate documents begins to flow. But what we see will tend to make us
believe that it was rather as a group of co-owning individuals than as a corporation
that the members of the vill thought of themselves when they had a chance of
applying either the one idea or the other.

The manner in which the “quasi-corporateness” of the township An illustration.
was dissolved at the touch of law may be illustrated by a story
from Dunstable Priory. In 1293 the Prior brought an assize of novel disseisin against
seventeen defendants concerning land at Toddington. Some of the defendants
confessed themselves the villeins of John Peivere; others, who were freeholders,
sought to justify what they had done. Thereupon the Prior pleaded that the lands in
question, which seem to have consisted of many disconnected strips, had been in the
seisin of the men of the township of Toddington, and that they by their unanimous
will and assent enfeoffed his predecessor, Prior Simon, to hold to him and his
successors for ever. The jurors endorsed this statement, adding that all the persons
who had any right in the said land were congregated in one place at a court held at
Toddington, and with one consent granted the land to Prior Simon and his successors,
at a rent of six pence a year payable to the said men of Toddington. Prior Simon (the
jurors say) held the land and paid the rent; the present Prior for several years held the
land and paid the rent; the defendants have dispossessed him.318 The Prior recovered
his seisin. Now this was a possessory action; the Prior had only to prove (and he did
prove) his seisin and disseisin; the soundness of his title was not in question. Still his
title was a feoffment by the men of the township made in the court of Toddington. But
then we also learn that when this feoffment was made the lord of Toddington, John
Peivere, was an infant in ward to the queen. The men of Toddington who were
defendants in the assize relied on this; their case was that the Prior obtained the land,
not from them, but from the queen’s bailiff. Then the Prior by expending a
considerable sum obtained from John Peivere a confirmation of the land “into which
we had entry by the community of the men of Toddington,” and for the future the
Prior “by the attornment of the men of Toddington” paid the rent of six pence, not to
them, but to their lord.319 We see therefore the men of Toddington making a
feoffment, the Prior dealing with them as capable of making a feoffment, of receiving
rent, and then we see this title melting away before the claims of the lord. But further,
we see the defendants endeavouring to avoid a feoffment made by the community in
its court, and one of the reasons that they urge is this:—When the feoffment was
made, some of us were under age. Such a plea gives us an instructive glimpse into
their minds. The men of Toddington suppose that they have land; they ignore their
lord. Let us do the same; let us suppose that John Peivere’s rights have been gained by
modern usurpations. What then, we may ask, is the men of Toddington’s theory of
their own title? That they form a corporation? That “the community” in its court can
alienate its land? No, but that they hold this land as co-owners, and that unless every
tenant is of full age and joins in the act there can be no alienation.320

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 367 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

However, except by way of rare exception, the men of the vill do The township rarely
not hold any property as joint tenants or tenants in common. has rights.
Each of them has his house, his virgate or croft; each of them has
or may have certain rights of pasture, of turbary, of fishing or the like in the lord’s
wastes or waters; but that is all. The consequence is that they rarely come before the
courts as co-plaintiffs. This is not due to any speculative doctrine about the way in
which corporations ought to sue. It is not due to the rule that an unincorporated group
of persons cannot sue under a general name. At present there is no such rule. As we
shall see below when the boroughs come before us, the courts are ready to listen to
complaints preferred in the name of classes of men who have some common interest
to assert; the lawyers do not yet demand the appointment of an attorney under a
common seal. “The citizens” of A, “the burgesses” of B can sue; their mayor or their
bailiffs attend the court on their behalf; and even so “the men” of C —which is a mere
rural township, or which is a hundred—can sue and be sued, their bailiff or their reeve
with four men will represent them. They can sue and be sued under a general name, if
there is anything for them to sue and be sued about. But then this rarely happens.
They hold no lands, they own no franchises, they, taken as a group, have no rights to
assert or to defend. The great exception to this rule is that the practice of assessing
taxes and imposing fines upon communities may give rights to a community. Thus we
may read how certain named men of the hamlet of Bordesdon had to answer in the
Exchequer to “the men of the vill of Little Hormead” for not contributing to a
fifteenth; it was a disputed question whether this hamlet should contribute towards the
amount assessed on Little Hormead or to the amount assessed on Braughing.321 Such
disputes the exchequer must often have had to decide, and in so doing it considered
that “the men” of a vill were sufficiently represented by a few of their number. So
also one township in the fens would sue its neighbour for a contribution towards the
cost of maintaining and repairing the sewers, and would base its claim on the custom
and use of the marsh.322 But within the sphere of private law we seldom see the men
of the vill joining to bring an action under the general name which covers them. Some
exceptional cases may be found upon the plea rolls. The line which divides the men of
a vill from the burgesses of a borough is being drawn not by speculative theories but
by practical needs. There is great need for actions by “the burgesses,” for the
burgesses have valuable franchises to assert, franchises which can hardly be regarded
as the sum of the rights of individuals; but with the mere township it is otherwise. The
community of the township is not incapable of suing, but it rarely sues, for it has
nothing to sue about; it is not incapable of rights, but generally it is rightless. No
lawyer’s theory keeps it out of the courts. What is lacking is not a common seal but
common property.323

It is difficult to discuss these matters at length without making Transition to the
some disputable assumptions touching the origin of “the English boroughs.
village community” and its history in centuries much earlier than
the thirteenth. Some see in those centuries free communities that are becoming
servile, while others see servile communities whose servility is being alleviated. We
incline, for reasons that have been elsewhere given, to think that the former is the
truer view.324 But we do not regard the old community as a landowning corporation.
That peculiar kind and degree of union which permits or begets a distinction between

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 368 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

what is owned by many men ut singuli and what is owned by them ut universi is not
primitive, nor native in our villages. It is slowly developed in our boroughs.

§ 8.

The Borough
Certain vills are more than vills; they are boroughs (burgi); The city.
certain boroughs are more than boroughs; they are cities
(civitates). The latter of these two distinctions has little or no meaning in law. A habit,
which seems to have its roots in the remote history of Gaul, will give the name city to
none but a cathedral town.325 This usage is in general well observed. In 1302 the
sheriff of Cornwall, returning the names of the burgesses of Launceston and Bodmin
who are to appear in parliament, says that there are no cities in his bailiwick; the
sheriff of Essex and Hertfordshire says the like when he announces the result of
elections at Colchester and Hertford.326 However, the usage was not very rigid;
Shrewsbury is called a city in a judicial record of Edward I.’s reign;327 at an earlier
date Cambridge was called a city;328 and in Domesday Book the name city is given
rather to county towns than to cathedral towns. But at any rate the civitas was also a
burgus, the cives might be called burgenses, and the communitas civium or
communitas burgensium was a villata and communitas villae.329

Now, at least from the early years of the thirteenth century The vill and the
onwards, the distinction between the mere villa and the burgus borough.
was a familiar, if not a very precise, outline of public law. At
recurring intervals the justices in eyre came into the county; each vill was to be
represented by its reeve and four men, while each city or borough was to be
represented by a jury of twelve. Thus when at a later day the sheriffs were bidden to
cause every city and borough to send representatives to parliament, they knew what
the command meant. If, however, we could bring one of these sheriffs to life and
cross-question him over the definition of a borough, very possibly his answers would
disappoint us; very possibly we should get little more from him than—“This place is a
borough, for it has always been treated as such; that place is not a borough, for I can
not remember its having ever sent twelve representatives to meet the justices in their
eyres.” If we could induce our sheriff to go behind practice, and tell us what in his
opinion it was that made a borough to be a borough, he would probably refer us, not
to just one attribute, but to many attributes. In particular, if we talked to him of
incorporation or artificial personality, unless he were an unusually learned sheriff, he
would be puzzled. He would tell us that the boroughs had franchises (libertates),
some more, some fewer, and he would in the end refuse to consecrate any particular
libertas or any combination of libertates as at once the necessary and the sufficient
essence of a borough.

We have not to write a history of the English boroughs.330 That The borough and its
task, even if accomplished only in outline, would be long, so community.
various from first to last have been the fortunes of our towns. We
shall merely attempt to detect the more important of the legal elements which make a

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 369 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

borough something other than a mere rural township and to raise some of those
questions which the coming historian must answer. He will, so we think, consider the
borough from two different points of view, and indeed, were this possible, he should
occupy both at the same time; for the borough is both organ and organism. On the one
hand, we have here a piece of England which is governed in a somewhat peculiar
way. To use our modern terms, there is within it a “local authority” of a somewhat
unusual type and there is more “local self-government” here than elsewhere. On the
other hand, we have here a community which differs from the other communities of
the land in that it is attaining the degree and kind of organization which we call
corporate, so that, for example, it will be capable of appearing as an individual
landowner among individual landowners, as a single contractor and as a single wrong-
doer. Neither point of view should be neglected. In a still recent past various causes
have induced Englishmen to think of the borough much rather as a piece of the
constitutional machinery of the English state than as an organism and a person that
has life and property. Also it must be confessed that throughout the middle ages the
central power was stronger in England than elsewhere and the boroughs served the
state as its organs and its instruments. Still, if we ignore the peculiarly corporate
character of the burgensic community, we fail to record one of the greatest moral and
legal achievements of the middle ages, an achievement which made possible the
countless and variegated corporations of modern days.331

In order that we may find a starting-point for what we have to Preliminary sketch of
say of the boroughs of the thirteenth century, we are compelled early history.
to premise a slight sketch of the boroughs of an older time. That
it will be an imaginary sketch we fully admit; but some reasons have been given
elsewhere for the belief that it is founded upon fact, and may be roughly true of those
towns which set an example for others.332

For at least a century and a half before the Norman Conquest, Borough and shire.
English law has known the borough as something different from
the ordinary tún or vill. The typical borough has been (i) the burh, (ii) the port, and
(iii) the moot-stow of a shire.333 (i) It has been a fastness and place of refuge whose
earth-works have, at least in some cases, been maintained by the men of the shire. It
may even have been in some sort a garrison town: the great people of the shire may
have been bound to keep in it houses or “haws,” as they were called, and “knights” of
the old English kind.334 (ii) A market has been held in it: that is to say, it has been
one of the few places in which men might buy cattle and other goods without putting
their necks in jeopardy; their bargains were attested by official witnesses and toll was
taken from them. (iii) It has been the meeting-place, the moot-stow of the shire, and
perhaps because it was the county’s town, it was in no hundred, but had a court of its
own, a burh-moot or port-moot, which was co-ordinate with the hundred-moots.
Moreover, a severe and exalted peace, the king’s burhgrið, had reigned within it. This
seems to be in origin the peace of the king’s own palisaded homestead, and has been
extended to those towns which are the military, commercial and political centres of
national life.335

But the borough has been a tún, and we may believe that in many The borough as vill.
cases its soil has been laid out in the old rural fashion: there have

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 370 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

been wide open fields, meadows and pastures; there have been intermixed hides and
yardlands. The borough community is a township, and, if in its moot it has the
organization of a hundred, it none the less has for its territory several square miles of
land on which corn is grown and beasts are depastured.

The texture of this community is unusually heterogeneous. We The borough’s
suspect that there are within it the knights or other dependants of heterogeneity.
the shire-thegns. As the military element becomes less
prominent, these thegns will let their houses to chapmen and craftsmen at money
rents, but will endeavour to maintain as long as possible a jurisdictional control (sake
and soke) over their tenants. Also there may be free and lordless house-owners and
land-owners in the borough who increase this heterogeneity by commending
themselves, their houses and their lands to the king or some other magnate: in
particular, many will pay a little haw-gavel or land-gavel (house-rent or land-rent) to
the king in return for his patronage. Thus it is likely that the borough, if it flourishes,
will escape the fate that awaits many a common village: it will not as a whole become
the king’s or any one else’s manor. On the other hand, strips of its arable fields may
be worked into manors whose centres lie either within or without the town-ditch. At
this point numerous variations are possible; but, whatever happens to the arable, it is
probable that the town community will retain some control over and use of the green
pasture, and also that just in these vills the claims upon the pasture will begin to take a
new shape. The “men” of important people will be turning out their horses to graze
and yet have no interest in the arable, and the opportunity for sale and purchase of
corn and hay which the market offers may cause a rapid disintegration of the old self-
sufficing hides and yardlands. Then in having a moot of its own, a moot established
by national law, whose profits are received by king and earl, the borough has an organ
capable of deeming dooms about this pasture, and, at least in some instances about the
arable land also, and this power of “right-speaking” cannot be sharply distinguished
from a power of regulation.

Thus to the eyes of the Conqueror’s officers, whose heads are The borough and the
full of the formula of dependent tenure, the old borough presents king.
itself as a knot that cannot be untied. Unit it is; but they scruple
to describe it as being Terra Regis, and clearly it is not any one else’s land. It is not
part of any one’s fief, and yet it is not like one of the king’s demesne manors, for
(since commendation is hardening into tenure) there are in it pieces of many fiefs. The
king is not its landlord, except in that wide and lordly, rather than landlordly, sense in
which he is landlord of all England. On the other hand, the king, though sometimes in
conjunction with the earl, is the immediate lord of those institutions which give the
borough its specific character: lord of its court and lord of its market, with a large
fund of liberties to bestow upon its burgesses. As time goes on, the burgesses, who are
coalescing in a new type of community, will be treated as an unit which has no lord
but the king, and will pay tallages when the king’s demesne manors are tallaged: but
they will make their profit of their communal “immediacy” by depriving all
landlordship of its lordly character and reducing it to the level of a mere right to
rent.336

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 371 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

As an organ, the borough has its moot, which is held by the The borough court.
sheriff or some portreeve who is his farmer. Perhaps all the
freemen or the house-holders are entitled and bound to sit as doomsmen. On the other
hand, in some boroughs which have been Danish, there seems to be a group of
hereditary law-men or doomsmen. Also we must reckon with the possibility that the
military organization of the borough has caused the formation of wards (custodiae), at
the head of each of which stands an alderman whose office, like every other office, is
apt to pass to his son. But the little evidence that we have suggests that a close and
definite college of doomsmen was exceptional, and we have small warrant for
supposing the existence of any legally constituted “patriciate.”

The burghal community being heterogeneous, voluntary societies The borough and the
are formed within it. Gilds spring up in the town. The festive and gilds.
religious gild may be very old, may even be traced back to the
days of heathenry;337 it is likely to flourish in the soil of a borough. In particular, the
“knights” (of the old English type) who are in the borough form gilds, and the
knights’ gild may become an important factor in the life and even in the government
of the town. The sphere of association and private enterprise cannot at this time be
marked off from the sphere of government and public power. The contractual or
associative principle when it first manifests itself is unruly; we see how the vassalic
contract threatens for a while to make itself the one bond between men; and even so a
club of thegns or knights, or at a later day of merchants, may aspire (the phrase must
be pardoned, for it seems apt) to “boss” the town.338 But at any rate gilds and gild-
like structure have a great future before them in the boroughs.

It is probable that some of these traits of the old English borough Transition to the
were vanishing or ceasing to be distinctive even before the thirteenth century.
Norman Conquest. In the new age that then opened many
changes tended to produce this effect. Castle-guard was substituted for the older burh-
bót; markets were established in many places; the ordinary village had a court, a
manorial court; the old burh-grið was merged in an ubiquitous and homogeneous
royal peace. Another class of boroughs was coming into existence, the enfranchised
manors. Perhaps the free-tenure of houses at fixed and light rents which was to be
found in the old shire-towns, served as a model and generated the idea that, where
such tenure is, there is a liber burgus; but just in this quarter a French strain may be
sought and perhaps detected.339 Be this as it may, the number of so-called burgi
increased rapidly. A lord created a liber burgus if he abolished villein services, heriot
and merchet, and instead thereof took money-rents, as, for example, twelve pence
from each house. Moreover, he might allow his tenants, his burgenses, to farm the
court, to farm a market bestowed on him by the king, and to elect a bailiff. It was
difficult or impossible to mark the lowest degree of privilege or exceptionality which
would make a township no mere township but a borough.

We may dwell upon this difficulty for a short while since it The inferior limit of
illustrates the slow growth of that new type of community which burgality.
we call municipal and corporate. We cannot define a borough as
a vill in which burgage tenure prevails, for of this we hear in places which were not
called boroughs.340 We cannot say that a borough is a vill which is held in farm by

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 372 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

the men of the vill, for this “self-farming” may be found in some little villages. Nor
again can we say that the borough is a township exempt from the jurisdiction of the
hundred court; many a mere rural township was quite as extra-hundredal as was the
normal borough, indeed it might well be more exempt from the interference of the
county officers than was many a small borough, for its lord (let us say the Abbot of
Westminster) had “the return of writs” in all his manors. Nor again can the test
afforded by the practice of the eyres have been applied except in a one-sided way.
Probably a place which had never sent twelve, instead of four, men to meet the
justices would have had to show some recent grant of new liberties before it could
pretend to be more than a township; but there seem to have been in some counties
many places which sent twelve men to the eyre and which yet were not called
boroughs or summoned to send burgesses to parliament.341 And when the
parliamentary test became applicable the line that was drawn was irregular. It has
been calculated that under the first two Edwards 166 boroughs were summoned once
or more often; that on an average under Edward I. no more than 75, under Edward II.
no more than 60 boroughs were actually represented.342 At any rate the number
rapidly decreased. That the sheriffs had an immense power in this matter is certain. In
1320 the sheriff of Bedford and Buckingham said that Bedford was the one borough
in his bailiwick, though in 1316 five others had been summoned, namely, Amersham,
Wendover, Aylesbury, Wycombe and Marlow.343

The truth seems to be that the summons to parliament Representation in
engendered a force which diminished the number of the would- parliament.
be boroughs. Theretofore it had been well to be a borough; the
townsfolk when they went before the justices in eyre had enjoyed the privilege of
“swearing by themselves,” of not being mixed up with “foreigners”; but now they
were called on to send to parliament representatives whom they would have to
pay:—at such a price they would no longer be burgesses. Another force was making
in the same direction; abbots and other far-sighted lords were beginning to discover
that it was not well to have burgesses. Long ago the men of Bury St. Edmund’s had
been freed from all servile works; the vill had received nomen et libertatem burgi
from the abbot; a portman-moot was held in it; Abbot Sampson had chartered it.344
In 1302 the sheriff of Suffolk bade it return members, sending the mandate, as he was
bound to do, to the abbot’s steward. The steward made no answer.345 Then from
1304 we hear how the men of Bury have been making a “conspiracy” and holding
“conventicles” among themselves; they have been pretending to have an alderman
and a merchant gild and to be “free burgesses.” They must pay heavy damages to the
abbot, and those who are too poor to pay must go to prison for a month.346 They
have not a gild merchant, nor a community, nor a common seal, nor a mayor. Thus
Bury soon drops out from the list of English boroughs, though long before this,
Jocelin of Brakeland, no friend of the townsfolk, had allowed it “the title and
franchise of a borough.”347 The short-sightedness of some burgesses who would not
pay representatives, the far-sightedness of some lords who just at the critical moment
perceived that burgesses would not be good tenants, the inertness of sheriffs who did
not care to enter, for no gain to themselves, upon an arduous struggle, the indifference
of the king who had no need of the men of little towns, all made for the same result.
Before the end of the fourteenth century the number of towns represented in
parliament had fallen to a hundred, and these were most unevenly distributed among

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 373 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

the various counties. We are not called upon to explain this phenomenon, for it
belongs to the fourteenth century; but it forcibly suggests that in the thirteenth no
strict definition of a borough was possible. And in the end what is the legal definition?
The effect is put in place of the cause:—“A burgh is an ancient towne, holden of the
king or any other lord, which sendeth burgesses to the parliament . . . and it is called a
burgh because it sendeth members to parliament.”348

Every note in the gamut whose two extremes are the mere rural The typical boroughs
township and the great community of London might be found and their franchises.
and sounded by the patient historian, and some of the small
boroughs, whose inhabitants never attain to a truly urban life, are of great interest as
archaeological museums; but we must here glance only at the towns which lead the
van, and on the whole we shall find that those old English shire-boroughs, of whose
early days we have spoken, remain in the front rank throughout the middle ages,
though a few other towns, especially some seaports, become prominent. We may first
look at the “liberties” or “franchises” which are bestowed by the charters of the
twelfth and thirteenth centuries, and then we may say a little of the corporate
character of the borough community.349

(i)Jurisdictional privileges. Usually there is no need for the Jurisdictional
charter to grant the right to hold a court, for the court exists privileges.
already either in the form of an ancient borough-moot or in that
of a manorial court. Indeed one of the “liberties” that the burghers sometimes seek is
that their court, their port-moot, or borough-moot, shall not be held too often—not
more frequently than once a week. On the other hand, a common clause provides that
the burgesses, except the king’s moneyers and servants, “shall not plead beyond the
walls” of the town, unless it be for tenements which lie elsewhere. Then sometimes a
further attempt is made to define the competence of the court in a manner
advantageous to the burgesses:—if a debt is incurred in the town, the plea upon it is to
belong to the borough court. Franchises of this kind are of importance in the history of
the boroughs because they give occasion for communal action. If a burgess is
impleaded in the king’s court, it behoves the officers of the borough to appear there
and “claim their court,” and any negligence in this matter is likely to be prejudicial to
the borough as showing that it is not “seised” of its franchises. Not unfrequently the
burgesses enjoyed in their court a procedure differing from that of the royal tribunal;
they were protected against innovations and reforms. When we find that trial by battle
is excluded, we may think that civic is in advance of royal justice; when on the other
hand we find that trial by jury is excluded, and that the accused burgess of the
thirteenth century even in criminal cases will wage his law, while the non-burgess
must abide the verdict of burgesses, we know that from Henry II.’s day onwards civic
has been falling behind royal justice, has been becoming antiquated and selfish.350
This may not always be its own fault; it has not been permitted to improve itself; it is
a chartered justice and must carefully keep within the limits of its charter.

Valuable though these courts may have been to the townsfolk, Civil jurisdiction.
they were not suffered to do much harm to the cause of common
law. Some of the boroughs developed a possessory procedure of their own; an “assize
of fresh force” took the place of the king’s as-size of novel disseisin;351 but even in

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 374 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

London a proprietary action for a burgage was begun by the king’s writ of right, and
when that writ was sent to less favoured towns it contained the usual threat of the
sheriff’s interference.352 The party dissatisfied by the judgment of the borough court
could bring the matter before the king’s tribunal by a writ of false judgment. From
time to time justices commissioned by the king held a session at St. Martin’s le Grand
to correct the errors of the London husting. The Londoners held their privilege so high
that they would refuse to answer even in the court of a fair that they frequented:
burgesses of other boroughs, though they had the same words in their charters, were
less haughty or more politic.353

The criminal justice of the boroughs seldom stretched to any Criminal jurisdiction.
higher point than that of infangthief and utfangthief, or, in other
words, the punishment of criminals caught in the act. The boroughs had to appear
before the king’s justices in eyre. It was privilege enough for them that they should
appear there by twelve of their own men as though they were hundreds, and that thus
no foreigners should make presentments about what had happened within the walls.
Even the city of London underwent visitations; the gaol of Newgate was delivered by
royal commissioners, and an occasional eyre held at the Tower would serve to bring
the citizens to reason, for they were like to find that in the eyes of the king’s
advocates their choicest liberties had been endangered by abuse.354

Some of the more important boroughs had also acquired the Return of writs.
franchise known as “the return of writs.” It was valuable to them,
for, so long as they had it not, the sheriff’s officers were constantly entering the town
in order to serve writs and execute the processes of the king’s court. Nevertheless it
was not acquired until late in the day. John was, to say the least, chary of granting
it.355

(ii)Tenurial Privileges. When the period of charters begins, Privileged tenure.
burgage tenure already prevails in many of the large towns; the
townsfolk already hold their lands and houses at money rents, and merely as tenants
they require no further favours. Otherwise is it when what has hitherto been but a
rural manor is to become a liber burgus. In such a case there will be a commutation of
services, a release from agricultural labour. Sometimes a free power of alienating his
tenement is conceded to every burgess, sometimes it is distinctly said that he may
make a will or make an heir; but in general the power, very commonly assumed, of
bequeathing burgage tenements “like chattels” seems to have been ascribed to custom
rather than to express grant.

In the great towns the existence of a court enjoying royal Mesne tenure in the
franchises seems to have reduced the mesne tenures to political boroughs.
insignificance. At the time of the Conquest the burgesses of a
county town were in many cases a heterogeneous mass; some of them held directly of
the king, but others were the tenants, the justiciables and the burgesses of this prelate
or of that baron. Seldom were the men of such a town “peers of a tenure”; seldom was
the soil an unbroken stretch of royal demesne. Not only might its bounds comprise
many a private soke, but some of the townsfolk were accounted to belong to the rural
manors of their lords. When therefore the king under pain of his full forfeiture ordains

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 375 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

that none of them need answer in any court outside the borough for any tenement
within the borough, he is practically detaching these burgesses from the manors to
which they have belonged and is defying the principle of feudal justice. The men who
have settled round his burh and his market are his burgesses, whosesoever tenants
they may be. Here and there a lord who held some considerable quarter of a borough
might keep a court for his tenants, and, as he had acquired for himself and them some
immunity from taxation, they would refuse to mix with, to be at scot and lot with,
their fellow townsmen. But a small group of men who formerly were reckoned to
belong to some distant manor would soon be merged in the general mass of burgesses.
They would still pay rent, not to the king, nor to the king’s farmers, but as of old to
their lord; still no other connexion would bind them to him, and he would soon sink
into the position of a mere recipient of rent.356 Where tenements can be devised by
will escheats are rare; the rights of the mesne lords are forgotten, and then it is said
that if any tenement in the borough escheats, it escheats to the king. Such in Edward
II.’s day was the rule in the city of London where many “barons” had once had sake
and soke.357

The rapidity of this process varied from borough to borough. In Seignorial rights in
some of the smaller towns that were chartered by mesne lords it the boroughs.
never took place at all. The burghal court was a seignorial court,
which assumed now the form of “court leet” and now that of “court baron”; and such
it continued to be until the end. But even in some great boroughs seignorial justice
was a hardy plant. In Stamford, which was an old royal borough, though it had come
to the hands of the Earl of Warenne, four prelates and five other lords claimed to have
court of all their tenants; and this in the year 1275.358 In London nearer the beginning
of the century there were many sokes, and it seems to have been usual that an action
for land should be begun in a feudal court, and should only come before the civic
husting after a default in justice had been made.359 Even in Edward II.’s reign many
lords have to say by what warrant they claim franchises in London. The Bishop, Dean
and Chapter of St. Paul’s have three sokes in Cornhill, Bishopsgate and Holborn
where they exercise the right of infangthief, though the actual hanging is done outside
the city at Finsbury and Stepney.360 The Prior of Trinity Church, as representing the
estate of the old English Knight-gild, holds the Portsoken and is an alderman by
tenure; even civic jurors admit that his men and tenants sue and are sued in his
courts.361 There is feudalism in the gildhall itself. Robert FitzWalter still represents
the lords of Baynard’s castle, though the castle itself has been sold to the Archbishop
of Canterbury. He must be summoned to every meeting of the common council; when
he enters the gildhall, the mayor must rise to do him honour, and while he is there all
the judgments that are to be delivered shall be delivered by his mouth. Such at all
events is his opinion.362

At a few points of private law the borough custom would swerve Customary private
from the ordinary rules. Often the tenant of a burgage could give law.
it by last will, at least if he had not inherited it, for some customs
drew a distinction between inherited and purchased tenements. Then the customary
rules of inheritance might differ from those of the common law. A custom which
gives the whole tenement to the youngest son has gotten the name “borough English,”
and has therefore been supposed to be peculiarly appropriate to the circumstances of

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 376 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

townsfolk. Really, however, this name seems due to a single instance. At Nottingham
in the days of the Conquest a new French borough grew up beside the old English
borough, and the customs of the Burgus Franciscus as to dower, inheritance and the
like had to be distinguished from those of the Burgus Anglicus.363 Among the
customs of the “borough English” was the rule in question, and after the “borough
English” of Nottingham the lawyers baptized it. As a matter of fact, there is no reason
for supposing that it had a burghal origin. It is not very often found in the boroughs,
while it was common in rural manors. Nottingham supplies us also with a rarer
custom, namely (we must borrow a term from France), the retrait lignager, the right
of the heir apparent (or perhaps of any kinsman) of one who sells his tenement to
come forward within year and day after the sale and buy back the tenement at the
price given for it.364 At Dover the expectant heir had to pay no more than nineteen
shillings for every pound that the stranger had paid.365 On the continent of Europe
such a right was common; a mitigation it was of old law which required the heir’s
consent to an alienation made by his ancestor. The English common law seems to
have leapt over this stage of development, and to have passed at once from the rules
laid down by Glanvill, who in many cases requires the heir’s consent, to the state of
things described by Bracton in which such consent is never necessary. Now in a
borough we should look for a greater and not for a less power of selling lands than
prevailed elsewhere, and it is not impossible that the custom of some boroughs fell
behind just because at an earlier time it had been in advance of the common law. The
borough obtains from the king a charter saying that if any one holds a tenement in the
town for year and day, the claims of every person to that tenement shall be barred,
unless he was in prison, under age or beyond the seas.366 The main object of this is to
preclude the claims of expectant heirs. This puts the custom in advance of the
common law of Glanvill’s day. But some boroughs stop here; Nottingham at least
stops here for a while; its custom falls behind the common law and develops a retrait
lignager. At Northampton we find not only the retrait lignager, but also the retrait
féodal.367 Then, again, the custom sometimes provided for a landlord, whose rent
was in arrear for year and day, a readier mode of ejecting his tenant than the common
law would have given.368 But we do not find many peculiarities of this sort.

In this context we may mention another privilege that was Freedom of serfs.
sometimes granted to a borough:—the serf who dwells in it for a
year and a day, at all events if he has become a burgess or a member of the merchant
gild, becomes free, or at least cannot be claimed by his lord so long as he remains
within the borough. In its origin this seems an assertion of royal right. The king treats
his borough, the whole of his borough, as though it were one of his ancient manors. If
a serf comes to dwell there, his lord must claim him at once or not at all, for the king
will not allow the lords to interfere with his lands. As regards a borough, an express
declaration of this principle is necessary, for, as we have seen above, the land within
the walls of one of the greater towns was seldom an unbroken stretch of royal
demesne land. Nevertheless “the borough” as a whole is the king’s, and he announces
that those who come there and form part of the burghal community, although they
may not be holding their burgage tenements immediately of him, are to enjoy the
security that is conferred by the soil of the ancient demesne.369 The first declarations
of this right are pitched in a royal key. Henry II. in his charter for Nottingham
declares that “if any one, whencesoever he be, shall dwell in the borough a year and a

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 377 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

day in time of peace, no one, except the king, shall have any right in him.”370 We are
not told that the serf is to be free; but what remains in the king’s hands for year and
day becomes the king’s. As the borough grows more independent of the king, the rule
begins to take the shape of a privilege conceded to the burgesses instead of being a
royal prerogative. The burgesses are glad of the concession; it keeps their town free
from the interference of foreigners, and someone thought fit to add to the Conqueror’s
laws a clause stating in the widest terms that, if a serf lives for year and day in a city,
borough or walled town, he shall become free.371 Nevertheless, it would be a mistake
to think that the townsfolk wished to obliterate the distinction between free and bond;
on the contrary, they were careful to prevent men of servile birth from becoming
citizens.372

(iii)Mercantile Privileges. The borough is not merely a Freedom from toll.
governmental and in a certain measure a self-governing district,
it is a possessor of mercantile privileges, and, as will be remarked below, it is chiefly
in this character that it becomes a person in the eye of the law. When a borough had
obtained the right to farm itself, one of the most important sources of its revenue was
toll. Of this we must speak hereafter when we discuss the firma burgi. Sometimes this
fount of income was protected not merely by a rule of common law, which would
have prevented even the king from setting up a new to the damage of an old market,
but also by a royal ban which compelled the folk of the neighbourhood to do their
buying and selling in the borough.373 But those who took toll were anxious to be quit
of toll, and perhaps the burgesses regarded freedom from toll as the most vital of all
their rights. Already in Domesday Book we read how the man who was domiciled in
Dover and there paid the king’s dues was quit of toll throughout all England.374
Subsequent charters threw about such favours with a liberal hand; sometimes the
burgesses were to be immune throughout all England, sometimes they carried their
immunity into all the king’s lands beyond the sea. In our eyes, it may be, the best
outcome of this privilege was that it provided an ever-recurring theme for inter-
municipal litigation and aroused in the boroughs a consciousness of their personality.

(iv)The Firma Burgi. Often the borough farmed itself, or perhaps The Firma Burgi.
we had better say for the present that the burgesses farmed the
borough. They might hold their town under a lease for years or during the lessor’s
pleasure; they might hold it in fee farm: that is, under a perpetual lease. Important as
this step towards independence might be, it was not taken by some towns of high rank
until late in the day; it would seem, for example, that the citizens of Winchester did
not obtain a perpetual lease or grant of their city until the reign of Edward III.,375
while on the other hand at a much earlier date many a rural manor was being farmed
by “the men of the manor,” though hardly farmed in fee.

Now in these cases the charter says that the king has granted the What was farmed?
burgus or the villa to the burgesses.376 What was the effect of
such a grant? As we understand it, “the burgesses,” taken in some collective fashion,
were to step into the shoes of the sheriff. They were to be entitled to certain revenues
which he had previously collected. These would be chiefly the tolls, the profits of the
court and such house-rents as had therefore been paid to the sheriff as the king’s
farmer; and there might also be the profits of a royal mill or the like. On the other

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 378 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

hand, the king had not parted with all his land-lordly rights. The burgesses, taken
collectively, had not obtained a place in the scale of land-tenure. They had not
become collectively or corporatively the domini or the tenentes of the soil that lay
within the boundary of the town. This seems to be proved by the law of escheat. Each
burgess still holds his tenement either of the king in chief or of some other man; he
does not hold of the community, and, if there is an escheat, the community will not
profit by it.377 This is the situation that is set before us by that minute description of
Cambridge which appears upon the Hundred Rolls. “The burgesses of Cambridge
hold the vill of Cambridge with all its appurtenances in fee farm of the king in chief,
as in meadows, pastures, mills, waters and mill-pools with all franchises and free
customs belonging to the said vill.” Nevertheless the burgesses, taken collectively, are
not conceived as being the lord of the individual burgess or of his tenement. If he pays
rent to them, or rather to their bailiffs, the phrase used with wearisome iteration
is—not “he holds of the borough,” nor “he holds of the burgesses,” but—“he pays to
the bailiffs of Cambridge, who hold the said vill at fee farm of our lord the king, so
many pence for haw-gavel, or so many for land-gavel towards their farm.”378
Bonenfant the Jew held an open place in the town of Cambridge; but he has lately
been hanged for clipping coin, and that place has escheated, not to the burgesses, but
to the king.379 The general theory of the law seems to be that, in becoming a farmer,
the burgesses become rather a bailiff than a tenant, though a bailiff who, like many
other medieval bailiffs, has to account each year for a fixed sum and may make a
profit or a loss out of his office. In short, when a “borough” is granted to the
burgesses, this “borough” belongs to the category of “things incorporeal,” a category
which comprises “counties” and “hundreds.” When a man is appointed sheriff, the
king commits to him “our county of X ”; and so the king will grant to a baron “the
hundred of Y. ” The sheriff will not own the soil of the county; the lord of the hundred
need not be tenant or lord of the soil of the hundred; in each case what is given is not
an ownership or tenancy of any land but a complex of royal rights and powers to be
exercised within the limits of a certain tract.

This question is of some importance; we have heard of its being The farm of the vill
raised in these last times between a municipal corporation and a and the soil of the vill.
telephone company—Did the firma burgi comprise any
ownership, any tenancy of the soil? Therefore we will add one further argument. The
citizens of London farmed not only the city of London but also the county of
Middlesex. Now, not only does no one suppose that the civic corporation has a place
in the scale of tenure between every Middlesex freeholder and the king, but no one
supposes that the civic corporation became the tenant of all the roads and open spaces
within the boundary of the shire.380 So again, the citizens of York farmed the
wapentake of Ainsty, and, if what was said be true, very ill they treated it. They sub-
let it at an advanced rent to a bailiff, who used his subjects so vilely that they talked of
selling their tenements and leaving the country.381 But, as we understand the matter,
the citizens of York held the wapentake in the same sense that the archbishop might
have held it without being owner, lord or tenant of a rood of land. Should a question
arise about these matters in our own day, great weight would very properly be
ascribed to acts of user,382 and (to say nothing of modern statutes) many boroughs
now have ampler charters than those that were granted in the thirteenth century. But
as to the historical question, we cannot think that the grant which made the burgesses

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 379 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

firmarii of the burgus, made them domini or tenentes of the land that lay within the
burgus.

(v)Property of the Borough. But the “borough” or “vill” which The lands of the
the king “granted” to the burgesses often comprised in some borough.
sense or another a large tract of arable and pasture lying without
the wall or the ditch, for the borough occupied the shell of an old agrarian community.
The charter will purport to concede the whole vill “with all meadows, pastures and
waters thereto pertaining.” Now as regards the arable, this was holden by individuals
and the most that the king could give away was his seignory. Apparently he did not
give away even that; the escheats were still to come to him, though the burgesses
might now receive such rents as had formerly been paid to the sheriff. As to the
pastures, which were often of wide extent, it is very probable that no exact idea of
ownership was yet applied to them. On the one hand, rights of common were being
exercised over this land, and we may believe that such rights were no longer so
closely connected with the arable as once they were, but were being more and more
regarded as annexed to membership of the feudally heterogeneous burgensic
community which in its moot had an organ for their regulation. On the other hand, the
king was lord of the vill, and the right to “approve,” or make profit of, its waste was
rather in him than in the community. This continued to be so even when “the
burgesses” had become the farmers of their town, for the right of approvement was
not one which the sheriff could have exercised for his own behoof while he farmed
the royal revenues.

The same seems to have been true of the intramural “waste,” and The intramural waste.
of this there was often a goodly supply which would be
profitable at a later day. The walls, ditches, streets and open spaces of the borough
were not as yet conceived to be “holden by” the community. They were still the
king’s, and he who encroached upon them committed a “purpresture” against the
king.383 The grant of the vill has not entitled the burgesses to approve this “waste”; a
more explicit licence is requisite, and such a licence they will sooner or later obtain.
The men of Bristol acquired it early; on the other hand we may find Edward I.
specially authorizing the citizens of London to let certain vacant spots within the
walls in order that the rents may be applied to the maintenance of the bridge,384 and
other towns were asking for a similar permission at a much later time.385

None the less, subject to this royal lordship, the waste, both The community and
intramural and extramural, had from the first belonged in some the waste.
vague sort to the community, and there are instances in which the
community dealt with it. Thus, for example, in 1200 the community of Ipswich
granted that their twelve chief portmen might have a certain meadow for the support
of their horses;386 and at an earlier time the men of Oxford gave an island to the
alderman of their gild who gave it to Oseney Abbey;387 also we may find the men of
Cambridge erecting a hospital on a piece of common land in the middle of their
town.388 But before there could be much freely proprietary dealing with the pasture
land on the part of the burgensic universitas, the rights of the commoners had to take
the form of a mere usage which the corporator is permitted to make of the land which
the universitas owns. So long as the rights of pasture are conceived to be rooted in the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 380 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

possession of arable strips or burgage houses, they are an impediment to those
transactions, leases or sales, which would demonstrate that a corporation is owner of
the soil.389 On the whole we believe that in the thirteenth century the burgensic
community, taken as unit, was rarely drawing any pecuniary revenue390 out of the
land which in this vague sort belonged to it, and seldom was there any land which
belonged to it in any other sort: the community was but rarely a purchaser of land, and
burgesses were not as yet devising land to a municipal corporation. A statute of
Richard II. forbids the borough corporations to acquire land without licence, and
proclaims the discovery that they are “as perpetual as men of religion.”391 When we
consider that ever since 1279, and indeed at an earlier time, the churches had been
debarred by law from augmenting their territories,392 we may draw the inference that
only in the course of the fourteenth century was the attention of the king and
magnates drawn to any diminution of their feudal revenues occasioned by the
“perpetuity” of municipal corporations.393

Moreover, it appears to us that the community or corporation of The borough’s
the thirteenth century rarely had any considerable revenue of revenue.
which it could freely dispose. The farming of the vill was a more
individualistic arrangement than we are wont to suppose. The burgesses were jointly
and severally answerable to the king for the whole fee-farm rent; but, as between
themselves, the plan was that their annually elected bailiffs should collect what the
sheriffs had theretofore collected and should be solely liable if this sum fell short of
that which was due to the king.394 Perhaps too the bailiffs were entitled to any profit
that they could make; but we fancy that a normal surplus of income over expenditure
was not to be looked for. In order to get rid of the sheriff from their court, the
burgesses had promised a heavy rent.395 Thus the old revenue consisting of the haw-
gavel rents, and the profits of the court and market, was no free revenue, but was
appropriated to the satisfaction of a chiefrent which it would hardly meet. In course of
time other sources of income reveal themselves; fees are paid by those who acquire
the freedom of the borough; mercantile privileges are sold; bits of waste land are let to
tenants; a treasurer or chamberlain begins to appear beside the bailiffs and to keep an
account with the community; there is a common chest. But all this is the work of
time,396 and even at the end of the middle ages the freely disposable annual income
of a great borough was not very large.397 The growth of such an income, though it
has as yet been little studied, is of much importance in legal history, for the town’s
personality only begins to stand out clearly when “the town” has a revenue which is
not going to be divided among the townsfolk.398

If the community owned chattels, these must have been few and Chattels of the
of no great value. Perhaps already some sword, some staff, some borough.
chain of office was handed on from mayor to mayor, and there
may have been drinking horns and casks of wine and beer for which it would have
been hard to find an owner in the world of natural persons. There was a muniment
chest and there was a common seal. But it is not for the sake of such trifles as these
that law will undergo the pain of giving birth to the juristic person. Sometimes, again,
there would be a box with money in it; but, had a thief stolen box or money, we
suspect that he would have been charged with stealing the proper goods and chattels
of some natural man, the mayor or the chamberlain of the borough. That those who

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 381 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

collect rents and taxes should misappropriate the monies that they receive is, if we
believe the jurors, a common event; but no one, so far as we know, ever speaks in this
context of theft or felony. We shall see in another chapter that the question whether
the treasurer (1) owned the money and owed a debt to the community, or (2) merely
possessed money that was owned by the community might long be shrouded from
view.399

(vi)Election of Officers and Government of the Borough. Already Elective officers.
Henry I. had promised the Londoners that they might elect a
sheriff and a justiciar from among themselves.400 But London was in advance of
other towns. Gradually some of the greater boroughs obtain the right of electing their
reeve or their bailiffs, who however do not enter on their offices until they have been
presented to and approved by the king’s justiciar. Sometimes this step is taken before
the burgesses have obtained the right of farming the borough in fee. In such a case the
bailiffs, though elected by the towns-folk, are still much rather the officers of the
sheriff than the officers of the community. They begin to look more like the officers
of the burgesses when the burgesses themselves have become answerable for the
firma; but even then, as we have lately said, it is the bailiffs who, as between
themselves and their fellow townsmen, bear the loss if the farmed revenues fall short
of the king’s rent. Some towns stop here for a long time; many following the example
of London buy the right to have an elected mayor. No doubt this step also was
important. No doubt the Londoners, influenced by what was happening abroad, set
great store by the election of a maior who should be the head of their communa;
“come what might they would have no king but the mayor.”401 Even if we take no
account of such aspirations as were never fulfilled, it was important that the town
should have some one man as its chief; the anthropomorphic picture of a body
corporate required that there should be a “head.”402 Still it seems clear that a large
and wealthy city might get on well enough without a mayor; until 1403 the citizens of
Norwich were content with their four bailiffs.403

Beyond conceding the liberty to elect mayor and bailiffs and the Borough leets.
liberty to elect coroners “who shall see that the bailiffs of the
borough deal justly and lawfully with rich and poor,” the charters of this age seldom
define any constitution for the borough. They make no class of councillors, aldermen,
chief burgesses; they do not say how or by whom the dooms of the burghal court shall
be rendered. As we might expect, the active organ of the borough is rather a court
than a council. The frankpledge system prevails in the boroughs. A view of
frankpledge is sometimes held for the whole borough (a “mickletorn” it is called in
some towns), whereat the mayor or the bailiffs preside,404 or else the borough is
divided into wards or into “leets,” each of which has its separate court.405 The
business of viewing the tithings and presenting offences seems to have been
conducted within borough walls much as it was conducted in the open country.
Naturally, however, the system of tithings sometimes took a territorial form; each
small district of the town or each street had its tithing-man.406 Occasionally in
boroughs which have little other organization a “court leet” will in course of time
assume the character of a regulative and governmental organ of a humble kind,407
and in some large towns the lower orders will give voice in “presentments” to

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 382 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

complaints against their rulers;408 but in its origin the leet or view of frankpledge is
much rather a royal police court than a communal assembly.

Then there is the old borough court holding frequent sessions. The borough court.
Often it sat once a week, and when “foreigners” were concerned
it would sit from day to day. Often it had no other name than “the court of the
borough (curia burgi)”; sometimes it was the “husting,” the “burwaremote,”
“portmote” or “portmanmote.” Over it the mayor or the bailiffs presided, and perhaps
in some places any burgess was capable of sitting in it as a doomsman. But the
amount of business that it had to do would inevitably deprive it sooner or later of its
popular character; the miscellaneous mass of burgesses would not easily be brought to
do weekly suit of court. Already in Henry I.’s day there was in London a “husting”
distinct from the “folk-moot.” Already before the Conquest there were twelve
lawmen, twelve iudices, in some of the boroughs.

In 1200 John granted to the men of Ipswich a liberal charter. In Court and council.
pursuance of its terms they forthwith elected two bailiffs and
four coroners. But they did not stop there. They decided that there should be in the
borough twelve chief portmen “as there are in the other free boroughs of England,”
who should have full power to govern and maintain the borough and render the
judgments of the town. Thereupon they chose twelve men,—among them were the
four coroners, two of whom were also the two bailiffs—and these twelve were sworn
to guard and govern the borough, to maintain its liberties and to render the judgments
of its courts. Thereupon all the men of the town swore to be obedient to them and to
every of them, save as against the king and the king’s power.409 We discover at a
little later time that the twelve chief portmen hold their offices for life, though they
may be removed for misbehaviour by the judgment of their fellows. Vacancies again
are filled, not by popular election, but by co-optation.410 Now certainly it would be
rash to draw any wide inferences from the few clear cases that come before us;
nevertheless it would seem that very commonly some select body was formed, some
body of twelve or twenty-four chief citizens, chief burgesses, chief portmen; formed
by definite act as at Ipswich or formed by a practice of summoning to the court only
“the more discreet and more legal men.” This body at first is rather a judicial than a
governing body, for the powers entrusted to the burgesses by their charter are much
rather justiciary than governmental. But municipal life grows intenser and more
complex; the court has to ordain and to tax as well as to adjudge, and it is apt to
become a council, the governing body of the borough. Then, as trial by jury penetrates
the boroughs, it sets up an important change. The old pattern of a court with
doomsmen who are there to declare the law gives way before the new pattern with
jurors who bear witness to facts. In the town, as in the realm at large, “court” and
“council” are slowly differentiated; the borough court becomes a mere tribunal, and
by its side a distinctly conciliar organ is developed. This, however, except perhaps in
exceptional London and a few other towns,411 seems to be rather the work of the
fourteenth than of the thirteenth century.412 The power of acting in the name of the
borough passed little by little from a general assembly of burgesses to a council or
“select body”; but even until 1835 there were towns, and towns with long histories, in
which all the most important business of the corporation had to be brought before a
meeting in which every corporator, every burgess or freeman, had a vote: such was

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 383 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

the case at Winchester, Maidstone, Cambridge, Ipswich.413 In the thirteenth century
we may sometimes suspect that grants, ordinances and agreements to which “the
burgesses” or “the community” are said to be parties may not have been sanctioned by
any general assembly; but this should be no more than a suspicion until it can be
verified in the history of the town that is in question.414

(vii)By-laws and Self-government. The charters do not expressly Powers of self-
grant any power of legislation; but no doubt such power in government.
varying degrees was often exercised:—in varying degrees, for
however little distinction the law might make in this respect between borough and
borough, there must have been a marked difference in fact between the city of London
and some small market-town which had just attained to burghal rank. Not that we can
at once ascribe greater powers to the wealthiest towns. On the contrary, in the petty
borough whose governing court was still the court of its lord, the lord with the assent
of his court would still be able to make ordinances almost as easily as, with the assent
of his court, he could make ordinances for his rural manors, and the validity of such
edicts would often pass unquestioned. But as an enfranchised town grew in trade, in
wealth and in population, its folk would be tempted or compelled to enter on the
regulation of affairs which had no existence in less busy places. Its “customs” had
been guaranteed to it, and the function of declaring custom could not always be
marked off from that of imposing new rules. In London definite legislation begins at
an early time. In 1189 Fitz-Alwyne’s Assize was issued. It has been well called the
earliest English “Building Act”;415 it contains stringent provisions about the houses
that men may erect. A somewhat similar ordinance was issued in 1212 after a great
fire, and it did not scruple to fix the rate of wages for masons, carpenters, tilers and
the like.416 Thenceforward ambitious attempts were made to regulate the price of
commodities and the business of the various crafts. Now it is the poulterers who
require attention, and now a code must be issued for the saddlers or the cordwainers;
and then again exceptional privileges are conceded to foreign merchants; such a grant,
for example, is made to the men of Amiens, Corbie and Nesle, for which they are to
pay an annual sum of fifty marks towards the farm of the city.417 The mayor and
aldermen of London seem to conceive themselves to be endowed with almost
unlimited legislative power over the whole province of trade and handicraft. And no
doubt their ordinances were obeyed. The individual citizen, the individual
“foreigner,” dared not quarrel with them.

For all this, however, many doubts may occur to us touching the Limits to legislative
limits set by common law to their powers. Over against their powers.
wide claims we must set the wide claims of the king. Now and
again some knot of traders, which thought itself oppressed, would be rich enough to
stir the king to action, and when the king takes action even the City of London is apt
to look powerless. In Edward II.’s day a dispute broke out between the civic
authorities and the body of fishmongers on the one hand and certain fishmongers who
did business at the Fish Wharf on the other.418 Ordinances had been made
prohibiting the sale of fish by retail at the wharf. The king was induced to dispute
their validity. Much was said about their good and bad effects; but the king’s counsel
took high ground:— “The city of London is the city of our lord the king, and of his
demesne, and it is not lawful for the mayor and commonalty, nor for any other, to

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 384 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

make any ordinances in the said city without consulting the king.”419 So, again, at an
earlier time Walter Hervey, mayor of London, had issued ordinances regulating the
affairs of various crafts and affecting to confer on the craftsmen power to make yet
other rules for their trade; but the validity of these ordinances was disputed, not only
on the ground that the aldermen had not been consulted, but also because the
regulations favoured unduly the richer men of the crafts.420

During the period now before us the common law does not come Enforcement of by-
to close quarters with municipal by-laws; it is rarely, if ever, laws.
called upon to uphold them, for they are enforced in the
municipal courts by those who made them;421 it is rarely called upon to condemn
them, for he must be both a bold and a rich citizen who will call in the king against
the city. And so we obtain no jurisprudence of by-laws, no established tests for their
validity.

The one thing that we can say with some certainty is that in theory no one in England
can claim to legislate unless that power has been given him by the king—to say
nothing of parliament. Those who claim to make by-laws must show that such power
has been given to them by royal charter, or else they must show (and this they will
hardly prove to the satisfaction of the king’s justices) that they have been exercising it
from time immemorial. On the whole, we may doubt whether in the majority of
English towns much was done by way of legislation that might not be represented as
being no more than a necessary definition and development of ancient customs. No
decent person would consider himself aggrieved if a sharper edge was given to old
rules directed against the wickedness of the “forestaller” who enhanced the price of
victuals.422

(viii)Self-taxing powers. Powers of taxation are not expressly Rates and taxes.
conceded by the charters of this age, and they must have been
confined within narrow limits. If the burgesses wished to repair their walls, their
bridges, their streets, they had to apply to the king for a grant of murage, pontage or
pavage; and such grants were not to be had as matters of course.423 In Edward I.’s
day the petition came before the royal council in parliament, and the “local rate,” we
may say, was frequently a “parliamentary tax”; but as the king had not yet lost the
right to tallage his boroughs, he could permit them to tallage themselves. The royal
nature of the power to tax is well illustrated by the loud complaints which come to our
ears from almost every ward in the city of London:—The great men of the city have
purchased charters exempting them from tallages and thus the burden is thrown upon
the smaller folk. “Not just once, twice, thrice or four times have the mayor and
aldermen set tallages upon us without the special command of the king or the assent
and consent of the whole community; they have spared the rich and distrained the
poor, to the disherison of the king and the destruction of his city.”424 A certain power
in “the whole community” to tallage its members, these London citizens are willing to
admit, but how far they would have allowed a majority to tax a dissentient minority is
doubtful. The heavy imposts to which they had recently been compelled to submit
were occasioned by the fines to which the city had been subjected owing to the share
which its citizens had taken in the Barons’ War. Speaking generally we may say that
tallages, fines and amercements imposed upon the borough from without, were

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 385 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

(together with the murages, pontages and pavages which, if not imposed from
without, were at least licensed from above) the main causes for municipal taxes.

The borough community had few other expenses to meet, it was Borough expenditure.
not an “improving corporation” with hosts of paid servants.425
The individual burghers had to serve as officers, as constables, aleconners and the
like, or find and pay fit substitutes, while small fees taken from suitors in the borough
court, or from the youths admitted into frankpledge, would serve as a remuneration
for the town clerk. On the whole, the burgher’s duty of paying “scot and lot” with his
fellows came home to him chiefly, if not solely, as a duty of contributing towards
sums exacted from the borough by a “not-itself,” and the question as to the legality of
rates made for other purposes was seldom raised.426 Had it been raised, the
recalcitrant burgher would have found no favour in the borough court, while an appeal
to the king’s court was only open to one who could afford to begin a small civil war
against his neighbours. But even the city of London thought fit to obtain from Edward
II. an express power of imposing tallages for its own use.427

A large part of the borough’s revenue was derived from tolls, if Tolls.
we use that term in its largest sense to include “passage, pontage,
lastage, stallage, bothage, ewage, tronage, scavage” and the like. Naturally a borough
community intrusted with the farm of tolls was tempted to impose a stringent and
protective tariff: its ideal of a perfectly “free” trade was an unlimited power to tax
other people. Nevertheless we may doubt whether it had any right to create new tolls.
The charge of levying new tolls is extremely common; and those against whom it is
brought seem always concerned to deny that there has been innovation. The land, it
must be remembered, was full of private lords who were toll-takers, and there hardly
could be one rule for them and another for the boroughs.

(ix)The Gild Merchant. In a large number of towns one of the The Gild Merchant.
privileges that has been granted to the burgesses and their heirs is
that of having their gild merchant or market gild. If we attempt to expand the brief
phrase used in the charter, we seem brought to some such result as the
following:—The king gives to the burgesses a right to form or retain an association
for the purpose of employing to the best advantage those mercantile immunities which
by other words of his charter he has conferred upon them. They are to be toll free;
they may organize themselves for the purpose of maintaining this freedom.

A detailed story comes to us from Ipswich. In 1200 King John The formation of a
granted a charter to the burgesses; they were to hold the borough gild.
in fee farm; they were to be quit of toll and all similar dues
throughout the king’s lands; they were not to be impleaded outside their town; they
were to have their gild merchant and their hanse; they were to elect two fit men to
keep the reeveship of the borough; they were to elect four coroners. Thereupon the
whole community met in the churchyard and elected two bailiffs and four coroners,
and ordained, as we have said before, that there should be twelve chief portmen who
should guard and govern their borough and give its judgments. Then on a later day the
chief portmen were elected and sworn. Then the bailiffs, coroners and chief portmen
held a meeting and resolved that an alderman of the gild merchant should be elected

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 386 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

by the community and that four men should be associated with him and that they
should swear to maintain the said gild and all that appertained to it. Then the whole
community met again and elected an alderman and four associates, who swore
faithfully to govern the gild merchant and faithfully to deal with all the brethren. Then
the alderman and his four associates in the presence of the people proclaimed that all
who were of the liberty of the town should come before them and put themselves in
the gild and give their hanse to the gild. Then the bailiffs, coroners, portmen and the
whole community took counsel how the gild might best be maintained, and they
decreed that the alderman and his successors should have a monopoly of gravestones,
pavingstones and the like, and that of the proceeds of this monopoly he should render
account to the bailiffs and coroners.428

Thus, having got their charter, the burgesses of Ipswich proceed The gild and the
to form two different organizations; there is the governmental government of the
and justiciary organization with its bailiffs, coroners, twelve borough.
chief port-men; there is the gild organization with its alderman
and his four associates. Certainly the two are closely connected. The gild is to be no
mere private club. Every burgess is to place himself in the gild and pay his hanse, his
entrance fee, to the gild, or otherwise, as we gather, he will lose some at least of the
advantages, notably the mercantile advantages, that the words of the charter give to
the burgesses of Ipswich and their heirs. No doubt it would be imprudent were we to
base any large generalities upon a few cases. Not all the charters of even date are
exactly like the Ipswich charter. Thus in the same year the same king granted a charter
to the men of Gloucester. In this the privilege of not being impleaded without the
walls and the privilege of being free of toll were expressly confined to “the burgesses
of Gloucester who are of the merchant gild.”429 In one place the merchant gild may
have been of more, in another of less importance; in one place it may have become in
practice, though hardly in theory, the governing body of the borough, while in another
place there was no such gild at all. In London itself traces of a merchant gild are, to
say the least, very faint, while Norwich stands out as an example of the flourishing
cities which to all seeming never had a merchant gild.430 The mercantile privileges
granted to the burgesses could be maintained and enforced without any such
organization, while with the public justice and police of the borough the gild as a
general rule had nothing to do. In boroughs which had a gild merchant the burgess
was not necessarily a gildsman, the gildsman was not necessarily a burgess.

The main object that the gild merchant has in view is the Objects of the gild.
maintenance of the mercantile privileges that have been granted
by charter. This is an important and a difficult matter. A few merchants of the town go
to some distant fair or market; toll is taken from them; the lord of the fair, the bailiffs
of the rival city to which they have gone, scoff at their charters, or temperately and
reasonably set charter against charter and seisin against seisin. In such a case a
solitary trader far from home needs all the help that his fellows can give. And they are
interested in his cause, for once let it be established that the burgesses of X are in
seisin of taking toll from the burgesses of Y, then only by litigation, if at all, will the
burgesses of Y recover seisin of their immunity. If the privilege is to be preserved
intact, the individual merchant must be backed by a community of merchants which
will take immediate action, which will complain to the king and support its complaint

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 387 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

with a handsome gift, or which will forthwith make reprisals against the aggressors.
To make reprisals they are encouraged by their charters. It is thus for example that the
king speaks in his charter to the men of Gloucester— and similar clauses are not
uncommon—“And if any one in our whole land takes toll from the men of Gloucester
of the gild merchant, and shall refuse justice, the sheriff of Gloucestershire or the
reeve of Gloucester shall for this take a nam at Gloucester.”431 If a gildsman of
Gloucester be subjected to toll in another town, the men of that other town had better
not bring their wares to Gloucester. The merchants of the borough must be organized
in order that this inter-municipal warfare may be conducted vigorously and prudently.
Both vigour and prudence are needful; all those who are not exempt from toll should
be forced to pay it, while it is perilous to touch those who are exempt. In order that
their action may be both prompt and deliberate, the merchants must be organized,
must constantly meet, must have executive officers and a common purse.

Still these mercantile privileges are not of equal importance to all The gild and the
the burgesses. Many of them are not traders; but few of them will burgesses.
carry goods to distant markets, though those few are likely to be
rich and powerful. Thus the gild organization may remain quite distinct from the
governmental organization; men may be burgesses who are not gildsmen. On the
other hand, it would certainly seem that rightly or wrongly the gildsmen take upon
themselves to receive as brethren men who are not burgesses, men who do not live in,
who do not hold property in, the town, but who desire to share the immunities which
the traders of the town enjoy.432 Thus, though according to the terms of the charters
“the gild merchant” is a liberty, a franchise, conceded to the burgesses, the gild comes
to be a body of persons which does not include all the burgesses and does not exclude
all who are not burgesses.

Further, at least in some cases, the gild merchant evolves out of The gild court.
itself a court of justice which exists beside the law court of the
borough. This can hardly be prevented; the craft gilds of London evolve courts of
justice, the French and German merchants in London evolve courts of justice, the
learned universities evolve courts of justice; there can hardly exist a body of men
permanently united by any common interest that will not make for itself a court of
justice if it be left for a few years to its own devices. The gild-brethren at their
“morning-speeches” do not merely take counsel for the maintenance of their
privileges and the regulation of their trade, but they assume to do justice. In the first
place, they decide questions of inheritance and succession. A person’s gilda, that is,
his right as a member of the gild, is treated as an object of ownership. With the
consent of the court a man may give it or sell it. If he dies possessed of it, then it will
descend to his heir. And so at the morning-speech one person will come and demand
against another the “gild” of a dead ancestor “as his right and inheritance,” using the
very form of words by which he would have demanded ancestral lands. Such disputes,
such actions we must call them, the gildsmen hear and determine at their morning-
speeches. But besides this they entertain actions of debt and covenant and trespass,
and hardly dare we call such assemblies mere courts of arbitration, for they can
enforce their own decrees; if it comes to extremities, the contumacious brother can be
expelled. The right of each gildsman to claim a share in any bargain that he sees one
of his fellows making is another cause for litigation.433

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 388 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Such in brief were the main franchises that the boroughs The borough as a
enjoyed, and these franchises, some or all of them, made the franchise-holder.
borough to be a borough. This gave the king a tight hold upon
the towns-folk. The group of burgesses was a franchise-holder in a land full of
franchise-holders, and had to submit to the rules which governed the other possessors
of royal rights. It might lose its privileges by abuse or non-use; it might lose them by
not claiming them before the justices in eyre, though in this case a moderate fine
would procure their restoration. Four times at least within eleven years did Henry III.
seize the city of London into his hands, once “for receiving Walter Buriler without
warrant for so doing,” once because of a false judgment in the hustings, once because
the citizens prevented the mayor and aldermen from discussing certain matters with
the king’s justices, and once because the assize of bread and ale was not kept.434 No
doubt Henry was tyrannical and greedy, but these seizures show how weak was the
most powerful of all the English cities. Then Edward I. kept London for many years
without a mayor, and during this time he legislated for it in royal fashion:—“ le Roy
voet, ” such is the formula by which by-laws are made.435 And the king’s inquests
searched out the secrets of the borough; he was not to be put off with the story told by
the rulers of the community. If he desired to know what had passed at Lincoln, he
heard one jury of the great, another of the “secondary,” a third of the “lesser” folk.436

We ought now to inquire whether the borough community differs Corporate character of
from the other “land communities” in exhibiting all or any of the borough
those peculiar characteristics to which we make reference when community.
we speak of corporateness or personality. And at once it must be
confessed that in the scale of “towns” which begins with the common village and ends
with London no break can be found. This does not, however, absolve us from the
inquiry: black and white are different, though nature displays every shade of grey.

The doctrine that some act of public power is necessary if a Corporateness not
corporation is to come into being had not as yet been accepted. bestowed by the king.
Probably we must wait for the fourteenth century to hear a king’s
advocate proclaim that the burgesses cannot have a communitas unless this be granted
to them by the king.437 As yet the charters contain no creative words. Nothing is said,
as in the charters of the fifteenth century, about the erection of a “corporation” or
“body politic”; nothing, as in the charters of the fourteenth, about the formation or
confirmation of a communitas.438 The communitas is already there; it may want
privileges, but it exists. The notion that there is some “feigning” to be done, some
artifice to be applied, has not as yet been received from the canonists,439 and perhaps
we ought to regret its reception; the corporation which exists “by prescription” seems
to defy it or to require that one fiction be explained by another.440 The foundation,
however, is being laid for a rule which will require a royal licence when a new
corporation is to be formed. This work is being done partly by legists and decretists,
who are discussing the collegia illicita of Roman law, partly by English statesmen.
The king had begun to interfere with the creation of new communitates, with the
creation of voluntary associations or gilds. Such intervention was dictated not by any
“juristic necessity,” any theory of personality, but by political expedience and
financial needs. Gilds may give trouble; they may become aggressive communae of
the French type. The Londoners from of old are a community, but they must not form

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 389 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

a sworn communa unless the king consents. “Adulterine gilds”441 must be suppressed
for much the same reason as that which decrees the destruction of “adulterine castles.”
Besides, here lies a not disreputable source of income. Men will pay for leave to form
clubs; and it is to be remembered that the medieval gild is never content with the
purely private position of a modern club, but aspires to exercise some jurisdiction and
coercive power over its members, and perhaps over outsiders. Thus the notion is
propagated that gild-like structure must not exist without royal licence, and this at a
time when the structure of the burgensic community is assuming a gild-like shape.442

For that was happening. The idea of voluntary association was Gild-like traits of the
moulding the community. In the great boroughs large sums of borough community.
money were subscribed in order that privileges might be bought
from the king, and the subscribing townsfolk naturally conceived that they purchased
those privileges for themselves. Some definition of the privileged, the franchised,
body was necessary, and yet in the great boroughs that body could not assume any of
the old accustomed forms. The hide or the yardland could no longer be the
groundwork of membership. Even the freehold tenure of a house would not serve to
mark the line, for leases for years were becoming fashionable in the big towns. The
gilds, especially perhaps the gilds of merchants, set an example. The community of
burgesses is a voluntary association. Some men, it may be, have a right to join it,
while others have no such right; but every member of it has joined it by a definite act.
He has entered the community, been admitted to it, paid an entrance-fee, “sued out”
or “taken up” his liberty.

A step is being made towards corporateness. The borough begins Admission of
to look somewhat like a religious house or an order of knights. burgesses.
Just as the monk or the templar becomes professed of his own
free will and is solemnly received into the order, so the new burgess enters “the
borough” (not the physical borough, but an ideal borough) of his own free will and is
solemnly received into the community. If the monk took vows, so did the burgess: at
Ipswich he swore upon his father’s sword to maintain the freedom and conceal the
secrets of the town.443 This process of transformation is still exceedingly
obscure.444 Besides the influence of the gild, the influence of the sworn communa of
the French town may be suspected.445 But also the freedom from toll which has been
granted to the burgesses may have played an important part at this crisis. The
townsfolk perceived that they had enviable “liberties” which were communicable to
others, that they could, at least for some intents, make burgesses out of non-burgesses,
that by so doing they could raise money, and that within limits which were not
precisely ascertained they could themselves define the class which should enjoy the
chartered liberties.446 The task of tracing this change must be left to those who can
afford to treat each borough separately, for doubtless it went further in some towns
than in others; but it helps to transmute the idea of burgherhood.

In course of time a definite right to burgherhood is established. The title to burgher-
Though there were many small variations, there was ultimately hood.
among our greater boroughs a remarkably unanimous agreement
that this right was communicated by a father to his sons, or at least to his firstborn
son, and by a master to his apprentices. We have not here a case of inheritance, for the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 390 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

son may claim “his freedom” in his father’s lifetime; but the community continues its
existence by virtue of an individualistic communication of right by an old to a new
member. The right seems to flow downwards in blood and craft. It is a curious idea
and has not been subjected to the careful exploration that it deserves. Despite its
universality, we may, at least as regards the apprentices, doubt its great antiquity, and
should not be surprised if it had its origin in a practice which exacted from the son of
a burgess a smaller entrance-fee than was demanded from other applicants.447 When
and where this right to burgherhood was established, the privileged body might
become by degrees very different from and much smaller than the sum of the
substantial men of the town; but we have little reason to suppose that during the age
of which we are here speaking this effect had become prominent. No doubt from the
first there were in the town many people who were not deemed to be “burgesses” or
active and fully qualified members of the community of the vill. There were women,
sons living with fathers, menial servants, apprentices: in a word the “mainpast” of the
burgesses. Persons of this sort there were in every community, in every township. Nor
is it impossible that some others were left out on the score of their poverty: they had
contributed nothing to those heavy sums which were the price of the charters, and
could pay no entrance-fee to the common chest. It is likely that from the remotest
period our ancestors were familiar with the idea that a class of men may be within a
community and yet have no right to share in the conduct of its affairs. Such probably
was the position of the bordarii and cotarii in the villages of old time.448 This idea
bore new fruit in the borough; many men might be within the community of the town
and yet have no vote in any burgensic assembly.

These changes take place in a darkness which is unilluminated The “subject” in the
by legal theory. Legal thought and legal phrases seem to be borough charters.
lagging behind the facts. If we examine the form of a borough
charter we see that the king or some other lord is conceived as making a gift of
franchises to “the burgesses” or “the men” of a certain town “and their heirs.” But in
what mode, we may ask, does this gift operate? (1) It may possibly give to each
person, who at this moment is a burgess of the town, a several right which he will
enjoy in severalty and transmit to his heirs. Or (2) it may confer on all the now
burgesses of the town a right of which they are to be joint tenants or tenants in
common, and may thus institute some kind of coproprietorship. Or (3) it may be
placing the right in some corporation or group-person in which the burgesses of the
town are organized and unified. And if we have to consider rights we have also to
consider duties. “The burgesses and their heirs” become liable for the farm of their
borough. What does this mean? Who is liable to pay what? What goods or lands can
the king seize if the rent of the borough be not duly paid to him?

The difficulty of these questions will best be seen if beside a Discussion of the
borough charter we place three other instruments, very similar to charters.
it in form, however different they may be from it and from each
other in substance. The Abbot and Convent of Malmesbury declare that they have
granted a certain piece of ground at Pilton near Barn-staple “to the men who have
taken it of our house—our cell—of Pilton for the purpose of building houses, to have
and to hold to them and their heirs of our said house of Pilton by rendering to the said
church twelve pence yearly from each burgage.”449 Now in this case we can hardly

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 391 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

doubt that the rights given by the charter are rights given to each tenant severally, and
rights that he is to enjoy in severalty. He has taken a plot of building land and is to
hold it heritably on the terms of burgage tenure, though Pilton is not, and is not to be,
a borough. There is to be no corporation; nor only so, there is to be (so far as we can
see) no co-ownership, no common enjoyment. We turn to another case. King John
would have it known that he has granted to his men of Cornwall that certain moors
shall be disafforested and that the said men may hunt thereon; also that without their
consent their serfs shall not be received into the liberties of the king’s boroughs; also
that the fees of the honour of Mortain (which are small450 )shall not pay the full rate
of scutage. “Therefore,” he says, “we will that the said men of Cornwall and their
heirs shall hold all the premises of us and our heirs with all liberties and free
customs.”451 The third charter to which we would ask attention is one by which this
same King John made a grant to all the freemen of England and their heirs; it is no
other than what will be known for all time as the Great Charter. At the end of its
famous clauses we read how all the men of England are to have and to hold certain
liberties to them and their heirs of King John and his heirs for ever.

Now these last two instruments, the Cornish charter and the Charters for the
Great Charter, are in form just like an ordinary borough charter. borough, the county,
The king grants libertates to the men of Nottingham, the men of the whole land.
Cornwall, the men of England and their heirs. In what mode do
the grantees hold the liberties? Does each “man” acquire a several right to be enjoyed
in severalty? Do all the “men” become tenants in common or joint tenants; or again, is
the true recipient of the grant a group-person, a corporation? The form of the Great
Charter and the charter for the men of Cornwall compel us to say that these questions
have not been faced. If we take the Great Charter and work out any theory as to its
grantees and the mode in which they received the boon, we are brought to absurdities.
The modern Englishman who would take advantage of its provisions must show
himself heir of some one who lived in 1215; or, if a clause of the charter be broken,
then either all Englishmen must join in an action against the offender, or the
corporation of England must appear by its attorney. There remains the possibility that
this is a gift to uncertain persons, to all and singular who at any time shall answer the
description “men of the realm of England”:—but is such a gift conceivable?

It may be replied that Magna Carta, whatever its form, is in Charters and laws.
substance no deed of grant but a code of law. That is true; but the
fact remains that the form of this solemn instrument is that of a deed of grant. That
was the form which to the prelates, clerks and lawyers of the time seemed the most
apt for the purpose. The king was to grant liberties to the men of England as he had
granted them to the men of Cornwall and the men of London. Or let us look at the
other side of this similitude:—Henry III., if he grants liberties to the men of
Nottingham, will execute an instrument whose jural form will be exactly the same as
that of the charters which he seals in favour of the men of England. This makes the
borough of Nottingham look, not like a corporation, but merely like a portion of the
earth’s surface within which certain laws are to prevail.

Now it can hardly be doubted that certain clauses in the borough Criticism of the
charters should be read as grants made to individuals of rights borough charters.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 392 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

that are to be enjoyed by them in severalty. Such, for example, would be a clause
declaring that the burgesses and their heirs shall hold their tenements in free burgage.
It is like the Abbot of Malmesbury’s charter for the men of Pilton. Each burgess gets a
right to hold his tenement heritably at a burgage rent. “The burgesses of X and their
heirs” is here but a compendious phrase which saves us the trouble of naming many
men by their proper names. And may this not also be true of other clauses: for
instance, of the clause which declares how the burgesses and their heirs are to be free
of toll throughout all England? Suppose the grant made to the burgesses of X; a
certain burgess of X goes into the town of Y; toll is demanded from him; he refuses to
pay; his chattels are seized. Now who is wronged, who can bring an action against the
offender? Has this injury been done to the individual merchant, or to the mass of the
men of X as co-owners of a franchise, or to the corporation known as “the borough of
X ”; or again, have there been several wrongs? There is good cause for doubting
whether the lawyers of this age were ready with an answer to these questions. On the
one hand, we may find two citizens of Lincoln, who have been distrained in the town
of Lynn, bringing their action against the bailiff of Lynn and relying on a charter
granted to the citizens of Lincoln.452 On the other hand, the plaintiffs who take action
for such a cause will often be described as “the citizens,” or “the burgesses,” or “the
bailiffs,” or “the mayor and commonalty” of the town whose charter has been
infringed;453 and yet we cannot be certain that the courts would have given one
action to the individual trader and another to the community, and compelled the
offenders to pay first for unlawfully seizing a merchant’s chattels and then for
infringing a city’s charter. Modern lawyers may be inclined to say that when such a
clause is treated as conferring rights on each individual burgess it is treated as an act
of legislation, not as an act of donation; that the burgess who brings the action is not
required to prove (very possibly he could not prove) that he was heir to one of the
original donees; that in reality a law or an ordinance has been made declaring that any
person who at any time shall be a citizen of Lincoln shall be quit of toll; but then this
distinction between laws and grants is not one that we find in our records.

There are, however, other clauses in the borough charters which Rights conferred on
cannot be thus treated. For example, there is the clause relating the burgesses jointly.
to the fee farm of the “borough,” which certainly does not mean
that each burgess is to hold a certain share of the “borough,” paying for that share a
certain rent to the king. Again, so far as we have observed, the important clause which
declares that the burgesses shall not be impleaded outside the borough is rarely, if
ever, construed to mean that a right of refusing to answer in foreign courts is
conferred on each burgess. On the contrary, when a burgess is impleaded in the king’s
court, the regular practice is that the officers or “the burgesses” of the borough should
intervene and claim cognizance of the cause, or (to use the language of the time)
“crave their court and obtain it.”454 Once more, if we take such a franchise as the
return of writs, we cannot possibly treat this as having been conferred on individuals
to be enjoyed by them in severalty. In some sense or another it must belong to the
community as a whole. But then in what sense?

This brings us to the great problem. Is the right conceived as The community as
inhering in many men or in an organized group which is for this bearer of rights.
purpose an indivisible unit? The best answer that we can suggest

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 393 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

for this difficult question is that the lawyers are trying to retain old forms of speech
and thought and to regard the burgesses as a set of co-proprietors, while at the same
time they are beginning to know that the borough community differs in kind from all
other “land communities” and that Bracton has got hold of the right idea when he
calls it an universitas.

In the first place, they are beginning to recognize the fact that the Inheritance,
idea of inheritance will no longer serve to describe the means by succession and
which the existence of “the burgesses” is perpetuated. The words organization.
“and their successors” begin to supplant the old formula “and
their heirs.”455 This is a step in advance, for on the one hand the burgensic
community is separated from the set of co-proprietors, and on the other hand it is
brought into line with religious bodies. Even this novel phrase, however, is not very
good, for the new burgess or new monk does not of necessity “succeed” any other
burgess or other monk. Our forefathers found it hard to conceive that one and the
same community can continue to exist unless each new member steps into the place of
some departed member. We have seen how in modern times there was within our
boroughs an individualistic communication of right by father to son or master to
apprentice, and this can be vaguely pictured as a kind of succession or perhaps of
inheritance.456 Down even to the present day the formal language of our law but ill
expresses what has long ago become our thought. A transaction which would be
commonly and aptly described as a contract between the University and the Town of
Cambridge will become upon parchment a contract between Chancellor, Master and
Scholars of the one part and Mayor, Aldermen and Burgesses of the other.457 This
retention by legal documents of a style or title which seems to lay stress rather on the
plurality than on the unity of the group has set snares for those who would penetrate
beneath style and title to the thought that is struggling to express itself.458

But we must pass from form to substance. Our law felt no Criminal liability of
difficulty about attributing misdeeds of many sorts and kinds to the borough.
communities. The counties, hundreds and townships are always
being fined and amerced for wrongful acts and defaults. So too the boroughs can be
punished. Every borough in England from the city of London downwards lives in
daily peril of forfeiting its charters, of seeing its mercantile privileges annulled, of
seeing its elected magistrates displaced and itself handed over to the mercies of some
royal custos or firmarius. If Londoners insult the queen or take the wrong side in the
Barons’ War, the city will have to redeem its privileges with an immense sum.459 If
in the town of Derby “superfluous” tolls are taken and the members of the gild
merchant are unduly favoured, the liberties of the borough will be seized.460 The city
of York claimed to farm the Ainsty; in support of this claim the mayor produced a
charter which purported to be of the fourth year of King John; but the word quarto
was written over an erasure. Judgment was given that the mayor should go to prison,
that the charter should be quashed, and that the citizens should lose all that they
claimed thereunder.461 The mayor of Sandwich was found guilty of asserting by acts
of violence certain supposed franchises of his town; “and because he is convicted of
the said trespass, and because whatever is done by the mayor in matters affecting the
community is the act of the community itself, it is adjudged that the community of
Sandwich lose its liberty.”462 Now between the punishment of a borough and the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 394 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

punishment of a county or village little difference would at first be seen. The one can
be fined; the other can be fined. The fact that the burden of the impost will distribute
itself much more automatically in the rural district than in the borough, where
movable wealth will probably be assessed, is a fact of which no account need be taken
by the court which inflicts the penalty. Still it must become evident sooner or later
that the borough community can be punished in a peculiar fashion; it has liberties and
it can forfeit them. It can be equated with other franchise-holders and punished as one
of them would be punished if he abused his franchise. Taken merely as unit it can be
punished, and the punishment may continue to operate while old members are
yielding place to new, whereas a fine inflicted on a hundred divides itself immediately
into punishments inflicted upon certain men who are now living. Sharp distinctions
are not to be looked for in this quarter. Even in the nineteenth century a county may
be indicted for non-repair of highways and until the other day a hundred might be
sued if rioters did damage.463 But still the “liberties” of the borough give the law an
opportunity of enforcing here more clearly than elsewhere the thought that if the
organized community acting organically breaks the law, it in its unity can be and
should be punished.464

In the region of civil liability little advance was possible. The Civil liability.
burgesses may “farm” the borough; but an ordinary township
may farm its vill.465 When the king accepted the burgesses as farmers in place of the
sheriff, he certainly did not mean to exchange the liability of a well-to-do man for that
of an unit which had few, if any, chattels. On the contrary, instead of looking to the
wealth of one man, he now looked to the wealth of many. If the rent of the borough
fell into arrear, he could proceed against all the burgesses or any burgess. A common
practice of the exchequer was to attack the rich. The sheriff would be ordered to
summon six of the richer burgesses to answer for the rent.466 This was for the king a
convenient procedure. He could exact payment of his rent, his fines and amercements
from those who had money, and then could say to the burgesses at large—“Now you
can settle the ultimate incidence of this impost among yourselves; the settlement is
your concern, not mine; at all events, it is not my concern so long as I am acting, not
as judge, but as creditor; for all of you are, and each of you is, liable to me for the
whole sum.” Then inside the borough, or the manor, there would be a settlement. To
meet the annual rent there were funds which normally would be sufficient; the
burgage rents, the tolls, the profits of the court should be applied for this purpose, and
the elected bailiffs might be bound to make good the deficiency.467 If a fine or
amercement had been inflicted, then a rate might become necessary. The men of a
rural manor would probably be charged according to the scheme of commensurable
tenements; the burgesses would be assessed according to their wealth in goods and
chattels. If really there were any lands or goods which we could properly describe as
belonging to the borough corporation, these also might be taken, but they would be
only a part, and usually a very small part, of the property of the community; for the
property of the community comprised, at least for this purpose, all the lands and all
the goods of every burgess. Development was especially slow in this quarter, for not
until 1285468 could land, as distinct from the profits of land, be regarded as an
“available asset” for the satisfaction of debts, and the nascent municipal corporation
had few, if any, chattels, and little, if any, land that bore crops.469

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 395 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Nor as yet can we find any marked distinction between the The communities in
various communities when they take part in litigation. The litigation.
doctrine that a community can appear in court only by attorney,
that it cannot possibly appear in person, has certainly not been grasped. “The citizens
of X ” or “the burgesses of Y ” are said to appear, and they are not said to appear by
attorney. Or again, the mayor, or the bailiffs, or the mayor and bailiffs appear to urge
the claims and defend the rights of the community. It is so with communities to which
we cannot ascribe incorporation.470 In the exchequer “the men” of this hundred, “the
men” of that township, are sued for fines, taxes and amercements. “The fullers and
dyers of Lincoln” sue “the aldermen and reeves of Lincoln.”471 In Edward II.’s time
Emery Gegge and Robert Wawayn “on behalf of themselves and the other poor and
middling burgesses of Scarborough” sue Roger atte Cross, John Hugh’s son, Warin
Draper “and the other rich burgesses of the said town.”472 John Abel is attached to
answer Betino Frescobaldi “and his companions merchants of the firm (societas) of
the Frescobaldi of Florence.”473 At a later time when an action was brought against
“the Fellowship of the Lombard Merchants of Florence in London” and the sheriff, by
way of making that society appear, distrained two of its members, the argument was
advanced that this was an illegal act;474 but in the thirteenth century we hear no such
arguments; no one seems to think that they can be used. Much rather we are inclined
to say that if there is any group of men having a permanent common interest, and if an
unlawful act is done which can be regarded as a lesion of that interest, even though it
does actual damage only to some one member of the group, then the members of it
may join in an action, or one of them may sue on behalf of himself and all the other
members:—as Bracton says “Omnes conqueri possunt et unus sub nomine
universitatis.”475 This is so within wide and indefinite limits. In the case of a borough
attacked from without, it is natural that the complaint should be lodged by the chief
officers of the community. The burghers compose a body, and what the head does in
matters concerning the community, the whole body does.476 But this is hardly more
than a special instance of a general rule. Instead of being attacked from without, the
borough may be divided within. If so, then A and B “on behalf of the poor burgesses”
can sue C and D “and all other the rich burgesses.”

Everywhere we find the same uncertain grasp of principles Debts owed to
which we are wont to regard as elementary. Henry III., when he communities.
died, owed £400 to the community of Northampton:—so say the
jurors of Northampton. Here at last, we may say, is a distinct case of a debt due to a
corporation. But how was it incurred? Thus, say the jurors:—during the twenty last
years of his reign the king’s purveyors (captores) took to his use peltry to that value in
the fairs of Northampton, Stamford, St. Ives, Boston, Winchester and St. Edmunds;
what is more he owes the drapers of Northampton £100 for goods taken in the same
fairs. The story, if true, is sad, for “many of the townsfolk are dying of hunger and
begging their bread and have abandoned their tenements in the town and the town
itself.”477 But King Henry has not been taking the goods of a corporation; we much
doubt whether there has been any joint-stock trading by all the burgesses or all the
drapers of Northampton; he has taken the goods of individual traders. Nevertheless, in
popular estimation he has incurred a debt to the community by taking goods from the
stalls of Northampton merchants who were exercising “liberties” of trading which
were granted to all the men of Northampton and their heirs. Again, if a merchant of X

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 396 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

owes a trading debt to a merchant of Y, then if other merchants of X go to the town of
Y, or to some fair where the creditor finds them, they will like enough be held
answerable for the debt—at all events if he proves that he has made a fruitless effort
to obtain justice in the court of X: —they are the communares of the principal debtor,
they are “his peers and parceners,” they are “in scot and lot” with him, and they, and
each of them, must answer for his trading debts: for debts, that is, incurred in the
exercise of trading privileges which they all enjoy in common.478 And should a
bailiff of X take unlawful toll from a merchant of Y, then woe betide the merchant of
X who enters the town of Y. “Collective liability”—this seems the best phrase—we
may see everywhere, in so much that we are tempted to say, not merely Quod
communitas debet, debent singuli, but also Quod singulus debet, debet communitas. In
all seriousness we are driven to some such proposition as the following:—If several
men have some permanent common interest, and in any matter relating to the
prosecution of that interest one of them commits a wrong or incurs a debt, all and
each of them will be liable. This is not the outcome of any doctrine of “implied
agency,” it expresses the nature of a communitas. But pure corporate liability—that
we shall not easily find.479

Nevertheless (and here we must turn to the other side of the The common seal.
picture) the burgensic community is attaining that kind of unity
which is personality. When in 1200 the community of Ipswich received its charter
from King John, one of their first acts was to obtain a common seal and commit it to
the care of the two bailiffs and one other of the chief portmen; they were sworn to set
it to no letter or instrument save for the common honour and profit of the burgesses of
the town, and only to use it with the assent of their peers, that is, of the other chief
portmen.480 No doubt by this time the greater boroughs were getting themselves
seals.481 Now we would not exaggerate the importance of this step—and we have
seen how in Edward I.’s day the county of Devon had a seal482 —still it was
important. In the first place, it was a step towards the co-ordination of the boroughs
with the religious houses, which in their turn were being co-ordinated with individual
men. In the second place, there was now an outward and visible sign of the borough’s
unity.483 A mode of conveying rights and creating obligations is established which
goes far to confute the notion that the communitas is a mere sum of men with joint
rights and joint liabilities. If the communitas be this, then the act by which it conveys
away its rights or subjects itself to an obligation should, so we naturally suppose, be
some act done by all its members. And so we have seen how the men of Toddington,
thinking that they had land to give to the Priory of Dunstable, met in one place at a
court holden for Toddington and there by their unanimous consent made the grant.
And then we have seen how afterwards they asserted that the transaction did not bind
them because some of them were infants when the grant was made.484 This is not the
way in which corporators behave; it is the way in which co-owners behave. No doubt
there are other fashions in which a corporation can become bound beside the
apposition of a common seal; we must not make our English formalism a measure for
all mankind; still a formality which somewhat distinctly marks off some
communitates from others, and a formality which is never used by co-owners who
have come to co-ownership by the operation of merely private law, which is never
used by co-heirs, is important. What is more the seal is intrusted to the guardianship
of a few. The community at Ipswich which has just received its charter, which has just

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 397 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

exercised its new right of electing bailiffs, which is in the act of establishing a council
of chief portmen and a gild merchant, seems to feel that not only is it passing from a
lower to a higher rank among the communities of the land, but that some new degree
or even kind of unity has been attained: it must have a seal that is its, for it may now
come before the law as pure unit and live as a person among persons. Rules as to
when and by whom this seal may be affixed will be developed in course of time, and a
definite theory about the power of majorities will take the place of some loose notion
which demands unanimity but is content if the voices of a dissentient few are
overwhelmed by the shout of the assentient many. The unanimity of ancient moots is
wonderful. Unconscious fiction begins its work at an early time. With one voice all
the people say “Yea, yea” or “Nay, nay.” But now there is to be a small deliberative
assembly “to govern and maintain the borough” and the votes of the twelve will be
counted.485

What now is necessary is that the community, acting as unit, The borough’s
should begin to develop its property. As regards rights in land, property.
critically decisive acts are hardly to be expected at this early
time. In some sort the “waste” land, intramural and extramural, may belong to the
community. But on the one hand this community must come to terms with the king
about the right of “approvement,” which is rather in him than in it,486 and, on the
other hand, it must come to terms with the singuli about their rights of “common”;
and this may be a long process. The early examples in which a community disposes of
land have a strong tinge of co-proprietorship about them.487 Apparently the
fourteenth century had come before there was any considerable quantity of land that
was paying rent into municipal chests; and until this was happening, the notion of a
true corporate ownership of town lands was insecure.

Unless we are mistaken, the property that was most important in The borough’s
the evolution of corporate unity was the property that the property in its tolls.
borough had in its franchises, but more especially in its tolls.
Already in 1225 “the burgesses” of Nottingham under their common seal had demised
to “the burgesses” of Retford the tolls “belonging to the borough of Nottingham” and
arising within certain geographical limits—“to have and to hold at farm to the said
burgesses of Retford and their successors of us and our successors for ever” at a rent
of twenty marks.488 Now this we can hardly regard otherwise than as a transaction
between two persons. It can scarcely be thought that the now burgesses of Nottingham
are in any tolerable sense co-owners of the right of taking toll. No one of them is
entitled to an aliquot share of the tolls; no one of them has anything that he could
demise to a burgess of Derby or of Retford; nay, if the Retford folk took a separate
deed from each man of Nottingham they would get nothing thereby. What is wanted
is not joint action but constitutional action; a common seal must be affixed by those
who according to the constitution of the borough are entitled to affix it. Very possibly
no man of Nottingham had yet said to himself “Our borough is a person.” Had he
done so he would have been in advance of the acutest English lawyers of his time, for
Bracton and his master Azo were not very clear that the res civitatis were not the res
omnium civium. But had he heard how a pope was ascribing a “fictitious personality”
to the universitas, he would perhaps have said: “Yes, the Holy Father is right; our
borough of Nottingham is a person.”

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 398 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

It is in this region that we may find “the ideal will” of the The ideal will of the
borough, a permanent purpose that keeps it together just as a borough.
religious house is kept together by the purpose of glorifying God
according to the Benedictine or Cistercian rule. The borough wills to maintain and
profit by its franchises, notably to take toll and be quit of toll. “The franchises and
liberties of the City of Norwich I will maintain and sustain with my body and
goods”—such is the oath which the freeman of Norwich will take from century to
century. The county, the hundred, the township, has no such will, no such definite,
abiding purpose. It has no franchises, or, if it has a few, not such as must be
vigorously “maintained and sustained” by the bodies and goods of its members and
anxiously guarded and administered by its rulers.

We may now sum up the whole of a long discussion which has Last words on the
strayed into regions that are insufficiently explored. The borough’s
question, When did our English boroughs become incorporate? is corporateness.
one to which no precise answer can be given. It is a question
about the evolution of a theory on the one hand and the appearance of certain
political, social and economic facts on the other, and then it is a question about the
application of the theory to the facts. The process was slow, and those who were
concerned in it were unconscious of it. But this we may say, that before the end of the
thirteenth century the organization that was to be found in our greater towns was of a
kind which imperatively demanded (so it will seem to us) some new idea. Such old
categories of legal thought as the vague communitas were no longer adequate to
express the relationships and habits that were being formed, and a new line had to be
drawn between the boroughs and the other communitates. We may add too that
Bracton saw this, though he saw it dimly.489 And if the facts were ready for the
theory, a theory was being fashioned for the facts, though those who were preparing it
were Italian lawyers. But as yet there had been no junction between English life and
Italian thought. “Church” and “borough” are still standing far apart from each other;
the English courts are not yet co-ordinating “mayor, aldermen and burgesses” with
“abbot and monks” under the rubric of Corporations. What happened in the
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries must some day be told us by one who is adequately
learned. If we may venture a guess, he will say that, along with some ideas which
were of the highest value, there stole into our temporal law others which should have
been left in that ecclesiastical sphere which was their native home.490 But for us at
the moment all this lies in the future. At present we have not heard those negative
propositions which will give a keen edge to the law of corporations. We listen in vain
for any one to say that the lands of the city are not simply the lands of the citizens, or
that a debt owed by the borough is not a debt owed by the burgesses. So long as such
sayings are not said, the personality of the group-person is latent and insecure.

At the present time there is perhaps some danger that a little too The communities and
much stress will be laid on the communal traits of medieval the nation.
history. It is a hard task to see old times just as they were. To a
school which could only perceive individual men and a “sovereign one or many”
succeeds another which, at least when dealing with medieval history, exalts the
independence and autonomy of some or all of those communities which lie within a
nation. Certainly it was high time that this reaction should be felt; but it must not

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 399 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

carry us beyond the truth, and in this chapter we may have seen enough to give us
pause before we assent to any grand dogma which would make “communalism” older
than “individualism.” The apparent communalism of old law covers an individualism
which has deep and ancient roots. Every right, every duty, however communal its
character, spontaneously becomes the right, the duty, of an individual by attaching
itself to the land that he holds. Because he holds a certain messuage he may turn out
two oxen on “the common of the vill”: because he holds a certain messuage he is a
doomsman of the county court. And then again in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries
we have seen some mighty forces, making not against, but for communalism of a
certain sort. In many quarters we have seen their play. The county is amerced for false
judgments, the hundred is fined for murders, the townships are compelled to attend
the justices, men are forced into frankpledge, the burghers are jointly and severally
liable for the firma burgi, the manorial lord treats his villeins as one responsible
group. Men are drilled and regimented into communities in order that the state may be
strong and the land may be at peace. Much of the communal life that we see is not
spontaneous. The community is a community, not because it is a self-sufficient
organism, but because it is a subordinate member of a greater community, of a nation.
The nation is not a system of federated communities; the king is above all and has a
direct hold on every individual. The communities are far more often the bearers of
duties than of rights; they appear before the courts chiefly as punishable units; the
proudest city will lose its liberties if it exceeds or abuses those powers that are given
to it from above. But above the king himself—thus even a royal justice may think—is
the greatest of all communities, “the university of the realm.”491 The England that
saw the birth of English law, the England of Magna Carta and the first parliaments,
was a much governed and a little England.

end of vol. i

[1 ] For texts relating to Normandy see below, vol. i. pp. 70–71; and for texts relating
to the English boroughs, see below, vol. i. p. 676.

[p. 38,] middle of page. As to the burh-geat (not burh-geat-setl) see W. H. Stevenson,
E. H. R. xii. 489; Maitland, Township and Borough, 209.

[p. 585, note 91.] Add a reference to J. H. Round, The Hundred and the Geld, E. H. R.
x. 732.

[1 ] The story that Augustine offended the Welsh bishops by not rising to receive
them may be accepted as symbolically if not literally true.

[2 ] According to Bede (ii. 5) Æthelbirht of Kent set dooms in writing “iuxta exempla
Romanorum.” It is of course quite possible that a few of the more learned among the
clergy may at times have studied some books of Roman Law. St. Aldhelm (ob. 709)
speaks as if he had done so in a letter printed by Wharton, Anglia Sacra, vol. ii. p. 6,
and by Jaffé, Monumenta Moguntina, 32. On this see Savigny, Geschichte des
römischen Rechts, c. 6 § 135.

[1 ] Æthelb. 1.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 400 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[2 ] Ihering, Vorgeschichte der Indoeuropäer; see especially the editor’s preface.

[3 ] The following summary has been compiled by the aid of Karlowa, Römische
Rechtsgeschichte, 1885—Krüger, Geschichte der Quellen des römischen Rechts,
1888—Conrat, Geschichte der Quellen des römischen Rechts im früheren Mittelalter,
1889—Maassen, Geschichte der Quellen des canonischen Rechts, 1870—Löning,
Geschichte des deutschen Kirchenrechts, 1878—Sohm, Kirchenrecht, 1892—
Hinschius, System des katholischen Kirchenrechts, 1869 ff.—A. Tardif, Histoire des
sources du droit canonique, 1887—Brunner, Deutsche Rechtsgeschichte, 1887—
Schröder, Lehrbuch der deutschen Rechtsgeschichte, ed. 2, 1894—Esmein, Cours
d’histoire du droit français, ed. 2, 1895—Viollet, Histoire du droit civil français,
1893.

[4 ] Krüger, op. cit. 198; Karlowa, op. cit. i. 736.

[5 ] Krüger, op. cit. 215; Karlowa, op. cit. i. 741.

[6 ] Krüger, op. cit. 226; Karlowa, op. cit. i. 752.

[7 ] Löning, op. cit. i. 195 ff.; Sohm, op. cit. 75. Löning asserts that in the intervals
between the outbursts of persecution the Christian communities were legally
recognized as collegia tenuiorum, capable of holding property. Sohm denies this.

[8 ] Excommunication gradually assumes its boycotting traits. The clergy were
prohibited, while as yet the laity were not, from holding converse with the offender.
Löning, op. cit. i. 264; Hinschius, op. cit. iv. 704.

[9 ] Sohm, op. cit. 378 ff.; Löning, op. cit. i. 423 ff.

[10 ] Dig. 1. 1. 1.

[11 ] The moot question (Krüger, op. cit. 203; Karlowa, op. cit. i. 739) whether the
Tertullian who is the apologist of Christian sectaries is the Tertullian from whose
works a few extracts appear in the Digest may serve as a mnemonic link between two
ages.

[12 ] Krüger, op. cit. 260; Karlowa, op. cit. i. 932.

[13 ] Gregorovius, History of Rome (transl. Hamilton), i. 85.

[14 ] Krüger, op. cit. 277 ff.; Karlowa, op. cit. i. 941 ff. It is thought that the original
edition of the Gregorianus was made about ad 295, that of the Hermogenianus
between 314 and 324. But these dates are uncertain. For their remains see Corpus
Iuris Anteiustiniani.

[15 ] Brunner, op. cit. i. 32–39.

[16 ] Ibid. 38.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 401 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[17 ] Löning, op. cit. i. 44.

[18 ] Löning, op. cit. i. 97–98, reckons 68 statutes from 57 years (380–438).

[19 ] Hefele, Conciliengeschichte, i. 201. For the presence of the British bishops, see
Haddan and Stubbs, Councils, i. 7.

[20 ] Sohm, op. cit. 443: “Das ökumenische Koncil, die Reichssynode . . . bedeutet
ein geistliches Parlament des Kaisertums.”

[21 ] Sohm, op. cit. 418. If a precise date may be fixed in a very gradual process, we
may perhaps see the first exercise of legislative power in the decretal (ad 385) of Pope
Siricius.

[22 ] Cod. Theod. 16. 1. 2.

[23 ] Löning, op. cit. i. 262 ff.; Hinschius, op. cit. iv. 788 ff.

[24 ] Löning, op. cit. i. 293; Karlowa, op. cit. i. 966. This depends on the genuineness
of Constit. Sirmond. 1.

[25 ] Löning, op. cit. i. 305; Hinschius, op. cit. iv. 794.

[26 ] Löning, op. cit. i. 64–94.

[27 ] Krüger, op. cit. 285 ff.; Karlowa, op. cit. i. 944.

[28 ] The Breviary of Alaric is a different matter.

[29 ] Bury, History of the Later Roman Empire, 142: “And thus we may say that it
was the loss or abandonment of Britain in 407 that led to the further loss of Spain and
Africa.”

[30 ] Zeumer, Leges Visigothorum Antiquiores, 1894; Brunner, op. cit. i. 320;
Schröder, op. cit. 230.

[31 ] Ficker, Untersuchungen zur Erbenfolge, 1891–95; Ficker, Ueber nähere
Verwandtschaft zwischen gothisch-spanischem und norwegisch-isländischem Recht
(Mittheilungen des Instituts für österreichische Geschichtsforschung, 1888, ii. 456
ff.). These attempts to reconstruct the genealogy of the various Germanic systems are
very interesting, if hazardous.

[32 ] For a map of Europe at the time of Justinian’s legislation see Hodgkin, Italy and
her Invaders, vol. iv. p. 1.

[33 ] Brunner, op. cit. i. 292 ff.; Schröder, op. cit. 226 ff.; Esmein, op. cit. 102 ff.;
Dahn, Die Könige der Germanen, vii. (2) 50 ff.; Hessels and Kern, Lex Salica, The
ten texts, 1880.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 402 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[34 ] However, there are some curious relics of heathenry in the Lex Frisionum:
Brunner, op. cit. i. 342.

[35 ] Greg. Turon., or at least Turonii. 22 (ed. Omont, p. 60): “Mitis depone colla,
Sicamber; adora quod incendisti, incende quod adorasti.”

[36 ] Brunner, op. cit. i. 303 ff.; Schröder, op. cit. 229; Esmein, op. cit. 107. Edited by
Sohm in M. G.

[37 ] Brunner, op. cit. i. 332 ff.; Schröder, op. cit. 234; Esmein, op. cit. 108–9. Edited
by v. Salis in M. G.

[38 ] Brunner, op. cit. i. 50–51.

[39 ] Ibid. 64–67.

[40 ] Krüger, op. cit. 317; Brunner, op. cit. i. 354; Schröder, op. cit. 234. Edited by v.
Salis in M. G.

[41 ] Krüger, op. cit. 309; Brunner, op. cit. i. 358. Edited by Hänel, 1849.

[42 ] Karlowa, op. cit. i. 976.

[43 ] See above, p. 8.

[44 ] The epitomes will be found in Hänel’s edition, Lex Romana Visigothorum,
1849.

[45 ] Brunner, op. cit. i. 365; Karlowa, op. cit. i. 947 ff. Edited by Bluhme in M. G.

[46 ] Maassen, op. cit. i. 422 ff.; Tardif, op. cit. 110. Printed in Migne, Patrologia, vol.
67.

[47 ] Haddan and Stubbs, Councils, iii. 119. See, however, the remarks of Mr. C. H.
Turner, E. H. R. ix. 727.

[48 ] Maassen, op. cit. i. 441.

[49 ] Krüger, op. cit. 319.

[50 ] Conrat, op. cit. i. 32.

[51 ] Krüger, op. cit. 354; Karlowa, op. cit. i. 938; Hodgkin, Italy and her Invaders, vi.
519.

[52 ] Gregorovius, History of Rome (transl. Hamilton), ii. 153 ff.; Oman, Dark Ages,
237, 245.

[53 ] For Byzantine law in southern Italy see Conrat, op. cit. i. 49.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 403 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[54 ] Hodgkin, Italy and her Invaders, iv. 571 ff.: “The Sorrows of Vigilius.”

[55 ] Conrat, op. cit. i. 8.

[56 ] Bede, Hist. Eccl., lib. 2, c. 5 (ed. Plummer, i. 90): “iuxta exempla Romanorum.”
Bede himself (Opera, ed. Giles, vol. vi. p. 321) had read of Justinian’s Codex; but
what he says of it seems to prove that he had never seen it: Conrat, op. cit. i. 99.

[57 ] Brunner, op. cit. i. 283.

[58 ] The oldest Germanic word that answers to our law seems to be that which
appears as A.-S. æ´. This word lives on in our Eng. ay or aye (= ever, from all time).
It is said to be cognate to Lat. aevum. See Brunner, op. cit. i. 109; Schröder, op. cit.
222; Schmid, Gesetze, 524; Oxf. Eng. Dict. s.v. ay. For lagu, see Brunner, loc. cit.;
Schmid, 621. Hlothær and Eadric increase the æ´ of the Kentish folk by their dooms.

[59 ] Whether we have Ine’s code or only an Alfredian recension of it is a difficult
question, lately discussed by Turk, Legal Code of Ælfred (Halle, 1893) p. 42.

[60 ] Brunner, op. cit. i. 368; Schröder, op. cit. 236. Edited by Bluhme in M. G.

[61 ] Brunner, op. cit. i. 308; Schröder, op. cit. 238. Edited by Lehmann in M. G.
There are fragments of a Pactus Alamannorum from circ. 600. The Lex is supposed to
come from 717–19.

[62 ] Brunner, op. cit. i. 313; Schröder, op. cit. 239. Edited by Merkel in M. G. This is
now ascribed to the years 739–48.

[63 ] Brunner, op. cit. i. 340 ff.; Schröder, op. cit. 240 ff. Edited by v. Richthofen and
Sohm in M. G.

[64 ] K. Maurer, Ueberblick über die Geschichte der nordgermanischen Rechtsquellen
in v. Holtzendorff, Encyklopädie.

[65 ] Alfred, Introduction, 49, § 9 (Liebermann, Gesetze, p. 46).

[66 ] Brunner, op. cit. i. 370; Schröder, op. cit. 235.

[67 ] Brunner, op. cit. i. 259; Schröder, op. cit. 225; Esmein, op. cit. 57.

[68 ] Agobardi Opera, Migne, Patrol. vol. 104, col. 116: “Nam plerumque contingit ut
simul eant aut sedeant quinque homines et nullus eorum communem legem cum altero
habeat.”

[69 ] Stubbs, Constit. Hist. i. 216. See, however, Dahn, Könige der Germanen, vii.
(3), pp. 1 ff.

[70 ] See above, p. 10.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 404 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[71 ] Brunner, op. cit. i. 260.

[72 ] Ibid. 261 ff.

[73 ] Brunner, op. cit. i. 269; Löning, op. cit. ii. 284.

[74 ] Brunner, op. cit. i. 255.

[75 ] Brunner, Zur Rechtsgeschichte der römischen und germanischen Urkunde, i.
187.

[76 ] Brunner, D. R. G. i. 401; Schröder, op. cit. 254. Edited in M. G. by Zeumer; also
by E. de Rozière, Recueil général des formules.

[77 ] Brunner, op. cit. i. 374; Sohröder, op. cit. 247; Esmein, op. cit. 116. Edited in M.
G. by Boretius and Krause; previously by Pertz.

[78 ] Brunner, op. cit. i. 382; Schröder, op. cit. 251; Esmein, op. cit. 117.

[79 ] Maassen, op. cit. i. 667 ff.; Tardif, op. cit. 117. Printed in Migne, Patrol. vol. 84.

[80 ] For the Roman law of the Origines, see Conrat, op. cit. i. 150. At first or second
hand this work was used by the author of our Leges Henrici. That the learned Isidore
knew nothing of Justinian’s books seems to be proved, and this shows that they were
not current in Spain.

[81 ] The Decretales Pseudo-Isidorianae were edited by Hinschius in 1863. See also
Tardif, op. cit. 133 ff.; Conrat, op. cit. i. 299; Brunner, op. cit. i. 384.

[82 ] Hinschius, op. cit. iv. 849 ff.

[83 ] Tardif, op. cit. 162. Printed in Migne, Patrol. vol. 132; also edited by
Wasserschleben, 1840.

[84 ] Ibid. 164. Printed in Migne, Patrol. vol. 140.

[85 ] Ibid. 170. See Fournier, Yves de Chartres, Paris, 1898.

[86 ] We borrow la féodalité classique from M. Flach: Les origines de l’ancienne
France, ii. 551.

[87 ] Esmein, op. cit. 487–88; Viollet, op. cit. 152. Schröder, op. cit. 624: “Vom 10.
bis 12. Jahrhundert ruhte die Gesetzgebung fast ganz . . . Es war die Zeit der
Alleinherrschaft des Gewohnheitsrechtes.”

[88 ] Oman, The Dark Ages, 511.

[89 ] As to the close likeness between the English dooms and the Frankish
capitularies, see Stubbs, Const. Hist. i. 223. We might easily suppose direct imitation,

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 405 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

were it not that much of the Karolingian system was in ruins before Alfred began his
work.

[90 ] The Usatici Barchinonensis Patriae (printed by Giraud, Histoire du droit
français, ii. 465 ff.) are ascribed to Raymond Berengar I. and to the year 1068 or
thereabouts. But how large a part of them really comes from him is a disputable
question. See Conrat, op. cit. i. 467; Ficker, Mittheilungen des Instituts für
österreichische Geschichtsforschung, 1888, ii. p. 236.

[91 ] Stubbs, Const. Hist. i. 263: “There are few if any records of councils distinctly
ecclesiastical held during the tenth century in England.”

[92 ] There seem to be traces of the Frankish forgeries in the Worcester book
described by Miss Bateson, E. H. R. x. 712 ff. English ecclesiastics were borrowing
and it is unlikely that they escaped contamination.

[93 ] Boretius, Preface to edition of Liber legis Langobardorum, in M. G.; Brunner,
op. cit. i. 387 ff.; Ficker, Forschungen zur Reichs- u. Rechtsgeschichte Italiens, iii. 44
ff., 139 ff.; Conrat, op. cit. i. 393 ff.

[94 ] It is well summed up for English readers by Rashdall, Universities of Europe, i.
89 ff. The chief advocate of a maximum of knowledge has been Dr. Hermann Fitting
in Juristiche Schriften des früheren Mittelalters, 1876, Die Anfänge der Rechtsschule
zu Bologna, 1888, and elsewhere. He has recently edited a Summa Codicis (1894) and
some Quaestiones de iuris subtilitatibus, both of which he ascribes to Irnerius. See
also Pescatore, Die Glossen des Irnerius, 1888; Mommsen, Preface to two-volume
edition of the Digest; Flach, Études critiques sur 1’histoire du droit romain, 1890;
Besta, L’Opera d’Irnerio, 1896; Ficker, op. cit. vol. iii. and Conrat, op. cit. passim.

[95 ] See E. J. Tardif, Extraits et abrégés juridiques des étymologies d’Isidore de
Séville, 1896.

[96 ] Conrat, op. cit. i. 65.

[97 ] M. G. Leges, ii. 40; Conrat, op. cit. i. 62.

[98 ] Ficker, Forschungen, iii. 126; iv. 99; Conrat, op. cit. 67. Apparently the most
industrious research has failed to prove that between 603 and 1076 any one cited the
Digest. The bare fact that Justinian had issued such a book seems to have vanished
from memory. Conrat, op. cit. i. 69.

[99 ] In dated documents Irnerius (his name seems to have really been Warnerius,
Guarnerius) appears in 1113 and disappears in 1125. The University of Bologna kept
1888 as its octocentenary.

[100 ] Esmein, op. cit. 347: “Une science nouvelle naquit, indépendante et laïque, la
science de la société civile, telle que l’avaient dégagée les Romains, et qui pouvait
passer pour le chef-d’œuvre de la sagesse humaine . . . Il en résulta qu’à côté du
théologien se plaça le légiste qui avait, comme lui, ses principes et ses textes, et qui

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 406 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

lui disputa la direction des esprits avides de savoir.” It is only by slow degrees that the
Digest comes by its rights. Throughout the middle ages the Code appears, as Justinian
intended that it should appear, as the prominent book: it contains the new law. See
Fitting, Preface to the Summa of Irnerius.

[1 ] See Maitland, Domesday Book and Beyond, Cambridge, 1897.

[2 ] The A.-S. laws were first printed by Lambard, Archaionomia, 1568. A second
edition of his work was published by Whelock, Archaionomia, Cambridge, 1644.—
This was followed in 1721 by Wilkins, Leges Anglo-Saxonicae.—In 1840 the
Ancient Laws and Institutes of England were edited for the Record Commission by
Price and Thorpe.—This was followed by Reinhold Schmid, Gesetze der
Angelsachsen, 2nd ed. Leipzig, 1858, which superseded a first and incomplete edition
of 1832.—A new edition by Dr. F. Liebermann is in course of publication.—For
detailed discussion see, besides Kemble’s well-known works, the Glossary in
Schmid’s edition— Konrad Maurer, Angelsächsische Rechtsverhältnisse, in Kritische
Ueberschau der deutschen Gesetzgebung, vol. i. ff. Munich, 1853, ff.—Essays in
Anglo-Saxon Laws (Adams, Lodge, Young, Laughlin), 1876.—Full use has been
made of the A.-S. documents by historians of German law, Brunner, Schröder, v.
Amira and others.—For the Scandinavian side of the story, see Steenstrup, Danelag,
Copenhagen, 1882.

[3 ] Schmid, Gesetze, p. 371. The Gerefa, which seems to be a continuation of this
tract, was published by Dr. Liebermann, in Anglia, ix. 251, and by Dr. Cunningham,
Growth of English Industry, ed. 3, vol. i. p. 571 ff.

[4 ] The principal collections are:—Kemble, Codex Diplomaticus, 1839–48.—
Thorpe, Diplomatarium, 1865.—Earle, Land Charters, 1888.—Birch, Cartularium,
1885 ff.—Napier and Stevenson, Crawford Charters, 1895.—Four volumes of
facsimiles published by the British Museum, 1873 ff., and two volumes by the
Ordnance Survey, 1877 ff.

[5 ] Æthelst. ii. 2. A man who was considerable enough to have only the king above
him required, of course, no other lord.

[6 ] A.-S. Chron. ann. 921.

[7 ] Ælf. 43.

[8 ] A solitary claim of villeinage is reported in the reign of James I.

[9 ] Æthelst. vi. (Iudicia civitatis Lundoniae) 8 § 2.

[10 ] Kemble, Saxons, i. 261. The A.-S. term for the kindred is “mægð,” in Latin
versions “parentela.”

[11 ] Hen. 88 § 13; Schmid points out the strong resemblance to Lex Sal. 60, “De eo
qui se de parentilla tollere vult.”

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 407 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[12 ] Brunner, D. R. G. i. 104 ff.

[13 ] The modern form thane has acquired misleading literary associations.

[14 ] Schmid, Gesetze, pp. 389, 397, 431.

[15 ] Little, Gesiths and Thegns, E. H. R. iv. 723; Maitland, Domesday Book, 161.

[16 ] Wiht. 26.

[17 ] Hl. and E. 5; see Schmid thereon. The slave-traders were often foreigners,
commonly Jews. Ireland and Gaul were the main routes.

[18 ] In. 11.

[19 ] Æthelr. v. 2, vi. 9; Cn. ii. 3; cf. Lex Rib. 16; Lex Sal. 39 § 2.

[20 ] A. Napier, Berlin, 1883, pp. 129, n., 158, 160–61.

[21 ] Will. Malm. Vita Wulstani, in Wharton, Anglia Sacra, ii. 258; quoted nearly in
full, Freeman, Norman Conquest, iv. 386.

[22 ] Leges Willelmi, i. 41.

[23 ] Cod. Dipl. iv. 263 (manumission by Geatflæd of “all the men whose heads she
took for their food in the evil days”). This and other examples are conveniently
collected at the end of Thorpe’s Diplomatarium.

[24 ] L. Q. R. vii. 64.

[25 ] Wiht. 8: an archaic authority, but there is nothing to show any change.

[26 ] Ælf. 43 (as Schmid and the Latin version take it). Cp. Theod. Pen. xiii. 3
(Haddan and Stubbs, Councils, iii. 202).

[27 ] Æthelb. 26.

[28 ] Wiht. 8: “If one manumits his man at the altar, let him be folk-free.”

[29 ] Glanvill, ii. 6. Details on Anglo-Saxon servitude may be found in Kemble,
Saxons, bk. i. c. 8, and Larking, Domesday Book of Kent, note 57. See also Maurer,
Kritische Ueberschau, i. 410; Jastrow, Zur strafrechtlichen Stellung der Sklaven
(Gierke’s Untersuchungen, 1878); Brunner, D. R. G. i. 95.

[30 ] In. 9. The wording “wrace dó” is vague: doubtless it means taking the other
party’s cattle.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 408 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[31 ] E.g. Clovelly Court, N. Devon. Cp. Rentalia et Custumaria, Somerset Record
Society, 1891, Glossary, s.v. Curia. For the aula, haula, halla of D. B., see Maitland,
Domesday Book, 109 ff.

[32 ] Brunner, D. R. G. ii. 375.

[33 ] The usual modern term “compurgator” was borrowed by legal antiquaries from
ecclesiastical sources in much later times.

[34 ] This discovery is due to Dr. Liebermann, Sitzungsberichte der berliner
Akademie, 1896, xxxv. 829. The less common word ceac (a cauldron) was confused
with ceap (buying) and the genuine reading was treated by the editors as an
unmeaning variant.

[35 ] The appearance of orest (a correct Northern form = Eng. eornest) among the
privileges of Waltham Abbey, Cod. Dipl. iv. 154, is probably due to a post-Norman
scribe, for our text rests on a very late copy. At all events the charter is only a few
years before the Conquest. However, trial by battle may well have been known in the
Danelaw throughout the tenth century.

[36 ] Brunner, D. R. G. ii. 415.

[37 ] Leg. Will. ii. (Willelmes cyninges ásetnysse).

[38 ] Ælf. 42. Sir James Stephen’s statement (Hist. Crim. Law, i. 61) that “trial by
battle was only private war under regulations” cannot be accepted.

[39 ] Cn. ii. 22, and the newly-printed gloss in Liebermann, Consil. Cnuti, p. 14. From
this, so far as it may be trusted, it would seem that a triple fore-oath might put the
“credible” defendant to a stronger oath and the “incredible” one to the severe
“threefold” ordeal.

[40 ] Edg. iii. 5 (third quarter of tenth century); “Institutes of Polity” in Thorpe,
Ancient Laws, ii. 313.

[41 ] However, as to the manner in which justice was done in ecclesiastical causes and
when clerks were accused extremely little is known. See Stubbs, Historical Appendix
to Report of Eccl. Courts Comm. 1883, p. 23; Makower, Const. Hist. of the Church of
England, 384 ff.

[42 ] “Witenagemót” does not appear to have been an official term.

[43 ] Edg. iii. 2; repeated Cnut, ii. 17.

[44 ] Æthelst. ii. 3.

[45 ] Cf. Æthelst. vi. (Iud. Civ. Lund.) 8 §§ 2, 3.

[46 ] Blackstone, Comm. iii. 51.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 409 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[47 ] Blackstone, Comm. iii. 444.

[48 ] Cases collected in Essays in Anglo-Saxon Law, ad fin.

[49 ] Haddan and Stubbs, Councils, iii. 541, 596.

[50 ] Earle, Land Charters, 453.

[51 ] Kemble, Saxons, ii. 247, 249.

[52 ] Edg. i. 1 (the ascription of this ordinance to Edgar is conjectural, but serves to
fix its earliest possible date, Schmid, p. xlviii; Liebermann, Consil. Cnuti, p. v.); Edg.
iii. 5.

[53 ] Edg. iii. 1.

[54 ] Cf. Schmid, Glossar, s.v. mearc; Maitland, Domesday Book, 275.

[55 ] Maitland, Domesday Book, 80 ff., 258 ff.

[56 ] Leg. Hen. c. 87 § 10, 89 § 1, secundum legem Saligam; 90 § 4, secundum legem
Ribuariorum solvatur.

[57 ] Leg. Hen. c. 33 § 4: “de libro Theodosianae legis, iniuste victus infra tres
menses reparet causam.” The quotation is really from an epitome of the Lex Romana
Visigothorum.

[58 ] See A.-S. Chron. ann. 1002.

[59 ] Fustel de Coulanges, Origines du système féodal, 300 ff. Lex Sal. xiii. 6; lvi. 5.
Edict of Chilperic, 9. To be out of the king’s protection is to be extra sermonem suum,
foras nostro sermone. In xiv. 4, praeceptum appears to be the king’s written
protection or licence. The phrase in Ed. Conf. 6 § 1 (cf. Brunner, D. R. G. ii. 42), ore
suo utlagabit eum rex, or, as the second edition gives it, utlagabit eum rex verbo oris
sui, looks more like the confused imitation of an archaizing compiler than a genuine
parallel.

[60 ] For some further details see Pollock, Oxford Lectures, 1890, “The King’s
Peace,” 65.

[61 ] See Brunner, D. R. G. ii. §§ 65, 66, who calls attention (p. 42) to the relative
weakness of the crown in England before the Conquest.

[62 ] Edw. ii. 1. Schmid, Gloss. s.v. Friede, considers the general peace to have been
the king’s peace in some sense. This lacks authority, but seems accepted as regards
the continent: Brunner, D. R. G. ii. 42. It is nearer the truth than any talk about the
“folk-peace.”

[63 ] Cn. ii. 20.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 410 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[64 ] Ælf. Prolog. 19, copied from the book of Exodus, is of course no exception.

[65 ] Cp. Grettis Saga, c. 79.

[66 ] Brunner, D. R. G. i. 86. An archaic synonym leód occurs Æthelb. 22, 23, cp.
Grimm, 652.

[67 ] Ælf. 42.

[68 ] Edm. ii. 7, and Be Wergilde (Schmid, App. vii.) § 4.

[69 ] Edm. ii. 1. Æthelr. ii. 6 § 1, suggests but hardly proves a change, leaving the
option with the slain man’s kindred alone, though such is held to have been the settled
rule on the continent: Brunner, D. R. G. i. 163.

[70 ] Tac. Germ. c. 12. Bót is closely connected with “better”: the idea is “making
good.”

[71 ] Ælf. Prolog. 49 § 7.

[72 ] In. 18; Ælf. 32; Cn. ii. 16, 30. The “folk-leasing” of Alfred’s law must be
habitual false accusation in the folk-moot, not private slander.

[73 ] It was formally abolished in civil proceedings only in 1879, 42 & 43 Vict. c. 59,
s. 3. In criminal matters it is still possible. But it has not been in use for a generation
or more.

[74 ] E. & G. 6 § 6; cp. Edg. i. 3; Æthelr. i. 1 § 9, and many later passages.

[75 ] E. & G. 6 § 7: the outlaw, if slain, shall lie æ´gylde, the exact equivalent of the
Homeric nhvpoinoı.

[76 ] Co. Lit. 130 a; Blackstone, Comm. iv. 118; 5 Eliz. c. 1.

[77 ] Eng. tiht-bysig, folce ungetrýwe, Lat. incredibilis. The idea is the contradiction
of getrýwe = homo probus or legalis. Folce or eallum folce signifies merely notoriety:
we cannot find in the text, as some writers have done, a doctrine of fealty to the
people as a quasi-sovereign.

[78 ] Edg. iii. 7; Cn. ii. 33; cp. ib. 22.

[79 ] Æthelst. ii. 3, cp. 17; iv. 3. Cp. vi. 8, as to over-powerful clans.

[80 ] Cf. Baillie Nicol Jarvie on the state of the Highlands, Rob Roy, ii. ch. 12
(original edition).

[81 ] Liutprand openly regretted that trial by combat could not be abolished. Liutpr. c.
118: “incerti sumus de iudicio dei, et multos audiuimus per pugnam sine iustitia
causam suam perdere: sed propter consuitutinem gentis nostrae langobardorum legem

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 411 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

ipsam uetare non possumus.” Avitus, Bishop of Vienne, protested against Gundobad’s
ordinance. At a later time Agobard of Lyons denounced it. See Lea, Superstition and
Force, ed. 4, p. 409.

[82 ] Ælf. 4.

[83 ] Ed. Roth. 1 (L. Langob.) “contra animam regis cogitaverit aut consiliaverit”; L.
Sax. 24, “de morte consiliatus fuerit”; so L. Baiuw. ii. 1; L. Alam. 23: “in mortem
ducis consiliatus fuerit”; cp. Brunner, D. R. G. ii. 688.

[84 ] The following words no doubt substantially represent the text of the Lex Julia:
“Cuiusve opera consilio dolo malo consilium initum erit quo quis magistratus populi
Romani quive imperium potestatemve habeat occidatur.” Dig. 48. 4. ad 1. Iuliam
maiestatis, 1 § 1. The consiliaverit, consiliatus fuerit, of the Germanic laws can hardly
be an accidental resemblance. In Glanv. xiv. 1, the principal terms are machinatum
fuisse vel aliquid fecisse, but consilium dedisse is there too.

[85 ] Cn. ii. 64; Leg. Hen. 12.

[86 ] Ælf. 4; Æthelst. ii. 4; Æthelr. v. 30, vi. 37; Cn. ii. 57. This last passage, in its
literal terms, would not allow purgation by oath-helpers at all, but send the accused
straight to the ordeal. So great a change of the previous law can scarcely have been
intended. Æthelred’s ordinance, vi. 37, requires the “deepest oath,” whatever that was.
Cp. Godwine’s oath “cum totius fere Angliae principibus et ministris dignioribus,”
Flor. Wigorn. i. 195. Possibly Danish law may have been stricter than English. We
hear of an oath of 48 thanes against the charge of robbing a corpse: Be walreáje,
Schmid, App. xv. in a document apparently of Danish extraction; see Brunner, D. R.
G. ii. 684. The Lex Ribuaria requires in some special cases an oath of 36 or even 72
men.

[87 ] Edg. i. 9; Dóm be hátan ísene and wætre, Schm. App. xvi.

[88 ] Cn. ii. 56; Hen. 71, 92. See Schmid, Gloss. s.v. morð, and cp. the old Norse
adage, “Night-slaying is murder” (Natt-víg er morð-víg); also Lex Rib. 15.

[89 ] In. 35, cp. 28; Æthelst. vi. (Iud. Civ. Lund.) 7; cp. Ed. Conf. 36.

[90 ] Ælf. 42.

[91 ] In. 21.

[92 ] Hen. 83 § 6. The detailed instructions for laying out the slain man with his arms,
etc., are curious but untrustworthy. The main object was to show that the killing was
not secret.

[93 ] Ælf. 35. For continental analogies, see Brunner, D. R. G. ii. 674.

[94 ] Ælf. 36 (probably enacted in consequence of some particular case in the king’s
court, or otherwise well known); cp. Hen. 88 §§ 1–3. The proviso as to holding the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 412 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

spear level is easily understood as referring to a spear of moderate length, which
could not be well carried, like the long sixteenth to seventeenth century pike, with the
point so high up as to be wholly out of harm’s way. The carriage of the “puissant
pike” was almost a special art when its time came.

[95 ] Hen. 88 § 6, 90 § 11. [Þe] brecht ungewealdes bete gewealdes, in Germany wer
unwillig gethan muss willig zahlen; see Heusler, Institutionen, ii. 263.

[96 ] Cn. ii. 75; cp. Hen. 87 § 2.

[97 ] See Ine 29; Ælf. 19.

[98 ] Ælf. 19 § 3; Hen. 87 § 3. A similar rule as to arms given in pledge still has the
force of law in Montenegro: Code général des biens (tr. Dareste), Paris 1892, art. 176.

[99 ] The word gesund may well point to a warranty of this kind. Brunner,
Forschungen, 520.

[100 ] Ælf. 12 seems to relate only to wilful trespass in woods.

[101 ] Ælf. 23.

[102 ] Ælf. 13.

[103 ] Ælf. 24.

[104 ] In. 17.

[105 ] Cn. ii. 21.

[106 ] Ib. 29.

[107 ] Ine 7, 57.

[108 ] Ed. Napier, Berlin, 1883, p. 158.

[109 ] As to robbing corpses, Schmid, App. xv. Be Walreáfe.

[110 ] Ælf. 5 § 5; the principle is reaffirmed, but so vaguely as to suggest that it had
become obsolete in practice, in Cn. ii. 38.

[111 ] Muirhead, Private Law of Rome, 149, 163, 227 (origin of stipulation).

[112 ] The Roman words credere, fides, spondere, involve a whole history of this
kind. Pernice, Labeo, i. 409; Pacchioni, Actio ex Sponsu, Bologna, 1888:
Ehrenverpfändung in German formulas as late as fifteenth century, see Kohler,
Shakespeare vor dem Forum der Jurisprudenz, 1884, appx.

[113 ] Edm. ii. 7, and Be Wergilde, Schmid, App. vii.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 413 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[114 ] Ælf. 33. Cp. the provisions as to “briduw” in the laws of Howel (tenth century)
ap. Haddan and Stubbs, Councils, i. 237, 271.

[115 ] Hl. & E. 16. The supposed “improbability of a Kentish king making a law for
purchases made in the Mercian city of London” (Thorpe’s note ad loc. is imaginary).
The law applies to a claim made in Kent by a Mercian professing to be the true owner,
and it is to be executed wholly in Kent.

[116 ] Edg. iv. 6; Cn. ii. 24.

[117 ] Leg. Will. i. 45.

[118 ] See Æthelr. ii. 9, Be teámum, and Schmid’s Glossary s. vv. Käufe, Teám.

[119 ] Glanv. x. 15–17.

[120 ] Ine 53.

[121 ] Pollock, The Land Laws, 3rd ed. Lond. 1896, chap. ii. and notes B, C and D;
Maitland, Domesday and Beyond, 1897.

[122 ] Ine 3 § 2; Ælf. 43; Rect. S. P. 3.

[123 ] Ine 40.

[124 ] Ine 42 is a good illustration, though by itself not conclusive.

[125 ] Ine 63–67. We assume that the hide here spoken of is not materially different
from the normal hide of the Domesday period, i.e. 120 acres. Perhaps these passages
have to do with the settlement of a newly conquered district. Maitland, Domesday
Book, 237–38.

[126 ] See Fustel de Coulanges, Le bénéfice et le patronat, ch. iv–vii.

[127 ] Royal Prerogative, ed. 1849, p. 135.

[128 ] Folk-land, E. H. R. viii. 1–17.

[129 ] It is now prudent rather than necessary to remind the reader that Kemble’s
brilliant conjectures were premature and largely unwarranted.

[1 ] The following brief sketch is based partly on the first-hand authorities for Norman
history, partly on the opinions expressed by Palgrave, Gneist, Stubbs, Freeman in
their well-known books.—Stapleton’s editions of the Norman Exchequer
Rolls.—Brunner’s account of the sources of Norman law given in his Anglo-
Normannisches Erbfolgesystem, his Entstehung der Schwurgerichte, and his article
upon this subject in Holtzendorff’s Encyklopädie.—Waitz, Ueber die Quellen zur
Geschichte der Begründung der Normannischen Herrschaft in Frank-reich,
Nachrichten von der Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften, Göttingen, 1866, pp.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 414 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

69–95.—Steenstrup, Inledning i Normannertiden, Copenhagen, 1876, of which the
author gave a French translation in the Bulletin de la Société des antiquaires de
Normandie, vol. x. p. 185, under the title Études préliminaires pour servir à l’histoire
des Normands.—von Amira, Die Anfänge des Normannischen Reichs, Historische
Zeitschrift, Neue Folge, vol. iii. p. 241.—Delisle, Études sur la condition de la classe
agricole en Normandie, Évreux, 1851, and the same writer’s essays on Norman
finance in the Bibliothèque de l’École des chartes, ser. ii. vol. 5; ser. iii. vols. 1,
3.—The editions of the rolls and custumals referred to below.—Luchaire, Institutions
monarchiques de la France sous les premiers Capétiens, 1883, and Luchaire, Manuel
des institutions françaises, 1892.

[2 ] Magni Rotuli Scaccarii Normanniae sub Regibus Angliae, published by
Stapleton, and reprinted in Mémoires de la Société des antiquaires de Normandie, vol.
xv. A fragment of the roll of 1184 was published by Delisle, Caen, 1851.

[3 ] These are most accessible in Delisle’s Recueil de jugements de l’échiquier de
Normandie au xiiime siècle, Paris, 1864. A collection of judgments delivered in the
assizes between 1234 and 1237 will be found in Warnkönig’s Französische Staatsund
Rechtsgeschichte, vol. ii. Urkundenbuch, pp. 48–69.

[4 ] Edited by E. J. Tardif, Rouen, 1881.

[5 ] This has been frequently printed. A recent edition by W. L. De Gruchy, Jersey,
1881, gives both the Latin and the French text. The Latin text has of late been
admirably edited by E. J. Tardif under the title Somma de Legibus Normannie, 1896.
He takes the Latin text to be the older and is inclined to date it in 1254–58.

[6 ] Dudo, Duchesne, p. 85. The story of Hrolf’s legislation has been rejected as
fabulous, but is defended by Steenstrup, Études préliminaires, pp. 351–91.

[7 ] This is frankly admitted by Steenstrup, Études préliminaires, p. 375: “Les
coutumes les plus anciennes de la Normandie datent du xiime siècle, et le droit
qu’elles nous présentent est français, quoiqu’il y ait quelques restes des coutumes du
Nord. Il serait injuste d’enregistrer ces sources dans la législation scandinave; elles
appartiennent à une législation spéciale, à la législation anglo-normande.”

[8 ] Waitz, D. V. G. vi. 1.

[9 ] It seems to be now generally admitted that the Roman precarium is one of the
germs of feudalism; Waitz, D. V. G. ii. 229; Brunner, D. R. G. i. 211; Fustel de
Coulanges, Le bénéfice et le patronat. It has been pointed out that even in the Digest,
43, 26, 14 (Paulus) the two words precarium and beneficium are brought into contact;
“magis enim ad donationes et beneficii causam quam ad negotii contracti spectat
precarii conditio.” The belief that the feudum is in any way connected with
emphyteusis has long been exploded.

[10 ] The term which occurs most often is hospites, a term which did not obtain a
permanent home in England, though it appears occasionally in Domesday, e.g. D. B. i.
259 b. The Conqueror gives certain vills to the Abbey of Caen “cum colonis et

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 415 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

conditionariis seu liberis hominibus”; Gall. Christ. xi. Instrum. p. 66; Neustria Pia, p.
626. In another charter he confirms “dominium cum militibus quod dedit Olilia”;
Gall. Christ. xi. Instrum. p. 203.

[11 ] In 968 Duke Richard the Fearless grants Bretteville to Saint Denis with the
assent of his lord Hugh Duke of the French, “cum assensu senioris mei Hugonis
Francorum Principis”; Bouquet, ix. 731. In 1006 King Robert confirmed a gift made
by Duke Richard the Good to Fécamp; Gall. Christ. xi. Instrum. p. 7. Such
transactions as these were probably exceptional; but instances in which Norman lords
confirm gifts made by their subordinates and in which the duke confirms these
confirmations are abundant. See for example Orderic’s account of the gifts to Saint
Evroul; ed. le Prevost, vol. ii. p. 16 ff. Ralph Taisson, when endowing an abbey,
forbids any of his barons or other men to give or sell any of their possessions to any
other church; Gall. Christ. xi. Instrum. p. 63.

[12 ] Neustria Pia, 311: “Ego Abbas Albertus Abbatiae SS. Stephani Prothomartyris et
Christi Confessoris Maximini . . . erat mihi quidam alodus ex materna hereditate, non
ex alicuius beneficio, quem S. Petro in Gemmetico monasterio . . . dedi. Est autem
ipse alodus in pago Belismensi.” Ibid. 217 in a charter for Fécamp, Richard II. says
that he is pleased to confirm “ea quae fideliter communi nostro [?] aut precario vel
beneficiis quae nostri iuris erant vel de hereditatibus quas paterno iure possidebant
concessere.” The first words of this passage seem corrupt, but the beneficium is
treated as something that is not a hereditas and is brought into con nexion with
precarious tenure. Rouen Cartulary (ed. Deville), 451: “dedit S. Trinitati omnem
decimam terrae suae in alodio quam domini sui Rodolfide Warenna tenebat
beneficio.” Neustria Pia, 634; the Abbot of Caen “emit allodium” and afterwards
“dedit in feodo.”

[13 ] Neustria Pia, 627: William the Conqueror grants to the Abbey of Caen “totum
alodium quod tenent Osmundus, Aculeus, Richardus et Rogerius in territorio Calvi
Montis super Divam; et etiam totum illud quod tenent quicumque allodiarii infra
leugam Pontis Divae.” Ibid. 636: “Rogerius de Rozel vendidit Gisleberto Abbati [de
Cadomo] concedente Normaniae Comite, pro xv lib. census, allodium suum totum
quod habebat in Rozel, tali conditione ut eum de Sancto [Stephano] teneret per tale
servitium quale antea ex eo Comiti reddebat.” In this case the alodiary does service
for his land.

[14 ] It is thus, for example, that William of Jumièges (Duchesne, 250) speaks of the
relation between Duke Richard II. and his bastard brother William:—“Is enim
[Willelmus] fraterno contubernio Oximensem ab ipso [Ricardo] accipiens munere
comitatum ut inde exhiberet ei militiae statuta . . . dominium eius sprevit.” William
the Conqueror gives to the church of Lisieux “terram de Fontaines . . . et servitium
militum . . . dominium cum militibus quod dedit Olilia”; Neustria Pia, 585; Gall.
Christ. xi. Instrum. p. 203. Richard son of Abp. Robert of Rouen makes a gift to Saint
Sauveur in these terms: “apud A dedi totum quod in dominio habebam excepto feodo
militum”; Gall. Christ. xi. Instrum. p. 126, where the date assigned is circ. 1060.

[15 ] Dudo, Duchesne, 85: “Illam terram suis fidelibus funiculo divisit.”

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 416 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[16 ] According to Dudo, Duchesne 82–84, the grant was made “in sempiternam per
progenies progenierum possessionem . . . quasi fundum et alodium in sempiternum . .
. in alodio et in fundo.”

[17 ] As regards the “relief” the main proof is to be found in Domesday Book; e.g. on
the first page of it we read that when a Kentish alodiarius dies “rex inde habet
relevationem terrae.” William of Jumièges, Duchesne, 250, says that Richard the
Good gave to his brother William the county of Eu and a beautiful girl called
Lescelina, the daughter of one Thurkill, a man of noble birth. The duke seems to be
disposing of the hand of a vassal’s daughter. So again Orderic (ed. le Prevost), ii. 409,
speaking of the days of William the Conqueror, says: “Guillelmus Gualterii de Falesia
filius fuit et in militia nimium viguit, unde Guillelmus Princeps filiam Guidmundi
cum toto ei honore Molinensi contulit.” It is not impossible that the king of the French
had twice asserted a right to the wardship of an infant duke of the Normans. As to the
case of Louis d’Outre-Mer and Richard the Fearless, see Palgrave, Hist. Normandy, ii.
chs. 3, 4; Freeman, Norman Conquest, ch. iv. § 4; Kalckstein, Geschichte des
französischen Königthums, i. 238–39. Dudo’s romantic tale may be false enough, but
the important point is, that not very long after the events the Normans believed that
the king had asserted and abused a right of wardship. Then as to the minority of the
Conqueror himself:—Henry of Huntingdon, p. 189, tells us that Harold son of Cnut
banished his father’s widow, the Norman Emma, and that she went to Flanders
instead of to Normandy, “Willelmo namque domino Normannorum adhuc in aetate
puerili cum rege Francorum manente, Normannia fiscus regalis erat.” It is difficult to
square this story with the known facts; still there seems to be a great deal in the
behaviour of the king towards Normandy and its young duke that is best explained as
an attempt of a lord to exercise rights over the land of an infant vassal. See the
account of William’s minority in Freeman, Norman Conquest, vol. ii. and see
Luchaire, Institutions monarchiques sous les premiers Capétiens, i. 113–14; ii. 15.

[18 ] About the time of the Conquest the word feodum becomes very common in the
Norman charters; but beneficium still appears. William of Jumièges, Duchesne, 259,
tells how William of Bellême held the castle of Alençon “beneficii iure” and tried to
shake off “serviminis iugum.” Luchaire, Institutions monarchiques sous les premiers
Capétiens, i. 87, remarks that in the charters of the French kings beneficium is still
common under Hugh Capet and Robert II. while feodum becomes usual under Henry
I. and Philip I. He also, ii. 17, fixes the very moment of the Norman conquest of
England as that at which the kings are finally forced to admit that the great fiefs have
become hereditary, though practically they had been hereditary for a long time past.
As to the inheritance of fiefs by females, the case of Mabel of Bellême is a capital
instance. Women were inheriting fiefs in France from the end of the tenth century
onwards; Luchaire, Manuel des institutions françaises, 167.

[19 ] Ord. Vit., vol. ii. p. 470: “Hugo Paganus Crassa Lingua et Agnes uxor eius atque
Guido filius eorum concesserunt S. Ebrulfo vicecomitatum, id est viariam, quantam
habebant in Villariis Vastatis.”

[20 ] The early charter by which Richard the Fearless grants Bretteville to Saint Denis
contains a full “immunity”; Bouquet, ix. 731. Less explicit clauses of the same kind

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 417 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

are found in the charters of Richard the Good for Fécamp and for Saint Michael of the
Mount; Neustria Pia, 215–17, 377–78. Another instance is afforded by the charter of
William of Bellême for Lonlai; Neustria Pia, 425. Observe also the words “in
pasnagio, in venationibus, in placitis ” in the charter for Cérisi; Neustria Pia, 431.

[21 ] See in Dudo, Duchesne, 136–40, the panegyric on Richard the Fearless, also
what William the Archdeacon of Lisieux, Duchesne, 193, says of the Conqueror.

[22 ] An argument to prove that the feudalization of justice had gone further in
England than in Normandy, might be founded on the fact that the Normans in
England when they wished to describe the rights of private jurisdiction, almost
invariably employed the English terms sake, soke etc.

[23 ] The one extreme is marked by Palgrave, the other by Steenstrup.

[24 ] Thus in or about 1077 a suit came before William’s court; he orders the
Archbishop of Rouen, Roger de Beaumont “and many other barons” to make a
judgment “ut facerent inde iudicium”; Mémoires de la Société des antiquaires de
Normandie, vol. xv. pp. 196–97.

[25 ] See e.g. Richard II.’s grant to St. Wandrille, his grant to St. Michael of the
Mount, the Conqueror’s charter for Fécamp; Neustria Pia, 165–66, 223–24, 377–79.

[26 ] In 1086 a suit is heard in the court of Robert of Bellême; he presides, but three
abbots, nine named laymen, and many others are the “iudices huius placiti”; Neustria
Pia, 311.

[27 ] The ordeal of fire occurs in the legend of Rollo; Dudo, Duchesne, p. 85. William
Pantolf purged himself of the murder of Mabel of Bellême by carrying the hot iron;
Ord. Vit. (ed. le Prevost) ii. 432. The ordeal is also mentioned in the statutes of the
Council of Lillebonne; ibid. 322.

[28 ] See William’s charter for St. Wandrille, Neustria Pia, 168; the champions being
ready for battle William interferes and makes peace. This is an early instance of a
“concordia per finem duelli.”

[29 ] In the Norman chronicles the crimes that we read of are chiefly the rebellions of
great men, and, when the rebel is brought to justice, his punishment is imprisonment
or exile and disherison. The insurgent peasants were punished by mutilation. In
England the kinsfolk of the slain Norman receive a certain part of the murder fine
which falls on the hundred if the slayer be not brought to justice; they receive six
marks out of forty-six; the rest go to the king; Leg. Henrici, 91 § 1; Edw. Conf. 15 §
6.

[30 ] Hinschius, Kirchenrecht, iv. 797 ff; v. 402; Brunner, D. R. G., ii. 311 ff.

[31 ] Eadmer, Hist. Nov. p. 9, just before he makes his well-known statement about
William’s dealings with ecclesiastical matters, has said of him “usus ergo atque leges
quos patres sui et ipse in Normannia habere solebant in Anglia servare volens.” His

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 418 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

edict (Leg. Will. iv.) establishing the ecclesiastical courts supposes that their proper
province is known; it is that allowed to them in Normandy; it is that which will be
made more definite by the Council of Lillebonne; see Ord. Vit. (ed. le Prevost) ii. 316.

[32 ] As to the treuga Dei in Normandy see Ord. Vit. (ed. le Prevost) ii. 316 and the
editor’s note; as to the truce generally see Hinschius, Kirchenrecht, v. 305. In the so-
called Leges Edwardi Confessoris, c. 2, we read that the peace of God prevails during
certain holy seasons, e.g. from noon on Saturday throughout Sunday, and that if
anyone breaks this, the bishop has jurisdiction. This claim of jurisdiction probably
betrays French influence. The laws of Æthelred v. 13–19; vi. 19–25, and of Cnut i.
15–17, forbid work and litigation during certain holy seasons and vaguely add that
during these seasons peace and concord should prevail. Even this may betray the
influence on England of the great ecclesiastical movement which established the
treuga Dei, but still we have no English evidence of the truce itself prior to 1066, nor
any of it after that date, save in the untrustworthy Leges Edwardi. An allegation of a
breach of the peace of God became a common form in the pleadings of the thirteenth
century, but only as an untraversable ornament. The peace of God was then conceived
as existing always and everywhere. Of private warfare we shall speak hereafter.

[33 ] The only good authority is William of Jumièges (Duchesne, 249); and he says
very little; the poems of a later age cannot be trusted about such a matter. See Delisle,
Études sur la condition de la classe agricole, 121; Freeman, Norman Conquest, i. 257
(ed. 3); Palgrave, Hist. Normandy, iii. 41; Steenstrup, Études préliminaires, p. 346.
These peasants have appeared in every character, from that of Gallo- Romans
reclaiming Roman liberties to that of untamed Danes.

[34 ] Delisle, op. cit. 17–19; Luchaire, Manuel des institutions, 295.

[35 ] Thus in a charter of the Conqueror for Trinity Abbey at Caen: “item in insula de
Gerzoi unum molendinum et terram duorum francorum hominum”; Neustria Pia, 659.
So in a charter of the Conqueror for S. Stephen’s Abbey at Caen, Neustria Pia, 626:
“Trado igitur . . . villas iuris mei . . . cum colonis et conditionariis seu liberis
hominibus . . . Et homines quidem duarum premissarum villarum videlicet C. et R.
qui francam terram non tenent ad servitium ecclesiae et monachorum . . . concedo.”
Delisle, op. cit. 17, 18, gives a few instances of zervi in the eleventh century.

[36 ] Vita Herluini, Lanfranci Opera, ed. Giles, i. 270: “Abbas peritus erat in
dirimendis causarum saecularium controversiis . . . Legum patriae scientissimus
praesidium suis erat contra iniquos exactores.” Ibid. 265: “Prima litterarum elementa
didicit cum iam existeret annorum prope quadraginta.”

[37 ] See above, p. 25.

[38 ] Lanfranc’s juristic exploits are chronicled in the Liber Papiensis, M. G. Leges,
iv. pp. xcvi, 402, 404, 566. See also Ficker, Forschungen zur Geschichte Italiens, iii.
47, 458. It is not absolutely certain that this Lanfranc is our Lanfranc, but the part here
assigned to him, that of confuting his elders, agrees well with what is said by Milo

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 419 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Crispin, Opera Laufranci, ed. Giles, 291: “Adolescens orator veteranos adversantes in
actionibus causarum frequenter revicit, torrente facundiae accurate dicendo.”

[39 ] Robertus de Monte, ann. 1032, ed. Howlett, p. 25: “Lanfrancus Papiensis et
Garnerius socius eius repertis apud Bononiam legibus Romanis, quas Iustinianus
imperator Romanorum . . . emendaverat, his inquam repertis, operam dederunt eas
legere et aliis exponere.” Savigny, Gesch. des röm. Rechts, cap. xxvii. § 8, points out
that the story cannot be true; Lanfranc must have left Italy before the days of Irnerius.

[40 ] See Savigny, op. cit., cap. vi. § 135. Robert of Torigny (Robertus de Monte),
ann. 1117, ed. Howlett, p. 100, tells how Ivo of Chartres, the famous canonist, had
when a youth heard Lanfranc in the school at Bec “de saecularibus et divinis litteris
tractantem.”

[41 ] See Lanfranc’s letters, especially No. 26, ed. Giles, in which he recommends
Bishop Herbert to mend his ways and read the canons: “Postpositis aleis, ut maiora
taceam, ludisque saecularibus quibus per totam diem vacare diceris, divinas litteras
lege, decretisque Romanorum Pontificum sacrisque canonibus praecipue studium
impende.”

[42 ] See below, pp. 100–101.

[1 ] The connexion between our law and the French lei or loi (Lat. legem) is for the
etymologist a remote one, and Henry I. knew what he was about when he restored to
us the lagam (not legem) Eadwardi. But the two words attracted each other. We
preserve the French droit in our “droits of admiralty.”

[2 ] The French set of Leges Willelmi will be mentioned below; it is private work. The
well-known passage about the English and French languages in the would-be Ingulf’s
History of Croyland (Scriptores post Bedam, p. 512 b) is one of that forger’s
clumsiest falsehoods.

[3 ] Maitland, Domesday Book, 8.

[4 ] Statute 4 Geo. II. c. 26.

[5 ] Our first parliament roll comes from 1290 and there is some French on the roll of
1293; Rot. Parl. i. 101. The very first entry on our statute roll as it now exists, the
Statute of Gloucester 1278, is in French, and if, as seems probable, a membrane
containing the Statute of Westminster 1275 has been lost, this also was covered with
French writing.

[6 ] Stat. 16 Car. I. c. 10, abolishing the Star Chamber, solemnly recites the Statute 36
Edw. III. Stat. i. c. 15, which says that (despite the use of English as a medium for
oral pleading) all pleas are to be enrolled in Latin.

[7 ] Even the earliest and purest glossaries of A.-S. law terms, the Expositiones
Vocabulorum, prove this ignorance. As to these glossaries, see Hall, Red Book of the
Exchequer, vol. iii. Introduction.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 420 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[8 ] The Court Baron (Seld. Society).

[9 ] The Court Baron, pp. 38, 42.

[10 ] 36 Edw. III. Stat. i. c. 15.

[11 ] Robert of Gloucester, lines 9650–730.

[12 ] Wycliffite Translation of the Bible; Matth. vii. 1 “for in what dome Z e demen,
Z e sculen ben demed”; Matth. xxvii. 19 “and while he [Pilat] sat for domesman”;
Mark xv. 16 “the porche of the mote halle.”

[13 ] The volume of Sarum Charters (Rolls Series), p. 5, contains what at first looks
like an early example, a French document executed by a Bishop of Salisbury and
apparently ascribed by a copyist of the fourteenth century to the year 1120. But there
is some mistake here. A French charter of Stephen Langton entered on the Charter
Roll of 10 John is given in facsimile by Hardy, Rot. Cart. p. xli.

[14 ] The proclamations will be found in the Select Charters.

[15 ] The exceptions are rather apparent than real; e.g. the Ordinance for Ireland of 31
Edw. III., though on the statute roll, is in the form of letters patent, and is also on the
patent roll.

[16 ] The transition from French to English statutes seems to occur suddenly at the
accession of Richard III. and to be contemporaneous with a change in the method of
enrolment. We pass at this date from the “statute rolls” preserved at the Tower to
“enrolments of Acts of Parliament.” As early as 1386, and it may be earlier—for but
few of the extant petitions are printed or dated—a petition to parliament might be
written in English (Rot. Parl. iii. 225), and the English words which Henry IV. spoke
when he met his first parliament are enrolled (iii. 423); then petitions in English
appear on the roll; but on the whole it is not until 1425 or thereabouts that the
parliament roll has much English on it. To the very last (1503) the formal parts of the
roll are written either in French or in Latin.

[17 ] Court Baron (Seld. Society), p. 11. See also the Brevia Placitata which are now
being edited by Mr. Turner.

[18 ] The honour of being the first books concerning English law that were written in
the English language must probably be given to some of Sir John Fortescue’s
treatises, but they cannot be called legal text-books. Before a deliberate judgment can
be passed on the question as to which is our first English text-book, an intricate group
of little tracts on pleading etc., some of which may not yet have been printed, must be
examined.

[19 ] The French that is a literary language in England under Henry III. and Edward I.
should not be called “Norman-French”; Parisian French, the French of the Isle of
France, is already its model; but there is some difference of opinion among
philologists as to how far “Anglo-French” is entitled to be considered as a dialect

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 421 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

which has a history of its own. See Behrens in Paul’s Grundriss d. German.
Philologie, i. 807. To dignify with the name “Norman-French” the mere “dog-French”
that we find in law reports of the sixteenth century is ridiculous.

[20 ] Laws of William (Select Charters), c. 7.

[21 ] Leg. Willelmi, iv; Eadmer, Hist. Nov. p. 10.

[22 ] Laws of William (Select Charters), c. 1.

[23 ] Laws, c. 2; A.-S. Chron. an. 1086; Florence, ii. 19.

[24 ] Laws, c. 3, 4; Leges Will. i. 22.

[25 ] Laws, c. 6; Leges Will. ii.

[26 ] Laws, c. 7, 8.

[27 ] Laws, c. 5, 9, 10.

[28 ] The precedents are collected in Schmid, Glossar, s.v. Marktrecht.

[29 ] Æthelred, v. 2; Cnut, ii. 3.

[30 ] Cnut, ii. 20.

[31 ] Æthelred, v. 3; vi. 10; Cnut, ii. 2.

[32 ] Edmund, iii. 1.

[33 ] Leg. Will. iii. 3; Leg. Will. i. 22; Leg. Henr. 91; Leg. Edw. 15, 16; Bracton, f.
134 b. In Swedish laws it is common to find the hundred charged with a fine of forty
marks (the exact sum that the Conqueror demands) if the manslayer be not produced,
more especially if the slain man be a stranger; Wilda, Strafrecht, 217–18. Some
similar liability seems to be indicated by an early capitulary added to the Lex Salica;
Hessels, Lex Salica, p. 408; with which should be compared Leg. Henr. 92 § 8. Henry
I. in his Coronation Charter, c. 9, seems to speak as though the murder fine was
known to the laga Eadwardi. Liebermann, Leges Edwardi, p. 112, rejects the story
about Cnut.

[34 ] Laws of William, c. 6; Leges Willelmi, ii. Had William said to the Englishman,
“If you accuse a Norman, you must adopt the Norman’s law and offer battle,” even
this could not have been regarded as a tyrannous decree; it would have been an
application of the principle of “personal law,” which would have looked plausibly
equitable. As it is, the Norman has to purge himself even though the Englishman will
not fight. He purges himself with “an unbroken oath,” “mid unforedan aðe,”
“sacramento non fracto.” This is a difficult phrase. Apparently a “broken” or
“breaking” oath is an oath sworn “in verborum observantiis,” and is an oath broken up
into phrases, each of which must be repeated with punctilious accuracy by the swearer

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 422 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

as it is dictated to him by his adversary. Dr. Brunner sees in William’s law a provision
that the Norman need not swear in words dictated by an Englishman. Brunner,
Zeitschrift d. Savigny-Stiftung, Germ. Abt. xvii, 128, and Pol. Science Quarterly, xi.
537; Forschungen, 328.

[35 ] Register of Abp. Peckham, i. 77: “leges Howeli Da quae Decalogo dicuntur in
diversis articulis obviare.”

[36 ] Orderic (ed. le Prevost), ii. 264. Dr. Stubbs, Const. Hist. i. 401, says of Roger’s
punishment, “The same penalty must have followed if he had been tried by English
law.” But under the Old English law conspiracy against the king was a capital crime;
and Orderic (p. 262) makes Waltheof remark that this is so. Roger, so it seems, is
treated as a Norman who has rebelled and levied war against the duke. Many
examples of earlier and of later date show us that the duke rarely puts a vassal to
death for rebellion. We must remember that William is merely duke or count of the
Normans, while he is the crowned and anointed king of the English. It may be that
under the Conqueror’s own ordinance Waltheof should have been, not decapitated,
but mutilated; but “Interdico ne quis occidatur” does not bind the man who says it.

[37 ] Leg. Henr. 92 § 6.

[38 ] In Domesday Book Englishmen are offering proof by battle; Bigelow, Placita
Anglo-Normannica, 43, 60. The Leges Henrici no longer make any distinction
between the two races in this matter, though they still allow Frenchmen and aliens to
swear with less accuracy than would be required of an Englishman: Leg. Hen. 64 § 3.

[39 ] Eadmer, Hist. Nov. 224.

[40 ] Selden’s Eadmer, 197; Plac. Anglo-Norm. 7.

[41 ] Heming’s Cartulary, i. 82; Plac. Anglo-Norm. 18.

[42 ] Hamilton, Inquisitio Cantabr. pp. xvii, xviii; Plac. Anglo-Norm. 22.

[43 ] Hist. Abingd. ii. 2; Plac. Anglo-Norm. 30: “sed et alii plures de Anglis causidici
per id tempus in abbatia ista habebantur.” This does not imply the existence of men
who are lawyers by profession.

[44 ] Stevenson, E. H. R. xi. 731: an important contribution to English diplomatics.

[45 ] Dr. Brunner, Zeitschrift d. Savigny-Stiftung, Germ. Abt. xvii. 125, in reviewing
the first edition of this book, says that in his opinion we have underestimated the
influence of Norman law and somewhat overrated the originality of Henry II.’s
legislation. It may be so. The question is very difficult and we fully admit that in any
case our private law and law of procedure have many French traits. The English
element is at its strongest in political structure, e.g. in the non-feudal county court.

[46 ] Eadmer, Hist. Nov. pp. 31–32.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 423 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[47 ] These lines were probably written in John’s day. They occur in a legal
compilation discovered by Dr. Liebermann: Leges Anglorum, Halle, 1894, p. 67.

[48 ] Charters of Liberties (Statutes of the Realm, vol. i.), p. 1; Select Charters.
Liebermann, Trans. R. Hist. Soc. viii. 21, gives a critical text.

[49 ] The Pipe Roll of 31 Henry I. was edited by Hunter for the Record
Commissioners. We shall hereafter have more than one occasion to remark on the
relation that it bears to the charter of 1100.

[50 ] The writ is given in the Select Charters; see Liebermann, Quadripartitus, p. 165.

[51 ] Legislation in 1108 about theft and coining: Florence, ii. 57; comp. A.-S. Chron.
an. 1124, and Foedera, i. 12. Legislation against abuses of royal purveyance and
against bad money: Eadmer, Hist. Nov. 192–93; Will. Malmesb. Gesta Regum, ii.
476. Legislation about wreck: Chron. de Bello, 65; Plac. Anglo-Norm. 144.
Legislation about measures, Will. Malmesb. Gesta Regum, ii. 487; in this last passage
it is said that towards the end of his reign Henry inclined rather to pecuniary mulcts
than to corporal punishment. The enactment of other rules has been ascribed to Henry
merely because they appear in the text-book known as Leges Henrici, of which
hereafter.

[52 ] Historians of Church of York, iii. 22: “et nova statuta mea de iudiciis sive de
placitis latronum et falsorum monetariorum exequatur et finiat [archiepiscopus] per
suam propriam iustitiam in curia sua.”

[53 ] Charters of Liberties (Statutes of the Realm, i.), p. 4; Select Charters; Stubbs,
Const. Hist. i. 346.

[54 ] Charters of Liberties, p. 5; Select Charters; Stubbs, Const. Hist. i. 347. As to the
date of these charters, see Round, Geoffrey de Mandeville, 438.

[55 ] As to the ecclesiastical legislation, see Stubbs, Const. Hist. i. 404.

[56 ] Dr. Liebermann has gradually been restoring the legal literature of this period.
Lagam Eadwardi nobis reddit. His forthcoming edition of the Anglo-Saxon and
Anglo-Norman laws will probably override some sentences in the following brief
summary.

[57 ] This is Leges Willelmi iv. of Thorpe and Schmid.

[58 ] This is Leges Willelmi ii. of Thorpe and Schmid.

[59 ] The set of ten laws is that printed by Dr. Stubbs in his edition of Hoveden, vol.
ii. p. ci, and again in the Select Charters. It may be conveniently referred to as Hic
intimatur. It also appears with some variants in the text of Hoveden’s Chronicle, vol.
ii. p. 216, for Hoveden inserts it when, under the year 1180, he speaks of Glanvill’s
appointment to the justiciarship. Liebermann, Quadripartitus, p. 145, mentions the
mss which give it and says that it was compiled after 1087 and before 1135. A French

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 424 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

version of it from the twelfth century he gives in Zeit-schrift für romanische
Philologie, xix. 82. The expanded form of it is Leges Willelmi iii. of Thorpe and
Schmid. Dr. Liebermann takes this to be the work of a Londoner of John’s reign, who
deliberately tampers with his documents: Ueber die Leges Anglorum, p. 32 ff.

[60 ] We have here tried to sum up very briefly the results attained by Liebermann,
Quadripartitus, Halle, 1892.

[61 ] Leg. Henr. 33 § 4. He cites Liber Theodosianae Legis, but what he really has
under that name seems to be the Epitome Aegidii; see Hänel, Lex Romana
Visigothorum, p. 228. This citation, which may be the outcome of literary vanity, has
been offered as proof of the prevalence of Roman law in England; but the fact that our
author had a Roman book and took but one sentence from it, is really a strong
testimony to the thoroughly un-Roman character of the English law of his day. It is
quite possible that he had but a single volume of foreign temporal law. The Salica and
Ribuaria occur in ms along with epitomes of Alaric’s Breviary.

[62 ] The preface cannot have been written after 1118, since it treats Queen Matilda as
living. The arguments of those who would give a later date to the body of the book
seem to be sufficiently answered by Liebermann, Forschungen zur deutschen
Geschichte (1876), vol. xvi. p. 582. His conclusion is accepted by Stubbs, Const. Hist.
i. 533 (ed. 1883). Two mistakes should be avoided. (1) Our author is not forging laws
for Henry I.; the title Leges Henrici refers only to the coronation charter with which
he begins his book. (2) He is not pretending to set forth the laga Eadwardi as it stood
in Edward’s day; he states it in what he thinks to be its modern and practicable shape.
The inference that he was a man of English race has been drawn from a passage, 92 §
10, in which he speaks of a French thief resisting capture “more suo”; but he throws
such phrases about in a hap-hazard way, and his knowledge of the Old English
language seems to have been small.

[63 ] Leg. Henr. 70 § 1; 87 § 5.

[64 ] These two tracts are Consiliatio Cnuti, published by Liebermann at Halle in
1893, and Instituta Cnuti aliorumque Regum Anglorum, communicated by him to the
Royal Historical Society in the same year; Transactions, vii. 77.

[65 ] Constitutiones de Foresta, Schmid, p. 318. Liebermann, Ueber Pseudo-Cnuts
Constitutiones de Foresta, Halle, 1894.

[66 ] The document in question is the Leges Willelmi i. of Thorpe and Schmid. For
the history of the mss which gave the French version see the article in Quarterly
Review, No. 67, p. 248, in which Palgrave exposed the Ingulfine forgery, also
Liebermann’s Ostenglische Geschichtsquellen. We are deeply indebted to Dr.
Liebermann for a valuable letter dealing with these Leis. That the French text is the
origin of the Latin is plain from several passages, in particular from c. 45 when
compared with Cnut, ii. 24 (the Latinist thinks that voest means “let him see,”
whereas it means “let him vouch”). On this point see Liebermann, Quadripartitus, p.
54. The Latin version is sometimes exceedingly stupid; see e.g. the “idoneos cultores”

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 425 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

of c. 31. The text has 52 chapters. From c. 39 onwards we have a translation of Cnut.
This, the third section of the work, is preceded by six articles, which, when taken
together, seem to betray Roman influence:—c. 33, sentence of death on a pregnant
woman is to be respited (Dig. 48, 19, 3); c. 35, a father may kill his daughter if he
finds her committing adultery in his house or his son-in-law’s house (Dig. 48, 5, 22);
c. 36, a poisoner is to be killed or exiled for ever (Dig. 48, 8, 3 § 5); c. 37, a
reminiscence of the lex Rhodia de iactu (Dig. 14, 2); c. 38, the eviction of one co-
parcener does not prejudice the rights of the others, being res inter alios acta (Cod. 7,
56, 2). To these we may add c. 34, the division of an inheritance among all the
children; this, unless enfans means sons, can hardly be English or Norman law, and is
surrounded by romanesque sentences. Perhaps we ought to place the beginning of the
middle section as far back as the very important c. 29; for c. 29–32 seem destined to
define the position of the English peasants as being similar to that of the Roman
coloni. Thus we are brought to the end of c. 28, where the only now extant ms of the
French version ends. As to the Danish traits of the earlier articles, see Steenstrup,
Danelag, pp. 59, 306–319. The unauthoritative character of the document, if it be
taken as a whole, is sufficiently proved by its style; see in particular c. 37, 38; but we
shall not readily believe that even the first section of it comes from the Conqueror. As
to the character of the French text, this must be left to philologists, but the result of
recent discussions seems to be that, though the language has been much modernized
by transcribers, it has some very ancient traits.

[67 ] This is the Leges Edwardi Confessoris of Thorpe and Schmid. See Liebermann,
Leges Edwardi, Halle, 1896.

[68 ] Leges Edwardi Confessoris, c. 11.

[69 ] Liebermann, op. cit. 16.

[70 ] The exemption from Danegeld of ecclesiastical demesnes, as stated in c. 11, is,
to say the least, exceedingly doubtful. See Round in Domesday Studies, i. 95–96.

[71 ] Hoveden, ii. 218, takes it up into his chronicle.

[72 ] Bracton, f. 134 b. Liebermann, op. cit. 122.

[73 ] Dr. Liebermann spoke of this work some time ago in his Einleitung in den
Dialogus de Scaccario, pp. 72–77. He has lately written an exhaustive essay about it.
It seems quite incredible that Glanvill had anything to do with the making of this
book. The difference between the style of these Leges and the style of the treatise
ascribed to Glanvill is the difference between darkness and light. The author of the
Leges assumes the character of a patriotic Englishman as against the detested Danes,
but Harold is for him an usurper, and he himself, if not French by race, seems to have
regarded French as his natural tongue (c. 35 § 1) and may have known but little
English. The account that he gives of “the peace of God” (c. 2) seems to take us back
rather to French than to English traditions. Liebermann thinks that he must have had
access to the library of some cathedral, perhaps that of Coventry, and probably lived
in or near Warwickshire. A French translation of the work exists in ms but has not yet

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 426 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

been printed. For specimens, see Liebermann, Zeitschrift für romanische Philologie,
xix. 83. The story that the Conqueror caused a solemn statement of the laga Eadwardi
to be made by juries is not very probable. Had such a statement been made, it would,
like Domesday Book, have been officially preserved, and there would have been no
room for such works as the Leges Henrici and the Leis Williame. Since the first
edition of our book was published Dr. Liebermann (Leges Edwardi, p. 45) has
decisively rejected the tale.

[74 ] Will. Malm. Gesta Regum, ii. 314. Malmesbury says that in his own day
FitzOsbern’s rule still prevailed.

[75 ] Will. FitzStephen (Materials for Life of Becket, iii.), p. 62.

[76 ] This famous phrase comes from a rhetorical passage in which William of
Malmesbury is describing the days of Rufus; Gesta Regum, ii. 369: “Nullus dives nisi
nummularius, nullus clericus nisi causidicus, nullus presbyter nisi, ut verbo parum
Latino utar, firmarius.” He has just called Ranulf Flambard “invictus causidicus.” But,
as noticed above, these causidici were not all of French race.

[77 ] Leg. Henr. 9 § 9: “Legis enim Angliae trina est partitio; et ad eandem distantiam
supersunt regis placita curiae, quae usus et consuetudines suas una semper
immobilitate servat ubique.” Ibid. 6 § 2: “Legis etiam Anglicae trina est partitio . . .
praeter hoc tremendum regiae maiestatis titislamus [?] imperium.”

[78 ] Dialogus, lib. i. c. xvi: “Rex Willelmus . . . decrevit subiectum sibi populum iuri
scripto legibusque subicere. Propositis igitur legibus Anglicanis secundum tripartitam
earum distinctionem, hoc est Merchenelage, Denelage, West-saxenelage, quasdam
reprobavit, quasdam autem approbans, illas transmarinas Neustriae leges, quae ad
regni pacem efficacisimae videbantur, adiecit.”

[79 ] Leg. Henr. c. 10.

[80 ] Early instances of the king’s missi presiding in the local courts are these:— the
Bishop of Coutances presides at the famous session on Penenden Heath: Plac. Anglo-
Norm. p. 7; he and others preside over the county court of Worcestershire: ibid. p. 17;
he and others preside over a combined moot of the eastern counties: ibid. p. 24;
Lanfranc presides at Bury over a combined moot of nine shires: Memorials of St.
Edmund’s Abbey, i. 65. The payments “pro recto” recorded on the Pipe Roll of Henry
I. were probably payments made for evocatory writs; see Plac. Anglo-Norm. 140–42.

[81 ] Apparently as a general rule the sheriffs hear the pleas of the crown, but the
profits go to the king and are not, unless some special compact has been made,
covered by the ferms of the counties; Leg. Henr. c. 10 § 3.

[82 ] Even Rufus in his rage respects this rule. Anselm is before the court; the
magnates are reluctant to condemn him. “Take heed to yourselves,” cries the king,
“for by God’s face if you will not condemn him as I wish, I will condemn you.”
Eadmer, Hist. Nov. 62.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 427 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[83 ] We have a life-like, though perhaps not an impartial, report of the trial of
William of St. Calais, Bishop of Durham. There is a keen argument between the
defendant, who knows his canon law, and Lanfranc, the great Lombardist, who
presides over the court; but the barons are not silent, and Hugh de Beaumont gives
judgment. See Symeon of Durham, i. 170. A little later Bishop William takes a
leading part in what may perhaps be called the trial of Anselm; Eadmer, Hist. Nov.
60–62.

[84 ] As to the king’s court and exchequer, see Stubbs, Const. Hist. c. xi, and Gneist,
Geschichte, § 10.

[1 ] See above, p. 27.

[2 ] See the passages collected by Holland, E. H. R. vi. 147–48.

[3 ] Quadripartitus, p. 149; Leg. Henr. preface.

[4 ] For the matter of this paragraph, see Schulte, Geschichte der Quellen des
Canonischen Rechts.

[5 ] As to the date, see Schulte, i. 48.

[6 ] Schulte, i. 84, 85, 88, 187–89. Among the compilations which have been
preserved are those of Alan and Gilbert, who seem to have been Englishmen, and that
of Johannes Walensis, i.e. John the Welshman.

[7 ] It may be well to explain that after the compilation of Gratian’s work, the
decretals not contained in it were known as decretales extravagantes, i.e. quae
vagabantur extra decretum. Even after they had been collected by Gregory they were
cited as Extra or X. Thus Extra de rescriptis c. ex parte, or c. 2. X de rescript. 1. 3, is
a reference to the Gregorian collection. The Sext is referred to by in vi to ; the
Clementines by Clem.; the collection of Extravagants published in 1500 consists
partly of Extravagantes Johannis XXII. (Extrav. Joh. XXII.), partly of Extravagantes
Communes (Extrav. Comm.).

[8 ] We speak of the middle of the twelfth century; before its end even the popes
perceive that limits must be set to the appeal.

[9 ] Maitland, Canon Law in England; E. H. R. vol. xii.

[10 ] This point has been argued at length in E. H. R. xi. 446, 641.

[11 ] Chron. Abb. de Evesham, p. 189: “Pater sancte nos didicimus in scholis, et haec
est opinio magistrorum nostrorum, quod non currit praescriptio contra iura
episcopalia.” Et dominus papa, “Certe et tu et magistri tui multum bibistis de cerevisia
Anglicana quando haec didicistis.” The result is found in c. 15, X. 2. 26.

[12 ] Epistolae Cantuarienses, p. 520.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 428 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[13 ] See below, p. 130.

[14 ] See above, pp. 108, 110.

[15 ] Malmesbury’s connexion with this work is discussed by Dr. Stubbs in his
introduction to the Gesta Regum, i. cxxxi ff. The work itself is described by Hänel,
Lex Romana Visigothorum, p. lv. See also Conrat, Geschichte der Quellen des R. R.,
i. 232.

[16 ] See above, p. 84.

[17 ] Rob. de Torigny, p. 100; Savigny, Geschichte, cap. 15 § 106; Conrat,
Geschichte, i. 378.

[18 ] Liebermann, Anselm von Canterbury, p. 41.

[19 ] Monasticon, i. 244–50: “Christianam legem quam hic scriptam habeo testem
invoco.”

[20 ] William of Malmesbury, Gesta Regum, ii. 553. The legate says, “Rex itaque
faciat quod etiam in forensibus iudiciis legitimum est fieri, ut revestiat episcopos de
rebus suis; alioquin iure gentium dissaisiti non placitabunt.” The king’s appeal occurs
on the next page. As to the proceedings at Rome between Stephen and Matilda, see
Round, Geoffrey de Mandeville, 250 ff.

[21 ] William Fitz Stephen, Materials for Life of Becket, iii. 17.

[22 ] Thomas’s activity in this matter is made probable by Gervase of Canterbury, ii.
384. This passage, together with the words of Robert of Torigny (ed. Howlett), p. 159,
and of John of Salisbury, Polycraticus, lib. viii. cap. 22, contains most what is known
of the legal career of Vacarius. These passages are conveniently collected by Holland,
Collectanea of Oxford Historical Society, ii. 139. In 1896 the whole story of Vacarius
was put on a new footing by Liebermann, E. H. R. xi. 305, 514. We adopt his results.

[23 ] Wenck, Magister Vacarius, p. 134.

[24 ] Gervase of Canterbury, loc. cit.; Liebermann, E. H. R. xi. 308; Rashdall,
Universities, ii. 335 ff.

[25 ] Joh. Salisb. Polycr. loc. cit. This matter is discussed by Wenck, pp. 28–41.
Liebermann, E. H. R. xi. 310.

[26 ] Large portions of the work were published in 1820 by Wenck, Magister
Vacarius (Leipzig). Savigny discusses it, Geschichte, cap. 22 § 174; cap. 36 § 124.
There is a ms of it at Worcester, of which no full account has yet been given.

[27 ] There is just enough to show that some of those who glossed the work had
English cases in their minds; e.g. Wenck, p. 189: “Argumentum pro decano
Eboracensi.”

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 429 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[28 ] Maitland, Magistri Vacarii Summa de Matrimonio, L. Q. R. 1897.

[29 ] Liebermann, E. H. R. xi. 312–14. Add to the references there given: Jessopp, E.
H. R. xi. 747; Historians of the Church of York, iii. 81.

[30 ] Hoveden, iv. 75, and the note by Stubbs.

[31 ] In general as to Vacarius see Wenck’s book; Stubbs, Const. Hist. § 147; Stubbs,
Lectures, 120, 137, 141, 301–3; Holland, E. H. R. vi. 243–44; Rashdall, Universities,
ii. 335; Liebermann, E. H. R. xi. 305, 514.

[32 ] Geschichte, cap. 36 § 131.

[33 ] Opera, ii. 348; iv. 3. 7.

[34 ] Chronicles of Robert of Swafham, ed. Sparke, pp. 96–98. As to the Summa
called Olim (it begins “Olim edebatur”), see Caillemer, Le droit civil dans les
provinces anglo-normandes, p. 32.

[35 ] Chron. Evesham, p. 267.

[36 ] Holland, Eng. Hist. Rev. vi. 247; Rashdall, Universities, ii. 338.

[37 ] Caillemer, op. cit. 15–50.

[38 ] Caillemer, op. cit. 50, prints the “Practica Legum et Decretorum edita a Magistro
W. de Longo Campo.” Longchamp’s career is described at length by Stubbs in the
Introduction to Hoveden, vol. iii. A manual known as the Ordo Iudiciarius of the
Bamberg ms is attributed to England; it was published by Schulte in the Proceedings
of the Vienna Academy (1872), vol. 70, p. 235.

[39 ] Chron. Evesham, p. 191: “dominum Gualam . . . inter cardinales in iure civili
peritissimum.”

[40 ] Schulte, Geschichte des canonischen Rechts, i. 183; Caillemer, op. cit. 33–34;
Bethmann-Hollweg, Civil Prozess, vi. 105.

[41 ] In our first edition we said that the identification of the bishop with the canonist
might require reconsideration. See now Mr. Blakiston’s article Poor, Richard, in Diet.
Nat. Biog., which shows that the evidence of identity is very slight. Schulte has
collected a few particulars about English students and teachers at Bologna—i. 151, a
certain David, canon of St. Paul’s, who was a master there in 1163 or there-abouts—i.
188, Gilbert, Alan, Johannes Walensis—i. 211, Elias Anglicus. As to Master David,
some entertaining stories are to be found in Spicilegium Liberianum, p. 603. For some
entries in a Bolognese necrology relating to English masters, see Dublin Review, cxii,
78.

[42 ] Schulte, ii, 113; Bethmann-Hollweg, Civil Prozess, vi. 123–31; Delisle,
Littérature latine, p. 68; Maitland, E. H. R. vol. xii.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 430 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[43 ] Epist. Cantuar. pp. 68, 471, 476, 506.

[44 ] Chron. Evesham, pp. 147, 153, 168. Marlborough went to Bologna by the advice
of the pope (Innocent III.) and Cardinal Ugolino. He employed as his counsel
Magister Merandus Hispanus, who had argued the king’s case against the Canterbury
monks, and Bertrand, a knight of Pavia, who as a lawyer was second to none but Azo.

[45 ] Mat. Par. Chron. Maj. iv. 33, 286, 351–53; Schulte, ii. 123; Maitland, Canon
Law in England; E. H. R. vol. xii.

[46 ] Stubbs, Const. Hist. § 179; Savigny, Geschichte, cap. 43 § 102.

[47 ] This by the bull Super speculam, of which divers portions are to be found in the
Decretales Gregorii, in particular, c. 28, X. 5. 33; Denifle, Chartularium Universitatis
Parisiensis, i. 80.

[48 ] Rot. Cl. 19 Hen. III. m. 16; Selden, Diss. ad Fletam, p. 525. Dr. Stubbs,
Lectures, p. 306, interprets the “leges” of this writ as though it indicated the canon
law; but surely it far more probably bears its usual sense, the sense in which it can be
contrasted with “decreta” or “canones.” The question why this bolt should be
launched against the “laws” in London while they are spared at Oxford, is not unlike
the much discussed question why Honorius struck at the laws in Paris and only in
Paris. The answer may be that these London schools were primarily theological
schools, and that the university of Paris was the great theological school of the world.
Or again, it seems possible that Henry is protecting the Oxford law school against
competition. That the “leges” of this writ mean English law we cannot believe; we
shall hear nothing of English law being taught for a long time to come. See Clark,
Cambridge Legal Studies, p. 40.

[49 ] Mat. Par. Chron. Maj. vi. 293–95.

[50 ] Digard, La papauté et l’étude du droit romain, Bibliothèque de l’École des
chartes, 1890, vol. 51, p. 381. Denifle, Chartularium Universitatis Parisiensis, i. 261,
had already questioned the authenticity of this bull. Perhaps it was originally no worse
than an university squib; however, Matthew Paris believed in it. Blackstone, Comm. i.
20, has strangely misunderstood the drift of this document.

[51 ] Rashdall, Universities, ii. 454; Clark, Cambridge Legal Studies, 42–59.

[52 ] See e.g. Memoranda de Parliamento of 33 Edward I. ed., Maitland, pp. 331, 335.

[53 ] Brunner, D. R. G. § 96; Fournier, Les officialités au moyen âge; Luchaire,
Manuel des institutions françaises, p. 121; Hinschius, Kirchenrecht, v. 373 ff.

[54 ] Gesta Henrici (Benedictus), i. 33.

[55 ] An excellent statement will be found in Makower, History of the Church of
England, 399; see further an interesting bull of Urban IV. in Chartae, Privilegia et
Immunitates, Irish Rec. Com., p. 30.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 431 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[56 ] Const. Clarend. c. 1.

[57 ] Ulrich Stutz, Geschichte des kirchlichen Beneficialwesens, Berlin, 1895.

[58 ] Glanvill, iv. 12–14.

[59 ] See e.g. Select Civil Pleas, i. pl. 245. Bracton’s Note Book, pl. 551: in 1231 the
Bishop of London, in a suit for an advowson, accepts a wager of battle.

[60 ] Maitland, E. H. R. xi. 647.

[61 ] Maitland, E. H. R. xi. 649.

[62 ] To a small extent the lay courts were enabled to interfere with such matters by
the doctrine that the services due from a “tenant by divine service” could be exacted
by distress or action; but on the whole the administration of pious gifts was left to the
courts Christian.

[63 ] Constitutions of Clarendon, c. 9. We shall deal with this matter hereafter when
we speak of tenure by frankalmoin.

[64 ] Mat. Par. Chron. Maj. iv. 614; Bracton, f. 402 b, 403; Circumspecte Agatis
(Statutes, i. 101), c. 3; Articuli Cleri (Stat. i. 171), c. 1.

[65 ] This was definitely settled by a mandate addressed by Alexander III. to the
Bishop of Exeter, which appears in the Gregorian collection as c. 6, X. 4. 17.

[66 ] Glanvill, vii. 15.

[67 ] Stat. Merton, c. 9; Letters of Robert Grosseteste, pp. 76, 95; Bracton’s Note
Book, i. pp. 101–116.

[68 ] It is for the ecclesiastical court to decide “an issue of general bastardy,” while
“an issue of special bastardy” is tried by a jury. “Is this man a bastard?”—that is an
issue of general bastardy. “Is this man a bastard because born before the marriage of
his parents?”—that is an issue of special bastardy. Blackstone, Comm. iii. 335.

[69 ] Glanvill, vii. 7; xii. 17; Harvard Law Review, iii. 168; this matter will be
discussed at greater length when we speak of the history of wills.

[70 ] Bracton, f. 60 b: “nullam enim meretur poenam quis, quamvis decedat
intestatus.”

[71 ] See in vol. ii. our section on Intestacy.

[72 ] Cart. Riev. p. 164: “et primum haec omnia sacramento firmavit, deinde
christianitatem in manu mea qua se obsidem dedit etc.”

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 432 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[73 ] Glanvill, x. 1–3; Bracton’s Note Book, pl. 50, 670, 683, 1361, 1464, 1671;
Bracton, f. 406 b. We shall return to the laesio fidei hereafter in our section on
Contract.

[74 ] Bracton, f. 401 b, 402.

[75 ] The regular form of the prohibition relating to movables forbad the ecclesiastical
judge to meddle with chattels “quae non sunt de testamento vel matrimonio.”

[76 ] Circumspecte Agatis (Statutes, i. 101), c. 6, 11.

[77 ] Of this in our section on Trespasses.

[78 ] Glanvill, vii. 17.

[79 ] See in vol. ii. our section on Ecclesiastical Offences.

[80 ] Note Book, pl. 719, 808; compare Bracton, f. 401 b.

[81 ] Maitland, E. H. R. xi. 646. Gratian at the end of c. 47, C. 11, qu. 1, summed up
the matter thus: “Ex his omnibus datur intelligi, quod clericus ad publica iudicia nec
in civili, nec in criminali causa est producendus, nisi forte civilem causam episcopus
decidere noluerit, vel in criminali sui honoris cingulo eum nudaverit.”

[82 ] Schröder, D. R. G. 569; Fournier, Officialités, 79.

[83 ] Glanvill, vi. 14. The widow who has received no part of her dower may go
straight to the king’s court.

[84 ] Schröder, op. cit. 568; Fournier, op. cit. 64–94.

[85 ] Mat. Par. Chron. Maj. ii. 368.

[86 ] Glanvill, vii. 15: “secundum canones et leges Romanas.”

[87 ] Glanvill, Prologus; Bracton, f. 1.

[88 ] See the famous passage in Diceto, i. 434.

[89 ] Diceto, i. 435.

[90 ] Thus on 16th July, 1195, the court consists of Hubert Walter, abp. of
Canterbury, Godfrey Lucy, bp. of Winchester, Richard FitzNeal, bp. of London
(author of the Dialogus), Gilbert Glanville, bp. of Rochester (a distinguished scholar),
Richard Barre, archd. of Ely, Ralph Foliot, archd. of Hereford, William of Chimelli,
archd. of Richmond, William of Yes. Ste. Mère l’Église, afterwards bp. of London,
Geoffrey FitzPeter, Simon Pateshull, Osbert FitzHervy, Richard Heriet.

[91 ] Blackstone, Comm. i. 19.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 433 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[92 ] Rob. Grosseteste, Epist. pp. 76, 95.

[93 ] Giraldus Cambrensis, ii. 344–45, iii. 27–28. Giraldus afterwards retracted his
charges; see i. 426.

[94 ] Glanv. ii. 12.

[95 ] Will. de Longo Campo (Caillemer, p. 25): “Sunt enim exceptiones aliae
perpetuae, aliae dilatoriae.” Bract. f. 399 b: “Exceptionum quaedam sunt dilatoriae,
quaedam peremptoriae.” This from Inst. 4. 13. 8.

[1 ] As to the constitutional side of Henry’s reforms we have little to add to what has
been said by Dr. Stubbs in the Introduction to the Gesta Henrici, vol. ii, the Select
Charters, and the Constitutional History.

[2 ] The document that we have professes only to give “a certain part” of the customs
that were “recognized and recorded.”

[3 ] Ass. Northamp. c. 4.

[4 ] The documents are printed in the Select Charters, except the Assize of Dread, for
which see Cunningham, English Industry and Commerce, ed. 3, i. 568.

[5 ] The most striking testimonies to Henry’s governmental activity are collected by
Stubbs, Const. Hist. §147. Ralph Niger says: “Nullo quaestu satiatus, abolitis legibus
antiquis, singulis annis novas leges quas assisas vocavit edidit.”

[6 ] In the main we accept the results attained by Brunner in his Entstehung der
Schwurgerichte. These have already been adopted by Stubbs, Const. Hist. § 164. See
also Brunner, D. R. G. ii. 522–27; Thayer, Development of Trial by Jury, Boston,
1896.

[7 ] When both the jury and the body of doomsmen are already established
institutions, the transformation of doomsmen into jurors may be possible, and this
transformation may actually have taken place in our manorial courts. See Select Pleas
in Manorial Courts (Selden Society), pp. lxvi–lxviii; Vinogradoff, Villainage, 370–71.
But that the jury should have originally grown out of a body of doomsmen seems
almost impossible.

[8 ] Brunner, Schwurgerichte, pp. 74–75.

[9 ] Ibid. p. 87.

[10 ] Regino Prumiensis de Eccles. Discipl. lib. 2, cap. 2 (Migne, Patrol. cxxxii. 282).
Stubbs, Const. Hist. i. p. 662, remarks that the iuratores synodi “do not present,” but
“only reply to the inquiry of the visiting bishop.” But there is no contrast here, for the
English jurors by their presentments only reply to inquiries addressed to them by the
royal officer. Cp. Burchardi Wormaciensis Decreta, lib. i. cap. 91 (Patrol. cxl. 571).

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 434 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[11 ] Æthelred, iii. 3. As to the Danish character of this ordinance see Schmid,
Gesetze, p. li; Brunner, Schwurgerichte, p. 403; K. Maurer, Krit. Ueberschau, v. 389;
Steenstrup, Danelag, p. 209.

[12 ] Brunner, Schwurgerichte, 402–3.

[13 ] K. Maurer, Das Beweisverfahren nach deutschen Rechten, Krit. Ueberschau, v.
332, 374.

[14 ] von Amira, Paul’s Grundriss der German. Philologie ii. ii. p. 198, contends that
the jury appears independently (1) in the Frankish king’s court, (2) the Danish king’s
court, and (3) the Icelandic courts.

[15 ] D. B. iv. 497 (Liber Eliensis.)

[16 ] See e.g. Henry II.’s charter for Rochester, Monast. i. 177: “Omnes minutas terras
. . . confirmo in perpetuum . . . in tantum et tam pleniter sicut proprii ministri mei
exquirere deberent.” This should be compared with the Frankish and Norman
privileges. Brunner, Schwurgerichte, 92–95, 238–45.

[17 ] The principal cases are collected by Palgrave, Commonwealth, ii. p. clxxvi, and
Bigelow, Placita Anglo-Normannica.

[18 ] Hamilton, Inquisitio Com. Cantab. p. xviii.

[19 ] On several occasions iuratores are mentioned on the Pipe Roll of 31 Henry I.
See also Brunner, Schwurgerichte, pp. 465–66.

[20 ] Brunner, pp. 301–4. As to Scotland, there is no doubt that from the time of
David I. onwards the kings made use of the inquest procedure. One passage in the
laws ascribed to David (c. 35) speaks as though a whole system of writs of novel
disseisin and mort d’ancestor was already in existence; but the mss in which this
passage is found seem to be few and late, and it is hardly in keeping with its
surroundings. On the other hand, certain passages which point to inquests which
decide subordinate questions in criminal cases (c. 6) may well be ancient. On the
whole we take it that the jury has much the same history in Scotland and in England:
it spreads outwards from the king; it is an “assize,” an institution established by
ordinance.

[21 ] Const. Clarend. c. 9.

[22 ] Gesta Abbatum, i. 113–15. The story is told with great particularity. In all
probability the substance of it is true and comes from Stephen’s reign; but apparently
some mistakes have been made about the names of the various persons concerned in
it, as a discussion of dates would show.

[23 ] Pipe Roll, 12 Hen. II. p. 65: “pro dissaisina super assisam Regis”; 13 Hen. II. p.
134: “pro dissaisina facta super assisam Regis”; 14 Hen. II. passim. No doubt there
are writs of earlier date which in many respects resemble the writ of novel disseisin;

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 435 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

see Bigelow, Placita, pp. 128, 130, 169, 170; Howlett, Chronicles of Stephen etc. vol.
iii. p. xxxvii; but we cannot find anything which shows that the general ordinance or
“assize” was of earlier date than 1166.

[24 ] Bracton, f. 164 b: “de beneficio principis succurritur ei per recognitionem
assisae novae disseisinae multis vigiliis excogitatam et inventam.”

[25 ] Charter, 1217, c. 35: “Nullus liber homo . . . dissaisietur de libero tenemento suo
. . . nisi per legale iudicium parium suorum vol [= et] per legem terrae.” Compare the
formula of the assize “Si B. iniuste et sine iudicio dissaisivit A. de libero tenemento
suo.”

[26 ] Glanvill, xii. 2, 25; Brunner, Schwurgerichte, 411.

[27 ] Glanvill, ii. 7.

[28 ] Bracton, f. 112: “Et sicut non debet sine brevi respondere, ita nec debet sine
iudicio disseisiri.” Ibid. f. 161: “Nemo debet sine iudicio disseisiri de libero
tenemento suo, nec respondere sine precepto domini Regis nec sine brevi.” Rot. Pat.
76: King John says to the people of Ireland, “Nolumus . . . quod aliquis . . . vos possit
disseisire de liberis tenementis vestris iniuste aut sine iudicio, nec quod in placitum
ponamini per alicuius breve nisi per nostrum vel iusticiarii nostri.” See Manorial Pleas
(Selden Soc.), p. lv. We know from Glanvill (ii. 19) that the grand assize was
established by a written ordinance: “poena autem in hac assisa temere iurantium
ordinata est et regali institutioni eleganter inserta.”

[29 ] Ass. Northampt. c. 4.

[30 ] Const. Clarend. c. 1.

[31 ] Gesta Henrici, i. 233; Hoveden, ii. 184.

[32 ] Glanvill, xiii. 18, 19.

[33 ] Stat. 59 Geo. III. c. 46.

[34 ] Stat. 3 & 4 Will. IV. c. 42, sec. 13.

[35 ] Continuatio Beccensis, Howlett’s edition of Robert of Torigny, p. 327: “Rex
Anglorum Henricus ad Natale Domini [1159] fuit apud Falesiam, et leges instituit ut
nullus decanus aliquam personam accusaret sine testimonio vicinorum
circummanentium, qui bonae vitae fama laudabiles haberentur.” Const. Clarend. c. 6:
“Laici non debent accusari nisi per certos et legales accusatores et testes in praesentia
episcopi . . . Et si qui tales fuerint qui culpantur, quod non velit vel non audeat aliquis
eos accusare, vicecomes requisitus ab episcopo faciet iurare duodecim legales ho-
mines de vicineto, seu de villa, coram episcopo, quod inde veritatem secundum
conscientiam suam manifestabunt.” With this should be compared Magna Carta,
1215, c. 38: “Nullus ballivus ponat de cetero aliquem ad legem simplici loquela sua,
sine testibus fidelibus ad hoc inductis.”

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 436 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[36 ] In or about 1246 Robert Grosseteste made strict inquest as to the continence and
morals of the laity. The king issued a prohibition to the effect that he was not to take
recognitions upon oath save in matrimonial or testamentary causes. See Prynne,
Records, ii. 704–6. Matthew Paris, Chron. Maj. iv. 579, speaks as though the bishop’s
proceedings were deemed both novel and harsh. The writs preserved by Prynne tell
the same tale. From this we may infer that, in consequence of Becket’s rejection of
the Constitutions of Clarendon, the church lost a right offered to her by Henry,
namely, a right to demand that the civil power should provide her with synodal juries.
For the future she had to rely upon her own powers, and the state seems even to have
opposed such endeavours as were made by Grosseteste to use the procedure of
communal accusation as a general means of detecting sins. As a matter of fact, this
procedure seems to have been chiefly used with reference either to purely
ecclesiastical matters, such as the repair of churches and attendance at church, or to
those sins of the flesh which admittedly lay within the province of ecclesiastical
jurisdiction.

[37 ] Select Pleas in Manorial Courts (Selden Soc.), pp. xxvii–xxxviii.

[38 ] Stubbs, Introduction to Gesta Henrici, vol. ii, has discussed this matter at length.
See also Round, Feudal England, 503.

[39 ] Diceto, i. 434–35.

[40 ] Gesta Henrici, ii. 207.

[41 ] See Eyton, Itinerary of Henry II. A good many “final concords” from the last
years of the reign are gradually being brought to light. See Round, The Earliest Fines,
E. H. R. xii. 293.

[42 ] Mapes, De Nugis, p. 241: “Habemus et nos censores sub serenissimo iudice,
quorum iustitiam domini sui iustitia remordet, quia iurati coram ipso quod aequitate
servata censebunt ut praedicti tres Plutonis arguti iudices.”

[43 ] Glanvill, viii. 5. A fine levied before the itinerant justices always purports to be
“finalis concordia facta in curia domini Regis.” Such at least is the case in later times;
but see Round, E. H. R. xii. 297.

[44 ] Dialogus, lib. i, c. 4–6.

[45 ] Ibid. lib. i, c. 15.

[46 ] Gesta Henrici, ii. 207–8.

[47 ] Madox, Exchequer, i. 798–801.

[48 ] This is the usual form throughout Glanvill’s book.

[49 ] Round, Feudal England, 513.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 437 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[50 ] Glanvill, viii. 5.

[51 ] Select Pleas of the Crown (Selden Soc.), pp. xxvi–xxviii. The rolls of the
itinerant justices spoken of in the Dialogue, lib. ii. c. 1, may have been mere lists of
amercements.

[52 ] William FitzStephen (Materials for Life of Becket, iii), p. 67.

[53 ] Palgrave, Commonwealth, vol. ii. p. xxviii.

[54 ] Ibid. p. xlvii: “populique insuper multitudine non modica.”

[55 ] Gesta Abbatum, i. 150.

[56 ] Ibid. 151: “Quod in tam iuvene rege non minori sapientiae deputatum est quod
dixit, quam iudicium Salomonis inter meretrices altercantes.”

[57 ] Gesta Abbatum, i. 154: “Privilegia, ut credimus, praeiudicant praescriptioni.”

[58 ] Palgrave, Commonwealth, vol. ii. p. lxvii; Bigelow, Placita, 175.

[59 ] Gesta Abbatum, i. 159–66.

[60 ] Palgrave, Commonwealth, vol. ii. pp. v–xxvii; Bigelow, Placita, 311; Hall, Court
Life under the Plantagenets; Maitland, L. Q. R. xiii. 141.

[61 ] See Letters of John of Salisbury (ed. Giles), i. 124.

[62 ] Palgrave, p. lxxxiii: “et tandem gratia domini Regis et per iudicium curiae suae
adiudicata est mihi terra avunculi mei.”

[63 ] Bigelow, Placita, 170.

[64 ] Palgrave, p. lxxiii; Bigelow, Placita, 222. Mapes, De Nugis, p. 227: “In legibus
constituendis et omni regimine corrigendo discretus, inusitati occultique iudicii
subtilis inventor.”

[65 ] Bigelow, Placita, 239.

[66 ] Mapes, De Nugis, p. 241.

[67 ] Ibid. p. 242.

[68 ] A full account of the case is given in Gesta Henrici, i. 138–54. We may say, if
we will, that there was here an “international arbitration”; still it was conducted with
all the regularity of a law-suit, and the award was expressly based upon a rule of
pleading. Each of the kings charged the other with having wrongfully dispossessed
him of certain lands. Neither directly denied the charge. The judgment is that each
must restore what he has taken.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 438 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[69 ] Prynne, Records, ii. 588, from Rot. Pat. 28 Hen. III.

[70 ] Hoveden, ed. Stubbs, i. p. xxi.

[71 ] Eyton, Itinerary, 265.

[72 ] The book has been fully discussed by Liebermann, Einleitung in den Dialogus
de Scaccario. It is printed by Madox in his History of the Exchequer and by Stubbs in
his Select Charters.

[73 ] Liebermann, pp. 33, 42, 54.

[74 ] Ibid. p. 31.

[75 ] Ibid. p. 65.

[76 ] Ibid. p. 10.

[77 ] Ibid. p. 96.

[78 ] Dial. ii. c. 16: “Huius autem rei causam, licet distorta modicum et regiae nimis
utilitati serviens videtur, evidentem et satis iustam secundum patrias leges
comprobabis.” Ibid. ii. c. 10: “Propter solam regis assisam sic esse cognoscas; nec
enim est qui regiae constitutioni, quae pro bono pacis fit, obviare presumat.”

[79 ] Dict. Nat. Biography.

[80 ] Palgrave, Commonwealth, ii. p. xxiii.

[81 ] Hoveden (ii. 215) under the year 1180 says that Henry appointed as justiciar
Ranulf Glanvill “cuius sapientia conditae sunt leges subscriptae quas Anglicanas
vocamus.” On this there follow (1) one set of the Leges Willelmi (Hic intimatur), (2)
the Leges Edwardi, (3) a genealogy of the Norman dukes, (4) an Expositio
Vocabulorum or glossary of A.-S. legal words, (5) the treatise in question, (6) certain
assizes of Henry II. We may regard it as certain that Glanvill did not compose 1 or 2;
also that the man who composed 5 did not compose 2. The question remains whether
Hoveden’s “condidit leges” covers all this legal stuff or is specially attributable to 5,
the treatise on the leges Anglicanae. In the former case it must bear a very vague
meaning; it can mean little more than that Glanvill administered English law in
accordance with those documents which Hoveden is going to transcribe; the phrase is
hardly better than an excuse for the introduction of a mass of legal matter. In the latter
case we still have to ask what Hoveden meant by “condidit leges.” This would be a
strange phrase whereby to describe the compilation of a treatise. In the contemporary
Dialogue (ii. 14) it is used of a legislator. The treatise undoubtedly sets forth the law
as administered by the royal court under Glanvill’s presidency. Hoveden, so it seems
to us, means no more than this. It is fairly certain that Hoveden found 1, 2 and 3
already hitched together so as to form a whole, which Dr Liebermann calls Tripartita,
and not improbable that the treatise known to us as Glanvill had already been tacked
on to this Tripartita. See Liebermann in Zeitschrift für romanische Philologie, xix. 81.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 439 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[82 ] Maitland, Glanvill Revised, Harvard Law Review, vi. 1.

[83 ] The king of the prologue is obviously Henry. In lib. viii. c. 3, reference is made
to a record of 31 October, 1187.

[84 ] Mapes, De Nugis, p. 8.

[85 ] According to Eyton, Itinerary, 294–97, Glanvill was in France from March until
June 1189; he then came to England to levy troops and was in France again in July.

[86 ] This suggestion is due to a passage in Bracton (f. 188 b). Half a century after
Hubert Walter’s death, Bracton, wishing to show how fatal it is for a pleader to make
mistakes in names, chooses as examples his own name and that of Hubert Walter.
Now the name “Hubertus Walteri” was not merely an uncommon name, it was a name
of an exceedingly uncommon kind. “Hubertus filius Walteri” would of course be a
name of the commonest kind, but the omission of the “filius” is, among men of gentle
birth, an almost distinctive mark of a particular family, that to which the great
archbishop belonged. Bracton therefore seems to be choosing the rare name of a man
who has been dead these fifty years. May he not be coupling with his own name that
of his only predecessor in English legal literature, whose book he has been constantly
using? However this is no more than a suggestion. For arguments against Glanvill’s
claim to the treatise, see Hunter, Fines, i. p. xv; on the other side, Foss, Judges of
England, i. 181; Liebermann, Einleitung, p. 73.

[87 ] Much first-hand knowledge of the Roman texts is not to be inferred from an
imitation of the opening sentences of the Institutes, from the occurrence of such
phrases as “quod principi placuit,” “melior est conditio possidentis,” or from
occasional allusions to the “leges et canones.”

[88 ] Leg. Hen. c. 10.

[89 ] Glanvill, vii. 3.

[90 ] Glanvill, Prologus; xii. 6; xiv. 8.

[91 ] Maitland, Glanvill Revised, Harvard Law Review, vi. 1. A second ms of this
revised Glanvill is preserved at Caius College.

[92 ] Brit. Mus. ms Lansd. 467: the translator will give the text “en un commun
romaunz sans ryme”; Camb. Univ. Ll. i. 16, f. 100. The version in Camb. Univ. Ee. i.
1 is partly in Latin, partly in French.

[93 ] The Regiam Maiestatem is collated with Glanvill in vol. i. of the Acts of the
Parliament of Scotland. Neilson, Trial by Combat, p. 104: “Either the Regiam was
compiled in the first half of the thirteenth century, say between 1200 and 1230 . . . or
it was compiled from materials of the law of that period.” Glanvill’s Treatise was
printed by Tottel without date about 1554; later editions were published in 1604,
1673, 1780; an English version by Beames in 1812. It will also be found in Houard’s

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 440 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Coutumes anglo-normandes and in Phillips’s Englische Rechtsgeschichte. A new
edition is wanted.

[94 ] What is accounted the most ancient ordinance of a French king comes from
Louis VII. in 1155: it establishes a “peace” for ten years: Viollet, Histoire du droit
civil français, p. 152; Esmein, Histoire du droit français, ed. 2, 488. From Germany
also we have as yet merely Landfriedensgesetze which strive to set limits to private
war: Schröder, D. R. G. p. 628.

[95 ] The Libri Feudorum in their present state are a composite work, some parts of
which may even go back to the last years of the eleventh century: an edition by K.
Lehmann is appearing in parts. See Lehmann, Das langobardische Lehnrecht, 1896;
Schröder, op. cit. 668. The Assises for the Cour des Bourgeois were compiled, it is
said, between 1173 and 1180, a few years before Glanvill’s treatise: Viollet, p. 170;
Brunner in Holtzendorff’s Encyklopädie, p. 310. The Assises for the Haute Cour are
of later date.

[96 ] The most notable French law-books are (1) the first part (Brunner’s Très
ancienne coutume) of (Tardif’s) Très ancien coutumier de Normandie, compiled circ.
1200; (2) the second part of the same work, circ. 1220; (3) the Grand coutumier de
Normandie, circ. 1254–58 (see Tardif’s edition); (4) a custumal of Anjou, 1246; (5) a
custumal of the Orléanais, from the first half of the thirteenth century; (6) the so-
called Établissements de Saint Louis (circ. 1273), a text-book which takes up into
itself the works here designated as 4 and 5; (7) the Conseil de Pierre de Fontaines,
circ. 1254–59, from the Vermandois, highly romanized; (8) the Livre de Jostice et Plet
from the Orléanais, circ. 1259; (9) Beaumanoir’s Custom of Clermont in the
Beauvoisis, finished in 1283. See Esmein, op. cit. 728–34; Viollet, op. cit. 177–88. In
Germany the first law-book is the Sachsenspiegel, 1215–35; Schröder, op. cit. 635 ff.
This was soon followed by the Deutschenspiegel and the so-called Schwabenspiegel.
It is by no means impossible that the development of French law in general was
quickened by the legislative or administrative activity of Henry, Duke of Normandy
and Count of Anjou; the practice of enrolling pleas seems to spread outwards from
Normandy and with it the assize of novel disseisin. Luchaire, Manuel des institutions,
p. 568: “l’usage des rouleaux d’arrêts, d’origine anglo-normande.” To the same effect,
Esmein, op. cit. 742.

[97 ] Stat. West. I. (1275) c. 39; Statutes of Quo Waranto (1289–90).

[98 ] The earliest of the known plea rolls has lately been published by the Pipe Roll
Society; others of Richard’s and John’s reigns have been published by the Record
Commissioners and the Selden Society. The earliest charter rolls, patent rolls, close
rolls have been published by the Record Commissioners.

[99 ] Feet of Fines, 7 & 8 Ric. I (Pipe Roll Soc.), p. 3 ff.

[100 ] Mat. Par. ii. 558: “Erat autem firmissima regni columna, utpote vir generosus,
legum peritus, thesauris, redditibus, et omnibus bonis instauratus, omnibus Angliae
magnatibus sanguine vel amicitia confoederatus.”

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 441 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[101 ] Mat. Par. iii. p. 296: “qui quandoque habenas sane moderabatur totius regni
iustitiarii.” Ibid. 542: “cuius sapientia aliquando tota Anglia regebatur.”

[102 ] See Baker’s History of Northamptonshire, i. 267; also Dict. Nat. Biog. He
certainly was the father of Hugh Pateshull, who was for a while treasurer to Henry III.
and became Bishop of Lichfield. Simon had a clerk called Martin; Select Pleas of the
Crown (Seld. Soc.), pl. 18.

[103 ] Select Pleas of the Crown, pl. 34.

[104 ] Ibid. pp. xii–xvii.

[105 ] Stubbs, Select Charters; Rolls of the King’s Court (Pipe Roll Soc.), vol. i.

[106 ] Select Charters, Edictum Regium; Hoveden, iii. 299.

[107 ] Hoveden, iv. 33.

[108 ] Rot. Pat. Joh. p. 54.

[109 ] Gesta Henrici (Benedict), ii. 110.

[110 ] Rot. Pat. Joh. p. 47.

[111 ] This Irish Register of Writs is described in Harvard Law Review, iii. 110. The
ms is Cotton, Julius, D. 11.

[112 ] Rot. Claus. Joh. p. 32. A writ of 1205, which in technical terms is “a writ of
entry sur disseisin in the per, ” has against it the note “Hoc breve de cetero erit de
cursu.”

[113 ] Charter 1215, c. 1: “Concessimus etiam omnibus liberis hominibus regni nostri,
pro nobis et heredibus nostris in perpetuum, omnes libertates subscriptas, habendas et
tenendas eis et heredibus suis de nobis et heredibus nostris.” By c. 61 power is given
the twenty-five barons to distrain the king “per captionem castro-rum, terrarum,
possessionum et aliis modis quibus poterunt . . . salva persona nostra et reginae
nostrae et liberorum nostrorum.”

[114 ] For an interesting discussion of a document professing to be a copy of an
earlier charter of liberties, see E. H. R. vii. 288 (Round); ix. 117 (Prothero), 326
(Hall).

[115 ] Charter, 1215, c. 12, 14.

[116 ] Charter, 1215, c. 39.

[117 ] Ibid. c. 2, 32, 33.

[118 ] Ibid. 215 c. 40, 45.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 442 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[119 ] For instance c. 54: “Nullus capiatur nec imprisonetur propter appellum feminae
de morte alterius quam viri sui”; Select Pleas of the Crown, pl. 32 (1202): “nullum est
appellum eo quod femina non habet appellum versus aliquem nisi de morte viri sui vel
de rapo.” The rule was already law in Henry II.’s day; Glanvill, xiv, c. 1, 3, 6.

[120 ] Charter, c. 18.

[121 ] Ibid. c. 1: “ecclesia Anglicana libera sit et habeat iura sua integra et libertates
suas illaesas.”

[122 ] Charter, c. 34: “Breve quod vocatur Praecipe de cetero non fiat alicui de aliquo
tenemento unde liber homo amittere possit curiam suam.” Glanvill, i. 5, allows the
king to issue this writ whenever he pleases. Had this prerogative been maintained, the
horrible tangle of our “real actions,” our “writs of entry” and so forth, would never
have perplexed us.

[123 ] Ibid. c. 41, 13.

[124 ] In after days it was possible for men to worship the words “nisi per legale
iudicium parium suorum vel per legem terrae” (cap. 39), because it was possible to
misunderstand them. In passing, a commentator should observe that in medieval Latin
vel will often stand for and. As the writer of the Dialogus (ii. 1) says, it can be used
subdisiunctive (for which term see Dig. 50, 16, 124). Often it is like the and (or) of
our mercantile documents. The wording of the clause leaves open the question
whether a man can ever be imprisoned or disseised by the law of the land without
having had the judgment of his peers. In the second place, it is now generally
admitted that the phrase iudicium parium does not point to trial by jury. For a legal
instrument to call the verdict of recognitors a judgment, would have been as gross a
blunder in 1215 as it would be at the present time. See Select Pleas in Manorial
Courts (Selden Soc.), p. lxvii. Thirdly, there can hardly be a doubt that this clause
expresses a claim by the barons for a tribunal of men of baronial rank which shall try
even the civil causes in which barons are concerned; we shall see hereafter that they
certainly wished for such a tribunal. The spirit of the clause is excellently expressed
by a passage in the laws ascribed to David of Scotland: Acts of Parliament, vol. i. p.
318: “No man shall be judged by his inferior who is not his peer; the earl shall be
judged by the earl, the baron by the baron, the vavassor by the vavassor, the burgess
by the burgess; but an inferior may be judged by a superior. ” Some of John’s justices
were certainly not of baronial rank. Just at this same moment the French magnates
also were striving for a court of peers; Luchaire, Manuel des institutions, p. 560; they
did not want trial by jury. For the history of the phrase iudicium parium, see Stubbs,
Const. Hist. i. 578.

[1 ] Glanvill, vii. 1: “secundum ius regni.”

[2 ] Charter, 1215, c. 45: “qui sciant legem regni.”

[3 ] Ibid. 1215, c. 39: “per legale iudicium parium suorum vel per legem terrae.”
Bracton, f. 128 b: “utlagatus rite et secundum legem terrae.” Ibid. f. 127 b: “ante

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 443 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

aetatem duodecim annorum non erit quis sub lege, et prius extra legem poni non
poterit.” Ibid. f. 147: “secundum legem Romanorum, Francorum et Anglorum.”

[4 ] Glanvill, vii. 12: “secundum ius et consuetudinem regni.”

[5 ] Prov. Oxford (Select Charters): “La haute justice a poer de amender les tors . . .
solum lei et dreit de la tere. E les brefs seient pledez solum lei de la tere e en leus
deues.”

[6 ] Thus in the count on a writ of right, “Peto terram ut ius et hereditatem meam . . .
pater meus fuit seisitus ut de iure . . . et de eo descendit ius . . . et quod hoc est ius
meum offero probare.”

[7 ] Dialogus, ii. 7: “leges candentis ferri vel aquae.” Glanvill, xiv. 2: “per legem
apparentem se purgare.” Charter, 1215, c. 38: “Nullus ballivus ponat . . . aliquem ad
legem simplici loquela sua.”

[8 ] Glanvill, Prologus: “Leges namque Anglicanas, licet non scriptas, leges appellari
non videtur absurdum.” Bracton, f. 1.

[9 ] Bracton, f. 1: “Habent enim Anglici plurima ex consuetudine quae non habent ex
lege.”

[10 ] Dialogus, ii. 21: “Decrevit enim rex illustris.” Hoveden, iii. 299: “Edictum
regium.” Dialogus, ii. 1: “ex novella constitutione, hoc est post tempora regis Henrici
primi.” Glanvill, ii. 7: “Est autem magna assisa regale quoddam beneficium,
clementia principis de consilio procerum populis indultum . . . legalis ista institutio
[al. regalis ista constitutio].” Bracton, f. 96: “sed nova superveniente gratia et
provisione.”

[11 ] Proclamation of the king’s acceptance of the Provisions of Oxford (Select
Charters): “and to werian þo isetnesses þæt beon imakede.”

[12 ] The laws of Merton and Marlborough, though they are retrospectively called
statutes, called themselves provisions. However, Henry I. had spoken of his statuta.
See above, p. 104.

[13 ] Dialogus, ii. 10: “Propter solam regis assisam sic esse cognoscas; nec enim est
qui regiae constitutioni, quae pro bono pacis fit, obviare praesumat.”

[14 ] Bracton, f. 1 b: the contrast is between mutari and in melius converti.

[15 ] Bracton, f. 414 b: the contrast is between a writ which is contra ius and one
which is praeter ius but at the same time rationi consonum et non iuri contrarium.

[16 ] c. 32, X. 2. 20: “tam de communi iure, quam de consuetudine generali
Anglicanae ecclesiae.”

[17 ] Sarum Charters, p. 89.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 444 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[18 ] Thus in Cod. Theod. 16, 5, 23 is a constitution repealing an earlier law which
had placed a certain class of heretics under disabilities. “Vivant iure communi,” it
says, and this we can best render by, “They are to live under the common law,” i.e.
the ordinary law. So in Cod. Theod. 2, 1, 10: “Iudaei romano et communi iure
viventes.”

[19 ] Sarum Charters, p. 320: “Nos vero . . . ius commune pro ecclesia de Preschut
faciens considerantes.”

[20 ] Dialogus, i. 11: “Legibus quidem propriis subsistit; quas non communi regni
iure, sed voluntaria principum institutione subnixas dicunt.” Ibid. ii. 22: “communis
lex.”

[21 ] Thus Y. B. 21–22 Edw. I. contrasts common law with statute (pp. 55–56, 419),
with local custom (pp. 213, 287), with prerogative (p. 406), with the law merchant (p.
459), with “special law” (p. 71). P. Q. W. 681: “videtur iusticiariis quod dominus Rex
placitare potest per breve magis conveniens legi communi quam hoc breve.” Rot.
Parl. i. 47 (1290): “Perquirat sibi per legem communem.” Articuli super Cartas (28
Edw. I.): “ou remedie ne fust avant par la commune ley . . . nul bref que touche la
commune lei.” Y. B. 20–21 Edw. I. p. 55: “You put forward no espessyalté. ”

[22 ] Bracton, f. 17 b: “Modus enim legem dat donationi et modus tenendus est contra
ius commune et contra legem, quia modus et conventio vincunt legem . . . Bene
poterit donator . . . legem imponere donationi . . . contra legem terrae.” Ibid. 19 b:
“Item poterit conditio impedire descensum ad proprios heredes contra ius commune.”
Ibid. 48 b: “Item poterit donator ex speciali conventione contra ius commune
conditionem suam meliorem facere in causa donationis.”

[23 ] Early instances of the use of the term in a more or less technical sense are these.
Foedera, i. 266, a writ of 1246: “Rex vult quod omnia brevia de communi iure quae
currunt in Anglia similiter currant in Hibernia.” Provisions of Oxford (1259): “de
sectis autem quae . . . subtractae fuerunt currat lex communis (curge la commune
lei)”:—“habeat rationabilem summonitionem secundum communem legem terrae
(solum la commune lei).” According to a story told in the Burton Annals, p. 210,
when John asked the papal legates what they wanted, they replied, “Nil nisi ius
commune”; this seems to mean, “Nothing but common justice.” See further as to the
history of this phrase, Clark, Practical Jurisprudence, p. 70.

[24 ] The Leges Edwardi and one set of the Leges Willelmi (Hic intimatur) were still
being amplified by imaginative persons, who wished to show how sheriffs were
elected in the good old days, and how the Scots were subject to the English king. See
Liebermann, Leges Anglorum, p. 28 ff. Bracton, f. 134 b, quotes historical matter
from the Leges Edwardi; and in his work (f. 147) there is an addicio which seems to
refer to some laws of Æthelstan.

[25 ] After 1225 but before Edward’s confirmation in 1297 a change was made in, or
crept into, the clause which defines the amount of the relief; the baron’s relief was
reduced from 100 pounds to 100 marks. See Bémont, Chartes des libertés anglaises,

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 445 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

pp. xxxi. 47–48. The text of the various editions can be best compared in this
excellent book.

[26 ] Statutes of the Realm, i. 6.

[27 ] Statutes, i. 1; Note Book, i. 104.

[28 ] Statutes, i. 8.

[29 ] Stat. Marlb. (Statutes, i. 19): “convocatis discrecioribus eiusdem regni tam ex
maioribus quam minoribus, provisum est et statutum ac concorditer ordinatum.”
There seems no reason why we should any longer speak of Marlbridge when we mean
Marlborough; “Marlbridge” is but a stupid misrepresentation of the French form
Marleberge.

[30 ] Statutes of the Realm, i. 12.

[31 ] Ibid. p. 7; Note Book, i. 43.

[32 ] The earliest statute roll now extant begins with the Statute of Gloucester, 1278.
What is now its topmost membrane shows distinct signs of having been preceded by
another membrane, which may have contained the Statute of Westminster I. (1275)
and other matters. Our first parliament roll comes from 1290.

[33 ] Among these may be reckoned the ordinance of 1219 relating to the abolition of
the ordeal, Foedera, i. 154; the “constitution” of 1234 relating to the holding of the
local courts, printed in Statutes of the Realm, i. 118; the ordinance of 1234 relating to
special bastardy, which (see Bracton’s Note Book, i. p. 104) is on the Coram Rege
Roll; an ordinance of 1233 relating to the conservation of the peace, preserved on the
Close Roll and printed in the Select Charters; a statute of limitation from 1237 which
(see Note Book, i. p. 106) is usually but wrongly regarded as part of the Provisions of
Merton; an ordinance about warranty made in 1251 on the dedication of the Abbey of
Hailes and mentioned by Bracton, f. 382 b; an ordinance of 1253 relating to watch
and ward, preserved by Matthew Paris and printed in the Select Charters; an assize of
bread, preserved in the Annals of Burton, p. 375, and elsewhere; lastly an important
ordinance of 1255 against alienation, recently discovered on the Close Roll by Mr.
Turner and printed by him in L. Q. R. xii. 299. Besides all this Matthew Paris
mentions a considerable number of acts of a legislative kind, e.g. vol. v. pp. 15, 18, an
edict of 1248 relating to the coinage; p. 35, an edict relating to vengeance upon
adulterers. The rolls of Henry’s day have yet to be carefully searched for the remains
of legislation.

[34 ] Rob. Grosseteste Epistolae, p. 96: Grosseteste to Raleigh: “nec tam idiota sum
quod credam ad alicuius suggestionem te vel alium sine principis et magnatum
consilio posse leges condere vel commutare.”

[35 ] For this see Giraud, Histoire du droit français, ii. 24. It will be remembered that
Henry’s queen belongs to the house of Provence on her father’s, to that of Savoy on

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 446 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

her mother’s side. Raymond himself may have copied what Matthew calls a
consuetudo Sabaudica.

[36 ] The ordinance is printed in the Select Charters. Mat. Par. v. 369: “praesertim
cum tanta legis permutatio sine communi assensu barnagii constitui minime
valuisset.”

[37 ] Bracton, f. 5 b, 107; Note Book, i. 29–33.

[38 ] Sidgwick, Elements of Politics, p. 21.

[39 ] Kingsford, Song of Lewes, pp. 103–4, 113–18.

[40 ] This matter will be discussed below when we speak of the King and the Crown.

[41 ] Mat. Par. iii. 337–38. At Henry’s coronation the earl carries the sword of St.
Edward “in signum quod comes est palatii et regem si oberret habeat de iure
potestatem cohibendi.” It seems not impossible that this theory, which cannot have
had any warrant in English precedents, was borrowed from Germany, where men
were asserting that a court presided over by the Pfalzgraf might even adjudge the
Emperor to death; Schröder, D. R. G., 468.

[42 ] Bracton, f. 171 b. The question whether the violent passage on f. 34 comes from
Bracton has been discussed elsewhere; see Note Book, i. 29–33.

[43 ] Bracton, f. 107 b: “Dum facit iustitiam, vicarius est Regis Eterni, minister autem
diaboli dum declinat ad iniuriam.”

[44 ] Bracton, f. 1 b: “Si autem aliqua nova et inconsueta emerserint et quae prius
usitata non fuerint in regno, si tamen similia evenerint, per simile iudicentur, cum
bona sit occasio a similibus procedere ad similia. Si autem talia nunquam prius
evenerint, et obscurum et difficile sit eorum iudicium, tunc ponantur iudicia in
respectum usque ad magnam curiam, ut ibi per consilium curiae terminentur.” Thus in
a quite unprecedented case the court may have to declare for law what, as Bracton
almost admits, has not as yet been law. For this purpose the court should take the form
of a great assembly of prelates and barons. In the above passage Bracton alludes to
Dig. 1. 3. 13.

[45 ] Bracton, f. 1, 2.

[46 ] Note Book, pl. 1213: the Earl of Chester appeals to cases concerning other
palatine earls. Ibid. pl. 1227: in the exceedingly important case raising the question
whether a palatinate can be partitioned, the magnates reject foreign precedents; “nec
voluerunt iudicare per exempla usitata in partibus transmarinis.” In 1291 the Earl of
Gloucester, being concerned in a case which raised an unusual question, asked the
king that the rolls of Pateshull (ob. 1229) and of later judges might be searched for
precedents, and a precedent was produced from 1248; Rot. Parl. i. 66–67. Of course
the rolls were often produced to show that a concrete question was res iudicata; but
this is quite another matter.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 447 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[47 ] See e.g. Y. B. 21–22 Edw. I. p. 146. Occasionally the appeal to a precedent is
entered on the roll as the substance of the plea: Northumberland Assize Rolls, p. 223.

[48 ] Bracton, f. 1 b: “licet sint nonnulli qui de propria scientia praesumentes, quasi
nihil iuris ignorent, nolunt alicuius consilium expetere.”

[49 ] Bracton, f. 1.

[50 ] For an instance of a custom that is declared to be unlawful, see Northumberland
Assize Rolls, p. 353: “illa consuetudo omnino est contra omnes leges.”

[51 ] Bracton, f. 329. The procedure of the feudal courts in respect of such matters as
summons and essoins may differ from that of the king’s court, but as regards
warranty, pleading, and battle the rules of the king’s court must be observed.

[52 ] Bracton’s Note Book, pl. 834. The suitors of Havering are asked to produce a
precedent (exemplum) for a judgment that they have delivered; not being able to do
this, they are amerced.

[53 ] Bracton, f. 85 b : “licet in quibusdam partibus et per abusum observetur in
contrarium, sicut in episcopatu Wintoniae”; Note Book, pl. 282.

[54 ] Note Book, pl. 623: “talis est consuetudo in feodo Comitis Britanniae.”

[55 ] Royal Letters, i. 103. A difficult case having arisen in the county court of
Nottingham, the bailiff who held the court advises the sheriff to obtain the opinion of
the king’s council.

[56 ] Select Pleas in Manorial Courts, p. 3.

[57 ] More will be said of the borough customs in a later chapter.

[58 ] Gross, Gild Merchant, i. 259.

[59 ] Note Book, pl. 1644: “secundum legem Kantiae.”

[60 ] Statutes, i. 223.

[61 ] Elton, Tenures of Kent, p. 29. In the form gavelingude the word occurs on our
earliest plea roll; Rolls of King’s Court (Pipe Roll Soc.), p. 43.

[62 ] Statutes, i. 223; Y. B. 30–31 Edw. I. p. 168.

[63 ] In Domesday Book and older charters Kent is distinguished by peculiar land
measures, the sulung and the yoke (iugum). Also it had been lightly taxed; Maitland,
Domesday Book, 466, 484. We can, however, find nothing in the record which in any
way suggests that the numerous villani of Kent are in any respect better off than the
villani of other counties or that they stand on a par with the sokemanni or the small
libere tenentes of Norfolk and Suffolk. See however Kenny, Primogeniture, p. 29.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 448 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[64 ] Among the ancient features we may reckon the allotment of the “aster” or hearth
to the youngest son, and the peculiar ninefold payment plus a wergild whereby a
tenant can redeem land that he has lost by non-payment of rent. The proverb which
sends “the father to the bough and the son to the plough” seems corrupt. In the oldest
versions of it the son goes to the “lowe,” the fire, the hearth, the aster; Note Book, pl.
1644; Statutes, i. 223. The custumal ends with an assertion that the usages which it
describes are older than the Conquest. As to the legend of the moving wood of
Swanscombe, this first appears at a very late day; Freeman, Norman Conquest, iii.
539.

[65 ] Statutes, i. 225.

[66 ] Note Book, pl. 1338, 1644.

[67 ] Observe the first words of the custumal:—“These are the usages and customs
which the community of Kent claims to have in tenements of gavelkind and gavelkind
folk.”

[68 ] This is well shown by the establishment at a very late period of a custom to
devise gavelkind land by will, a matter fully discussed by Elton, Tenures of Kent,
73–78.

[69 ] The case as to the partition of the Chester palatinate; see above, p. 195.

[70 ] Bracton, f. 1.

[71 ] Note Book, i. pp. 104–115. We have no authoritative text of this famous
resolution; but the last word of it seems to have been mutare, not mutari.

[72 ] Delisle, Recueil de jugements, p. 139: “Judicatum est quod ille qui natus fuit
ante sponsalia sive post est propinquior heres ad habendam hereditatem patris . . . si
sancta ecclesia approbet maritagium.”

[73 ] Rob. Grosseteste Epistolae, 76–97. Grosseteste (p. 97) writes to Raleigh:
“Induxistis testimonium Ricardi de Luci; cuius testimonium quantam et qualem
habeat comparationem ad testimonia divinae scripturae et canonicae contrarium
testificantia, lippis patet et tonsoribus.” The arguments which Grosseteste adduces
from the Bible and the law of nature are very curious; however, he seems to expressly
disclaim the notion that the king’s justices could desert their ungodly precedents in
favour of divine and natural law until the law of England had been changed by king
and magnates.

[74 ] Brunner, D. R. G. ii. 135–36.

[75 ] Glanvill, vii. 1: “aliquando tamen super hoc ultimo casu in curia domini Regis
de consilio curiae ita ex aequitate consideratum est.” Note Book, pl. 273, 785, 786,
900, 940, 1376. Bracton, f. 1 b: unprecedented cases are to be decided “per consilium
curiae.” In the Year Books we may sometimes see a contrast between rigor and
aequitas; Y. B. 30–31 Edw. I. 120.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 449 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[76 ] The exchequer plea rolls do not begin until far on in Henry III.’s reign; much
business of a judicial character is noticed on the memoranda rolls of the
remembrancers which begin with the beginning of the reign. There are also numerous
sets of rolls which set forth the more purely financial business in the form of accounts.

[77 ] Madox, Exchequer, ii. 51.

[78 ] Fleta, p. 82.

[79 ] Foss, Judges, iii. 196.

[80 ] Madox, Exchequer, ii. 54.

[81 ] Writs sent to the exchequer are addressed to the treasurer and barons, or, if they
merely order the delivery of treasure or the like, to the treasurer and chamberlains.

[82 ] Fleta, p. 81: “Habet etiam Rex curiam suam et iustitiarios suos in Scaccario apud
Westmonasterium residentes.”

[83 ] Madox, Exchequer, ii. 295.

[84 ] This is the theme of Lord Somers’s magnificent judgment in The Banker’s case;
State Trials, vol. xiv. p. 1. In course of time a practice of sending to the exchequer
“current liberates, ” or, as we might say, standing orders for the payment of periodical
charges, was adopted.

[85 ] Hughes, The Parliament of Lincoln, Trans. Roy. Hist. Soc. ix. 41.

[86 ] Rolls of Parliament, vol. 1, passim. It would seem that most of those matters
which in after days would have been the subjects of “petitions of right” were in earlier
days thus delegated to the exchequer.

[87 ] The curious point is that in this matter the barons seem to have acted in defiance
not merely of laws and ordinances but of the king’s own interests. Whether the well-
known phrase in the Charter (“Communia placita non sequantur curiam nostram sed
teneantur in aliquo loco certo”) was originally intended to deprive the exchequer of
jurisdiction over common pleas is doubtful; but that intention was authoritatively
attributed to it in Edward I.’s day. We find Edward laying down the prohibitive rule
not merely in the Articuli of 1300 (Statutes, i. 138), some of which were won from
him by pressure, but in a much earlier ordinance, the so-called Statute of Rhuddlan (i.
70), where he gives as his reason the delay of the exchequer’s proper business. As to
the motives which sent plaintiffs to the exchequer, we find that when the king by way
of exceptional favour sanctions their going thither, he sometimes expressly says that
they are to have the benefit of the processes appropriate to crown debts. See Madox,
Exchequer, i. 209–214, ii. 73–76.

[88 ] Fleta, p. 66: “Habet etiam [Rex] curiam suam in cancellaria sua.”

[89 ] Stubbs, Const. Hist. i. p. 381.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 450 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[90 ] The term magistri when applied to the masters in chancery seems at first merely
to mark them as men with university degrees. But they were also praeceptores, for in
certain cases they had power to order that a writ should issue; Fleta, p. 77. Apparently
the class of writs known as magistralia consists of those which must be settled by one
of the magistri; Bracton, f. 413 b. Edward I. had two apostolic notaries in his
chancery, John Arthur of Caen and John Busshe. The series of masters of the rolls
goes back to the early years of Edward’s reign. The master of the rolls is the
chancellor’s principal subordinate.

[91 ] Mat. Par. Chron. Maj. v. 130.

[92 ] Writs issued by the court in the course of litigation are brevia iudicialia; they are
sometimes said to “issue out of the rolls of the court”; this means that the order for the
issue of the writ is on the court’s roll.

[93 ] Articuli super cartas, 1300, c. 6 (Statutes, i. 139).

[94 ] The large collection of privy seal writs in the Record Office begins in Edward
I.’s reign.

[95 ] Maitland, Memoranda de Parliamento, 33 Edward I., p. xxxvii.

[96 ] The stages by which the chancery ceased as a matter of fact to be a peripatetic
office, following the king in his progresses, have never yet been accurately
ascertained; but it seems probable that Chancellor Burnel made some noteworthy
change in 1280; Annales Monastici, ii. 393, iv. 477.

[97 ] The best introduction to them will be found in Bémont, Rôles Gascons
(Documents inédits), Paris 1896.

[98 ] If an intending litigant has to pay for his original writ, then an entry will be
made on the fine roll, but the nature of the writ will be but briefly described, e.g. as “a
writ of trespass,” “an attaint” or the like. See Fleta, p. 77. The Record Office contains
large stores of these writs.

[99 ] Harv. L. R., iii. 175.

[100 ] Excerpta e Rotulis Finium, i. 29, 49, 62, 68; Harv. L. R., iii. 12.

[101 ] Fleta, p. 77.

[102 ] Fleta, p. 77; Excerpta e Rotulis Finium, ii. 101.

[103 ] Fleta, p. 77–78.

[104 ] Bracton, f. 413 b–414 b.

[105 ] Harv. L. R., iii. 173, 174, 176.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 451 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[106 ] Mat. Par. Chron. Maj. iii. 364, 491, 495, 530.

[107 ] Ibid. iii. 629; v. 594.

[108 ] This begins as early as 1244; ibid. iv. 363, 367; vi. 363.

[109 ] Ann. Burton, 448.

[110 ] Placita de Quo Warranto, 681, 686: writs brought by the king are quashed by
the judges. Rolls of Parl. i. 52: Edward complains to his council that a particular case
has occurred which is not exactly met by any of the three writs of escheat current in
the chancery.

[111 ] Royal Letters, i. 68, 276, 282; ii. 48.

[112 ] Hale, Jurisdiction of the House of Lords, 47; Blackstone, Comm. iii. 48.

[113 ] See Rolls of Parliament, vol. i. passim, and Maitland, Memoranda de
Parliamento, 33 Edward I. An instance of a case committed to the chancellor occurs in
Rolls of Parl. i. p. 60: “Veniant partes coram cancellario et ostendat ei Adam quare
ipsos eiecit; et fiat eis iustitia.” Such a response as this is rare. Already a practice
obtained of acknowledging debts in the chancery, and when this had been done, a writ
of execution would issue from the chancery in the creditor’s favour. Fleta, p. 76,
mentions this as a case in which a “judicial” writ issues from the chancery. But here
originally there was little to be called jurisdiction, for the creditor who had a
recognizance had in theory what was equivalent to a judgment in his favour, and
execution would issue as a matter of course. It is probable that in dealing with the
king’s wards the chancery exercised something like jurisdiction, e.g. by deciding that
full age had or had not been attained, by allotting dower to widows and making
partition among co-heirs; but on the whole this (like much of the work done in the
Chancery Division to this day) is the work of an administrative office rather than of a
tribunal.

[114 ] Above, p. 163.

[115 ] Select Pleas of the Crown (Selden Soc.), pp. xiii–xix.

[116 ] Note Book, i. pp. 56–58.

[117 ] Charter, 1215, c. 17.

[118 ] It is of comparatively late origin. There are many criminal cases on the de
banco rolls of Edward I.

[119 ] Note Book, pl. 1166, 1189, 1190.

[120 ] In discussions of this obscure matter it has too often been forgotten that so long
as there was a Court of Common Pleas the most solemn title of its justices was
“Justices of the Bench,” while in 1875 the justices of the Queen’s Bench were

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 452 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

“Justices assigned to hold pleas before the Queen herself.” In 10 Edw. I. we have the
King’s Bench distinguished from the “Great Bench”; Plac. Abbrev. p. 274. About this
time “the justices of either bench” becomes a common phrase. Foss (ii. 160–86),
viewing the matter from a biographer’s stand-point, may be right in fixing a late date
for the final establishment of the two courts, for until the end of Henry’s reign the
judges are easily moved backwards and forwards between the two courts or divisions;
but long before this there are two parallel sets of rolls; and Bracton may serve as an
instance of a judge who, so far as we know, never sat at “the bench,” but for several
years held pleas “coram rege.”

[121 ] Hale, Jurisdiction of the House of Lords, p. 53.

[122 ] The problem for the fourteenth century is neatly raised by the words of Fleta, p.
66: “Habet enim Rex curiam suam in concilio suo in parliamentis suis, praesentibus
praelatis, comitibus, baronibus, proceribus et aliis viris peritis [corr. iurisperitis].”
Besides this the king has a court (King’s Bench) of justices “locum suum tenentes in
Anglia”; also he has a court before the justices of the (Common) Bench at
Westminster. The parallel passage in Bracton (f. 105 b, 108) recognizes but two
central courts, the Bench, and a higher court which is more specifically the king’s
own court, where his “chief justices” sit. See Maitland, Memoranda de Parliamento,
33 Edw. I., Introduction, p. lxxix.

[123 ] Thus Cambridge gaol seems to have been delivered about twenty-four times in
seven years, beginning with 2 Edw. I., the deliverers being usually Cambridgeshire
knights. Reports of Dep. Keeper, xliii–xlix.

[124 ] Bracton took Devonshire assizes at Exeter, Morchard, Molton, Torrington,
Chulmleigh, Barnstaple, Umberleigh; Note Book, i. p. 17.

[125 ] Calendar of Patent Rolls in 43rd Rep. of Dep. Keeper.

[126 ] During Henry’s reign there seem to have been several years in which no court
was sitting at Westminster, eyres having been proclaimed in all or most of the
counties: Note Book, i. pp. 141–42.

[127 ] As to these articles see Select Pleas of the Crown (Selden Soc.), p. xxii. More
of them in our section on Trespasses.

[128 ] The proceedings of an eyre can be best studied in Page, Three Assize Rolls for
Northumberland (Surtees Society), and in the rolls which Mr. Chadwyck Healey is
publishing for the Somersetshire Record Society.

[129 ] Bishops were largely employed in the first eyre of the reign. In 1236 the
appointment of an abbot is a scandal; Rob. Grosseteste, Epistolae, pp. 105, 108.

[130 ] Ann. Dunst. p. 135 (1233): “quorum metu omnes ad silvas fugerunt.”

[131 ] Ann. Wigorn. p. 446 (1261). Close Roll, Hen. III. No. 77, m. 9 d: an eyre in
Norfolk is postponed as seven years have not elapsed since the last eyre.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 453 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[132 ] A “nisi prius” clause was occasionally used as early as 1225; see Not Book, pl.
721 and many other cases. The burden of jury service was not so intolerable as it
might seem, did we not remember (1) that by far the most popular of all actions were
the assizes of novel disseisin and mort d’ancestor; (2) that these assizes were not as a
general rule actions pending in the court at Westminster, but were from the moment
of their inception consigned to justices of assize; (3) that “trespass” did not become
common until late in the reign; (4) that jurors were seldom required for actions of debt
or detinue or for actions on prohibitions; (5) that a “grand assize” was, or ought to
have been, constituted of knights.

[133 ] Mat. Par. v. 213, 223, 240, charges against Henry of Bath; v. 628, against
Henry de la Mare.

[134 ] Charter, 1215, c. 34.

[135 ] Petition of 1258, c. 29: the great lords are not to make their courts tribunals of
second instance. Provisions of Westminster, c. 9, 10, damages are to be given in the
assize of mort d’ancestor; c. 6, procedure in dower unde nihil habet (an action which
controverts feudal principles) is to be speedier; c. 18, the royal control over all actions
touching freehold is to be secured. Stat. Marlb. c. 29: the scope of the writs of entry is
to be extended at the expense of the writ of right.

[136 ] Bracton, f. 106, a defence of dower unde nihil habet; f. 281, a defence of the
writ of cosinage; comp. Note Book, pl. 1215.

[137 ] Bracton, f. 414 b: “pertinet enim ad regem ad quamlibet iniuriam
compescendam remedium competens adhibere.”

[138 ] Note Book, i. pp. 144–45.

[139 ] Foss, Judges, ii. 270. It is convenient to give the title of “chief justice” to the
series of presidents of the king’s bench which begins at or about this point, reserving
“chief justiciar” for the line of first ministers or viceroys which is becoming extinct.
But this is a modern artifice. The change of style was really a very small one; it
consisted in adding to the old title “Capitalis Justiciarius Angliae” the limiting words
“ad placita coram Rege tenenda.” So long as Latin is used, a justice is a iusticiarius, a
chief justice is a capitalis iusticiarius. In the twelfth century iustitia had been the
commoner title.

[140 ] Foss, Judges, iii. 142, makes Gilbert Preston the first chief justice of the
common pleas.

[141 ] Note Book, i. pp. 24–25.

[142 ] Mat. Par. Chron. Maj. iii. 293.

[143 ] cc. 1, 2, 4, 5, 10, X. 3, 50. Ann. Burton. p. 308–9: Articles of inquiry into the
life of the clergy; “An aliqui sint . . . iustitiarii saeculares . . . An aliqui beneficiati
audiant vel doceant leges saeculares.” Grosseteste, Epist. p. 266: Robert Lexington

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 454 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

has piled irregularity upon irregularity by hearing criminal causes on Sunday. From
another letter (p. 106) we learn that a clerical justice would salve his conscience by
leaving the bench when a sentence of death was to be passed. The clerks who write
the plea rolls have scruples about writing the word “suspendatur”:—“et ideo habeat
iudicium suum,” or simply “et ideo etc.” will be quite enough.

[144 ] Mat. Par. Chron. Maj. iv. 49: “Thomas de Muletuna, miles in armis cum
iuventus ei arridebat, et cum provectioris esset aetatis abundans possessionibus
legisque peritus saecularis.” Ibid. v. 317: “Rogerus de Thurkebi miles et literatus.”

[145 ] Laurence de Brok, who often represented Henry III. in litigation, seems to be
one of the first men who climb to the judicial bench from the bar; Foss, Judges, ii.
267. It is by no means impossible that Martin Pateshull was clerk to Simon Pateshull
(see above, p. 180), that William Raleigh was Martin’s clerk (Maitland,
Gloucestershire Pleas of the Crown, p. xiii), that Bracton was Raleigh’s clerk and thus
inherited the rolls that he used. William of York had been a clerk in the chancery: “I
raised you from the depths; you were the scribbler of my writs, a justice and a
hireling,” says King Henry; Mat. Par. Chron. Maj. v. 374.

[146 ] See Bracton’s Note Book; also Bracton and Azo (Selden Soc.).

[147 ] Bracton’s Note Book, vol. i. The discovery was due to Prof. Paul Vinogradoff.

[148 ] See Güterbock, Henricus de Bracton; Scrutton, Roman Law in England;
Bracton and Azo (Selden Soc.).

[149 ] The nearest approach to an admission that Roman law may be employed to eke
out English law is to be found on a roll of 1237–38, Note Book, pl. 1227. The
question is as to whether a palatinate can be partitioned among co-heirs; the magnates,
prelates and justices declare that they never heard of a similar case, that they do not
know whether there is anything about it in Magna Carta, that they will not follow
foreign precedents, and that they have seen no such case in iure scripto (i.e. in Roman
law); therefore they adjourn their decision. Any notion that this country was in any
way subject to the empire would have been scouted in England. Just when Bracton
was writing it had become extremely probable that the Emperor for the time being
would, when in England, be a subject and vassal of the king of England. Ricardus Rex
Alemanniae (he was Rex Romanorum semper augustus) was impleaded for a novel
disseisin; Placit. Abbrev. p. 145.

[150 ] Abbrev. Placit. p. 128: “nunquam se dimisit de terra illa corpore nec animo.”
This is from one of the rolls which record Bracton’s doings as a justice of assize.
They are to be edited by Mr. Chadwyck Healey. As to the usufruct, see Note Book, i.
p. 91–93.

[151 ] Bracton, f. 2 b, 3: “Ius dicitur ars boni et aequi, cuius merito quis nos
sacerdotes appellat: iustitiam namque colimus et sacra iura ministramus.” This old
phrase (Dig. 1. 1. 1) is no cant in Bracton’s mouth; he feels that he is a priest of the
law, a priest for ever after the order of Ulpian.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 455 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[152 ] Note Book, i. 104–116.

[153 ] For the anti-feudal inclination see the argument in favour of free alienation;
Bracton, f. 45 b–46 b. For the anti-ecclesiastical tendency see the whole treatment of
the writ of prohibition, f. 401–410, many sentences in which flatly contradict claims
which were being made by the high churchmen of the day. Bracton, however, if we
mistake not, is within the ecclesiastical sphere a thorough-going papalist. He ascribes
to the pope not merely a jurisdiction, but an ordinaria iurisdictio, over all men. As to
his political opinions see Note Book, i. pp. 29–33. We cannot decide what they were
until some certain answer has been found for the question whether he wrote the fiery
words on f. 34; but the moderate and unquestioned passage on f. 171 b is enough to
show that he was neither a courtly flatterer nor a champion of despotic monarchy; this
however is evident enough from many other passages, including that (f. 107) in which
he wilfully distorts (Note Book, i. p. 4) the “sed et quod principi placuit.”

[154 ] Selden, Dissertatio ad Fletam, p. 456.

[155 ] Nichols, Introduction to his edition of Britton.

[156 ] Walter of Henley, ed. Lamond and Cunningham.

[157 ] Brevia Placitata, now being edited by Mr. G. I. Turner.

[158 ] The Court Baron (Selden Soc.), Introduction.

[159 ] See the edition of Walter of Henley cited above.

[160 ] Select Pleas in Manorial Courts (Selden Soc.), Introduction.

[161 ] Brunner, Forschungen, p. 389; Brunner, D. R. G. ii. 349.

[162 ] Leg. Henr. 46, 47, 48, 49, 61 § 18, 19.

[163 ] Leg. Henr. 46 § 3: “Bonum autem est, ut cum alicuius consilium in placito
redditur, cum emendatione dicendum praedicatur, ut si forte perorator vel
superadiecerit aliquid, vel omiserit, emendare liceat ei. Saepe enim fit, ut in sua causa
quis minus videat quam in alterius, et in ore alterius plerumque poterit emendare quod
in suo non liceret.”

[164 ] Note Book, pl. 298. So in pl. 131: “deadvocat quod narrator suus pro eo
narravit.” So in pl. 1106: “Alanus de Waxtonesham qui narravit pro Eustachio in
misericordia, quia Eustachius deadvocavit id quod pro eo narravit.”

[165 ] The Court Baron (Selden Soc.), p. 41. References to this practice may be found
in the Year Books, e.g. Y. B. 33–35 Edw. I., pp. 297, 458.

[166 ] Mat. Par. Chron. Maj. iii. 124. It is noticed as somewhat strange that in 1227
the king’s brother Earl Richard of Cornwall should urge his claims before the king
“sine aliquo advocato rationabiliter simul et eloquenter.”

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 456 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[167 ] Glanvill, lib. xi.

[168 ] See Stat. West. II. c. 10, which gave a general right to appoint an attorney to
appear in all causes which should come before the justices in a given eyre.

[169 ] Registrum Brevium Originalium, ff. 20–22.

[170 ] Britton, vol. ii. p. 357.

[171 ] Select Civil Pleas, pl. 141.

[172 ] Note Book, pl. 342, 1361, 1507.

[173 ] See above, p. 168.

[174 ] Gesta Abbatum, i. 136: “Robertus [Abbas S. Albani] . . . Magistrum
Ambrosium, clericum suum, legis peritissimum, Italicum natione (de primis tempore,
scientia et moribus, Angliae legis peritis) Romam . . . destinavit.” See also
Liebermann, E. H. R. xi. 313–14.

[175 ] On 31 March, 1163, Glanvill appeared along with Anesty at Windsor; at
Michaelmas in that year he became sheriff of Yorkshire.

[176 ] Mat. Par. Chron. Maj. iii. 111: “Ricardus de Marisco Dunelmensis episcopus . .
. cum tumultu valido reboantium legistarum.” Ibid. 531: “Miserat enim [rex] ad
curiam Romanam unum legistarum suorum, quorum magnam catervam retinuit, quasi
venator canes venaticos, super electores praelatorum discopulandos, videlicet
Simonem Normannum.” Ibid. 268, “Rogerum de Cantelu legistam”; 483, “Magister
Odo [de Kilkenny] legista”; 491, “legistas suas Romipedas”; 491, “Simonem
Normannum et Alexandrum Saecularem legistas conductitios”; iv. 266, “Alexandrum
legistam, cognomento Saecularem.”

[177 ] See above, p. 130.

[178 ] Thus, iii. 190, Pateshull is “legum terrae peritus”; iii. 525, Raleigh is “legum
terrae peritissimus”; iv. 49, Multon is “legis peritus”; iv. 587, William of York is
“legum regni peritissimus.”

[179 ] Mat. Par. Chron. Maj. iii. 619: “licet Rex cum omnibus prolocutoribus banci
quos narratores vulgariter appellamus in contrarium niteretur.” The Latin narrator
and its French equivalent contour became technical terms. If an English term was in
use, it was perhaps forspeaker.

[180 ] Madox, Exchequer, i. 236.

[181 ] Liber de Antiquis Legibus, 42–43.

[182 ] Mat. Par. Chron. Maj. iii. 439–40; Joh. de Athona, p. 70.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 457 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[183 ] Stat. West. I. c. 29.

[184 ] Rolls of Parliament, i. 84.

[185 ] So early as 1253 the Bishop of Rochester was impleaded by the Archbishop of
Canterbury in the king’s court, “et Abell de S. Martino venit et narravit pro episcopo
et non fuit advocatus; ideo in misericordia”; Placit. Abbrev. 137. We cannot be quite
certain that the objection to Abel was that he was not a member of the legal
profession; perhaps the bishop had given him no authority to plead his cause.

[186 ] Liber Custumarum, i. 280 (ad 1280).

[187 ] Cart. Rams. i. 428.

[188 ] Pleas in Manorial Courts (Selden Soc.), 155, 159, 160.

[189 ] Walter of Hemingford (ed. Hearne), ii. 208, tells how in 1304 the Abp. of York
was impleaded. “None of his counsel nor any of all the pleaders (narratores) could or
dared answer for him. So in his own person, like one of the people, and before all the
people, he made his answer bareheaded:—for the men of the court did not love him.”

[190 ] See e.g. Y. B. 30–31 Edw. I. p. 107.

[191 ] Y. B. 33–35 Edw. I. p. 471. The allusion is to Cod. 3. 31. 11: “Cogi
possessorem ab eo, qui expetit, titulum suae possessionis dicere, incivile est.”

[192 ] Y. B. 33–35 Edw. I. p. 9; 30–31 Edw. I. p. 57; 21–22 Edw. I. 295.

[193 ]De regulis iuris, in vi to.

[194 ] Britton (ed. Nichols), ii. 65.

[195 ] Constitutions of Otho (1237), Mat. Par. iii. 438; Joh. de Athona, p. 67:
“Quoniam tabellionum usus in regno Angliae non habetur.” See Selden, Titles of
Honour, Works, ed. 1726, vol. iii. pp. 131–32, 467. A book of English precedents of
the thirteenth century remarks that for a bond two witnesses with the tabellio or notary
are enough; see L. Q. R. vii. 66. We must remember, however, that a mercantile bond
should be so attested that it will be valid in foreign courts.

[196 ] Foedera, i. 784: “Ego Johannes Erturi de Cadomo apostolicae sedis auctoritate
notarius.” This John Arthur of Caen was a master of the chancery.

[197 ] Bethmann-Hollweg, Civilprozess, vi. 189, gives an account of this book. The
author says to the archbishop: “Cum solempnis vestra curia et regnum Angliae quasi
totum personis careat, quae secundum formam Romanae curiae vel idoneam aliam
qualemcunque intellectum et notitiam habeant eorum quae ad artem pertinent
notariae.” From the ignorance of the English scribes “iudicibus obprobrium et
partibus incommodum saepe proveniunt.” John of Bologna seems to have been

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 458 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

employed by Peckham and to have obtained a benefice in Wales: Peckham’s Register,
i. 45, 278; iii. 1009.

[198 ] Maitland, A Conveyancer in the Thirteenth Century, L. Q. R. vii. 63; The Court
Baron (Selden Soc.), pp. 7, 12–14.

[199 ] A good specimen is given in Mat. Par. iii. 329; but many may be found
elsewhere.

[200 ] Y. B. 30–31 Edw.: “Defaute de bon serjant fet B perdre sez deniers.”

[201 ] Leg. Henr. 46 § 3.

[202 ] Statutes, i. 55.

[203 ] Note Book, pl. 1474.

[204 ] Royal Letters, Henry III., vol. ii. p. 353: “Vestram rogamus regiam dignitatem
quatenus . . . leges terrarum vestrarum ubique per Walliam et per Marchiam nobis
concedere velitis, et hoc est, quod innocens non puniatur pro nocente, nec etiam
imputetur parentelae alicuius si aliquis de parentela interfecerit aliquem vel furtum vel
aliquam seditionem [fecerit] nisi ipsi malefactori.”

[205 ] As to the transmission of the register, see Harv. L. R. iii. 110. For an early case
in which an Irish judgment is corrected in England, see Rot. Cl. p. 549; there are
several other cases on the rolls of Edward I. For Irish petitions to the English council,
see Memoranda de Parliamento, 33 Edw. I. p. 232.

[206 ] Calendar of Papal Registers, i. 283: Constitution (1253), whereby in the
province of Cashel the evil custom of giving credence to an Englishman on his oath
touching a theft, if supported by six Englishmen, while an Irishman, whose innocence
is testified by thirty witnesses, has to make restitution, is abolished, and equal justice
is ordered to be done between English and Irish.

[207 ] Memoranda de Parliamento, 33 Edw. I. pp. 253–54.

[208 ] Acts of Parliament of Scotland, i. 413; Neilson, Trial by Combat, 126.

[209 ] In Acts of Parliament of Scotland, vol. i, Regiam Maiestatem is collated with
Glanvill. The present state of the question as to its date may be gathered from
Neilson, Trial by Combat, pp. 99–104. Of all the various theories that have been
started, that which ascribes this book to Edward I. will seem to an Englishman the
most improbable. If Edward had attempted to foist an English law book on Scotland,
that book would have been founded on Bracton or Britton and not on the antiquated
Glanvill. The English law that is borrowed is distinctly law of the twelfth century.

[210 ] Schröder, D. R. G. 746. The Roman law that comes to England is the law of the
early “glossators.” The Roman law that wins victories in Scotland and Germany is the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 459 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

law of the later “commentators” (Baldus, Bartolus and so forth) which has
accommodated itself to practical needs.

[1 ] As to the arrangement of the treatise see Bracton and Azo, p. 14.

[2 ] Bract. f. 3 b: “Est autem ius publicum quod ad statum reipublicae (al. cod. rei
Romanae) spectat . . . ius autem privatum est quod ad singulorum pertinet utilitatem
principaliter et secundario pertinet ad rempublicam.” On the general ground that a
copyist is more likely to have discarded than to have reintroduced the allusion to
Rome, rei Romanae seems the preferable reading; it is also the reading of the best
mss. See Bracton and Azo, p. 27. A germ of the distinction between public and
private law may be found in Bracton’s treatment of suit of court, f. 37, and franchises,
f. 55 b; but it is not prominent.

[3 ] Austin, Jurisprudence, i. 69–71.

[4 ] Rot. Hund. ii. 673.

[5 ] This statement will require some qualification hereafter when we speak of the
unfree tenures.

[6 ] In later days the term “tenure in capite” was sometimes used as though it were
equivalent to “tenure in capite of the crown” and even to “tenure in capite of the
crown by knight’s service.” In the Baronia Anglicana, Madox has sufficiently proved
that this use of the term was an innovation. See also Hargrave’s notes to Co. Lit. 108
a. In the thirteenth century the term “in capite” is merely equivalent to “immediately,”
“sine medio”; thus even a burgage tenant may have “tenants in capite” holding of
him: Ann. Dunstap. p. 173. Again, in the time of Henry I. Roger holds of Nigel, Nigel
of the Earl of Chester; Nigel consents that Roger shall hold of the Earl “in capite, ut
vulgo loquitur”: Hist. Abingd. ii. 67. See also Madox, Formulare, No. 22; but
examples are plentiful. The term was in use in Normandy, where we find an
equivalent and expressive phrase: “Les fiefs sont tenus nu à nu [Lat. immediate] des
seignurs quand il n’y a aulcune personne entre eulx et leurs tenants”; Ancienne
Coutume (de Gruchy) c. 29. So too a tenant’s “capitalis dominus” is his immediate
lord, not the lord who is chief above his other lords, but the lord who is nearest to
him. See e.g. Petition of the Barons, 1258, c. 29; Ann. Burton, p. 474 § 13. But
perhaps this usage of the term “chief lord” is not very consistently maintained; it was
giving trouble in 1304; Y. B. 32–33 Edw. I., p. 39.

[7 ] We use the phrase “dependent and derivative tenure” instead of saying merely
“tenure,” for though English lawyers have been wont to speak as though tenure of
land were characteristic of feudalism, we ought to remember that long before there
was any feudal tenure the verb tenere, sometimes in conjunction with habere, was
currently used to describe the possession of land. What is characteristic of feudalism
is not tenere terram, but tenere terram de X.

[8 ] There are two passages in the Leg. Henr. in which feodum seems to signify rather
inherited than heritable rights:—70 § 21, the eldest son is to inherit the father’s

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 460 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

feodum, while the emptiones and acquisitiones the father may give to whom he will;
here the feodum seems to be the ancestral estate and is opposed to lands acquired by
purchase:—88 § 15, there seems a contrast drawn between the feodum and the
conquisitum, though the passage is not very plain as it stands. See also Maitland,
Domesday Book, 152.

[9 ] Glanvill, xiii. 2: “ut de feodo vel ut de vadio . . . ut de feodo vel ut de warda.”
Ibid. xiii. 24: land held by a church in free alms is feodum ecclesiasticum. Where a
church is tenant, there is of course no inheritance; but the church has a perpetual right
in its feodum. The contrast between fee and gage disappears when the gage takes the
form of a conditional feoffment.

[10 ] Perhaps the tenant in villeinage was not yet spoken of as holding in feodo.
Demandants of customary land, while closely following the forms by which free land
was demanded, seem to avoid saying that their ancestors were seised “of fee,” while
asserting that they were seised “of right,” or “of hereditary right”; Manorial Pleas
(Seld. Soc.), i. 34, 39, 41. On the other hand, among the sokemen on the ancient
demesne we find seisin in fee freely asserted; ibid. 123.

[11 ] Brunner, D. R. G., ii. 11: “Wo jedes Grundeigentum sich in Lehn verwandelt,
wird das Lehn, wie die Entwicklung des englischen Rechtes zeigt, schliesslich zum
Begriff des Grundeigentums.”

[12 ] It is believed that the forms feud and fief appear in England but late in the day
under the influence of foreign books; they never became terms of our law. It is
noticeable also that feodum was constantly used in the sense that our fee has when we
speak of a lawyer’s or doctor’s fee; payments due for services rendered, at least if
they are permanent periodic payments, are feoda; the judges, for example, receive
feoda, salaries. The etymological problem presented by the English fee seems no easy
one, because at the Conquest the would-be Latin feodum or feudum (the d in which
has puzzled philologists and does not always appear in Domesday Book) is introduced
among a people which already has feoh as a word for property in general and cattle in
particular. See Oxf. Eng. Dict. There are valuable remarks on this word in Flach,
Origines de l’ancienne France, ii. 315.

[13 ] After a struggle in twelfth century with other forms, such as tenura, tenuitura,
the word tenementum has established itself in the thirteenth century as the proper
word whereby to describe the subject of a tenure. Such a word is the more wanted
because terra is often applied in a special sense to arable land; tenementa on the other
hand will include houses, meadows, pastures, woods and the like, and will also
comprise certain “incorporeal things.”

[14 ] Phrases showing that the lord is conceived as holding the land are quite
common; see e.g. Bracton f. 432 b, “Item cum petens totum petat in dominico, tenens
respondere potest et cognoscere quod totum non tenet in dominico, sed partim in
dominico et partim in servitio.” So also the lord is seised not merely of the tenant’s
services but of the land; Bracton f. 81, “nisi ipse vel antecessores sui in seisina fuerint

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 461 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

de tenemento illo in dominico vel servitio”; f. 392, “antecessor obiit seisitus ut de
feodo in dominico vel in servitio.”

[15 ] Testa de Neville, 71. See Gierke, Genossenschaftsrecht, ii. 92.

[16 ] The writ of mesne is not in Glanvill, but appears in very early Registers; Harv.
L. R., iii. 113, 115. In Henry III.’s day it was in common use.

[17 ] Y. B. 33–35 Edw. I., p. 377.

[18 ] See Bracton’s explanation of the term “forinsec service,” f. 35–37. This term
had been in common use even in Richard’s reign; see Fines, ed. Hunter, passim ; and
may be found in Domesday Book, i. 165 b. It seems constantly used as though it were
equivalent, or almost equivalent, to “royal service,” “military service,” “scutage,”
insomuch that to say of a man that he owes forinsec service is almost the same as
saying that his tenure is military, and therefore implies wardship and marriage; see
Bracton’s Note Book, pl. 33, 236, 288, 703, 795, 978, 1076, 1631; Y. B. 20–21 Edw.
I., p. 133. Hence the notion put forward by Hale and supported by Hargrave (Co. Lit.
69 b, 74 a, notes) that forinsec service is so called because it is done in foreign parts.
But this can hardly be true; the military tenants were constantly asserting that into
foreign parts they were not bound to go. Besides, services which are not military are
occasionally called “forinsec,” services due from socage tenements, e.g. suit of court,
landgafol, churchscot; Reg. Malm., ii. 51, “salvo forinseco servicio pertinente ad
liberum socagium quantum ad unam virgatam terrae”; ibid. 52, “salvo forinseco
servicio pertinente ad unam virgatam terrae de libero socagio”; ibid. 69, “et pro
chirchsote [sic] et omnibus aliis serviciis forinsecis.” And forinsec service is not
necessarily due to the king; Whalley Coucher, i. 21: A’s tenant B has enfeoffed C; A
releases to C “omne forense servicium quod ad me pertinet”; the service due from B
to A was forinsec as regards C. Thus the term is a relative one; what is “intrinsec”
between A and B is “forinsec” as regards C. At the same time, it must be confessed
that this use of the word, which has not been found in France, implies a considerable
degree of abstraction, and it seems possible that as a matter of historic fact it is due to
the legal development of a more concrete notion. In northern charters we sometimes
read of the king’s “utware” just where we should expect to read of “forinsec service.”
Perhaps at first “outside service” meant service done outside the tenement or outside
the manor; but jurisprudence gave a new turn to the phrase, and there is hardly room
for doubt that Bracton’s explanation (f. 36) gives us the law of his
time:—“forinsecum dici potest quia sit [corr. fit] et capitur foris sive extra servitium
quod sit [corr. fit] domino capitali.” Observe that the tenant’s “dominus capitalis” is
his immediate lord.

[19 ] The passage in Glanvill most important in this context is lib. ix. c. 4, where we
read of “barony,” “knight’s service,” “serjeanty,” “socage”; elsewhere “burgage” and
“frankalmoin” appear; “frankmarriage” will also demand attention, but at a later stage
of our work.

[20 ] But in 13 Edw. I. (Fitz. Abr. Counterple de voucher, 118) it is said that
frankalmoin is the highest and most certain of all services.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 462 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[21 ] Lit. secs. 133–38.

[22 ] See the writ Cessavit de cantaria, Reg. Brev. Orig. 237 b, 238.

[23 ] A few instances of such definite spiritual services may be found already in
Domesday, e.g. ii. 133, 133 b, a tenant has to sing three masses. Gifts for the
maintenance of lamps before particular altars and the like are not uncommon, and
often they expressly say that the land is frankalmoin, e.g. Reg. St. Osmund i. 234
(1220– 25), a gift of land to the church of Sarum in pure and perpetual alms to find a
taper to burn before the relics on festivals. Sometimes it would have been difficult to
draw the line between “certain” and “uncertain” services, as when land was given that
its rents might be expended “tam in reparanda ecclesia quam in maioribus necessariis
ecclesiae,” Reg. St. Osmund, i. 350.

[24 ] D. B. i. 293: “In W. tenet quidam cecus unam bovatam in elemosina de rege.”
Ibid. iv. 466: “Tenuit Edritius mancus in elemosina de rege Edwardo.” In Dorsetshire,
under the heading “Terra Tainorum Regis” (i. 84), we find “Hanc terram dedit Regina
Dodoni in elemosina.” In Devonshire, under the like heading (118), we find “Aluuard
Mert tenet dim. virg. . . . Regina dedit ei in elemosina.” In Hertfordshire (137 b) we
read how a manor was held by two thegns, one of whom was the man of King
Edward, the other was the man of Æsgar; they could not sell “quia semper iacuerunt
in elemosina.” This would seem to mean that they held precariously. See the curious
entry, ii. 5 b, which tells how Harold gave a hide to a certain priest of his, “set hundret
nescit si dedit liberae [sic] vel in elemosina”; seemingly the hundred did not know
whether the priest’s tenure was free or precarious.

[25 ] D. B. ii. 24 b; ii. 189 b: the parish church holds sixty acres of free land
“elemosina plurimorum.” See the survey of Suffolk, where the parish church
generally holds some acres “of free land” in elemosina.

[26 ] D. B. i. 25 b: “Clepinges tenet Abbatia de Almanesches de Comite (Rogerio) in
elemosina . . . se defendit pro xi. hidis. . . . In eodem manerio tenet S. Marunus de
Sais de Comite in elemosina xi. hidas.” Ibid. i. 58: “Episcopus Dunelmensis tenet de
Rege Waltham in elemosina.” Ibid. i. 166 b: “Ecclesia de Cirecestre tenet de Rege
duas hidas in elemosina et de Rege E. tenuit quietas ab omni consuetudine.”

[27 ] Thus when Henry I. makes gifts to the Abbey of Abingdon “to the use of the
alms of the said church,” we seem to get the term in a slightly different sense from
that which becomes usual; he may well mean that the land is devoted to those pious
works of the abbey which belong to the almoner’s department; Hist. Abingd. ii. 65,
94.

[28 ] In comparatively late documents we may still find persons who are said to hold
in frankalmoin but are not holding in right of any church. Thus in the Whalley
Coucher, i. 43, William the clerk of Eccles gives land to his brother John, his heirs
and assigns, to hold in pure and perpetual alms of the donor and his heirs, rendering
yearly a pound of incense to God and the church of Eccles. William’s tenure may
have been frankalmoin, but according to modern notions John’s could not be.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 463 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[29 ] Already Bede, Hist. Eccl. iii. 24, tells how Oswy gave land to the church in
order that prayers might be offered for the peace of his folk. The land, instead of
providing for a militia terrestris, is devoted to a militia caelestis.

[30 ] Cart. Glouc. i. 197: “habendum in liberam elemosinam . . . sine aliquo
retinemento ad opus meum vel aliquorum heredum meorum nisi tautummodo
orationes spirituales perpetuas.” Ibid. i. 199, 289, 335, ii. 10. Such phrases are
common in the Whalley Coucher Book.

[31 ] Cart. Glouc. i. 307: “Nos vero . . . praedictam terrain . . . per praedictum
servicium orationum warantizabimus.” The term “consideration” is of course rather
too technical, but still the prayers seem regarded as having a certain juristic value.

[32 ] Litigations over the right to bury benefactors may be found, e.g. Register of St.
Thomas, Dublin, p. 349, between the canons of St. Thomas and the monks of Bective
about the body of Hugh de Lacy; also struggles for the bodies of dying men, e.g.
between the monks of Abingdon and the canons of St. Frideswide, Hist. Abingd. ii.
175. See also a charter of John de Lacy in the Whalley Coucher, i. 33: “Know ye that
I have given and granted to the abbot and monks of Stanlaw after my death myself
and my body to be buried.”

[33 ] For an elaborate agreement about masses and other spiritual benefits, see
Newminster Cartulary, p. 120.

[34 ] Bracton, f. 12.

[35 ] Cart. Ramsey, i. 159, 160, 255, 256.

[36 ] See e.g. Cart. Glouc. i. 164, 205; ii. 74, 86, 97.

[37 ] See e.g. Hist. Abingd. ii. 55; Whitby Cartulary, i. 200; Whalley Coucher, i. 17,
113.

[38 ] See e.g. Bull of 1138, Hist. Evesham, 173; Bull of 1140, Cart. Ramsey, ii. 155;
Bull of 1146, Hist. Abingd. ii. 191.

[39 ] Bracton, f. 12, 286 b.

[40 ] Bracton, f. 27 b. Cf. Somma, p. 99.

[41 ] Fines, ed. Hunter, i. 200 (3 John): “Ala dedit et concessit in puram et perpetuam
elemosinam Deo et ecclesiae S. Marie de B. . . . totam partem suam . . . ita quod
praedictus prior et successores sui facient inde forinsecum servicium.” Cart. Glouc. i.
167: gift in frankalmoin, “salvo tamen regali servicio.” Ibid. 187: gift in frankalmoin
saving the landgafol due to the king. Ibid. 289: gift in free, pure and perpetual alms
subject to a rent of pepper and to royal service.

[42 ] Cart. Glouc. ii. 17, 30, 98.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 464 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[43 ] Bracton, f. 27 b; Note Book, pl. 21.

[44 ] Rievaulx Cart. p. 29: gift by Bishop Hugh of Durham in free and perpetual alms
at a rent of 60 shillings, payable to him and his successors. Ibid. pp. 80, 226, 249.
Newminster Cart. p. 73: gift by Newminster Abbey to Hexham Priory in free, pure,
and perpetual alms at a substantial rent. Bracton, f. 48, holds that in these cases the
services must be done, but speaks with some doubt.

[45 ] Const. Clarend. c. 9. In the Gesta Abbatum, i. 114, the St. Alban’s chronicler
gives an account of litigation in Stephen’s reign in which something very like an
Assisa Utrum takes place. See above p. 154.

[46 ] See the remarkable series of papal rescripts in the Rievaulx Cartulary, 189– 97;
see also c. 7, X. 4, 17, where the pope admits that he has gone too far in ordering his
delegates to give possession in a dispute between laymen, which came into the
ecclesiastical courts in consequence of a question having been raised about bastardy.
See also in the Malmesbury Register, ii. 7, proceedings under letters of Innocent III.
for the recovery from a layman of land improvidently alienated by an abbot. In the
Gesta Abbatum, i. 159–62, there is a detailed account of litigation which took place
early in Henry II.’s reign between the Abbot of St. Alban’s and a layman touching the
title to a wood; the abbot procured letters from the pope appointing judges delegate.

[47 ] Somma, p. 295; Ancienne coutume, p. 288; Brunner, Entstehung der
Schwurgerichte, 324–26; Brunner, Pol. Sci. Quarterly, xi. 538. Apparently, the
Norman as-size had from the first served as a petitory action; but if the recognitors
could give no verdict, then the cause went to the ecclesiastical court.

[48 ] The term Juris Utrum seems due to a mistake in the expansion of the
compendium Jur’; it should be Jurata Utrum, in French Juré Utrum; see e.g. Y. B.
14–15 Edw. III. (ed. Pike), p. 47; and see Bracton, f. 287, where the technical
distinction between an Assisa Utrum and a Jurata Utrum is explained.

[49 ] Britton, ii. 207.

[50 ] According to Glanvill (xii. 25, xiii. 23, 24) the courts Christian are competent to
decide an action for land between two clerks or between clerk and layman in case the
person in possession is a clerk who holds in free alms. So late as 1206 an assize
Utrum is brought by one monastic house against another and, on its appearing that the
land is almoin, the judgment is that the parties do go to court Christian and implead
each other there; Placit. Abbrev. p. 54 (Oxon.).

[51 ] This remark seems fairly well-supported by the practice of conveyancers in
Bracton’s time; thus e.g. a donor gives land “to God and St. Mary and St. Chad and
the church of Rochdale,” and contracts to warrant the land “to God and the church of
Rochdale,” saying nothing of the parson; Whalley Coucher, i. 162.

[52 ] Bracton, f. 286 b, 287. This may have been the reasoning which caused a denial
of the assize to the parson when that parson was a monastery, a denial which an
ordinance of 1234 overruled; Note Book, pl. 1117.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 465 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[53 ] Bracton, f. 287 b. The parson has not only the assize of novel disseisin, but he
may have a writ of entry founded on the seisin of his predecessor. This being so, the
refusal to allow him a writ of right is already somewhat anomalous. But the writs of
entry are new, and the law of the twelfth century (completely ignored by Bracton) was
that the ecclesiastical court was the tribunal competent to decide on the title to land
held in frankalmoin.

[54 ] Stutz, Geschichte des kirchlichen Benefizialwesens; Stutz, Die Eigenkirche.

[55 ] Bracton, f. 286 b.

[56 ] Bracton, f. 285 b; Fleta, p. 332; Britton, ii. 207.

[57 ] Stat. 13 Ed. I., c. 24.

[58 ] Bracton, f. 407; Note Book, pl. 547, 1143.

[59 ] Bracton, f. 407. Such lands constitute the church’s dos or dower. See also f. 207
b.

[60 ] See Note Book passim. The writ of prohibition is found in Glanvill, xii. 21, 22.
It is found in the earliest Chancery Registers. Bracton discusses its scope at great
length, f. 402 ff.

[61 ] In the twelfth century the donor sometimes expressly binds himself and his heirs
to submit to the church courts in case he or they go against the gift; see e.g. Rievaulx
Cartulary, 33, 37, 39, 69, 159, 166. So in the Newminster Cartulary, 89, a man
covenants to levy a fine and submits to the jurisdiction of the archdeacon of
Northumberland in case he fails to perform his covenant. For a similar obligation
undertaken by a married woman, see Cart. Glouc. i. 304. As to such attempts to
renounce the right to a prohibition, see Note Book, pl. 678.

[62 ] Ann. Burton, p. 427. See also the protest of the bishops in 1257, Mat. Par.
Chron. Maj. vi. 361.

[63 ] Viollet, Histoire du droit civil, p. 702: “la franche aumône . . . un franc alleu . . .
échappant à toute juridiction civile.”

[64 ] There is only one half-century during which scutages are frequently imposed,
namely that which lies between 1190 and 1240. The early history of scutage is now in
the crucible. New materials have been rendered accessible by the publication of the
Red Book of the Exchequer and some of the Pipe Rolls of Henry II.’s day. Two
important tracts have come to our hands at the last moment, viz. (1) J. F. Baldwin,
Scutage and Knight Service, Chicago, University Press, 1897; and (2) J. H. Round,
The Red Book of the Exchequer (privately printed), 1898. Mr. Round makes it fairly
certain that our statement (infra, p. 267) as to the existence of scutage before the days
of Henry II. is not strong enough, and he leaves us doubting whether at this point
Henry did much that was new. Mr. Baldwin has thrown light on many details. While
agreeing with us in holding that in the last days of scutage the tenant in chief cannot

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 466 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

escape from the duty of military service at the cost of paying scutage, Mr. Baldwin
seems inclined to hold that in the earlier time the scutage was treated as a full
equivalent of the service. His researches seem to show that Henry II.’s endeavour to
charge the tenants in chief with the number of fees that they had created if it exceeded
their old servitium debitum (infra, p. 266) was not permanently successful. Not the
least interesting result of Mr. Baldwin’s essay is the proof that, as compared with
other sources of revenue (dona, auxilia, tallagia), the importance of the scutages may
easily be over-rated.

[65 ] Stubbs, Const. Hist. i. 563–64, ii. 132, 278. Already in 1198 the knights of the
Abbot of St. Edmund’s asserted that they were not bound to serve outside the realm;
Jocelin of Brakelond (Camd. Soc.), 63. Hugh, Bishop of Lincoln, had just made a
similar assertion; no service is due from the church of Lincoln outside the bounds of
England; Vita Magna S. Hugonis, 249. See also the story of how the knights of
Holderness refused to follow Edward into Scotland, Chron. de Melsa, ii. 107.

[66 ] What Littleton, sec. 95, has to say on this matter is little better than traditional
antiquarianism.

[67 ] Viollet, Établissements, ii. 95–96; iii. 31, 352–53. In Germany also the rule
seems to have been that the vassal was only bound to find provisions for six weeks;
after this he served at his lord’s cost; Schröder, D. R. G., 502. As to Normandy, see
Somma, p. 69; Ancienne Coutume, p. 66, c. 25.

[68 ] Mat. Par. Chron. Maj. iii. 116.

[69 ] Lords’ Report on the Dignity of a Peer, App. i. p. 1. The summonses of the
feudal array are collected in this Appendix.

[70 ] Testa de Neville, e.g. 146–47.

[71 ] Chron. Jocelini de Brakelond (Camden Soc.), 63.

[72 ] Gesta Abbatum, i. 435.

[73 ] In 1212 John gives orders for the payment at his cost of the knights in his
service, from the time when the period shall have elapsed during which they are
bound to serve at their own cost; Rot. Cl. i. 117.

[74 ] As to France, see Viollet, Établissements, ii. 93; iii. 350. As to the “retrobannus
Normanniae,” see a charter granted by John to the Abp. of Rouen, Rot. Cart. 69; also
Somma, p. 69; Ancienne Coutume, p. 66.

[75 ] The Norman term feodum loricae, fief de haubert, occurs but rarely in England,
still it may be found; the Abbot of Tavistock holds fifteen and a half fees en fe de
haubergh; Rot. Hund. i. 81. Cf. Coronation Charter of Hen. I. c. 11: “Milites qui per
loricas terras suas deserviunt.” It is also common to speak of the knight’s fee as a
scutum, particularly in reference to taxation.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 467 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[76 ] See the muster rolls of Edw. I.; Parl. Writs, i. 197, 228.

[77 ] Liber Rubeus, i. 341.

[78 ] Hunter, Fines, i. 15.

[79 ] Co. Lit. 69 a, 69 b (Hale’s note); Stubbs, Const. Hist. i. 287; Round, Feudal
England, 231 ff., 293 ff.; Hall, Liber Rubeus, vol. ii. p. clxiii.

[80 ] Glastonbury Inquests (Roxburgh Club), passim.

[81 ] Testa de Neville, 63–64.

[82 ] Liber Rubeus, i. 385, 431.

[83 ] Chron. Petroburg. 169.

[84 ] Kirkby’s Inquest for Yorkshire (Surtees Soc.) 196–97.

[85 ] Testa de Neville, 408.

[86 ] Madox, Exch. i. 649.

[87 ] Stubbs, Const. Hist. i. 288, and Round, Feudal England, 295, seem inclined to
accept this theory. See also Hall, Lib. Rub. vol. ii. p. clxiv.

[88 ] Mat. Par. Chron. Maj. vi. 1; Haddan and Stubbs, Councils, iii. 470.

[89 ] This we regard as having been proved by Mr. Round’s convincing papers in E.
H. R. vols. vi and vii, which are now reprinted in his Feudal England. Sometimes
when land came to the king by way of escheat and was again granted out, new terms
would be imposed on the new tenant; but in the main the settlement made in the
Conqueror’s day was permanent. As to the old English army, see Maitland,
Domesday Book, 156 ff. 295, 308.

[90 ] The use of the term honour to signify none but the large estates cannot be traced
back very far. But it seems to have borne this sense early in the twelfth century; Leg.
Hen. 55 § 1, where honour is contrasted with manor.

[91 ] Selden, Titles of Honour, pt. ii, cap. v. sec. 26.

[92 ] The oldest versions of the Charter make the relief for the barony, not a hundred
marks, but a hundred pounds, so that were the argument sound, the barony should
contain twenty fees.

[93 ] Madox, Exchequer, i. 670–71, where other cases of Henry III.’s reign are given.
John had observed this rule: Rot. Pat. 52, writ in favour of the Abbot of Stanlaw.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 468 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[94 ] Round, Ancient Charters, p. 19. In 1237, jurors are asked by what services
Agnes de Wahull holds a number of manors: “Servicium praedictorum maneriorum
nesciunt separare, quia tota baronia de Wahulla respondet integre dom. Regi pro xxx.
militibus”: Note Book, pl. 1182.

[95 ] Liber Rubeus, passim, e.g. p. 368: “Carta S. de Scaliers . . . Haec est summa; x.
milites habeo feffatos et servitium v. militum remanet super dominium meum.”

[96 ] Select Pleas in Manorial Courts, pp. 48–51; Monast. ii. 578. But see Cart. Rams.
iii. 48, 218, and Round, Feudal England, 298. Apparently the land had once been cut
up into fees, and the arrangement under which it provided only four knights is not
aboriginal.

[97 ] See the Muster Rolls of 1277 and 1282 in Parl. Writs, vol. i, e.g. p. 202:
“Robertus de Markham infirmus, ut dicitur, offert servicium dimidii feodi militis in T.
faciendum per W. de L. servientem.”

[98 ] This is often shown by the form of the summons; the layman is told to come
with his service; women and ecclesiastics are bidden to send their service.

[99 ] Jocelin of Brakelond (Camd. Soc.) 40.

[100 ] See above, p. 253.

[101 ] Thus, according to William Rufus, the knights of the Archbishop of Canterbury
appear in a Welsh war without proper armour; Rufus makes this the ground of a
charge against Anselm. Freeman, Will. Ruf. i. 574, argues that even if the charge be
true, it is not well founded in law; but we cannot agree to this. Anselm may perhaps
complain against his knights; but the king’s complaint must be against Anselm.

[102 ] The king may compel B to do his service to A; see e.g. Rot. Cl. i. 117 (for
Ralph Berners), 297 (for the Abbot of Peterborough); but we must distinguish
between what the king does as feudal lord and what he does as supreme judge and
governor.

[103 ] We shall discuss this matter more fully in connexion with homage.

[104 ]Infeudaciones militum in Red Book of the Exchequer, ii. 624 ff.; Bouquet xxiii.
698.

[105 ] Chron. de Melsa, ii. 210, 222–23.

[106 ] Liber Rubeus, i. 394. But in Henry II.’s day the view taken at the exchequer
was that the abbot owed aid for fifty-two fees. Madox, Exch. i. 572. See also in Testa
de Neville, 415, the amusing letter in which the abbot in Henry III.’s reign professes
an absolute ignorance as to the whereabouts of his fees:—“In what vills they are
distributed and in what place they lie, God knows.”

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 469 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[107 ] Jocelin of Brakelond (Camd. Soc.), 20, 48. See also Feet of Fines 7 & 8 Ric. I.
(Pipe Roll Soc.), p. 53 ff., where are printed the documents which record the abbot’s
victory.

[108 ] Bracton, f. 36.

[109 ] Fines (ed. Hunter), ii. 51.

[110 ] Round, Feudal England, 242 ff.

[111 ] Round, Feudal England, 268 ff.

[112 ] Charter of Abbot Faritius, Hist. Abingd. ii. 135.

[113 ] Ramsey Cart. i. 147; see also Henry II.’s Canterbury charter, Monast. i. 105.

[114 ] Somma, p. 70; Ancienne coutume, c. 25, where the auxilium exercitus seems
the equivalent of scutage. In some Norman documents it appears as one of the three
aids, along with those for knighting the son and marrying the daughter; Assisiae
Normaniae, Warnkönig ii. 58; Très ancien coutumier, p. 39.

[115 ] See Rot. Cl. i. 570–71. Of these aids we shall speak in another section.

[116 ] Madox, Exchequer, i. 660.

[117 ] See the writ in Lords’ Report, iii. 165.

[118 ] Gesta Abbatum, ii. 94.

[119 ] Round, Feudal England, 271.

[120 ] Jocelin (Camd. Soc.), 63.

[121 ] Mat. Par. Chron. Maj. vi. 374, 438.

[122 ] Select Pleas in Manorial Courts (Selden Soc.), 60–62.

[123 ] See in particular the writ of 27 Hen. III. in Madox, Exchequer, i. 681; also Hall,
Liber Rubeus, ii. p. clx.

[124 ] Robert of Torigny (ed. Howlett), p. 202, in the classical passage which
describes the scutage of 1159 says that the king “nolens vexare agrarios milites, nec
burgensium nec rusticorum multitudinem” took a sum of money from each knight’s
fee, and, this done, “capitales barones suos cum paucis secum duxit, solidarios vero
milites innumeros.” The king does not give his capitales barones an option between
going to the war and paying scutage, but he absolves from the duty of personal
attendance their undertenants, many of whom, though in name tenants by military
service, are mere yeomen (milites agrarii, burgenses, rustici), and instead he takes a
scutage. As Henry III. was bound by charter not to collect scutage, except in

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 470 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

accordance with the practice of Henry II., we might seem entitled to draw inferences
from the grandson’s days to the grandfather’s. But more light is needed at this point.

[125 ] To the contrary Littleton, sec. 96, relying on Y. B. 7 Edw. III. f. 29 (Trin. pl.
23). But Littleton knew nothing of knight’s service as a reality. See Magna Carta,
1215, c. 29.

[126 ] Hist. Abingd. ii. 128 (temp. Hen. I.): an Abingdon knight fails to do service;
“unde cum lege patriae decretum processisset ipsum exsortem terrae merito debere
fieri, etc.”

[127 ] Already in 1198 the knights of St. Edmunds profess themselves willing to pay
scutage, but they will not serve in Normandy; Jocelin of Brakelond, 63. Hear a groan
from the Abbey of Evesham:—“Hic notantur milites et liberi tenentes de Abbatia de
Evesham, multi iniuste fefati, pauci vero iuste. Isti nullum servitium faciunt ecclesiae
nisi servitium Regis et hoc tepide” (quoted by Wrottesley, Burton Cartulary, p. 2).

[128 ] In Normandy by the middle of the thirteenth century the knights’ fees had
become divisible into two classes; “Quaedam feoda loricae servitium exercitus debent
dominis quod debet fieri Principi: quaedam vero auxilium exercitus”: Somma, p. 126;
see also p. 70. It may be suspected that this really represents the state of things that
existed in England under Henry III.; some of the nominally military tenants had at
least de facto established a right to do no more than pay scutage. Then on the muster
roll of 1277 we find this entry: “Robert of Lewknor says that he does not owe any
service in the king’s army, for he holds a knight’s fee and a half of the escheat of
Laigle [an escheated barony] and owes scutage when it is leviable for that knight’s fee
and a half”: Parl. Writs, i. 202. Then from Edward II.’s time we have this curious
case:— G. holds a knight’s fee of the honour of H. which is in the king’s hand; he
asserts, and as it seems successfully, that his obligation is merely to pay soutage and
not to serve in person; the king who fills the place of the lord of the honour can only
demand scutage; Madox, Exch. i. 652.

[129 ] It would not be safe to lay down a general rule. In 1257 the Abbot of St.
Albans, who had only to provide six knights, succeeded by a great effort in forcing his
military tenants to admit that they were bound to personal service. He held a court for
them under the great ash tree at St. Albans and secured the presence of one of the
king’s justices who had come there to deliver the gaol. In 1277 they did their service
in Wales, and, according to the chronicler, the abbot profited thereby; for the total
cost amounted to but 50 marks and almost all the prelates of England were compelled
to pay as much as 50 marks per knight’s fee for default of service. However, soon
after this even the Abbot of St. Albans had to make fine for default of service, on one
occasion with 120 marks, on another with £120 (Mat. Par. Chron. Maj. vi. 372–76,
437–39; Gesta Abbatum, i. 435, ii. 94).

[130 ] Mat. Par. Chron. Maj. vi. 437–39; Gesta Abbatum, ii. 45.

[131 ] See e.g. Note Book, pl. 795, where a tenement is said to owe 10 pence scutage,
when the rate is £2 on the knight’s fee.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 471 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[132 ] The question “whether escuage was a tenure distinct from knight’s service? ”
suggested by Littleton’s text, has been learnedly discussed by Madox, Wright,
Blackstone, Hargrave and others. The answer to it seems to be:—(1) From an early
time there were many tenants, those of small aliquot parts of knights’ fees, who were
bound to pay scutage, but who can hardly, even in theory, have been bound to fight.
(2) At a later date the great bulk of the military tenants of mesne lords seem certainly
in fact, perhaps in theory also, to have been bound to do no more than pay scutage. (3)
If a tenant was bound to pay scutage, he was deemed to hold per servitium militare,
and his lord had the rights of wardship and marriage.

[133 ] The writ is in Reg. Brev. Orig. f. 88 (scutage of 1 Edw. III.). For earlier writs
see Rot. Cl. i. 371 (1217), 377 (1218), 475 (1221), 571 (1223), 605–10 (1224). See
also Madox, Exch. i. 675; Note Book, pl. 333, 1687, and Rolls of Parl. i. 166, where
on the petition of the barons the king grants them their scutage. So in Normandy the
“auxilium exercitus” is defined as “illud pecuniale quod concedit princeps
Normanniae, facto exercitus per quadraginta dies servitio, baronibus et militibus de
illis qui tenent de eis feodum loricale vel de tenentibus suis in feodo loricali: nec
maius auxilium de suis tenentibus poterunt extorquere quam eis concessum fuerit a
Principe Normannorum”; Somma, p. 70.

[134 ] Madox, Exch. i. 680–84; see especially the case on p. 682, note r. (27 Hen.
III.): William de Hayrun is summoned before the exchequer for having taken scutage
from a military tenant of his, whereas it ought to have been paid to the sheriff.

[135 ] There is Norman authority from 1220 for an affirmative answer. Delisle,
Recueil de jugements, p. 75: “Iudicatum est . . . quod Abbas [mesne lord] non potest
alium mittere in loco eiusdem P. [tenant by knight’s service] ad faciendum servicium
quod feodum dicti P. debet quando dominus rex debet seu vult capere servicium suum
de Abbate, dum idem P. servicium quod debet de feodo suo in propria persona sua
facere velit.”

[136 ] Charter of 1215, c. 29. A substitute may be sent, but only for reasonable cause.

[137 ] See the two muster rolls of the feudal host; Parliamentary Writs, i. 197, 228.

[138 ] Rot. Hund. ii. 441.

[139 ] Gesta Abbatum, ii. 94.

[140 ] As regards the shape that scutage assumed at various periods, we have here
dealt but superficially with a most difficult subject. We shall have done some good if
we persuade others that there are yet many questions to be answered by a diligent
study of the exchequer rolls. See Hall, Lib. Rub. vol. ii, Preface.

[141 ] The fines of Richard’s and John’s reigns present numerous instances of
dispositions of both these classes:—thus (Fines, ed. Hunter, i, p. 22) a gift of half a
hide to be held of the donor “per forinsecum servicium quod ad tantum terrae
pertinet”; (p. 31) a gift of a virgate to be held of the donor “faciendo inde forinsecum
servicium quantum pertinet ad illam virgatam terrae pro omni servicio”; (p. 91) a gift

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 472 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

of a quarter of a virgate to be held of the donor by the service of one pound of pepper
annually “salvo forinseco servitio quod ad dominum Regem pertinet de eadem quarta
parte virgatae terrae”; (p. 95) a gift of a messuage and seven virgates to be held of the
donor by the service of 24 shillings annually “salvo regali servicio scilicet servicio
dimidii militis”; (p. 274) a gift of a messuage and three acres to be held of the donor
at a rent of 12 pence, “saving the king’s service, namely, 3 pence to a scutage of 20
shillings and so in proportion.”

[142 ] Rot. Hund. ii. 756.

[143 ] Rot. Hund. ii. e.g. 733, 767, 769.

[144 ] Bracton, f. 37. See the cases cited above, p. 253, note 18.

[145 ] It is rare, though not unknown, to find that a tenant in villeinage is said to pay
scutage. Doubtless the weight of taxation often fell on the lowest class of tenants; but
it might have been dangerous to exact scutage eo nomine from the villeins, as this
might have encouraged them to assert that their tenure was free.

[146 ] Hist. Abingd. ii. 3.

[147 ] Rot. Cl. i. 297.

[148 ] Pipe Roll, 31 Hen. I., p. 44; Monast. i. 482.

[149 ] See the Assisiae Normaniae in Warnkönig’s Französische Rechtsgeschichte, ii,
e.g. p. 73 (ad 1208): “apud Bellum Montem debebat servicium quinque militum per
quadraginta dies ad custodiendum castellum ad custum domini de Bello Monte.”

[150 ] Viollet, Établissements, ii. 80.

[151 ] D. B. i. 151 b: “De eodem Leuuino tenuit Radulfus Passaquam et inveniebat
duos loricatos in custodia de Windesores.”

[152 ] This is a simplification of the story; the abbot and his knights differed as to the
amount of the service to be done; Jocelin of Brakelond, 49, 135.

[153 ] Rot. Hund. ii. 548.

[154 ] Rot. Hund. ii. 580.

[155 ] Hall, Liber Rubeus, ii. p. ccxxxvi.

[156 ] See Maitland, Northumbrian Tenures, E. H. R. v. 625; Hall, Liber Rubeus, ii. p.
ccxl. ff.

[157 ] Rot. Hund. ii. 18: “Radulfus de Gaugy tenet feodum de Ellincham de dom.
Rege in capite per baroniam per servicium trium militum.”

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 473 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[158 ] Bracton, f. 76 b, 93.

[159 ] Note Book, pl. 96.

[160 ] Hallam, Middle Ages, ed. 1837, vol. iii, p. 21; Stubbs, Const. Hist. i. 394, 605;
ii. 181–84; Gneist, Verfa-sungsgeschichte, 237–38. For older theories, see Madox,
Baronia Anglicana, and Selden, Titles of Honour, pt. ii, cap. 5, sec. 21.

[161 ] Stubbs, Const. Hist. 433.

[162 ] Dial. de Scac. ii. 24.

[163 ] Charter, 1215, c. 43.

[164 ] Madox, Baronia Anglicana, throughout; Hargrave, notes to Co. Lit. 108 a;
Challis, Real Property, p. 4.

[165 ] Madox, Exch. i. 317.

[166 ] Madox, Bar. Ang., p. 27: “I think there were not any honours created de novo
by feoffment in the reign of King Henry III. or perhaps of King John.”

[167 ] See Britton, ii. 10, and the editor’s note.

[168 ] Lit. secs. 153–61.

[169 ] Lit. sec. 154.

[170 ] Some scribes, it is said, distinguish seriantia, the land, from serianteria, the
service or office.

[171 ] Lit. sec. 153.

[172 ] Stubbs, Const. Hist. i. 383.

[173 ] “Seriantia W. M. pro qua debuit esse emptor coquinae dom. Regis,” Testa de
Neville, 78; “Seriantia hostiariae dom. Regis,” ibid. 93; “Seriantia pro qua debuit
custodire lardariam dom. Regis,” Ib. 146, 232. We are compelled to cite the bad but
only edition of the Testa. But see Hall, Lib. Rub. iii. 1305. Mr. Hall’s index enables
us to omit some citations given in our first edition.

[174 ] Madox, Exch. ii. 295.

[175 ] D. B. 162 b.

[176 ] “Robertus de Wilmiton tenet Wilmiton per sergeantiam de honore de Bononia,
et valet ij. marcas et debet esse cocus Comitis,” Testa de Neville, 217.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 474 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[177 ] Testa, 357; so to find litter for the king’s bed and food for his horses at B., Ib.
237; so to meet the king when he comes into the rape of Arundel and give him two
capons, Ib. 229.

[178 ] Testa, 409, 118–19.

[179 ] Testa, 58: Serjeanty to be constable of 200 foot-soldiers so long as the king is
in Wales. Ib. 114: Serjeanty to carry a pennon in the king’s army before the foot-
soldiers of the hundred of Wootton. Ib. 119: “Servicium portandi baneram populi
prosequentis per marinam [?].”

[180 ] As to these “sack and buckle men,” some references are given in Select Pleas
in Manorial Courts (Selden Soc.), i. 186.

[181 ] Bracton, f. 35 b. Compare Fleta, p. 198.

[182 ] R. H. ii. 639.

[183 ] R. H. ii. 838.

[184 ] R. H. ii. 833.

[185 ] Cart. Glouc. ii. 207–9.

[186 ] Jocelin of Brakelond (Camd. Soc.), 20.

[187 ] The biographer of Abbot Samson of St. Edmunds regards as a part of the
prudent administration of his hero that he committed the affairs of the eight and a half
hundreds belonging to the abbey to mere domestics, “servientibus suis de mensa sua”;
Jocelin, 21.

[188 ] See e.g. R. H. ii. 336, 539; Cart. Glouc. iii. 69.

[189 ] R. H. ii. 336.

[190 ] See Bracton’s Note Book, pl. 758; Cart. Glouc. i. 356, ii. 101, 102, 207–9, iii.
149. The Abbot of Ramsey has ridemanni, Manorial Pleas, i. 53.

[191 ] Cart. Glouc. ii. 207–9: “debuerunt facere unum esquirerium nomine
seriantiae.” Ib. iii. 149: “per serianteriam . . . servitio esquierii.” Gesta Abbatum, i.
264: six armigeri are enfeoffed by the service of riding with the Abbot of St. Albans
to his cell at Tynemouth and carrying his baggage.

[192 ] Select Pleas in Manorial Courts, i. 62, 63.

[193 ] R. H. i. 157.

[194 ] R. H. ii. 767.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 475 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[195 ] In Germany the servientes or ministeriales became a powerful class. A group
of servientes, e.g. those of an abbey, had a court of its own and law of its own
(Dienstrecht as contrasted with Lehnrecht, Hofrecht, Landrecht), see Waitz, v.
288–350, 428–42; Schröder, D. R. G. 667. The nearest approach that England in the
thirteenth century can show to such a court of servientes is the court of the king’s
household; but even this aims rather at a common law jurisdiction over all that
happens within the verge of the palace, than at developing a special law for the king’s
servientes. In England as in Germany the duty of the serviens is frequently termed a
ministerium; see e.g. Pipe Roll, 31 Hen. I., in which it is common to find a man
making fine “pro terra et ministerio patris sui.” The word magisterium also occurs;
e.g. Whitby Cart. i. 222: “magisterium officii coquinae,” a hereditary office; Rot.
Cart. 46: “magistratum mariscalciae curiae nostrae.”

[196 ] Any contemporary account of warfare will illustrate this, e.g. Paris’s account of
the war in 1216–17 (Chron. Maj. iii. 6–23), “. . . quidam serviens strenuus . . .
exierunt de castello milites et servientes . . . exierunt denuo milites et servientes . . .
exierunt de castello quod Munsorrel appellatur milites et servientes . . . decem milites
cum servientibus multis . . . capti sunt milites quadringenti praeter servientes equites
et pedites, qui facile sub numero non cadebant.” We do not however suggest that all
these servientes were bound to fight by tenure.

[197 ] As to the military servientes see Selden, Titles of Honour, part ii. c. 5 § 47.

[198 ] D. B. i. 74 b.

[199 ] D. B. i. 84 b.

[200 ] D. B. i. 117 b, 236 b.

[201 ] D. B. i. 160 b.

[202 ] D. B. ii. 4 b, 98 b, 110 b.

[203 ] D. B. i. 49.

[204 ] Bracton, f. 35 b.

[205 ] Ellis, Introduction, i. 72.

[206 ] Note Book, pl. 758. Maitland, Domesday Book, 305 ff.

[207 ] Glanvill, ix. 4.

[208 ] Hoveden, iv. 47. Round, E. H. R. iii. 501, has shown that some of the returns
made on this occasion are preserved in the Testa de Neville.

[209 ] Bracton, f. 84 b.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 476 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[210 ] It seems to be assumed in 1410, Y. B. 11 Hen. IV. f. 72 (Trin. pl. 9), and is
stated by Littleton, sec. 154.

[211 ] Placit. Abbrev. p. 39 (Kent); compare p. 34 (Kent). Rot. Obl. p. 237: the eldest
of several sisters claims the whole of her dead brother’s land “quia illa terra est de
sergenteria.”

[212 ] Placit Abbrev. p. 48 (Bedf.); Bracton, f. 395.

[213 ] Thus e.g. the prior of Barnwell held of the king the ancient demesne manor of
Chesterton at a rent of £30; R. H. ii. 402.

[214 ] For early instances see Burton Cart. 30, 31. The Charter of 1215, c. 37, shows
that the king has tenants in chief who hold in socage, burgage, fee farm.

[215 ] See e.g. in Cart. Glouc. i. 322 the elaborate labour services due from the Abbot
of Gloucester to the Templars. In the north of England among the tenants in thegnage
and drengage it is common to find the lord of a whole vill bound to supply a number
of ploughers and reapers for the assistance of his over-lord.

[216 ] Thus at Offord Cluny there is a group of tenentes per cartam and a much larger
group of tenentes per vetus feofamentum; R. H. ii. 683.

[217 ] Burton Cart. 31, 37.

[218 ] Hist. Abingd. ii. 65, 128, 167.

[219 ] Reg. Malm. ii. 173; Rot. Obl. p. 12, 68.

[220 ] But the latter seems to be derived from Low Latin, in which firma has come to
mean a fixed rent or tribute; Skeat, s.v. farm.

[221 ] Delisle, Études sur la condition de la classe agricole en Normandie, 45.

[222 ] For the co-ordination of fee farm and burgage with socage, see Magna Carta,
1215, c. 37: “Si quis teneat de nobis per feodifirmam, vel per sokagium, vel per
burgagium . . . occasione illius feodifirmae, vel sokagii vel burgagii.” Also Bracton, f.
85 b, 86, where as regards relief a distinction is drawn between socage and fee farm.
The Statute of Gloucester (6 Edw. I. c. 4) seems in course of time to have generated
the notion held by Coke that a rent is not “a fee farm rent” unless it amounts to one-
fourth of the annual value of the land; see 2nd Inst. 44, Co. Lit. 143 b, and the note in
which Hargrave shows that neither in the statute nor in earlier history is there any
warrant for this restriction of the term.

[223 ] Maitland, Domesday Book, 66 ff.

[224 ] Bracton, f. 77 b: “Et dici poterit sockagium a socko, et inde tenentes qui tenent
in sockagio sockemanni dici poterunt, eo quod deputati sunt ut videtur tantummodo

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 477 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

ad culturam.” As to the history of the Old French soc see Skeat, s.v. socket.
Apparently it occurs in Domesday Book, i. 167 b: “unus burgensis reddit iiij. soccos.”

[225 ] See Vinogradoff, Villeinage, p. 196.

[226 ] In Glanvill, vii. 11, and even in Bracton, f. 87 b, the heirs who escape wardship
in chivalry are still the heredes sokemannorum. The term socager seems to be of later
date.

[227 ] Chron. Petroburg., p. 173, e.g. “Sochemanni de Ailintona i. hidam et i. virgam
et serviunt cum militibus.”

[228 ] Rot. Hund. ii. 748–49. These entries are very curious: “set antecessores eius
solebant esse liberi quasi sokemanni et solebant facere servicium dom. Regi in
guerra,” etc.

[229 ] For the burgage of Normandy, see Somma, p. 98.

[230 ] More of this in our section on The Boroughs.

[231 ] Liber de Antiquis Legibus, pp. lxxi–lxxvi.

[232 ] Glanvill, ix. 1; for the use of this word before the Conquest, see Maitland,
Domesday Book, 293.

[233 ] D. B. i. 225 b: “G. Episcopus clamat hominationem eorum.”

[234 ] Waitz, D. V. G. vi. 46; Schröder, D. R. G. 391; Warnkönig, Französische
Rechtsgeschichte, ii. 357.

[235 ] Waitz, D. V. G. vi. 47.

[236 ] Bracton, f. 80. Cf. Glanvill, ix. 1; Statutes of the Realm, i. 227.

[237 ] Britton, ii. 37.

[238 ] Littleton, sec. 85. Compare the details from French books in Warnkönig, ii.
358. The man must be without arms, or spurs, or mantle.

[239 ] Bracton, f. 80.

[240 ] Glanvill, ix. 1; Britton, ii. 39, 40.

[241 ] See Skeat, Dict. s.v. liege; Viollet, Histoire du droit civil français, 657; Esmein,
Histoire du droit français, 199, where interesting passages are given from the canonist
Durandus, which show that already in the thirteenth century there was some
uncertainty about the import of this word. In the thirteenth century there was another
context in which the word was commonly used, viz. a donor is said to have made a
gift in ligia potestate, i.e. he was unconstrained, had full power; this phrase survived

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 478 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

in Scots law in the form liege poustie; it is common in Bracton’s Note Book, e.g. pl.
255, but is apt to degenerate into in legitima potestate.

[242 ] Britton, ii. 37, 38. Statutes of the Realm, i. 227.

[243 ] Leg. Hen. 43 § 6; Glanvill, ix. i. Comp. Statutes of the Realm, i. 227: “de qi il
tient son chief mesuage.”

[244 ] Bracton, f. 79 b: “feoffator primus propter primum feoffamentum.”

[245 ] Round, Ancient Charters, p. 8: Henry I. gives the lordship over certain tenants
and expresses his will that all of them shall do liege homage to the donee “in mea
salva fidelitate.” Thus the general duty to be faithful to the king does not prevent
homage to another being liege. Madox, Formulare, No. 298: William Bloet enfeoffs a
tenant “pro suo homagio et ligeantia, salva fide Regis.”

[246 ] See the proceedings against the Bishop of Exeter, Co. Lit. 65 a. As to the
similar measure of the Emperor Frederick I., see Waitz, D. V. G. vi. 46. The kings of
the French after a struggle had for a while abandoned the attempt to insist on the
insertion of these saving clauses; Luchaire, Institutions monarchiques, ii. 27. See also
Somma, pp. 39, 94.

[247 ] Britton, i. 185; Fleta, 114. See Hale, P. C. i. 62–76. The idea that allegiance
(ligeantia, ligeaunce) is due only to the king slowly gains ground. The same process
went on in France; “the progress of monarchical power gave rise to the principle that
liege homage can be done only to the sovereign”; Giraud, Bibl. de l’École des chartes,
Sér. iii, vol. iii. p. 4.

[248 ] Chron. Sax. ann. 1086; Florence, ii. 19, speaks only of an oath of fealty; but we
are hardly in a position to contradict the Peterborough chronicler.

[249 ] Laws of Edmund, iii. § 1.

[250 ] Leg. Hen. 55 §3, accepting the variant Deum for dominum.

[251 ] Ibid. 43 § 8.

[252 ] Ibid. 82 § 3–6. In what cases the lord can warrant violence, is left an open
question.

[253 ] Ibid. 75 § 1. Apparently the traitor is to be flayed alive.

[254 ] Ibid. 75 § 3. Compare the Norman law; Très ancien coutumier (Tardif), c. 35: if
a lord kills his man he shall be punished by death; if a man kills his lord he shall be
drawn and hanged, unless it be by misadventure, and even if it be by misadventure he
shall be punished with death.

[255 ] Bracton, f. 78 b. This is based on Glanvill, ix. 4.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 479 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[256 ] Leg. Her. 43 § 6: “Quoteunque dominos aliquis habeat, vel quantumcunque de
aliis tenet, ei magis obnoxius est, et eius residens esse debet, cuius ligius est.” Cf. 55 §
2; 82 § 5.

[257 ] Glanvill, ix. 1.

[258 ] Bracton, f. 79 b; Fleta, p. 207.

[259 ] Britton, ii. 41: “Si deus seignurs soint en destaunce, si covendra al tenaunt fere
soen service a soen [seignur lige encountre soen autre] seignur en sa propre person et
de fere soen service a soen autre seignur par attourné.” The omission in some mss of
the words here printed within brackets is noteworthy.

[260 ] Rot. Parl. i. 70–77. See especially p. 77. But Edward was playing the part of a
king who is so strong that he can be merciful. Orderic, iv. 167, in an important
passage, points out the difference between England and Normandy. Under Henry I.,
Ivo of Grandmesnil “guerram in Anglia coeperat et vicinorum rura suorum incendio
combusserat, quod in illa regione crimen est inusitatum, nec sine gravi ultione fit
expiatum.” The ordinary English criminal law is strong enough to suppress anything
that we could fairly call private war; just for this reason it is needless for Glanvill to
say with his Norman contemporary, “Nullus hominum audeat versus alium guerram
facere”; Très ancien coutumier (Tardif), c. 31. He can even indulge in a speculation as
to the vassal’s duty of following one of his lords against another, for this must be read
subject to the rules of criminal law which forbid homicide and the like. In France
there arose a jurisprudence of private war, for which see Viollet, Établissements, i.
180; Esmein, Histoire du droit français, 252.

[261 ] Bracton, f. 81 b, 141.

[262 ] Mat. Par. Chron. Maj. iii. 249, 258.

[263 ] Chron. T. Wykes, 149. Other chroniclers notice this incident as important.

[264 ] Bracton, f. 427 b.

[265 ] Leg. Hen. 43 § 7; 46 § 3; 53 § 4.

[266 ] Select Pleas of the Crown, pl. 67; Bracton, f. 141, last line.

[267 ] Note Book, pl. 1687.

[268 ] Glanv. ix. 1: “Et generaliter nihil de iure facere poterit quis salva fide homagii
quod vertat ad exheredationem domini sui vel ad dedecus corporis sui.”

[269 ] Bracton, f. 81 b. Compare Glanvill, ix. 1, who seems to demand an intent to do
grievous harm. The lord’s power to proceed in his own court against the tenant is fully
admitted by Glanvill.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 480 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[270 ] Bracton, f. 81 b, gives a precedent of a writ of escheat grounded on a malicious
disavowal by the tenant of the lord’s title. The printed Registrum (see f. 164–65) does
not contain any such writ, whence we may infer that it went out of use soon after
Bracton’s day.

[271 ] Bracton, f. 77 b, 78, 79 b.

[272 ] Glanvill, ix. 1, 2.

[273 ] Bracton, f. 78 b § 4.

[274 ] In after days, according to Littleton, § 87, when an unmarried woman does
homage, she is to say “I do to you homage,” not “Jeo devieng vostre feme.” But in the
days of real vassalism there would have been no talk of the latter formula; the
question would have been as to “Jeo devieng vostre homme.”

[275 ] This seems to have been so even in the twelfth century; see e.g. the Burton
Cartulary, pp. 30–40.

[276 ] Round, Ancient Charters, p. 69; Geoffrey Trussel gives an advowson to a
priory and adds “and if any dispute arise about that church or the possession thereof, I
will come to the aid of the monks to deraign what the church ought to hold,
wheresoever it may be needful, to the best of my power, at their cost and upon a horse
of theirs if I have not got my own.”

[277 ] Comment. ii. 63.

[278 ] Glanvill, vii. 1.

[279 ] Note Book, pl. 964, 1235, 1811. In the more ancient charters the gift instead of
being “to X and his heirs” is often a gift “in feudum et hereditatem” or “hereditario
iure possidendum.”

[280 ] Glanvill, ix. c. 4.

[281 ] Dial. ii. c. 10, 24.

[282 ] In 1229 on the death of Hugh Balliol his heir was charged with £150 for thirty
fees; afterwards however the relief was reduced and he paid as for a barony; Excerpta
e Rot. Fin. i. 183, 212.

[283 ] See the facsimiles of the various charters in Stat. of the Realm, vol. i; and
Bémont, Chartes des libertés, pp. xxxi. 47.

[284 ] Bracton, f. 84 b.

[285 ] Bracton, f. 85 b, 86. In this passage fee farm is treated as distinct from socage;
by “socage” Bracton seems here to mean the tenure of the sokemen. See above p. 312.
Britton, ii. 50, agrees that a relief is only due when the tenure is knight’s service or

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 481 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

grand serjeanty. So does the apocryphal statute De wardis et releviis; Statutes of the
Realm, i. 228. See also Y. B. 33–35 Edw. I. p. 351. However, the additional year’s
rent payable for socage land was usually called a relief. Thus on the Fine Rolls of
Bracton’s day it is common to find a “relief” paid for socage land held of the king; see
Excerpta e Rot. Fin. i. 78, 97, 126, 154; but these are not payments from the king’s
“sokemen”: the sokemen would settle their affairs with the manorial bailiffs.
Sometimes a charter of feoffment fixes a conventional relief, and burgage reliefs are
sometimes fixed by the borough charter; see e.g. Reg. Malmesb. ii. 34.

[286 ] Très ancien coutumier (ed. Tardif), c. 47.

[287 ] Ibid. c. 84; Somma, p. 107; Ancienne coutume, c. 34; Delisle, Bibliothèque de
l’École des chartes, Sér. III. vol. ii. p. 99. The Norman pound is worth much less than
the English.

[288 ] D’Arbois de Jubainville, Biblioth. de l’École des chartes, Sér. III. vol. iii. pp.
139–42; Viollet, Établissements, i. 160–64; Esmein, Histoire du droit français, 203.

[289 ] Glanvill, vii. 9; ix. 4.

[290 ] Bracton, f. 252–53.

[291 ] See the strikingly antifeudal passage in Bracton, f. 253 b; Note Book, pl. 348,
1149; Petition of 1258 (Select Charters), cap. 1; Prov. Westm. c. 9; Stat. Marlb. c. 16;
Britton, ii. 52 and note by Nichols. For a picturesque case of John’s day, see Pleas of
the Crown (Selden Soc.), pp. 67–75.

[292 ] Stat. Marl. c. 16.

[293 ] Statutes of the Realm, i. 226.

[294 ] In Bracton’s day it was said by some that lords in general were entitled to
primer seisin; but Bracton, f. 252 b, thinks this an inaccurate phrase, for the “simple
seisin” to which the mesne lord is entitled is, not prior to, but concurrent with, the
seisin of the heir.

[295 ] Glanvill, ix. 6: whenever the tenant of a barony dies the king seizes his land.
For the history of the writ Diem clausit extremum see Roberts, Excerpta e Rot. Fin. i.
p. ix. The escheators do not become prominent until the later years of Henry III.’s
reign.

[296 ] Rot. Pip. p. 9, two hundred marks of silver and one mark of gold; p. 67, two
hundred marks of silver.

[297 ] The phrase often is “pro terra patris sui”; p. 36, “ut sit saisitus de terra patris
sui”; p. 36, “ut filius suus hereditetur de terra W. avunculi sui”; p. 106, “Agnes . . .
reddit compotum de xl. s. ut filii sui hereditentur de terra patris eorum.” It is even
allowable to speak of the lord as making the son the heir to his father; thus (temp.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 482 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

Hen. I.) the Abbot of Abingdon “fecit Henricum filium Oini heredem de omnibus
quae fuerunt patris sui”; Hist. Abingd. ii. 138.

[298 ] Charter of Hen. I. c. 2.

[299 ] A. S. Chron. ann. 1100.

[300 ] See the curious story in Monast. i. 165. Under William II. the heirs of a man
who has entered religion find that they cannot obtain his land without paying heavily,
“erant enim illis diebus consuetudines regis gravissimae”; so they commend
themselves and their land to Bishop Gundulf of Rochester, who lends them money.

[301 ] Cnut, ii. 70, 71.

[302 ] Cnut, ii. 78.

[303 ] D. B. i. 1.

[304 ] Ibid. i. 56 b.

[305 ] Ibid. i. 280 b.

[306 ] Ibid. i. 298 b.

[307 ] Ibid. i. 179; see the same page for the moneyer’s relevamentum.

[308 ] Leg. Hen. c. 14.

[309 ] Leg. Will. i. c. 20.

[310 ] Lib. Rub. ii. 647: of the knights of the Bishop of Bayeux it is written: “Et
unusquisque miles debet feodum suum relevare de morte patris sui per xv. libras
Rothomagensis monetae vel per equum et loricam.” Cf. Bouquet, xxiii. 701.

[311 ] In Normandy before the Conquest disherison seems to have been a common
event and to have given the duke much land of which he could dispose. See above p.
77.

[312 ] This point will be discussed in our chapter on Inheritance.

[313 ] Thus when the father had lands or “honours” both in Normandy and England
and left several sons there was a problem to be solved. It is thus that Orderic, ii. 405,
speaks of the death of William FitzOsbern: “Guillelmus Rex eius honorem filiis eius
distribuit, Guillelmo Bretolium totamque patris possessionem in Normannia, et
Rogerio Herfordensem comitatum.” See also iii. 427 and 455 as to the Beaumont and
Grandmesnil inheritances. Even in much later days any doubt about the rules of
inheritance brought profit to the king; see as to the Mandeville inheritance, Round,
Ancient Charters, p. 97, and as to the Buckland inheritance, Note Book, pl. 12.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 483 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[314 ] See Stubbs, Const. Hist. i. 295, 390. Dr. Stubbs takes Orderic to task for not
observing distinctions. May we not infer that those distinctions were not very
obvious?

[315 ] Hist. Abingd. ii. 35.

[316 ] Early in the twelfth century the Abbot of Burton grants land to one Orm; the
charter provides that on Orm’s death his son shall have the land on paying “pro
relevatione ipsius terrae tantum pecuniae quantum nobilis homo dare debet pro tali
terra”; Burton Cart. p. 30.

[317 ] Glanvill, vii. 5.

[318 ] Bracton, f. 60.

[319 ] Bracton, f. 86; Fleta, p. 212; Britton, ii. 51.

[320 ] Vinogradoff, Villainage, p. 161.

[321 ] Schröder, D. R. G., 392; German feudists distinguish the two cases as
Mannsfall and Herrnfall.

[322 ] Heming, Cart. p. 79; Round, Feudal England, 308.

[323 ] Très ancien coutumier, c. 47–48; Somma, p. 109.

[324 ] Glanvill, ix. 8.

[325 ] Thus in 1182 the newly-made Abbot Samson demanded an aid from his
knights, and being dissatisfied with what they offered, took occasion to pay them out
for their illiberality; Jocelin of Brakelond, p. 20. The Bishop of Ely in Edward I.’s day
attempts to exact a recognition of this sort from his freeholders: Y. B. 33–35 Edw. I.,
pp. 135, 139.

[326 ] Bracton, f. 35 b; Note Book, pl. 758.

[327 ] Glanvill, vii. 9; Bracton, f. 87. The duty of paying debts is gradually shifted
from the heir to the executor.

[328 ] Note Book, pl. 485, 717, 1840.

[329 ] Note Book, pl. 256, 349, 812, 1131, cases before Stat. Merton. In pl. 1608 we
find that it might be dangerous for an abbess to receive a young lady as a nun.

[330 ] Sometimes, even in pleadings, this is frankly stated; “Adam dicit . . . quod
vendidit ei predictam Emmam cum terra sua”: Note Book, pl. 270.

[331 ] Charter of 1215, c. 6; Stat. Mert. c. 7; Petition of 1258, c. 6.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 484 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[332 ] In Note Book, pl. 965, it is suggested that a woman, who has married a ward
without his lord’s consent, ought not to have dower.

[333 ] Bracton, f. 89, quotes this maxim, “Libera debent esse coniugia.”

[334 ] Note Book, pl. 1286, Quare permisit se maritari after the Statute; pl. 1280.
Quare maritavit after the Statute; pl. 1090, 1596, Quare duxit in uxorem against
husband of ward before the Statute; pl. 1278, the same after the Statute.

[335 ] Bracton, f. 86 b. As the text now stands we are left in some doubt about
Bracton’s own opinion. In later times the law was found in Stat. Westm. I. c. 22.

[336 ] Glanvill, vii. 12; Bracton, f. 88.

[337 ] See e.g. Excerpta e Rot. Fin. ii. 149.

[338 ] Note Book, pl. 266; Bracton, f. 89 b.

[339 ] Note Book, pl. 661, 868, 906; Bracton, f. 89 b.

[340 ] Bracton, f. 85 b, 88; “in episcopatu Wintoniae” probably means not the diocese
but the barony of the bishop.

[341 ] Note Book, pl. 990.

[342 ] Rot. Hund. i. 202–231.

[343 ] Bracton, f. 85 b.

[344 ] Bracton, f. 87 b.

[345 ] Glanvill, vii. 9; Bracton. f. 86 b.

[346 ] Bracton, f. 88.

[347 ] Glanvill, vii. 10; Bracton, f. 87 b; Note Book, pl. 743, 908, 1221, 1280.

[348 ] Charter of 1215, cc. 37, 43.

[349 ] See above, p. 298.

[350 ] Geoffrey de Mandeville promises John 20,000 marks for the Countess of
Gloucester and her land: Rot. Obl. p. 520.

[351 ] The treatment of a wardship as a chattel can be traced to the early years of
Henry III.; Excerpta e Rot. Fin. i. 163, 177, 230, 234.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 485 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[352 ] Bracton, f. 89: “Si autem cum heres infra aetatem extiterit et sub custodia
parentum de sokagio, propinquior consanguineus eum maritare poterit sine alicuius
iniuria vel aliis vendere maritagium.”

[353 ] Prov. Westm. (1259), c. 12; Stat. Marlb. (1267), c. 17.

[354 ] Coke, 2 Inst. 135, regards the chapter of the Statute of Marlborough touching
guardianship in socage as a “declaration of the common law”; but he did not know the
Provisions of Westminster and has no warrant for his doctrine. An action of account
was a very new action in 1259. Events seem to have taken the same course in
Germany; the guardian is gradually made accountable; a profitable right, tutela
usufructuaria, is turned into a trust; Schröder, D. R. G., 713.

[355 ] Charter of 1215, c. 37.

[356 ] Bracton, f. 87 b.

[357 ] Note Book, pl. 743, 1183, 1231, 1270, 1280.

[358 ] Bracton, f. 35 b, 87 b; Note Book, pl. 758.

[359 ] Reeves, Hist. Engl. Law, ed. 1814, i. 284, has noticed this.

[360 ] Freeman, William Rufus, i. 335: “burthens and exactions under which
Englishmen, and preeminently the rich and noble among Englishmen, groaned for not
much less than six hundred years after Flambard’s day.”

[361 ] Articles of the Barons, c. 3, 27; Charter of 1215, c. 4, 5, 6, 37; Petition of 1258,
c. 2, 3.

[362 ] Higden, Polychron. viii. 202; Chron. de Melsa, i. 443.

[363 ] Selden, Notes on Fortescue, cap. 44.

[364 ] Digby, Hist. of Real Property, ch. iii. sec. i. § 3; Blackstone, Comment. ii. 71.

[365 ] Madox, Exch. i. 323–25.

[366 ] Rot. Cart. 108; see also ibid. 27, 48, 104, 116, 120. See Hardy’s Introduction to
the Oblate and Fine Rolls, p. xxxvi.

[367 ] Pipe Roll, e.g. p. 37, “pro custodia terrae W. donec heres suus possit terram
tenere”; p. 66, “Uxor Walteri filii Goduini et Robertus frater Goduini . . . ut habeant in
custodia terram et pueros ipsius Walteri”; p. 83,”pro custodia filii W. de D. cum terra
sua.” In 1121 Henry I. grants “Sibilla daughter of Bernard of Neufmarché and her
land” to Miles of Gloucester; Round, Ancient Charters, p. 8.

[368 ] Pipe Roll, e.g. p. 8, “ut ducat in uxorem sororem Ilberti de Laci”; p. 43, “pro
Cecilia filia Alani . . . cum dote et maritagio suo”; p. 66, “pro terra et filia R. de C. ad

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 486 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

opus Hugonis nepotis sui”; p. 81, “pro uxore Eduardi de Sar[isbiria] cum terra sua ad
opus Pagani filii sui”; p. 92, “ut mater sua duceret virum ad electum suum”; p. 136,
“pro uxore W. F. cum dote sua”; p. 96, “ne capiat virum nisi quem voluerit.”

[369 ] Ibid. p. 8, “ut Rex concedat ei ducere uxorem”; p. 26, “ut ducat uxorem ad
velle suum.”

[370 ] Charter of Hen. I. c. 3, 4.

[371 ] Très ancien coutumier, c. 11; Somma, p. 101 ff.; Ancienne coutume, c. 33;
Delisle, Bibl. de l’École des chartes, sér. iii. vol. iii. p. 99.

[372 ] Très ancien coutumier, p. 10.

[373 ] Hallam, Middle Ages, ed. 1837, vol. i. pp. 189–91, and Freeman, William
Rufus, i, 340, remark the peculiar severity of English and Norman law. As to
Germany, see Schröder, D. R. G. 405. As to France, D’Arbois de Jubainville,
Recherches sur la minorité et ses effets dans le droit féodal français, Bibl. de l’École
des chartes, sér. iii. vol. ii. p. 415, vol. iii. 136, 533; Viollet, Histoire du droit civil
français, 536; Luchaire, Manuel des institutions françaises, 209; Esmein, Histoire du
droit français, 211.

[374 ] See above, p. 77.

[375 ] See Orderic, ii. 409: “Praefatus Guillelmus [de Molinis] Gualterii de Falesia
filius fuit et in militia nimium viguit; unde Guillelmus Princeps filiam Guidmundi
cum toto ei honore Molinensi contulit.” Florence, an. 1074: “Herefordensis comes
Rogerus, filius Willelmi eiusdem pagae comitis, East-Anglorum comiti Radulfo,
contra praeceptum regis Willelmi, sororem suam coniugem tradidit.” So of St.
Wulfstan we have this story: “Hanc terram tenuit Sirof de episcopo [de Wirecestre] T.
R. E. quo mortuo dedit episcopus filiam eius cum hac terra cuidam suo militi qui et
matrem pasceret et episcopo inde serviret”; D. B. i. 173.

[376 ] See above, p. 77.

[377 ] Luchaire, Institutions monarchiques, ii. 17, fixes on the date of the Norman
Conquest of England as that at which the French kings may be said to have finally
abandoned all hope of controlling the inheritance of the great fiefs.

[378 ] Hist. Abingd. ii. 23.

[379 ] Coke, 2nd Inst. 65; Co. Lit. 43 a.

[380 ] Wright, Tenures, 154; Gilbert, Tenures, 51–52; Blackstone, Com. ii. 71–72.

[381 ] Report on Dignity of a Peer, 398–401; Digby, Hist. Real Property, ch. iii. sec.
2; Scrutton, Land in Fetters, 41; Challis, Real Property, 2nd ed. p. 18. See however,
Williams, Real Property, ed. 18, p. 65 ff.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 487 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[382 ] In the course of this discussion it will be convenient to use the term alienation
to cover both alienation by way of substitution and subinfeudation.

[383 ] Bracton, f. 395: “particularis solutio multa habet incommoda.”

[384 ] Escheat of a mesne lordship gives rise to some pretty problems discussed by
Bracton, f. 23 b (the passage is an “addicio”):— A enfeoffs B at a rent of 10 shillings;
B enfeoffs C at a rent of 5 shillings; B dies without an heir; is A entitled to 5, or 10, or
15 shillings a year? In favour of 15 it may be said that 10 are due to him under his
feoffment of B, and 5 more because he now fills B’ s place; but Bracton decides in
favour of 10. Again, A enfeoffs B at a rent of 5; B enfeoffs C at a rent of 10; B dies
without an heir; Bracton thinks that A is entitled to 10. On f. 48 he treats as an
insoluble puzzle the question whether A is entitled to the wardship of C’ s heir, if C
held of B in socage, and B, whose rights have escheated to A, held of A by knight’s
service.

[385 ] Bracton, f. 45 b, 46.

[386 ] Glanv. vii. 1. As noticed by Dr. Brunner, Pol. Science Quarterly, xi. 339, it is
possible to find in Glanvill’s text the assumption that, without the lord’s consent,
there can be no “substitution.”

[387 ] Charter, 1217, c. 39; Coke, 2nd Inst. 65.

[388 ] 2nd Inst. 66.

[389 ] Bracton, f. 169 b; Note Book, pl. 1248.

[390 ] Bracton, f. 45 b–46 b.

[391 ] Bracton, f. 169 b, 395.

[392 ] The only case in the Note Book in which it is mentioned is pl. 1248.

[393 ] Bracton, f. 21 b. This passage is an “addicio.”

[394 ] Bracton, f. 81.

[395 ] Bracton, f. 82.

[396 ] Bracton, f. 21 b.

[397 ] Charter, 1217, c 43. One is not to enfeoff a religious house and then take back
the land as tenant of that house. The mischief to be prevented seems to be
this:—Some favoured religious bodies, e.g. the Templars, have royal charters which
by general words set free all the lands that they now have, or shall hereafter acquire,
from many burdens. A man gives land to such a house, and then becomes that house’s
tenant, and as such he claims immunity under the charter.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 488 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[398 ] Petition of Barons, c. 10.

[399 ] Provisions, cap. 14.

[400 ] Stat. 7 Edw. I. For the parallel French ordinance of 1275 see Langlois, Le règne
de Philippe le Hardi, 206 ff.; Esmein, Histoire du droit français, 278.

[401 ] The reference is not, as commonly supposed, to the Charter of 1217; it is a
recital of one of the Provisions of 1259. These Provisions were unknown to our
classical commentators.

[402 ] Hoveden, iv. 62.

[403 ] Rot. Cl. i. 55; Abbrev. Placit. p. 48 (Bedf.). See also Liber Rubeus, vol. ii. p.
cclxxxv.

[404 ] Rot. Cl. ii. 38; Note Book, pl. 1665; Bracton, f. 395.

[405 ] Testa de Nevill, 197. The whole book is full of information about the
arrentation of serjeanties.

[406 ] Bracton, f. 169 b. The passage as it stands is not very plain. See also f. 395.

[407 ] It was discovered on the Close Roll by Mr. Turner and published by him in L.
Q. R. xii. 300. Equally important ordinances may yet be latent.

[408 ] As to the date of this document, see E. H. R. vi. 367.

[409 ] Calend. Geneal. 415.

[410 ] Britton, i. 222.

[411 ] Fleta, 178.

[412 ] See Rot. Orig. Abbrev. e.g. 126; see also Y. B. 33–35 Edw. I. 306.

[413 ] Hoveden, iv. 62.

[414 ] Bracton, f. 116 b; Cart. Glouc. ii. 276; Ann. Burton. 330, ad 1254.

[415 ] Rot. Hund. i. Introduction and p. 20.

[416 ] Rot. Hund. i. 20–34.

[417 ] Rot. Hund. i. Introduction.

[418 ] Fleta, pp. 25, 26; Britton, i. 71.

[419 ] Stat. 18 Edw. I.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 489 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[420 ] To treat this measure as having been passed in the interest of the great lords
seems a mistake. The one person who had all to gain and nothing to lose by the new
law was the king.

[421 ] Rot. Parl. i. 430.

[422 ] Stat. 1 Edw. III. c. 12.

[423 ] Y. B. Pasch. 15 Edw. III (ed. Pike), pp. 157–58.

[424 ] Lib. Ass. f. 73, ann. 20, pl. 17; see also Fitz. Abr. Avowre, 126.

[425 ] Lib. Ass. f. 124, ann. 26, pl. 37.

[426 ] Lib. Ass. f. 160, ann. 29, pl. 19.

[427 ] 2nd Inst. 66; Co. Lit. 43 a.

[428 ] Rot. Parl. ii. 265.

[429 ] Stat. 34 Edw. III. c. 15.

[430 ] In 1412 Hankford J. said that in Henry III.’s time a tenant in chief of the crown
might have alienated as freely as any other tenant; Y. B. 14 Hen. IV. f. 4 (Mich. pl. 6).

[431 ] While writs bidding the sheriffs seize lands which have been alienated without
licence appear upon the very earliest Fine Rolls of Edward I., we have in vain sought
for any similar writs upon some of the last Fine Rolls of Henry III. Fine Roll, 1 Edw.
I. m. 9: the sheriff of Sussex is ordered to seize tenements which Franco de Bohun, a
tenant in chief by barony, has sold without licence to Almaric de Lucy. For other
instances see the same roll, m. 16, m. 22; Roll of 3 Edw. I. m. 15, m. 21; Roll of 5
Edw. I. m. 5. See also the discussions in Y. B. 32–33 Edw. I. p. 38; 33–35 Edw. I. pp.
306, 470.

[432 ] Waitz, D. V. G. vi. 67–69.

[433 ] See the law ascribed to Conrad II. in M. G., Leges, ii. 38 and the Constitutio
Lotharii, ibid. 84; Richter, Annalen, iii. 317. The Lombard feudists of the twelfth
century seem to have held that in the past the vassal had enjoyed a greater liberty than
was left to him by modern ordinances; Lib. Feud. i. xiii; ii. ix; ii. xxxiv. §§ 2, 3. For
France, see Luchaire, Manuel des institutions françaises, 171; Esmein, Histoire du
droit français, 213.

[434 ] See above, p. 76, note 11.

[435 ] Orderic, ii. 15 fol. See also Cartulaire de l’abbaye de la Sainte Trinité du Mont
de Rouen, passim.

[436 ] Orderic, iii. 18, 26.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 490 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[437 ] For Norman instances see Orderic’s chronicle; English instances are to be
found everywhere.

[438 ] Pipe Roll, 31 Hen. I.; fines are paid, p. 34, “pro concessione terrae quam H. de
L. ei dedit”; p. 45, “pro concessione terrarum quas episcopus ei dedit”; p. 73, “ut
habeat terram quam abbas de B. ei dedit”; p. 91, “pro concessione terrae quam tenet
de H. filio E.”; p. 96, “pro concessione terrae de qua R. de B. cum hereditavit”; p.
105, “ut rex firmet in cartha ecclesiae suae de A. omnes res quas comes de Warwic ei
dedit ad opus eiusdem ecclesiae”; p. 108, “pro concessione terrae . . . quam comes de
Warwic ei dedit.” To judge from the later Pipe Rolls, it would seem as if the king for
a while abandoned the attempt to make a steady revenue out of his confirmations; but
we may not be entitled to this inference. Chron. de Melsa, i. 221: the Archbishop of
York circ. 1190 takes 60 marks for confirming a tenant’s gift.

[439 ] For very early cases see Hist. Abingd. ii. 7, 8, 9. The abbot gives land to Robert
of Ouilly, but, repenting himself, is able to get back the land because the king has not
confirmed the gift. Then he bought Nuneham from Leofwine and, since the
Conqueror was in Normandy, procured and paid for the assent of Odo of Bayeux who
was acting as regent; but he lost his money, for the king having quarrelled with Odo
gave the land to another. Rufus peremptorily forbids the Abbot of Ramsey to alienate
any part of his demesne “without my licence”; Cart. Rams. i. 234. In John’s reign
licences to mortgage become common; Rot. Pat. 1, 3, 4, 7, 59. See also the mandate in
favour of the Bishop of Ely, Rot. Pat. 47.

[440 ] Cart. Glouc. i, 319; ii. 89. See the confirmation by Earl Richard of Chester in
Hist. Abingd. ii. 69.

[441 ] Bracton, f. 21 b. The passage is an “addicio.”

[442 ] See e.g. Orderic, ii. 449: a lord confirms his man’s gift to the abbey and adds
that if the man by any crime shall lose his fee (feudum), the church is still to keep the
land that has been given to it. See also Très ancien coutumier (Tardif), c. 89. This
view of the matter seems to have become of great importance in the history of
Scottish law; see Ross, Lectures on Conveyancing, ii. 251–53. See also Schröder, D.
R. G. p. 399, note 58.

[443 ] Bracton, f. 382 b. In 1251 this had become a grievous obstacle to the course of
justice, and an ordinance was made to the effect that a royal charter of confirmation
should not stay the action, unless the charter was so worded that the king would be
bound to give an exchange to the donee in case of his being evicted. At least from
John’s reign onwards royal confirmations were usually so framed that the king was
not bound to give an exchange. He would be so bound if he simply confirmed “the
gift of A. B., ” but he was not so bound if he confirmed “the reasonable (i.e. lawful)
gift of A. B. ”; in the latter case he only confirmed the gift in so far as it was no wrong
to any one. For this rule see Bract. f. 59 b; and see Rot. Cart. p. 79, where it is noted
that by special order of King John the word rationabiliter was omitted from a charter
of confirmation. As to the special value of royal charters even in the worst days of the
French kingship, see Luchaire, Institutions monarchiques, i. 117.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 491 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[444 ] The French seigneur, who did not usually get a relief from the heir, if the heir
was a descendant of the dead man, did very generally receive a fine when the
tenement was alienated, under such names as lods et ventes, quint et requint; also he
had the retrait féodal or right of repurchasing within a certain limited time the land
sold by his tenant at the price given for it. For Normandy, see Très ancien coutumier,
c. 57, 89–91; Somma, p. 96; Ancienne coutume, c. 29; on the face of these texts,
Norman law seems to grow more favourable to the lords during the thirteenth century.

[445 ] Fines, ed. Hunter, i. 32, 54, 110, 115, 123, 188, 239; ii. 59.

[446 ] Note Book, pl. 627, 779, 947, 984, 1616, 1924.

[447 ] Whitby Cart. i. 203.

[448 ] Madox, Formulare, p. 54. So T. de G. and his wife having sold land to the
Abbot of Meaux surrender it by the rod to the count of Aumâle in his court (ad
1160–82), Chron. de Melsa, i. 165, 224.

[449 ] Bracton, f. 81.

[450 ] Hist. Abingd. ii. 59–60.

[451 ] Hist. Abingd. ii. 20.

[452 ] Newminster Cart. p. 2.

[453 ] Hist. Abingd. ii. 136.

[454 ] Cart. Rams. i. 153.

[455 ] In this age it is seldom said that the tenant attorns (attornat seipsum) to the new
lord; the old lord, or in some cases the court, attorns (attornat) the tenant to the new
lord, or attorns the service and homage to the new lord.

[456 ] Bracton, f. 81 b–82 b. See also Y. B. 32–33 Edw. I. p. 43.

[457 ] Bracton, f. 80 b, 81 b, 382 § 5. However, if the lord was so poor that he was
unable to warrant the tenant, he was allowed to disclaim the seignory and the tenant
then held of the next lord in the ascending scale; Note Book, pl. 563, 674.

[458 ] In 1130 R. de C. fined to the king “ut Symon de Belcampo dominus suus non
daret servitium suum nisi concessu suo”: Pipe Roll, 31 Hen. I. p. 62.

[459 ] Note Book, pl. 236, 369, 593, 598, 627, 948, 1622. The tenant who will not
attorn can be sent to gaol: Y. B. 33–35 Edw. I. p. 317.

[460 ] Fines, ed. Hunter, e.g. 61, 65, 77, 109. When the tenant himself is spoken of as
the subject of the transfer, he generally is a tenant in villeinage; but it would be rash to
draw this inference in all cases. See e.g. Chron. de Melsa, i. 176 (ad 1160–72) a gift

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 492 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

of a half-carucate and of Gilbert son of Richard, who holds the land, with his wife and
their children. Whalley Coucher, i. 6, 7: a gift of Leving and Guy his brother and their
heirs, who seem to be freehold tenants of the donor.

[461 ] Glanv. ix. 8: “Utrum vero ad guerram suam manutenendam possint domini
huiusmodi auxilia exigere quaero. Obtinet autem quod non possunt ad id tenentes
distringere de iure, nisi quatenus facere velint.” In this passage guerra sua hardly
means a national war.

[462 ] Très ancien coutumier, c. 47, 48; Somma, p. 110; Ancienne coutume, c. 35.

[463 ] Charter of 1215, c. 12.

[464 ] Rot. Pat. p. 52.

[465 ] Rot. Pat. p. 61.

[466 ] Rot. Cl. i. 66.

[467 ] Rot. Cl. i. 127.

[468 ] Rot. Cl. i. 306.

[469 ] Rot. Cl. i. 570–71.

[470 ] Note Book, pl. 1146.

[471 ] Bracton, f. 36 b.

[472 ] Stat. West. I. (3 Edw. I.) c. 36.

[473 ] Stat. 25 Edw. III. stat. 5, c. 11. Stubbs, Const. Hist. ii. 521.

[474 ] See Ducange, s.v. auxilium; Madox, Exchequer, ch. xv. § 1; Viollet,
Établissements, iv. 18–20; Luchaire, Manuel des institutions françaises, 206.

[475 ] Glanv. vii. 17: “Ultimi heredes aliquorum sunt eorum domini.”

[476 ] Bracton, f. 297 b (last lines), distinguishes between cases in which the lord who
comes to the land by escheat can be treated as filling the place of the tenant’s heir
from those in which such treatment is impossible.

[477 ] See above, p. 301.

[478 ] Hist. Abingd. ii. p. 168, gives from Henry I.’s day an instance of a re-entry
clause in a feoffment in fee; but such clauses seem quite uncommon, even in leases
for years, until about 1250. The lords may still be relying on the efficiency of their
courts.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 493 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[479 ] Stat. Glouc. c. 4; Stat. Westm. II. c. 21; Second Institute, 295, 400. Coke says
that he had “read amongst ancient records” that a cessavit was brought in the reign of
King John. We have found no trace of any such action before the statutes.

[480 ] Blackstone, Comment. iii. 232. In Cod. 4. 66. 2, Justinian lays down the rule
that the emphyteuta whose rent is in arrear for three years may be ejected. In Nov. 7.
3. 2, the period of three years is cut down to two years where the landlord is a church.
In this form the rule passes into the canon law; c. 4, X. 3. 18.

[481 ] Leg. Henr. 51 § 3; Glanvill, ix. 8; Bracton, f. 157 b; Note Book, pl. 2, 78, 270,
348, 370, 1207; Bigelow, Hist. Procedure, 202–8. Distraint as a means of compelling
appearance in court is of course another matter.

[482 ] Hist. Abingd. ii. p. 128: in Henry I.’s time a tenant of the abbey is held to have
forfeited his land by default in military service; but the abbot does not proceed to
extremities. See also Bigelow, Placita, pp. 97, 166–73. The last of these cases goes to
show that even in the earliest years of Henry II. a tenant could not be deprived of his
land for non-payment of rent. In older times a refusal to perform military service
would have been a near approach to a felony. Lib. Feud. ii. 24: “Non est alia iustior
causa beneficii auferendi, quam si id, propter quod beneficium datum fuerit, servitium
facere recusaverit.” But in England “feudal” tenure in becoming universal soon loses
its “conditionalness.”

[483 ] Glanvill, ix. c. 8; Bracton, f. 205 b; Note Book, pl. 2, 270, 348, 370.

[484 ] The extreme reluctance of ancient law to deprive a tenant of his tenement
merely because he has not paid rent is shown by the gavelet procedure of the Kentish
custom; Statutes, i. p. 225. After a great deal of forbearance the land is at last
adjudged to the lord; but even then the tenant has a theoretical right of redeeming it by
paying the arrears nine (or is it eighteen?) times over and adding a wergild of £5. The
law does not like to say that he has lost the land for good and all, though it imposes an
impossible condition upon him if he wishes to have it back again.

[485 ] Littleton, sec. 139.

[486 ] See above, p. 354.

[487 ] Littleton, sec. 160; see above, p. 341.

[488 ] Littleton, sec. 159.

[489 ] Britton, ii. 10, and the editor’s note.

[490 ] See e.g. the provision for Engelard of Cigogné: Rot. Cl. i. 79.

[491 ] We need hardly say that the whole of this subject is admirably discussed in
Vinogradoff’s Villainage in England.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 494 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[492 ] The important cases are Bestenoverv.Montacute, Note Book, pl. 70, 88, and
William Henry’s sonv.Bartholomew Eustace’s son, ibid. pl. 1103. As to the decisions
of Brian and Danby under Edw. IV., see Littl. Tenures, sec. 77; it is doubtful whether
Littleton wrote this passage.

[493 ] Vinogradoff, Villainage, 78–81. It is possible to regard these decisions of
Pateshull and Raleigh as belated rather than premature; but the formula of the as-size
of novel disseisin lays stress on the freedom of the tenement, and therefore goes to
prove that the lawyers of Henry II.’s reign had not intended to protect villein holding.
The original version of Magna Carta might seem to give protection to the freeman
holding in villeinage; but in 1217 some words were interpolated, apparently for the
very purpose of showing that his case was outside the charter. The text of 1215 says,
“Nullus liber homo . . . dissaisietur . . . nisi per legale judicium etc.” That of 1217
says “Nullus liber homo . . . dissaisietur de libero tenemento suo vel libertatibus vel
liberis consuetudinibus suis . . . nisi etc.”

[494 ] Britton, ii. 13: “Villenage est tenement de demeynes de chescun seignur, baillé
a tenir a sa volunté par vileins services de emprouwer al oes le seignur.”

[495 ] Bracton, f. 164 b: “de beneficio principis succurritur ei per recognitionem
assisae novae disseisinae multis vigiliis excogitatam et inventam.”

[496 ] We are here dealing with normal cases. Sometimes, as will be explained in our
chapter on Jurisdiction, the lord may have had so few tenants in villeinage that he did
not keep a court for them.

[497 ] Select Pleas in Manorial Courts, e.g. p. 39.

[498 ] It will be almost needless to refer the reader to the works of Nasse, Seebohm,
Ashley, Cunningham and Vinogradoff. See also Maitland, Domesday Book, 362 ff.

[499 ] Thus Bracton, f. 75 b: “tam dominica quam villenagia quae dici possunt
dominica.” Ibid. f. 98: “tertia pars villenagii quod est quasi dominicum.” In the
Hundred Rolls some jurors habitually reckon the villeinage to be part of the demesne,
while others as habitually exclude the villeinage when they give the contents of the
demesne. Thus (ii. 343) in the Bunstow Hundred of Essex their formula is—the lord
has x acres in demesne of which y are in villeinage. On the other hand, in
Huntingdonshire (e.g. ii. 656) the lands holden by villein tenants are not part of what
the lord holds in demesne. The word demesne, which is the Anglo-French equivalent
for the Latin dominicum, is very curious. Our spelling of it seems due to a false
derivation from the French mesnie (household); the demesne lands supply the lord’s
household. Not improbably another mistake confounded confusion. Bracton, f. 263,
apparently believed that the word was connected with the Latin mensa: “est autem
dominicum quod quis habet ad mensam suam”; the demesne lands supply the lord’s
table, they are his “board-lands.” Cf. Whitby Cart. i. 200: “et ea conditione . . . illam .
. . terram ecclesiae reddidi ut nullus a dominica mensa illam auferret.” Spelman,
Gloss. s.v. dominicum, long ago pointed out that the s in demesne is an intruder.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 495 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[500 ] Thus a tenement containing in all but five acres may consist of no less than
fourteen disconnected pieces; Fines, ed. Hunter, i. 42.

[501 ] Vinogradoff, p. 259.

[502 ] Vinogradoff, Essay i. chap. vi.

[503 ] Cart. Rams. i. 393.

[504 ] Cart. Rams. i. 310.

[505 ] Cart. Rams. i. 315: “opera ad taschum assignata, quae aliquando per dimidium
diem poterunt adimpleri.”

[506 ] Thus Cart. Rams. i. 473: the tenant owes suit to the lord’s mill; but between 1st
Aug. and 29th Sept. he may grind elsewhere if the lord’s mill is too busy, and corn
that he has purchased may be ground anywhere.

[507 ] See above, p. 365.

[508 ] In the Hundred Rolls the phrase “at the will of the lord” occurs often enough in
connexion with particular services, e.g. ii. 479, “possunt talliari ad voluntatem
domini”; and where rent is payable the same phrase is often used to show that the lord
has a choice between rent and work, e.g. ii. 554, “et valent consuetudines eiusdem per
annum ad voluntatem domini vj. sol.”; but it is rare to find it said that the tenant in
villeinage holds at the will of the lord. However the jurors of the Northstow hundred
of Cambridgeshire say this plainly in some cases (ii. 461–62) as also do those of the
Papworth hundred.

[509 ] See above, p. 310.

[510 ] Thus when it is said that a tenant must bring his servants to the boon works “et
ipse debet eos adducere et ibi interesse,” his presence in person seems required;
Placit. Abbrev. p. 97 (Bedf.).

[511 ] Note Book, pl. 1210.

[512 ] Bracton, f. 26, 208 b.

[513 ] Placit. Abbrev. p. 23 (Bucks.): “tenet ad furcam et flagellum et in villenagio”;
ibid. p. 92 (North.): “per consuetudines serviles ad furcam et flagellum.” See
Vinogradoff, p. 170.

[514 ] These stories are examined by Karl Schmidt, Jus Primae Noctis.

[515 ] See e.g. Testa de Neville, p. 393.

[516 ] Reg. Maj. lib. iv. c. 54.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 496 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[517 ] Ancient Laws of Wales; see Index s.v. amobyr, amobragium.

[518 ] In two places Bracton (f. 26, 208 b) speaks as though merchet could never be
exacted from a freeman; in a third passage (f. 195) he allows that a freeman may be
compelled to pay it by reason of an express agreement. Fleta, p. 193, and Britton, i.
196, think that it is not conclusive of personal unfreedom. For the law of later days
see Littleton, secs. 174 (an interpolation), 209 and Coke’s comment thereon. Coke’s
doctrine is that the merchet may be exacted from a freeman by reason of special
reservation, though not by reason of general custom, and the positive half of this rule
seems to be borne out by Y. B. 43 Edw. III. f. 5 (Hil. pl. 13); as to the negative half,
see Littleton’s remark in Y. B. 34 Hen. VI. f. 15 (Mich. pl. 28). In 10 Edw. III. f. 22
(Pasch. pl. 41), a case came before the court illustrating the Northumbrian tenures
referred to in our text; the tenant, it is said, did homage, paid scutage and merchet. It
is chiefly in Northumbria, the home of drengage and thegnage (see above, p. 295),
that freeholders are to be found paying merchet; but tenants bearing the distinctive
name of Freeman and yet paying merchet are met with elsewhere, e.g. Pleas in
Manorial Courts, i. 94. Vinogradoff, p. 154, argues from the Hundred Rolls that there
were considerable parts of England in which the villeins were not subject to this
exaction, since the jurors of some hundreds say nothing about it. But when we find it
habitually mentioned throughout some hundreds and never mentioned in others, the
sounder inference seems to be that it was almost universal. Some juries think fit to
mention it, others do not; just as some juries think fit to say that the villeins hold at
the will of the lord, while others do not. So again the jury for the Lang-tree hundred of
Oxfordshire (ii. 774) call all the tenants in villeinage servi, while in some
Cambridgeshire hundreds they are in general custumarii. For a discussion of the
derivation of the word merchet see Y. B. 15 Edw. III., ed. Pike, Introduction, pp.
xv–xliii.

[519 ] Now and then in the extents a man who seems to be a freeholder is said to pay
tallage; e.g. Cart. Rams. i. 322: “dat talliagium cum villanis quotienscunque ipsi
talliantur.” In Y. B. 8 Edw. III. f. 66 (Mich. pl. 31) it is said that the Bishop of Ely
held land by the service of being tallaged along with the villeins. Of course the bishop
was free, but his tenement also seems to have been considered free.

[520 ] Thus, Placit. Abbrev. 90 (Mid.), in 1215 jurors say—We do not know whether
the tenement is free; the tenant had to plough three acres for his lord, to mow three
turns and carry to the lord’s barn, receiving for this the best sheep in the lord’s fold, to
attend boon days and give an Easter egg; we never heard that he made fine for
marrying his daughter or selling his oxen; but the lord used to seek an aid from him
once in seven years. Held that the tenement was free. On p. 84 (Berk.) is another
special verdict in an action for dower; there is no week work; the jurors however had
never heard of a woman being endowed of such a tenement, but after her husband’s
death the widow used to hold the whole. Held that the tenement was not free, at least
for the purpose of endowment. In 1228 (Note Book, pl. 281) we find another case in
which, according to one story, the jurors doubted, because, though the tenant owed
labour services, he knew “quid debuit facere et quid non.”

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 497 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[521 ] It may be said that we contradict Bracton in making “uncertainty” the essence
of villein service, for he not unfrequently (e.g. f. 7, 26) speaks of villein services and
servile works which are certain and determinate; such are the services and works
owed by some classes of tenants on the ancient demesne. The truth is that the term
“certain” is used in two different but closely connected senses; the one takes the law
of the king’s court, the other takes the custom of the manor as its criterion. Services
may be accounted uncertain either (1) because the custom cannot define them without
frequent reference to the lord’s will, or (2) because, if the lord chooses to break the
custom, the king’s court will not help the tenants. In the ordinary case of villeinage
the services are uncertain in both senses, and uncertain in the second sense because
uncertain in the first. But there are cases on the ancient demesne in which the services
are uncertain in the first, but not in the second sense, and these seem to be Bracton’s
“servitia villana sed certa.” We cannot fully define them without speaking of the
lord’s will, nevertheless the definition is legally binding on the lord. Suppose the
terms of a tenure to be that A must work three days a week for B at whatever kind of
agricultural labour B may require; in one sense these terms are very uncertain, but if
courts of law enforce them, then in another sense they are certain. Still it is not to be
denied that the word “villein” may sometimes have been applied to any hard work in
the fields. In the thirteenth century it was a word of abuse; a “villein deed” is a base
and cowardly deed; “villein words” are gross words, bad language.

[522 ] Above, p. 380.

[523 ] Thus Bracton, f. 263: “villenagium quod traditur villanis, quod quis tempestive
et intempestive resumere possit pro voluntate sua et revocare.”

[524 ] See e.g. Britton’s definition of the tenure as given above, p. 380.

[525 ] Magna Vita S. Hugonis, p. 60; Somersetshire Pleas, pl. 1521.

[526 ] Monast. v. 454. See as to the foundation of Kirkstall, ibid. v. 530–31, “amotis
habitatoribus.”

[527 ] However it seems clear that during the thirteenth century the Bishop of Ely
increased the services of some of his Cambridgeshire tenants. He exacted one more
day’s work in the week. This appears on a comparison of the two unprinted registers
mss Cot. Tib. B. 2; Claud. C. 11.

[528 ] The Placitorum Abbreviatio for the first twenty years of Edward I.’s reign
gives at least twenty actions of this character, in ten of which the defendant was a
religious house. In fourteen out of the twenty it was shown that the manor in question
was not on the ancient demesne, and only in two cases (if we mistake not) did the
tenants get a judgment.

[529 ] Proceedings of the court of the Abbot of Bec at Combe in Hampshire, ad 1290;
Select Pleas in Manorial Courts, i. 34; see also p. 39, where a man counts upon the
seisin of his great-grandmother.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 498 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[530 ] Cart. Glouc. iii. 148: “et post decessum ipsius heres eius redimet terram ad
voluntatem domini.” Ibid. p. 182: “et post decessum suum heres eius antequam terram
illam ingrediatur redimet illam ad voluntatem domini.” Rot. Hund. ii. 874: “et si filius
eorum voluerit tenere eandem terram tunc facit gratum dicti Abbatis.”

[531 ] Bracton, f. 192 b.

[532 ] “Sequela, dicitur de pullis equinis, vitulinis, aliisque animalibus quae matrem
sequuntur”; Du Cange, Glossarium. When King John is forced to promise that he will
banish his foreign captains “et totam sequelam eorundem” (Charter, c. 50), this phrase
expresses a bitter hatred and contempt. Gerard de Athée, the most famous of the band,
was, it was said, of servile birth.

[533 ] Maitland, History of a Cambridgeshire Manor, E. H. R. ix. 423 ff.

[534 ] If a widow holds the whole of her husband’s tenement, instead of enjoying but
a third or a half, this is regarded as a sign that the tenement is villein; Placit. Abbrev.
p. 84 (Berk.).

[535 ] Note Book, 794, 1005, 1062.

[536 ] The “extent” of Holm in Norfolk, Cart. Rams, i. 401, is a rare example of a
manor in which the tenements were allowed to descend to co-heirs and co-heiresses;
thus three sons and co-heirs hold twelve acres, six daughters and co-heiresses hold
thirty acres. But then the tenure is not villeinage of the common kind; probably it is
not freehold, for merchet is paid, but there is no week work. The widow’s right to
hold the whole or a portion of the tenement is often much better settled than the heir’s
right. Thus at Brancaster, Cart. Rams, i. 416, the widow gives a heriot and for this
becomes entitled to enjoy half the land: the son or daughter, if such there be, must
make fine for the other half “quoad melius poterit.” In the Domesday of St. Paul’s, p.
52, there is an often cited passage which seems to show that the Canons in 1222
admitted that some of their customary tenants had heri-table rights. On the other hand,
in 1327 the monks of Christchurch at Canterbury forbade the steward of a Devonshire
manor to admit any heir or other person who demanded admittance as a right; Literae
Cantuarienses, i. 229, 385.

[537 ] See Halmote Rolls of the Priory of Durham (Surtees Soc.), Introduction.

[538 ] See the very early (1239) specimen of a court roll in Cart. Rams. i. 423–29.

[539 ] Select Pleas in Manorial Courts, i. 91, 171.

[540 ] See Vinogradoff, Villainage in England, p. 89 ff.

[541 ] See the Exon. Domesday, D. B. iv. 76: “Dominicatus Regis ad Regnum
pertinens in Deveniscira.”

[542 ] See Fleta, p. 3: “Antiqua maneria vel iura coronae annexa Regi non licebit
alienare, sed omnis Rex coronae suae alienata revocare tenetur”; Britton, i. 221. A

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 499 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

strong support for this doctrine is found in what seems to be the coronation oath of
Edward I.; see Stubbs, Const. Hist. ii. 105.

[543 ] Britton, ii. p. 13, gives this as the reason for the little writ of right. The
sokemen who enjoy it are the tillers of the king’s soil, and disputes about that soil are
to be decided within the manor by simple and rapid processes.

[544 ] Glanv. xii. c. 3; Bracton, f. 328; Reg. Brev. f. 1.

[545 ] When the lord himself is the deforciant, it is directed to him, in other cases to
his bailiffs, see Reg. Brev. f. 9 b.

[546 ] Reg. Brev. f. 9.

[547 ] By the writ Accedas ad curiam, Reg. Brev. f. 9 b.

[548 ] By the writ of Recordari, Reg. Brev. f. 10 b, 11.

[549 ] Select Pleas in Manorial Courts, i. pp. 114–21.

[550 ] Reg. Brev. 10 b: “Cum secundum legem et consuetudinem infra maneria quae
de huiusmodi antiquo dominico coronae existunt hactenus ut dicitur usitatas etc.”

[551 ] Reg. Brev. f. 14.

[552 ] Fleta, p. 4: “sed cum huiusmodi [sokemanni] per Regem vel suos expellantur
ab huiusmodi tenemento, non habetur remedium nisi tantum supplicatio.”

[553 ] As to this last point see Vinogradoff, p. 103. It is very probable that the
Monstraverunt did not become a writ “of course” until a comparatively late time. It is
not mentioned by Glanvill or Bracton, nor have we found it in any Registrum
Brevium of Henry III.’s reign. There is some sign that the step of making it a writ “of
course” was not taken until 1290. In that year the men of Grendon, asserting that they
were on the ancient demesne, complained of their lords to the king. The petition is
thus endorsed: “Let the Chancellor convene the justices and provide for this and
similar cases a remedy to endure for all time”: Rot. Parl. i. 60. But such writs were in
use early in Henry III.’s reign: see Note Book, pl. 1230, 1237, Placit. Abbrev. 113,
119; and were extremely common in the early years of Edward I. The comparatively
late appearance of this writ as a writ de cursu is no proof that the principle which it
enforced was new; but it is, as Vinogradoff has well argued, some proof that the
procedure against mesne lords grew out of a procedure against royal bailiffs. Against
the royal bailiffs there would naturally be no writ “of course”: if a man would
complain of the king’s agents he must begin with a petition to the king. As to the little
writ of right, Glanvill does not, and has no occasion to mention this; in his day
“original writs” of any kind were still somewhat new as normal institutes of the law.
On the other hand the writ is found in a Registrum of Henry III.’s time as a writ de
cursu and is currently mentioned by Bracton as a well-known thing; see Maitland,
Register of Original Writs, Harvard Law Review, iii. 170.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 500 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[554 ] Bracton, f. 7 b; Fleta, pp. 3, 4.

[555 ] These do not appear very clearly in Fleta, p. 4.

[556 ] Bracton, f. 208 b.

[557 ] Placit. Abbrev. p. 233 (Berks.): “et cum licet cuilibet capitali domino mutare
antiquum dominicum in liberum tenementum et maxime dominus Rex.”

[558 ] Ibid. p. 228 (Berks.); cf. ibid. p. 241 (Ebor.); Y. B. 20–21 Edw. I. 378.

[559 ] R. H. ii. 501–2.

[560 ] D. B. i. 189.

[561 ] R. H. 607–13.

[562 ] D. B. i. 203 b.

[563 ] R. H. ii. 751.

[564 ] Select Pleas in Manorial Courts, p. 106–24.

[565 ] R. H. ii. 402–3.

[566 ] Cart. Rams. i. 397; Select Pleas in Manorial Courts, 99–129.

[567 ] Y. B. 21–22 Edw. I. p. 499; Y. B. 1 Edw. II. f. 19.

[568 ] See Seebohm, E. H. R. vii. 453, an able review of Vinogradoff’s book. Mr.
Seebohm thinks that the men of Ripton failed to prove that they were “privileged
villeins,” and no doubt it is true that in one sense they were convicted of being very
“ordinary villeins”; they owed hard and degrading services and were in many respects
subject to “the will of the lord.” But, for all this, they have got the little writ and the
Monstraverunt and the abbot cannot make them work two days a week instead of one.
So they are “privileged villeins.”

[569 ] Y. B. 21–22 Edw. I. p. 250: “son barun tint en sokemanerie.” Y. B. 33–35 Edw.
I. p. 557: “tyent en sokemanerie.”

[570 ] Stat. 31 Geo. II. c. 14.

[571 ] Printed by Horwood, Y. B. 20–21 Edw. I. p. xviii. The document is transcribed
along with the apocryphal statutes and is sometimes entitled Statutum de Antiquo
Dominico.

[572 ] Note Book, pl. 1203.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 501 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[573 ] There seems to be a sad logical gap in this argument. The ejected villein, if
with his lord’s permission he brought an assize, would have to bring it in his lord’s
name, but Aunger seems certainly to suppose that the sokeman could bring it in his
own name.

[574 ] So in later times we find the anomaly that if on the ancient demesne the lord
disseises the tenant, the tenant may elect between an action in the manorial court and
a (freeholder’s) action in the king’s court: Y. B. 41 Edw. III. f. 22 (Mich. pl. 13); 41
Lib. Ass. f. 253, pl. 7. See Stat. 9 Hen. IV. c. 5, which shows that by naming the lord
as a disseisor one could evade his jurisdiction and bring a dispute about a tenement on
the ancient demesne before the king’s court.

[575 ] Placit. Abbrev. 246–47.

[576 ] The most important case from the later middle ages seems to be Y. B. 14 Hen.
IV. f. 34 (Hil. pl. 51). Hankford there fixes the terminology of later times; for
compare Fitz. Nat. Brev. f. 12 b. On the ancient demesne there are (b) sokemen of
free tenure, who are freeholders, who use the little writ and who, as it seems, convey
by feoffment, and (c) sokemen of base tenure who hold by the rod, who surrender into
the lord’s hand, who are unprotected by the little writ, but sue for their tenements by
bill [i.e. petition] in the lord’s court. Of any (a) tenants by knight’s service who may
hold of an ancient demesne manor, no mention is here made, since their tenure is
hardly conceived as a “tenure in ancient demesne.” The doctrine of the thirteenth
century makes a different distribution; there are (a) freeholders, who may hold either
by knight’s service or in free socage and who have the ordinary freeholder’s
remedies; (b) the tenants in privileged villeinage, who have the little writ and who
usually convey by surrender; (c) the tenants in absolute villeinage, who at least in
strict law have no protected tenant right. The question discussed in later days, “In
whom is the freehold? Is it in the lord, or is it in the tenant? ” implies a conception of
“ the freehold” to which the lawyers of Henry III.’s day had hardly come.

[577 ] Fleta, p. 3–4; Britton, i. 221–22.

[578 ] See Note Book, pl. 632: “destruxit duos villanos divites ita quod pauperes
effecti sunt”; pl. 691: “talliavit quendam villanum etc. ita quod ipsum fugavit.”

[579 ] The lord distrains the tenant for services; the tenant brings a replevin; the lord
pleads ancient demesne: Y. B. 12 Edw. II. 384; Y. B. 29 Edw. III. f. 9. If the question
is between sokemanry and mere villeinage, the tenant will desire to show that the land
is ancient demesne; but if the question is between sokemanry and ordinary
freeholding, then this contention will come from the lord, for he would rather that a
case in which he is concerned should come into the manorial court than that it should
go before the king’s justices.

[580 ] Y. B. 15 Edw. II. f. 455; Y. B. 13–14 Edw. III. (Pike), p. 102; Fitz. Abr.
Auncien Demesne, pl. 15; Y. B. 49 Edw. III. f. 22–23; Vinogradoff, p. 90. The rule as
to the exclusive use of Domesday may well be of comparatively late growth; in one of
the earliest cases the sheriff is directed to inquire whether the land be ancient demesne

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 502 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

or no; Placit. Abbrev. p. 119 (Staf.). In some cases the appeal to Domesday would
have been misleading. No one, for example, could discover from that record that the
manor of King’s Ripton was ancient demesne; probably it is there reckoned as a
member of an adjoining manor, still its lord when at war with his refractory tenants
raised no question as to its quality; Select Pleas in Manorial Courts, i. p. 99.

[581 ] Placit. Abbrev. 270–71; Vinogradoff, 118–19. Vinogradoff’s criticism of this
decision seems unnecessarily severe. All that can be said against the judges is that
they apparently gave one bad reason for a sound judgment. A jury had found that the
men of Tavistock were of servile condition; this was foundation enough for the
decision.

[582 ] Select Pleas in Manorial Courts, i. 105–6.

[583 ] Y. B. 20–21 Edw. I. p. xix. Cf. Fleta, p. 4: “Provisum est etiam quod
huiusmodi tenentes inter se tantum unicum beneficium habeant recuperationis
tenementorum per quoddam breve de recto clausum.” Britton, ii. 13: “le bref de dreit
clos pledable par baillif del maner de tort fet del un sokeman al autre. ” See also Y. B.
21–22 Edw. I. p. 501.

[584 ] See the coronation oath of Edward II., Stubbs, Const. Hist. ii. 317.

[585 ] Chron. Petrob. p. 160: “et xi. sochemanni . . . in estate facient per xv. dies
quicquid iusserit dominus.”

[586 ] R. H. ii. 469–70.

[587 ] Boldon Book, and Bp. Hatfield’s Survey, e.g. pp. 29–30.

[588 ] Placit. Abbrev. p. 238: in 1298 the whole county [court] of Kent is asked the
question how tenements held in gavelkind can be changed into liberum feodum.
Spelman, Gloss. s.v. Sokemanria gives from a Register of Christ Church, Canterbury,
a remarkable classification of tenures.

[589 ] Durham Halmote Rolls, Introduction, pp. xxxv–xxxvii.

[590 ] Bracton, f. 7, says of them “tenent de dominico.” This phrase here and in some
other places seems to mean that they hold land which until lately was in the lord’s
hand, and had once been part of his demesne in the narrowest sense of that term.

[591 ] Concanen’s Report of Rowev.Brenton (1830) gives us interesting glimpses of
large classes of “conventioners” on some of the Cornish manors. When they first
appear they seem to be holding under conventiones, that is to say, leases for short
terms of years. Bracton does not say whether the tenants whom he describes hold for
terms of years. A lease for years is very often called a conventio, and in Bracton’s day
the writ of covenant existed chiefly for the benefit of termors.

[1 ] Bracton will occasionally use the word status to stand for the whole mass of a
person’s rights, even with special reference to his proprietary rights in land, as when

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 503 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

(f. 423 b) he discusses the maxim that an infant’s status is not to be changed; but he
chiefly uses the word when discussing personal freedom and personal slavery; these
are the two great estates. In one passage (f. 40 b, line 23) he seems to use the word
status in its later meaning—“Si autem totum non habuerit statum transfert id quod
habet”; but the mss show that he wrote not statum, but statim.

[2 ] Leg. Hen. c. 31, 32, 33.

[3 ] Magna Carta (1215), c. 39. See above, p. 183.

[4 ] Note Book, pl. 1213 (ad 1236–37): the Earl of Chester in a civil suit claims the
judgment of his peers, but abandons this claim in order to put forward another,
namely, that the plea being a “common plea” should not be heard coram Rege. Placit.
Abbrev. p. 201 (ad 1281): the Earl of Gloucester, being sued for his franchises in
Glamorgan, insists that he ought to have the judgment of his peers, namely, the lords
marchers.

[5 ]ad 1233; Mat. Par. iii. 252, 257; vi. 73; Note Book, pl. 857.

[6 ] Bracton, f. 119.

[7 ] In the fourteenth century it was held that a peer in a civil suit was entitled to have
at least one knight on the jury. But this can have nothing to do with the iudicium
parium, for the knight is neither the peer’s peer nor his judge. See Y. B. 12–13 Edw.
III. (ed. Pike), p. 291.

[8 ] Bracton, f. 116 b.

[9 ] Madox, Exch. i. 530–39: the Abbot of Croyland and Thomas de Furnival protest
that they are not barons in order to escape from heavy amercements.

[10 ] This from the thirteenth century version of Glanvill contained in ms Camb.
Univ. Mm. i. 27, f. 30 b.

[11 ] Bracton, f. 337 b–338.

[12 ] Bracton, f. 444.

[13 ] Here again we must refer to Vinogradoff’s work for the discussion of many
details. See also Leadam, in Proceedings of Royal Hist. Soc. vi. 167, and in L. Q. R.
ix. 348.

[14 ] Bracton, f. 4 b.

[15 ] Bracton, f. 4 b; Bracton and Azo, p. 49.

[16 ] Bracton, f. 5; Fleta, pp. 1, 239, § 23; Britton, i. 197 and the editor’s note.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 504 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[17 ] See the attempts of John of Longueville, Nichols’s Britton, i. 195 note;
Vinogradoff, p. 45 note.

[18 ] Mirror (Selden Soc.), pp. 79, 165.

[19 ] For example, in the Hundred Rolls for Oxfordshire (R. H. ii. 688 ff.).

[20 ] The English bondman may have been common, for we often read of bondi or
bondes; but this word covers an instructive ambiguity; a Scandinavian word, meaning
man and hence peasant, has been misunderstood to imply bondage, i.e. servility. See
Vinogradoff, p. 145. Britton writing in French frequently used the word serf, and
there is no sufficient reason for denying that this word was used also in English
speech. We shall use it as a translation of Bracton’s servus.

[21 ] See above p. 412 as to Bracton’s odd use of the term ascriptitius.

[22 ] We hold this to have been fully proved by Hallam, Middle Ages, ed. 1837, vol.
iii. p. 256, and by Vinogradoff, pp. 48–56. But they are perhaps inclined to give too
late a date to the appearance of the idea that there are two classes of villeins. Thus in
Y. B. 1 Hen. IV. f. 5 (Mich. pl. 11) a nieve brings an appeal for the death of her
husband against her lord; it is argued that if the lord be convicted, the appellant will
become free; to this it is replied, Not so, if she be regardant to a manor, for in that
case she will be forfeited and become the king’s nieve; but otherwise would it be if
she were a villein in gross.

[23 ] See e.g. Cart. Glouc. ii. 4: the Bishop of Hereford grants a villein to the Abbey
of Gloucester. Cart. Burton, p. 75, grant of a nativus by the Abbot of Burton to the
Abbess of Polesworth. Note Book, pl. 1103: a villein sold for 40 shillings; this price
will hardly cover a tenement. Register of Abp. Gray (Surtees Soc.), p. 282: the
Archbishop of York buys two nativi for 20 pounds. Selby Coucher Book, i. 278: a
nativus is sold for four shillings and a talentum. Ninth Rep. Hist. mss Ap. 1, p. 32: a
man and his sons are sold to the Chapter of St. Paul’s for 60 shillings, a mare, a cart
and 28 sheep.

[24 ] Britton, i. 197.

[25 ] Bracton, f. 197 b, line 3, appeals to common opinion; “dicitur enim vulgariter
quod quis potest esse servus unius et liber homo alterius.” He uses the same phrase, f.
25, line 13, f. 196 b, line 36. On f. 198 b, he says, “Cum quis servus sit, non erit
servus cuilibet de populo.” Britton, i. 199; Fleta, p. 111 (§ 15).

[26 ] Bracton, f. 6 § 3; f. 155 b § 3. Britton, i. 195 and the Longueville note.

[27 ] Bracton, f. 141: the serf only has an “appeal” in case of high treason. For later
law as to appeals by villeins see Y. B. 18 Edw. III. f. 32, Mich. pl. 4 (which appears
also as 11 Hen. IV. f. 93, Trin. pl. 52); 1 Hen. IV. f. 5, Mich. pl. 11; Fitz. Abr.
Corone, pl. 17; Lit. secs. 189, 190, 194, and Coke’s comment. Littleton’s doctrine is
that a villein’s heir has an appeal for the death of his ancestor, that a nieve has an
appeal for rape, but that a villein has no appeal for mayhem, though for this crime the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 505 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

lord may be indicted. When a civil action was brought for beating, wounding,
imprisonment, etc. there seems to have been some doubt as to how much of the
charge the defendant should formally deny before pleading that the plaintiff was his
villein; see Y. B. 33–35 Edw. I. p. 296.

[28 ] Select Pleas of the Crown, p. 3: a villein kept in chains because he wished to run
away. For the imprisonment of a body of rebellious tenants in the 14th century see
Literae Cantuarienses, vol. ii. p. xxxvii.

[29 ] A ms of Bracton in the Phillipps Library, No. 3510, has a marginal note written
early in the fourteenth century which states the hereditary rights of the villeins in
forcible terms. “Item usque ad tertium gradum inclusive illi de parentela et sanguine
villanorum, sive mares fuerint sive feminae, succedent iure hereditario in terras et
tenementa villanorum. Et si per iniquum dominum seu ballivum eiciantur, iniuriatur
eis in hoc, quia legem suam habent ut liberi homines suam.”

[30 ] Bracton, f. 6 § 3; Bracton and Azo, pp. 67, 71; Vinogradoff, p. 74.

[31 ] Bracton, f. 155 b § 3.

[32 ] See especially Bracton, f. 193 b, line 6.

[33 ] But customs vary very much in this respect. The Abbey of Bec claims the
chattels of all villeins who die intestate; R. H. ii. 758 and an unprinted custumal
belonging to King’s Coll. Camb. The Abbot of Ramsey makes a similar claim at St.
Ives; Cart. Rams. i. 290. At Warboys and Caldicote if the villein has no heir of his
body the abbot takes a third of the goods. At Hemingford the villein can make a will
“even in the absence of the reeve or serjeant.” Often the best of the villein’s chattels
were regarded as annexed to the tenement and could not be bequeathed; see Literae
Cantuarienses, ii. 411–12.

[34 ] See in particular Bracton, f. 190 b, line 8: “. . . in possessione servitutis . . . in
possessione libertatis.” Bracton quaintly misappropriates the term statu liber for the
serf who is de facto free, while the freeman who is de facto a serf is statu servus.
Bracton and Azo, 78.

[35 ] Bracton, f. 191.

[36 ] Bracton, f. 191 b, last lines: “in statu dubio semper erit pro libertate
iudicandum”; f. 193, “in hoc dubio erit pro libertate iudicandum ita quod in
benigniorem partem cadat interpretatio.”

[37 ] Bracton, f. 6 b, 7; Bracton and Azo, p. 77; Y. B. 21–22 Edw. I. p. 449; 33–35
Edw. I. p. 205.

[38 ] Bracton, f. 163. These strict possessory rules were being relaxed before the end
of the century. Year and day takes the place of the four days; Britton, i. 199, 201.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 506 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[39 ] Bracton, f. 6 b: “ad similitudinem cervorum domesticorum.” Cf. Britton, i. 201;
Y. B. 32–33 Edw. I. p. 56.

[40 ] Bracton, f. 24 b, 208 b; Vinogradoff, pp. 70–74.

[41 ] Littleton, sec. 205–7.

[42 ] See Vinogradoff, p. 73. Add to his illustrations, Cart. Glouc. ii. 87: grant of land
to G. our “native” for life and to his wife during her viduity, at a rent and in
consideration of a gross sum; he is not to marry son or daughter without our leave.
Select Pleas in Manorial Courts, i. 172: elaborate agreement between the abbot of
Battle and his villeins. Note Book, pl. 784, 1814.

[43 ] See above, p. 428.

[44 ] Hengham Parva, c. 8.

[45 ] Bracton, f. 155 § 2, 155 b § 3.

[46 ] Bracton, f. 204, 204 b.

[47 ] A man’s liability for the doings of his mainpast will deserve fuller discussion in
another context.

[48 ] In Bracton’s day the man who purchases and obtains possession of villein land
from a villein is protected against the lord’s self-help; Note Book, pl. 1203.

[49 ] Dialogus de Scaccario, ii. c. 14.

[50 ] Bracton, f. 217, line 36. We seem to see here a change unfavourable to the
villein.

[51 ] Britton, ii. 159, 168–69.

[52 ] See Broke, Abr. Villenage, pl. 33: in an assize of mort d’ancestor one of the
defendants pleaded that he was the villein of X and the action was dismissed. Broke
notes that he did not add that he held in villeinage and therefore treats the case as
curious. Still this was an action for land.

[53 ] Select Pleas in Manorial Courts, i. 97, 98.

[54 ] On a very early roll of a Norfolk manor, for a sight of which we have to thank
Dr. Jessopp, a villein is amerced for having essoined a freeman, “et testatur per
curiam quod non potest assoniare liberum hominem.”

[55 ] Thus the Hundred Rolls seem to be founded on the presentments made as well
by representatives of townships, who would often be unfree, as by free and lawful
jurors of the hundreds; see the rolls for Essex, R. H. i. 136 ff.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 507 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[56 ] The original Assize of Arms (1181) contemplates only the arming of free-men;
but the writ of 1252 requires that the villani, if rich enough, shall be armed. It is plain
also that already in 1225 villani were iurati ad arma. This appears from the writ of
that year for the collection of a fifteenth. See these documents in Stubbs, Sel.
Charters.

[57 ] Even the ordinance for the Saladin tithe draws no line between free and unfree.
The fifteenth of 1225 was levied from villani; so apparently were the fortieth of 1232
and the thirtieth of 1237.

[58 ] Bracton, f. 194, last lines.

[59 ] Thus Britton, i. 197, says that the “native” who is a native not by birth but by his
own confession is more properly called a villein.

[60 ] Leg. Henr. c. 77.

[61 ] Glanvill, lib. v. c. 6.

[62 ] See c. 15, C. 32, qu. 4. This was altered by c. 8, X. 1, 18. Such a rule, expressed
in the German proverb “das Kind folgt der ärgeren Hand,” is by no means unnatural;
see Heusler, Institutionen, i. 188. In France they say “Le mauvais emporte le bon”:
Viollet, Histoire du droit civil, p. 319.

[63 ] Bracton, f. 5, 194 b; Bracton and Azo, p. 53; Note Book, pl. 1041, 1839.

[64 ] See Vinogradoff, pp. 59–63, also the note on Leg. Hen. c. 77 in Thorpe’s
Ancient Laws and Institutes. The freedom of the bastard appears at least as early as Y.
B. 19 Edw. II. f. 651–52. It appears also in Beaumanoir (c. 45, sec. 16) where it is the
more curious because the general rule is “Servitude vient de par les mères.”

[65 ] See the Abridgements, tit. Villenage.

[66 ] Co. Lit. 123 a, 136 b, 137 b.

[67 ] Y. B. 30–31 Edw. I. 164–68. Comp. Britton, i. 199; Y. B. 18 Edw. II. 604.

[68 ] Bracton, f. 202, 202 b; Britton, i. 281. Bracton’s own opinion seems this:—Free
woman with free tenement marries a bondman; his lord ejects them from her free
tenement; they can sue him. (See Bracton’s Note Book, pl. 1837; it is not stated in this
case that the disseisor was the villein’s lord.) But apparently Bracton admits that this
is not the prevailing opinion, at all events if the lord is in seisin of the husband.
Observe the words “secundum quosdam quod ego non approbo.” But at any rate
during the marriage the wife can have no action against her husband’s lord save one
based on the disturbance of her possession.

[69 ] Bracton, f. 202, 428 b, 430 b; Britton, f. 198–99; Note Book, pl. 702, 1139. As
to the whole of this subject, see Vinogradoff, pp. 61–63.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 508 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[70 ] Assize Roll, Lincoln, No. 481 (57 Hen. III.), m. 3: “in villa de Bellesby sunt duo
feoda, scilicet, feodum de Fauemer et feodum Peverel et . . . omnes illi qui nati sunt in
feodo de Fauemer liberi sunt, omnes vero illi qui nati sunt in feodo Peverel villani
sunt.”

[71 ] Bracton, f. 5. But as to the ingratitude of one who has become free by
knighthood, or by orders, see Britton, i. 208; Fleta, p. 111.

[72 ] P. Q. W. 818–19.

[73 ] Rot. Pat. i. 55. If they make default they and their heirs shall be servi for ever,
paying every year four pence per head. A chevage of four pence a head seems to have
been common in France; hence the serf is homo quatuor nummorum.

[74 ] Note Book, pl. 466, 591, 1411, 1885, 1887, 1894; Y. B. 30–31 Edw. I. p. 454;
Y. B. 32–33 Edw. I. p. 4; Y. B. 19 Edw. II. f. 651.

[75 ] But how could a defendant gain anything by saying untruly that he was
personally a villein? In an action for land was it not enough to say, “I hold in
villeinage, or I hold at will, and therefore I am not the right person to be sued”; while
is it not only in actions for land that we find defendants relying on villeinage of any
kind? The answer is given by a case of 1292; Y. B. 20–21 Edw. I. p. 41. If the
defendant merely pleads tenure in villeinage, the plaintiff may contradict him and the
falsehood of the plea may be established; but if he adds that he is a villein, then the
plaintiff can make no reply and fails in his suit. Perhaps it was considered improbable
that any one would condemn himself and his posterity to perpetual servitude unless he
had good cause for so doing. At any rate there was no reply to this confession of
villein status until in 1363 a Statute, 37 Edw. III. c. 17, permitted the plaintiff to
contradict it. In 15 Edw. III. Fitz. Abr. Brief, 322, the absurdity of the rule is
shown:—“It is hard; for a man may confess himself villein to his father or his cousin,
and then next day get a release from him.” “Yes, it is hard,” is the reply, “but it is
law.”

[76 ] See above, p. 441.

[77 ] On the face of it this looks like an ancient procedure, which has been preserved
in this case in favorem libertatis. The lord ends his count by offering “suit,” to wit, A,
B, C, kinsmen of the defendant. In most other cases the production of suit has in the
king’s court become a mere formality, but here it is still all important. A jury may be
brought in to decide whether the “suitors” are really of kin to the defendant. Cases
illustrating this procedure are, Note Book, pl. 1005, 1041, 1167, 1812; Y. B. 32–33
Edw. I. p. 514; Northumberland Assize Rolls (Surtees Soc.), pp. 46, 159, 196.

[78 ] See above, p. 394, and Britton, i. 196. In Y. B. 8 Edw. III. f. 66 (Mich. pl. 31), it
is said that the Bishop of Ely held land by the service of being tallaged along with the
villeins.

[79 ] The best illustration of this point is a case of 20 Edw. I. reported in the notes to
Hale’s Pleas of the Crown, ii. 298. Two justices of assize laid down the rule “quod

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 509 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

nulla praescriptio temporis potest liberum sanguinem in servitutem reducere.” The
case was then brought before the auditors of complaints, who declared that this
maxim “omnino falsum est.” The case was then taken into the King’s Bench, but with
what result does not appear. Britton, i. 196, 206, denies that long performance of base
services, e.g. payment of merchet, can make a free stock unfree. So does Hengham in
Y. B. 33–35 Edw. I. p. 15: “praescriptio temporis non redigit sanguinem liberum in
servitutem.” On the other hand, a gloss in the Longueville ms at Cambridge, printed
by Vinogradoff, p. 63, says that in the fifth generation villein services will make free
blood servile. The Scottish Quoniam Attachiamenta, c. 39 (Acts of Parliament of
Scotland, i. 655), makes the fourth generation servile. Then in Fitz. Abr. Villenage, pl.
24, we have an extract from an unprinted Year Book of Edward III., which seems to
say that a stock may become servile by holding in villeinage from time immemorial.

[80 ] Bracton, f. 24 b, 194 b. Britton, i. 198.

[81 ] Bracton, f. 194.

[82 ] See above, p. 442.

[83 ] Glanvill, v. 5. This passage is very difficult, but seems to be explained by
Bracton, f. 194 b. We may doubt whether Glanvill means to deny that a lord can
gratuitously liberate his serf. If however he liberates him in consideration of a sum of
money then a difficulty arises; this is met by the intermediation of a third person who
purchases the serf nominally with his own, though really with the serf’s money.
Bracton says “eligat fidem alicuius qui eum emat quasi propriis denariis suis.” Still
villeins are said to buy their own liberty; e.g. Note Book, pl. 31, 343. The books of
conveyancing precedents of the thirteenth century, e.g. the Luffield and Carpenter mss
at Cambridge (Ee. i. 1; Mm. i. 27), give forms of manumission by way of sale; the
former shows how the transaction can be accomplished either by two deeds or by a
single deed. But see Vinogradoff, p. 86, who deals somewhat differently with the
difficult passage in Glanvill.

[84 ] Glanvill, v. 5.

[85 ] Leg. Henr. c. 78 § 1: “et liberas ei vias et portas conscribat apertas.”

[86 ] Note Book, pl. 1749. Here again Vinogradoff, pp. 86–88, gives a somewhat
different explanation.

[87 ] Glanvill, v. 5; Bracton, f. 190 b; Fleta, 111, 235; Britton, i. 200, 209; Stubbs,
Hoveden, vol. ii. (Introduction), p. xl.

[88 ] Bracton, f. 190 b, 198 b; Britton, i. 200, 208; Fleta, 111.

[89 ] See the whole of Dist. 54 and X. 1, 18. In 1270 Robert de Montalt at his
mother’s request enfranchised by charter his “beloved and faithful clerk” Roger de
Malberthorpe, who perhaps was not in holy orders: Assize Roll, Lincoln, No. 494, m.
43 d.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 510 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[90 ] Bracton, f. 5,190 b; Britton, i. 200, 208; Fleta, 111. According to Fleta the serf
who has been ordained may be degraded by the bishop if he proves a disobedient
clerk, and thereupon he relapses into serfdom.

[91 ] Note Book, pl. 1217; Stat. Westm. I. (3 Edw. I.) c. 39.

[92 ] See above, p. 441.

[93 ] As to the liti and aldiones see Brunner, D. R. G. i. 101.

[94 ] A comparison between our medieval serfdom and the slavery of the ancient
world might seem to some beside the point on the ground that the ancients were
heathen. But a no less startling contrast might be drawn between our medieval
serfdom and the law which Englishmen and men of English race evolved for their
negro slaves. It was quite untroubled by any idea of “relativity,” and reproduced,
though it had hardly copied, the main features of Roman law. See T. R. Cobb, An
Inquiry into the Law of Negro Slavery, Philadelphia, 1858.

[95 ] The contemporary law of France knew how to keep the vilain and the serf well
apart. Sometimes the former word is used to describe the whole mass of peasants
bond and free. “Mais souvent aussi le même mot est employé avec une signification
restreinte et s’applique au paysan libre, par opposition au serf, comme la tenure en
villenage est opposée à la tenure en mainmorte”: Luchaire, Manuel des institutions, p.
329. A contemporary French critic of Bracton’s book would have accused him of
mixing up two classes of men.

[96 ] Bracton, f. 4 b.

[97 ] Kentish Custumal (Statutes, i. 222); Y. B. 30–31 Edw. I. p. 168. But see Note
Book, pl. 1419.

[98 ] Maitland, Pleas of the Crown for Gloucestershire, p. xiii.

[99 ] Depositions and Ecclesiastical Proceedings from the Court of Durham (Surtees
Soc.), p. 6.

[100 ] Y. B. 1 Edw. II. f. 4; Liber de Antiquis Legibus, p. 249.

[101 ] Bracton, f. 421 b: “Est etiam mors civilis in servo in servitute sub potestate
domini constituto.”

[102 ] See e.g. Lyndwood, p. 168.

[103 ] For the parallel and closely similar French law, see Viollet, Histoire du droit
civil, p. 283.

[104 ] Æthelr. viii. 25; Cnut, i. 5 § 2: “He gæð of his mæg-lage, þonne he gebýhð tú
regol-lage.”

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 511 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[105 ] Alf. 20.

[106 ] Cnut, i. 5 § 2, Cod. Colbert; Leg. Henr. 23 § 3, 45 § 2, 3. On the other hand, the
abbot has to answer for the acts of the obedientiaries of his house, i.e. of the sacrist,
cellarer, almoner, vestiary and the like. They have a general power of binding him.

[107 ] Æthelr. v. 5; vi. 3.

[108 ] e.g. D. B. i. 90: “Praeter hanc terram habet Abbas [Glastingberiensis] xx.
carucatas quae numquam geldaverunt . . . De terra quae non geldat tenet Alnodus
monachus i. hidam liberaliter de Abbate concessu Regis.” But Monachus may be a
layman’s surname. So late as 1175 it is necessary to prohibit monks from taking land
as firmarii; Johnson, Canons, ii. 62.

[109 ] This appears already in Glanvill, xiii. 5, 6.

[110 ] Select Civil Pleas (Seld. Soc.), i. pl. 208; Note Book, pl. 455, 1057, 1139,
1586, 1594.

[111 ] See cc. 2, 4, 6, X. 3, 35. For proceedings against a proprietarius, see Lit.
Cantuarienses, iii. 176–77.

[112 ] Edward I. kept ten of the Westminster monks in prison on the ground that they,
if not cognizant of a robbery of the king’s treasury, were guilty of negligence which
made the robbery possible. Rishanger, 222, 225, 420; Flores Historiarum, 116; Pike,
History of Crime, i. 198.

[113 ] See the writs in Reg. Brev. Orig. 107 b.

[114 ] Interesting discussions will be found in Y. B. 49 Edw. III. f. 25 (Mich. pl. 5);
20 Hen. VI. f. 21 (Hil. pl. 19).

[115 ] Y. B. 3 Hen. VI. f. 23 (Hil. pl. 2). In his character of executor he might even
have an action of debt against his prelate. Hence a riddle:—When can a man sue his
own executor? When owing money to a monastery, he becomes professed in it and
afterwards abbot of it. But ecclesiastical law forbad the monk to become an executor
without the leave of his abbot and (in England) the ordinary. See Lyndwood, p. 168.

[116 ] In our law French the term sovereign is technically used in this context: see e.g.
Britton, i. 159.

[117 ] See the long statement as to the cruelties practised among the Dominican friars;
Flores Historiarum, iii. 161.

[118 ] The great quarrel between the monks of Canterbury and the two archbishops
Baldwin and Hubert, of which a long account is given by Dr. Stubbs in the
Introduction to the Epistolae Cantuarienses, is a classical example. But here the
question, if regarded from the point of view of English temporal law, was

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 512 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

this—Whether the archbishop was or was not the “sovereign” of the cathedral
monastery.

[119 ] See the writ De apostata capiendo, Reg. Brev. Orig. 71 b. A good story of an
escape is told in Literae Cantuarienses, ii. p. xxxviii.

[120 ] Y. B. 3 Hen. VI. f. 23 (Hil. pl. 2).

[121 ] Y. B. 32–33 Edw. I. 356.

[122 ] Langton’s Constitutions, 1222, c. 51, 52 (adopting canons of the Fourth
Lateran Council) in Johnson, Canons, ii. 120; Gravamina of 1257, Mat. Par. Chron.
Maj. vi. 360–61; Boniface’s Constitutions, 1261, c. 7, Johnson, Canons, ii. 197.

[123 ] See above, p. 262.

[124 ] Bracton’s Note Book, pl. 444, 766; Circumspecte Agatis; Articuli Cleri (1315);
Statutes of the Realm, i. 101, 171; Blackstone, Com. iv. 217.

[125 ] c. 29, C. 17, qu. 4; see Lyndwood, p. 329 ad fin.

[126 ] Bracton, f. 442 b, 443 h.

[127 ] Bracton, f. 443; Note Book, pl. 143, 276, 407, 576, 802.

[128 ] Gravamina of 1257, Mat. Par. Chron. Maj. vi. 354–55.

[129 ] Hale’s treatment of this matter in his Pleas of the Crown is full and good, but
he says little of times so remote as those with which we are dealing. See Makower,
Const. Hist., 399 ff.

[130 ] Grosseteste’s protest, Ann. Burton, 424; Mat. Par. Chron. Maj. vi. 355–56;
Ann. Burton, 417; Johnson, Canons, ii. 193; Court Baron (Selden Society), 19; Select
Pleas of the Crown, pl. 160.

[131 ] Bracton, f. 123 b. Early examples will be found in Select Pleas of the Crown,
e.g. pl. 49 (a subdeacon), 117 (a subdeacon), 123, 140, 160, 189 (an acolyte), 197 and
Note Book, e.g. pl. 548 (a prior).

[132 ] Coke, 2nd Inst. 164, rightly observes that the change takes place between
Bracton (f. 123 b) and Britton (vol. i. p. 27). He attributes it to Stat. West. I. (1275)
cap. 2. But as a matter of fact the eyre rolls of the last years of Henry III. show that
the change has already taken place. See, for example, the roll of a Cambridgeshire
eyre of 45 Hen. III. (Assize Rolls, No. 82) passim. We know from Matthew Paris,
Chron. Maj. iv. 614, that in 1247 some new rule was made about criminous clerks and
that the clergy disliked it, but we have not got the text of this decree. Despite the
commentaries of Coke and Hale, we may doubt whether the Statute of Westminster
made any definite change in the law. The new king sanctions the clerical privilege,
but tells the prelates that they must be careful in the matter of purgation, and that

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 513 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

otherwise he will be obliged to make some change. Thereupon in 1279 Abp. Peckham
made some effort to improve the procedure in the spiritual court; Johnson, Canons, ii.
267.

[133 ] This account is based chiefly on the Assize Roll just mentioned. Sometimes if
the verdict is favourable the judgment is Ideo quietus.

[134 ] Y. B. 33–35 Edw. I. p. 57.

[135 ] Hale, P. C. ii. 383. The clergy protested against the forfeiture, saying that it was
a second punishment for a single offence; Gravamina of 1257, Mat. Par. vi. 356.

[136 ] Fournier, Les officialités au moyen âge, 262–81. No doubt this procedure was
used in the case of minor offences; but we are speaking of felonies.

[137 ] Letters of John of Salisbury, No. 122, ed. Giles, i. 170.

[138 ] c. 9, X. 5, 34. The whole of tit. 34 bears on this matter.

[139 ] Sarum Charters, 35.

[140 ] Johnson, Canons, ii. 81, 91.

[141 ] Hoveden, iii. 250.

[142 ] Fournier, op. cit. 235–56.

[143 ] Thus in the case of the archdeacon accused of poisoning the archbishop, the
accuser could not make good the charge “secundum subtilitatem legum et canonum”;
see John of Salisbury’s letter cited above.

[144 ] Johnson, Canons, ii. 267; Stat. West. I. c. 2.

[145 ] Constitution of 1351, Johnson, Canons, ii. 413.

[146 ]Berton’s case, Ryley, Plac. Parl. 56; Rolls of Parliament, i. 40; Hale, P. C. ii.
328.

[147 ] Rot. Cl. 22 Hen. III. m. 17 d; compare Bracton, f. 134 b.

[148 ] Rolls of Parl. i. 146. It is adjudged that two persons have committed adultery,
though they have purged themselves in court Christian. The lady’s compurgators were
women.

[149 ] Herbert of Bosham, Materials for History of Becket, iii. 265.

[150 ] Fitz Stephen, Materials, iii. 45–46.

[151 ] Herbert of Bosham, Materials, iii. 267, 270.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 514 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[152 ] c. 6, X. 5, 37.

[153 ] Maitland, The Deacon and the Jewess, L. Q. R., ii. 153, 165.

[154 ] Johnson, Canons, ii. 207–8.

[155 ] Hale, P. C. ii. 328, says, “Nuns had the exemption from temporal jurisdiction,
but the privilege of clergy was never allowed them by our law.” But elsewhere, P. C.
ii. 371, “Anciently nuns professed were admitted to the privilege of clergy.” He cites
a case from 1348, Fitz. Abr. Corone, pl. 461, which speaks of a woman—she is not
expressly called a nun—being claimed by and delivered to the ordinary.

[156 ] Select Pleas of the Crown, pl. 185. At a later date the judges would allow “his
clergy” to a man who could read, though the ordinary did not claim him; Hale, P. C.
ii. 373.

[157 ] This hope is expressed by Dr. Stubbs, Const. Hist. § 722.

[158 ] c. un. in vio. 1. 12; Statute 4 Edw. I. De Bigamis. For an early case of “bigamy”
see Y. B. 30–31 Edw. I. p. 530. Fleta, p. 51, speaks as though the rule which excluded
bigami from privilege had been revoked by the Council of Lyons. There must be
some mistake here.

[159 ] Hale, P. C. ii. 330.

[160 ]Berton’s case, Ryley, Plac. Parl. 56; Rolls of Parl. i. 40; Hale, P. C. ii. 331–32;
Bracton, f. 413 b, allows the privilege in this case.

[161 ] Diceto, i. 410.

[162 ] Bracton, f. 401, 401 b, 407, 411.

[163 ] As regards the transgressiones (trespass and misdemeanour are but slowly
differentiated from each other) of clerks, the history of this matter may be traced
thus:—In 1176 Henry II. concedes that no clerk shall be drawn into the lay court in
any criminal cause or for any offence, except offences against forest law; Diceto, i.
410. Bracton, f. 401 b, says that every day clerks are sued in the lay courts both on
contracts and for trespasses. In 1237 the clergy claim exemption in all personal
actions; Ann. Burton. 254. In 1257 they repeat the protest; Mat. Par. vi. 357. In 1258
Grosseteste repeats it, and about this time Robert de Marisco asserts it in large terms;
Ann. Burt. 424, 426. In 1261 it is asserted by the Constitutions of Abp. Boniface;
Johnson, Canons, ii. 185. It covers contract and quasi-contract, delict and quasi-delict.
In 1263 the pope, who has reasons for not quarrelling with Henry III., will not
confirm the constitutions, but implores the king to give way; Bull of Urban IV.
Foedera i. 424. The conflict is now nearly over; but even in 1279 a clerk is still,
though vainly, protesting that an action for assault and wounding cannot be brought
against him in the king’s court; Hale, P. C. ii. 325. Maitland, Canon Law in England,
E. H. R. xi. 647; Makower, Const. Hist. 407 ff.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 515 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[164 ] Maitland, Henry II. and the Criminous Clerks, E. H. R. vii. 224.

[165 ] Const. Clar. c. 3: “Clerici rettati et accusati de quacunque re, summoniti a
iustitia regis venient in curiam ipsius, responsuri ibidem de hoc unde videbitur curiae
regis quod ibidem sit respondendum, et in curia ecclesiastica unde videbitur quod
ibidem sit respondendum; ita quod iustitia regis mittet in curiam sanctae ecclesiae ad
videndum qua ratione res ibi tractabitur; et si clericus convictus vel confessus fuerit,
non debet de cetero eum ecclesia tueri.”

[166 ] The constitution was thus understood by Reuter, Geschichte Alexanders des
dritten, i. 372–73; Hefele, Conciliengeschichte (ed. 2), v. 625; Makower, Const. Hist.
402. Dr. Stubbs, Const. Hist. i. 501, says that Henry proposed that “clerical criminals
should be tried in the ordinary courts of the country.” Henry may at one time have
gone as far as this; but we cannot believe that this is the scheme defined by the
constitutions.

[167 ] Materials for the History of Becket, ii. 28, iii. 281; iv. 39, 96, 202. No point in
the controversy seems better attested by Becket’s own friends and biographers than
that he insisted on this argument. This seems fatal to that interpretation of the
constitutions which would make Henry propose that criminous clerks shall be treated
like criminous laymen. The famous Nemo bis in idipsum may be ultimately traced to
some words of the prophet Nahum (i. 9) which in our Bibles appear as “Affliction
shall not rise up the second time.” Gratian has much to say of this maxim in D. 3 de
poen. For the distinction that was gradually drawn between deposition and
degradation, see Hinschius, Kirchenrecht, v. 51.

[168 ] Bracton’s Note Book, pl. 251: “non fuit seisitus in tempore illo nisi tantum in
tempore Stephani Regis quod fuit werrinum.”

[169 ] See Pauli, Geschichte von England, iii. 44; Reuter, Geschichte Alexanders des
dritten, i. 369–70.

[170 ] The strongest denial that the so-called customs were customs, is that which
comes from Fitz Stephen, Materials, iii. 47: “Sed scriptae nunquam prius fuerant, nec
omnino fuerant in regno hae consuetudines.”

[171 ] Schmid, Gesetze, p. 357; Stubbs, Select Charters. There can we think be little
doubt that in this ordinance iudicium is used in a technical sense for the ordeal,
iudicium Dei.

[172 ] Leg. Hen. Prim. 57 § 9: “De illis, qui ad sacros ordines pertinent, et eis, qui
sacris ordinibus promoti sunt, coram praelatis suis est agendum de omnibus
inculpationibus, maximis et minoribus.”

[173 ] D. B. ii. 7: “Quidam clericus Comitis E[ustachii] . . . iudicatus est esse in
misericordia regis et de omni cessu suo et de corpore suo.”

[174 ] Freeman, Norm. Conq. iv. 684.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 516 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[175 ] Thus in Leg. Hen. 57 § 9: “Cum clerico qui uxorem habeat et firmam teneat
laicorum et rebus extrinsecis seculariter deditus est, seculariter est disceptandum.”

[176 ] Simeon of Durham, i. 170. Freeman, William Rufus, i. 89, tells the story at
length.

[177 ] The bishop relies less on the mere fact of his being a bishop than on this
coupled with the fact that he has been and is dispossessed. “Spoliatus episcopus ante
omnia debet restitui” is the burden of his plea.

[178 ] Will. Malmesb. Gesta Regum, ii. 548–54; Henr. Huntingd. 265; Gesta
Stephani, 47; Will. Newb. i. 35; Gervase Cant. i. 104.

[179 ] Second Charter of Stephen; Statutes of the Realm, Charters p. 3; Will.
Malmesb. Gesta Regum, ii. 541: “Ecclesiasticarum personarum et omnium clericorum
et rerum eorum, iustitiam et potestatem, et distributionem bonorum ecclesiasticorum,
in manu episcoporum esse perhibeo et confirmo.”

[180 ] Letters of John of Salisbury (ed. Giles) No. 122. William of Newburgh, i. 80,
treats the story of the poisoned chalice as untrue and absurd.

[181 ] Anselm had some difficulty in preventing Henry I. from enforcing by
pecuniary fines the canons against married priests. Eadmer, Hist. Nov. 172–76.

[182 ] See Stubbs, Const. Hist. § 87; Schmid, Glossar, s.v. Geistliche; Makower,
Const. Hist. 390.

[183 ] Alfred, 21. See Schmid’s note. The Latin version is important: “Si quis
presbyter hominem occidat, capiatur, et totum unde sibi mansionem emerat, et
exordinet eum episcopus, et tunc ab ecclesia reddatur.” Henry reading this in the
twelfth century might well say that he was fulfilling its spirit, if not its letter.

[184 ] Nov. 83; Nov. 123. 21 § 1; Hinschius, Kirchenrecht, iv. 794–97.

[185 ] Summa Causae (Materials, iv. 202): “Episcopi dicebant secundum leges seculi
clericos exauctoratos curiae tradendos, et post poenam spiritualem corporaliter
puniendos.”

[186 ] Löning, Kirchenrecht, i. 304, ii. 516; Hinschius, op. cit. iv. 849–64; Nissl,
Gerichtsstand des Clerus; Brunner, D. R. G. ii. 311–20. The story is elaborate because
it must distinguish between (1) bishops, (2) priests and deacons, (3) the inferior
clergy.

[187 ] According to William of Newburgh, i. 140, it was said that a hundred murders
had been perpetrated by clerks during Henry’s reign before the king took action.

[188 ] The pope seems to have condemned this constitution as a whole; Materials, v.
74. He was not called upon to say how much of it was tolerable.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 517 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[189 ] As to this matter of double punishment, Henry’s canonists based his case on
two passages of the Pseudo-Isidore which appear as cc. 18, 31, C. 11, qu. 1. These say
in effect that in certain cases an offending clerk after being degraded is curiae
tradendus. Does this mean that he is to be delivered to the lay court for further
punishment? Henry’s party said Yes; Becket’s No. Our question ought to be, not what
these words meant for the Pseudo-Isidore, still less what they meant for Arcadius and
Honorius, from whom he stole them, but what they meant for the best ecclesiastical
lawyers of the middle of the twelfth century. In 1164 five great canonists have lately
had or are just having their say, namely, Gratian, Paucapalea, Roland (now Alexander
III.), Rufinus and Stephanus Tornacensis. We can hardly bring ourselves to doubt that
Gratian (see the dicta on cc. 26. 30. 47, e. qu.) would have agreed with Henry’s
contention. And the same must be said of Paucapalea (Summa, ed. Schulte, p. 78) and
Roland (Summa, ed. Thaner, p. 25). Then Rufinus distinctly says that the clerk is to
be degraded, “et dimittetur post hoc iudici secundum leges publicas puniendus”
(Summa, ed. Schulte, p. 274). Stephanus considers the opinion that Becket adopts and
rejects it. Some say that the degraded clerk is not to be accused before the secular
judge, since thus he will be tried twice for one offence. Others say that there is no
occasion for a further accusation, but that he can be punished by the secular judge
without a second trial. But the better opinion is, says Stephen, that the secular judge
should try him; the Authenticum [= Nov. 123. 21 § 1] supports this doctrine (Summa,
ed. Schulte, p. 212). An anonymous author of this period (Summa Rolandi, ed.
Thaner, p. 293) has no doubt that the canon law sanctions it. Something may depend
on the date of the decretal of Alexander III. which stands as c. 4, X. 2, 1. In later times
the canonists admitted that there were various cases in which the degraded clerk was
to be delivered to the lay power for further punishment. See the gloss on c. 18, C. 11,
qu. 1; also Fournier, Officialités, 67–68. In 1222 Stephen Langton handed over to the
lay power a deacon whom he had degraded for turning Jew and the lay power burnt
him; see L. Q. R. ii. 153. Innocent III. (c. 7, X. 5, 20) ordained that the forgers of
papal letters should be handed over, and further declared (c. 27, X. 5, 40) that this
procedure was sanctioned by the doubtful passages in the Decretum. If once it be
allowed that there is here no breach of that fundamental maxim which requires that a
man be not punished twice for one offence, then there remains no more than a
question about the relative gravity of offences:—is, for example, the forgery of a
decretal a worse crime than a murder? Lastly, since Becket was willing to add
imprisonment for life to degradation, provided that both punishments came from the
ecclesiastical court, it is plain that the principle for which he contended was a highly
technical principle condemning not two punishments but two judgments. This long
note has seemed necessary, for in England it has been too readily assumed by both
parties to the controversy that all Becket’s claims were sanctioned by the law of the
church. We dare not speak confidently of such a matter but have grave doubts about
the truth of this assumption.

[190 ] Will. Newb. i. 163: “Sive autem parceret homicidis illis, sive non, considerabat
proclives esse homines ad male sentiendum de eo. Nam si parceret sceleratissimis,
tanti mali ausum vel auctoritatem praestitisse videretur. Si vero in eis plecteret, quod
absque eius mandato non attentasse putabantur, utrobique nequissimus diceretur.
Idcirco parcendum eis duxit.” Another account, Materials, iv. 162, says that Henry
knew that he could not make his peace with the church, unless he punished the

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 518 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

murderers by death (“et traderet Sathanae in interitum carnis”), and yet was ashamed
to punish them, because the crime had been committed for his sake. And again of the
knights it is said (p. 163) that they sought the pope when it had become clear that they
must fall into the hands either of God or of man.

[191 ] Gesta Henrici, i. 32; Hoveden, ii. 35: “malefactores illos, qui . . .
archiepiscopum occiderunt habere non poterat.”

[192 ] He seems to have referred to cc. 39, 47, C. 23, qu. 5; c. 2, C. 15, qu. 6; cc. 19.
20, C. 11, qu.1.

[193 ] Trivet, an. 1176 (Eng. Hist. Soc.), p. 82: “In ecclesia Anglorum damnosa
omnibus et omnino damnanda consuetudo invaluit . . . Si Judaeus aut laicorum
vilissimus occiditur statim supplicio mortis occisor addicitur. Si quis vero sacerdotem
sive clericum minoris aut maioris status occiderit, sola excommunicatione contenta,
aut (ut verius loquar) contempta, ecclesia materialis opem gladii non requirit.” This,
the archbishop argues, is directly contrary to many canons. He adds: “Nec dicatur
quod aliquis bis puniatur propter hoc in idipsum, nec enim iteratum est quod ab uno
incipitur et ab altero consummatur.” A neater reply to Becket’s talk of double
punishment could not be given.

[194 ] Diceto, i. 410: “Concedo etiam quod interfectores clericorum, qui eos scienter
vel praemeditati interfecerint, convicti vel confessi coram iustitiario meo, praesente
episcopo vel eius officiali, praeter consuetam laicorum vindictam, suam et suorum de
hereditate quae eos contingit perpetuam sustineant exheredationem.” This seems to
show that so late as 1176 the ordinary sentence on a manslayer did not always involve
disherison.

[195 ]Calvin’s case, 7 Rep. 1.

[196 ] Rolls of Parliament, ii. 139.

[197 ] Rolls of Parliament, ii. 231; Statute 25 Edw. III. de natis ultra mare.

[198 ] Fitz. Abr. Aiell. pl. 8 (5 Edw. II.); Y. B. 6 Edw. III. f. 22 (Pasch. pl. 47); Y. B.
8 Edw. III. f. 51 (Trin. pl. 38); Fitz. Abr. Briefe, pl. 677 (Mich. 13 Edw. III.); compare
Y. B. (ed. Pike), Mich. 13 Edw. III. pp. 76–78.

[199 ] So far as we are aware this appears first in Y. B. 32 Hen. VI. f. 23 (Hil. pl. 5).
For the extent of the exception in Coke’s day see Co. Lit. 2 b.

[200 ] Lit. sec. 198; Co. Lit. 129 b.

[201 ] Co. Lit. 8 a, 129 a.

[202 ] Bracton, f. 427 b. He mentions as examples the Earl Marshal and M [Ingeram?]
de Fiennes.

[203 ] Mackay, Lives of the Bruces in Dict. Nat. Biogr.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 519 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[204 ] Annals of Tewkesbury, 111; Mat. Par. Chron. Maj. iii. 524.

[205 ] Note Book, pl. 750. The king gave part of the lands of Ralph of Tankerville to
Basset and his heirs “donec eam reddiderit heredibus praedicti Radulfiper voluntatem
suam vel per pacem.” There are many other examples.

[206 ] Bracton, f. 298, 415 b, 427 b, 428 b. He is not quite certain what will happen if
ever there be peace. His phrase “donec terrae fuerint communes” seems to mean, not
so much “when there is peace between England and France,” as “when Normandy,
Anjou, etc. are once more under the ruler whom England obeys.”

[207 ] Note Book, pl. 110, 1396.

[208 ] Mat. Par. Chron. Maj. iv. 288.

[209 ] Comment. i. 372.

[210 ] See the apocryphal statute, Praerogativa Regis, c. 14 (Statutes, i. p. 226). Here
we seem to see the king’s claim growing. First we have an assertion of his right to the
lands of the Normans, then we are told that this extends also to lands of certain
persons born beyond the sea, and we have various readings of the clause which
defines this class of persons. One version says, “those whose ancestors were in the
faith of the King of France in the reign of King John.” Another, “those who were not
in the king’s faith.” In this context “foreigner” and “subject of the King of France” are
for practical purposes synonymous terms. In France also the droit d’aubaine but
slowly attains its full stature; Viollet, Histoire du droit civil, p. 365.

[211 ] Bracton, f. 427 b.

[212 ] Rolls of Parliament, i. 44.

[213 ] Rolls of Parliament, i. 135: “Dominus Rex ipsum Elyam Anglicum purum
tenet.” Coke, Co. Lit. 129 a, cites these letters as though they effected but a limited
denization. “The king may make a particular denization, quod in quibusdam curiis
suis Angliae audiatur.” For quibusdam read quibuscumque. No one will now-a-days
be misled by Coke’s derivation of denizen from “ donaisoni.e.donatio. ” The word
originally means one who is within, de intus, deinz, dans, as opposed to one who is an
outsider.

[214 ] Charter of 1215, c. 13, 41.

[215 ] Munimenta Gildhallae, vol. i. pt. ii. pp. 205–8.

[216 ] The story is told at length by Schanz, Englische Handelspolitik, i. 379–433.

[217 ] Plac. Abbrev. p. 201.

[218 ] Carta Mercatoria, c. 3; Liber Rubeus, iii. 1063; Stat. 27 Edw. III. stat. 2. c. 8;
28 Edw. III. c. 13.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 520 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[219 ] Y. B. 32 Hen. VI. f. 23 (Hil. pl. 5).

[220 ] Indeed they had lately obtained two statutes declaring that alien merchants
must dwell with English hosts and not elsewhere; 5 Hen. IV. c. 9; 4 Hen. V. c. 5.

[221 ] See above, p. 485.

[222 ] Y. B. 13 Edw. III. f. 9 (Pasch. pl. 5). This is the celebrated case of the carrier
who “broke bulk.”

[223 ] Mat. Par. iv. 8; v. 245. See Du Cange, s.v. Caorcini. The name has been
derived from Cahors in France, from Caorsa in Piedmont, from a Florentine family of
Corsini. Paris speaks of “Caursini praecipue Senonenses.” Probably by Senonenses he
means men of Siena, not of Sens. It seems fairly plain that already the origin of the
name was unknown, and that at least in England Caursin was equivalent to foreign
usurer. Had the word borne an obvious meaning, Paris would hardly have dared to
perpetrate so bad a joke as (iii. 331) “quasi causantes, vel capientes, et ursini.”

[224 ] Stubbs, Const. Hist. § 195.

[225 ] Select Pleas in Manorial Courts (Seld. Soc.), i. 133.

[226 ] Three volumes of Publications of the Anglo-Jewish Historical Exhibition
issuing from the office of the Jewish Chronicle (1888) contain valuable essays,
documents, bibliographies, etc. We shall make our references chiefly to these.
Prynne’s Demurrer, Tovey’s Anglia Judaica, Madox’s chapter on the exchequer of the
Jews, and the plea roll printed in Cole’s Documents Illustrative of English History are
among the most important sources of information. See also Jacobs, The Jews of
Angevin England.

[227 ] Liebermann, Zeitschrift für Geschichtswissenschaft, i. 182.

[228 ] Leges Edw. Conf. c. 25.

[229 ] Bracton, f. 386 b.

[230 ] There is a good deal of evidence which tends to show that in the first half of the
twelfth century the Jew’s legal position was not so bad as it afterwards became. The
doctrine, not without supporters in England, which teaches that the disabilities of the
Jew were due, not to the mere fact that he was a Jew, but to the fact, real or presumed,
that he was a usurer and therefore living in mortal sin, seems to us groundless. Our
law did not regard usury as any offence in a Jew; on the contrary, it enforced his
usurious contracts for him.

[231 ] Gross, Publications, i. 195.

[232 ] Hoveden, iii. 266.

[233 ] Gross, Publications, i. 174.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 521 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[234 ] The earliest extant roll was printed in Cole’s Documents; it is that for 3–4
Henry III. A list of the other rolls is given in Publications, iii. p. xiv. Occasionally
cases in which Jews are concerned come onto the ordinary plea rolls and some are
printed in the Placitorum Abbreviatio and in Bracton’s Note Book. References to
these are given in Publications, iii. 4, 24. Cases of small debts were heard by the
constables of the royal castles; the court of the University of Oxford claimed pleas
between Jew and scholar, and in London the civic court held plea touching land
between Jew and Gentile; but on the whole the competence of the exchequer seems to
have been exclusive.

[235 ] Edict of 1271 forbidding them to hold land, Foed. i. 489; prohibition of usury,
Statutes of the Realm, i. 221. See also the ordinance printed by Gross in Publications,
i. 219.

[236 ] Gross, Publications, i. 192, 225.

[237 ] Rot. Cart. Joh. p. 93. The charter of Henry II. seems to be lost. For a charter
granted by Richard, see Foedera, i. 51.

[238 ] In 1255 Henry III. mortgaged his Jewry to his brother Richard: Tovey, p. 135;
Mat. Par. Chron. Maj. v. 488. Afterwards Henry assigned it to his son Edward, who
assigned it for two years to two Caursin merchants: Tovey, pp. 157–59.

[239 ] Tovey, p. 185 (54 Hen. III.). In France the Jew seems to have been distinctly
called servus; Viollet, Histoire du droit civil, p. 356; Luchaire, Manuel des
institutions, p. 582.

[240 ] Gross, Publications, i. 207.

[241 ] Bracton, f. 13. In feoffments made by certain convents it is common to find a
stipulation that the land is not to be sold or gaged to Jews.

[242 ] Gross, Publications, i. 190.

[243 ] Gesta Abbatum, i. 401; Liber de Antiquis Legibus, 234.

[244 ] Foed. i. 489.

[245 ] A collection of Shetaroth or “stars” has been published by M. D. Davis:
Publications, vol. ii. As to the use of seals see p. 285. Tovey, p. 183, gives an
engraving of a seal appended to a charter of feoffment.

[246 ] See the volume of Shetaroth, pp. 4, 109, 136, 143, 178, 298, 336.

[247 ] Henry III. permits the “masters of the law” to pronounce “summam
excommunicationem” against those who will not pay their promised contributions to
the London cemetery; Tovey, p. 127; Jacobs, Publications, i. 46.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 522 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[248 ] In 1257 Henry III. deposed “bishop” Elyas and declared that for the future the
Jews might elect their own sacerdotes: Madox, Exch. i. 261.

[249 ] Y. B. 32–33 Edw. I. p. 355: “ley de Jwerye.”

[250 ] In our chapter on Ownership and Possession we shall trace the preservation of
the pedes finium to this point. See vol. ii. p. 97.

[251 ] Madox, Exchequer, i. 247 from a roll of 3–4 Edw. I.; Statutes of the Realm, i.
221.

[252 ] Stat. West. II. 13 Edw. I. c. 18.

[253 ] Brunner, D. R. G. i. 173.

[254 ] Bracton, f. 125 b; Select Pleas of the Crown, pl. 47; Y. B. 20–21 Edw. I. p.
237.

[255 ] Bracton, f. 127 b. The passage “Facta autem possunt esse plura . . .
aliquantulum cum humana” is a marginal gloss. See Note Book, pl. 82, 85, 1263,
1267; Co. Lit. 128 b.

[256 ] Bracton, f. 128 b. The printed book has Hertford instead of Hereford. The
citation from the Digest should be, Dig. ad legem Corneliam de Sicariis et Veneficis
(48. 8) 3 § 6, “Transfugas licet ubicunque inventi fuerint quasi hostes interficere.” As
to killing an outlaw, see Britton, i. 51. So late as 1328 it was argued that a plea of the
dead man’s outlawry was a sufficient answer to an indictment for slaying him; 2 Lib.
Ass. pl. 3, f. 3; Y. B. 2 Edw. III. f. 6 (Hil. pl. 17); and it would even seem that the
same assertion was made in 1353; 27 Lib. Ass. p. 41, f. 137.

[257 ] Bracton, f. 128 b.

[258 ] Bracton, f. 125, 128 b.

[259 ] Bracton, f. 132 b.

[260 ] Bracton, f. 30 b, citing Dig. de donationibus (39. 5) 15: “Post contractum
capitale crimen donationes factae non valent ex constitutione divorum Severi et
Antonini, si condemnatio secuta sit.” See also Fleta, p. 43.

[261 ] Bracton, f. 130: “cum sit progenitus talis ex testiculo et sanguine felonis.”
Fleta, p. 43.

[262 ] Æthelr. viii. 42. The excommunicate is “God’s outlaw.”

[263 ] Schmid, Gesetze, p. 357; Leg. Edw. Conf. 2 § 9.

[264 ] Leg. Edw. Conf. 6.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 523 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[265 ] Bracton, f. 426 b, 427; Reg. Brev. Orig. f. 65.

[266 ] Bracton, f. 426 b: “Excommunicato enim interdicitur omnis actus legitimus.”
Note Book, pl. 552; Britton, i. 322; Lit. sec. 201.

[267 ] Gravamina of 1257, Mat. Par. Chron. Maj. vi. 355; Constitutions of 1261,
Johnson, Canons, ii. 192.

[268 ] Johnson, Canons, ii. 258; Rolls of Parliament, i. 224.

[269 ] Rolls of Parliament, i. 102. In 1194 Archbishop Geoffrey of York was in
trouble for having contemned the king by excommunicating one of his ministers;
Rolls of the King’s Court (Pipe Roll Soc.) vol. i. p. xvii.

[270 ] Note Book, pl. 670. See Ann. Burton. 255, 413; Mat. Par. Chron. Maj. vi. 354;
Articuli Cleri, c. 7 (Statutes i. 172).

[271 ] Bracton, f. 408, 426 b, 427; Co. Lit. 134 a.

[272 ] Bracton, f. 427: “Nunquam capietur aliquis ad mandatum iudicum delegatorum
vel archidiaconorum vel alterius iudicis inferioris, quia rex in episcopis coertionem
habet propter baroniam.”

[273 ] Bracton, f. 426 b; Reg. Brev. Orig. f. 68.

[274 ] Bracton, f. 426 b; Lit. sec. 201.

[275 ] Bracton, f. 426 b; “funestam enim vocem interdici oportet.”

[276 ] The Court Baron (Seld. Soc.), p. 134.

[277 ] Bracton, f. 12, 421; Select Civil Pleas, pl. 157; Note Book, pl. 807, 1648. For
parallel and similar French law, see Viollet, Histoire du droit civil, p. 375.

[278 ] Blackstone, Comm. i. 302.

[279 ] Memoranda de Parliamento, 33 Edw. I. (Rolls Ser.), p. 228.

[280 ] Maitland, Praerogativa Regis, E. H. R. vi. 369.

[281 ] Praerogativa Regis, c. 11, 12 (Statutes, i. 226).

[282 ] See above, p. 340.

[283 ] Bracton, f. 5: “Et differunt feminae a masculis in multis, quia earum deterior
est conditio quam masculorum.” This comes from Azo, who gives many examples,
while Bracton gives none.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 524 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[284 ] Bracton, f. 125 b; Britton, i. 50. This doctrine is connected with the rule that a
woman cannot be in frankpledge, and this probably implies or has implied that every
woman is the mainpast of some man.

[285 ] Note Book, pl. 342, 1361, 1507.

[286 ] Already in D. B. i. 238 b we read of pleas “coram regina Mathilde.”

[287 ] For several years under Henry III. Ela, countess of Salisbury, was sheriff of
Wiltshire; see list of sheriffs in 31st Rep. of Deputy-Keeper. But in this case there was
a claim to an hereditary shrievalty; Note Book, pl. 1235. The wife of Ranulf Glanvill,
sheriff of Yorkshire, is called Berta Vicecomitissa in a charter: Round, Geoffrey de
Mandeville, 385.

[288 ] Hargrave’s note to Co. Lit. 29 a.

[289 ] Stubbs, Const. Hist. § 751. Rolls of Parliament, iv. 270 (ad 1425): the Earl of
Norfolk had issue Margaret his heir, “to whom no place in Parlement myght
apperteyne, by cause she was a woman.”

[290 ]Chorltonv.Lings, L. R. 4 C. P. 374; Beresford-Hopev.Sandhurst, 23 Q. B. D. 79.

[291 ] Rot. Hund. ii. 62: “Domina J. le E. tenet W. . . . et facit sectam ad comitatum et
hundredum.” One example among many.

[292 ] The Provisions of 1259, c. 10 (Stat. i. 9), say that the prelates, barons, earls,
“nec [al. vel] aliqui religiosi [al. ins. viri] seu mulieres” need not attend the turn
unless specially summoned. The reading of the Close differs slightly from that of the
Patent Roll. The Statute of Marlborough, c. 10 (Stat. i. 22), repeats this with a small
variation; the persons who need not attend are the prelates, earls, barons, “nec aliqui
viri religiosi seu mulieres.” The question has been raised whether in this last passage
mulieres is governed by religiosi. In any case we should have answered this in the
negative, but a comparison of the various texts seems to make this plain; in one
version of the Provisions there is no viri. The term religiosi was often used as a
substantive. The whole section has the air of dealing with a modern abuse, for the turn
is to be held as in the time of the king’s ancestors. The reference to a special summons
means this, that the persons exempted from doing suit to the turn may none the less
have to go to it for the purpose of defending actions that are pending in the hundred
court, or of answering the accusations which the presenting jurors bring against them.

[293 ] Bracton, f. 69; Note Book, pl. 198.

[294 ] Cart. Rievaulx, p. 62: five men and six women, including Ranulf Glanvill and
his wife, witness a widow’s gift.

[295 ] Britton, i. 207: “de sicum saunc de homme ne peut, ne deit, estre tryé par
femmes”; Fleta, 111–12; Fitz. Abr. Villenage, pl. 37 (13 Edw. I.); Northumberland
As-size Rolls (Surtees Soc.), p. 275.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 525 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[296 ] Rolls of Parliament, i. 146–47.

[297 ] Note Book, pl. 7: “Lex de masculis si femina defendat.”

[298 ] Glanvill, lib. xiv. c. 1, 3. 6; Select Pleas of the Crown, i. pl. 32; Charter of
1215, c. 54; Bracton, f. 148. It is often said that the woman must allege that her
husband was slain “within her arms.” This seems to be only a picturesque “common
form.”

[299 ] Glanv. xiv. 3.

[300 ] In the version of Glanvill’s treatise given by ms Camb. Univ. Mm. i. 27, f. 31
b, it is remarked that women can never essoin themselves as being on the king’s
service, “quia non possunt nec debent nec solent esse in servitio domini Regis in
exercitu nec in aliis servitiis regalibus.”

[301 ] A repeated perusal of Dr. Gierke’s great book, Das deutsche
Genossenschaftsrecht, Berlin, 1868–81, has occasioned many changes in this section,
which in the first edition bore the title Fictitious Persons. See also Gierke, Deutsches
Privatrecht, vol. i.

[302 ] Interpretation Act 1889 (52 & 53 Vic. c. 63) sec. 2. 19.

[303 ] Dig. 3. 4, 7.

[304 ] In the first half of this century our parliament tried many experiments of this
kind. See for example the Act for the Registration of Joint-Stock Companies, 7 & 8
Vic. c. 110, sec. 25, 66.

[305 ] We neglect for a while that unhappy freak of English law the corporation sole.

[306 ] Such as the German Rechtssubject, Rechtssubjectivität.

[307 ] For some anthropomorphic vagaries of the middle ages, see Gierke, D. G. R.
iii. 549.

[308 ] Gierke, D. G. R. iii. 132.

[309 ] See the Year Books of Edward IV. in general, but especially the great case
Abbot of St. Benet’s (Hulme) v. Mayor and Commonalty of Norwich, four times
reported, Y. B. 21 Edw. IV. f. 7, 12, 27, 67.

[310 ] Y. B. 20 Edw. IV. f. 2 (Pasch. pl. 7): an unincorporated gild or fraternity. 12
Hen. VII. f. 27 (Trin. pl. 7): “feffement fuit fait al oeps de paroissiens que n’est nule
corporacion.”

[311 ] Y. B. 14 Hen. VIII. f. 3 (Mich. pl. 2); dean and chapter, mayor and
commonalty are incorporated by the king; the mendicant friars by the pope; abbot and
convent by both king and pope.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 526 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[312 ] Y. B. 4 Hen. VII. f. 6 (Pasch. pl. 2); 4 Hen. VII. f. 17 (Mich. pl. 7); 7 Hen. VII.
f. 9 (Hil. pl. 2); 7 Hen. VII. f. 16 (Trin. pl. 3).

[313 ] Lib. Ass. ann. 22, f. 100, pl. 67.

[314 ]Maundv.Monmouthshire Canal Company, 4 Manning and Granger’s Reports,
452.

[315 ]Abp. of Yorkv.Mayor etc. of Hull, Y. B. 45 Edw. III. f. 2 (Hil. pl. 5); Y. B. 8
Hen. VI. f. 1 (Mich. pl. 2); Y. B. 18 Hen. VI. f. 11 (Trin. pl. 1); Y. B. 32 Hen. VI. f. 8
(Mich. pl. 13).

[316 ] Y. B. 21 Edw. IV. f. 13 (Mich. pl. 4): “le corporacion de eux n’est que un
nosme, que ne poit my estre vieu, et n’est my substance, e a ceo nosme ou corps est
impossible de faire un tort.”

[317 ] Y. B. 32 Hen. VI. f. 9 (Mich. pl. 13): “ils sont per cest nosme un person
corporate”; Y. B. 21 Edw. IV. f. 32 (Pasch. pl. 28) per Catesby.

[318 ] Y. B. 18 Hen. VI. f. 16 (Trin. pl. 4); Y. B. 21 Edw. IV. f. 28 (Pasch. pl. 22).
Compare what is said of the Canons of Southwell in Sutton’s Hospital Case, 10
Coke’s Reports, 30 b.

[319 ] Y. B. 21 Edw. IV. f. 31 (Pasch. pl. 28), f. 63 (Mich. pl. 33).

[320 ] Y. B. 2 Hen. VI. f. 9 (Pasch. pl. 6) per Rolf.

[321 ] Y. B. 21 Edw. IV. f. 7, 12, 27, 67.

[322 ] For the facts of this interesting case, see Green, Town Life, ii. 391.

[323 ] Y. B. 21 Edw. IV. f. 69.

[324 ] See Grant on Corporations, p. 110, where it is said that “if the master of a
college devise lands to the college, they cannot take, because at the moment of his
death they are an incomplete body.” But in 1333 an abbot was successfully sued upon
a bond given by prior and convent during a vacancy: Y. B. 7 Edw. III. f. 35 (Trin. pl.
35).

[325 ] Y. B. 21 Edw. IV. f. 15, f. 68, per Vivisour.

[326 ] Y. B. 8 Hen. VI. f. 1 (Mich. pl. 2); f. 14 (Mich. pl. 34).

[327 ] The words are “sera levie de touts biens etc.”; it is clear from the context that
this means “shall be levied from all the goods of the members.”

[328 ] In 1437 it is said that if a man recovers debt or damages against a commonalty
he shall only have execution against the goods that they have in common; Fitz. Abr.
Execution, pl. 128, citing an unprinted Y. B. of Mich. 16 Hen. VI.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 527 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[329 ] See Gierke, D. G. R. especially vol. iii. pp. 202–6, 227–85. Innocent says,
“cum collegium in causa universitatis fingatur una persona.” Johannes Andreae says,
“universitas non est capax poenae capitalis, corporalis, spiritualis . . . cum corpus
animatum non habeat ad hoc aptum.” The amusing question was discussed whether a
corporation could be a godmother.

[330 ] Rot. Parl. i. 420.

[331 ] Rot. Parl. ii. 47.

[332 ] Rot. Parl. ii. 191.

[333 ] Ann. Burton, 471: “communitas bacheleriae Angliae.”

[334 ] Inst. 2. 1. 6: “Universitatis sunt, non singulorum, veluti quae in civitatibus sunt,
ut theatra, stadia et similia et si qua alia sunt communia civitatium.”

[335 ] Bracton, f. 8: “Universitatis vero sunt, non singulorum, quae sunt in civitatibus,
ut theatrum, stadia et huiusmodi et si qua sunt in civitatibus communia.” Ibid. f. 180
b: “Item videre debent [iuratores in assisa novae disseisinae] utrum tenementum fuerit
sacrum et deo dedicatum, vel quasi sacrum, sicut publicum, vel universitatis ut
stadium, theatrum, muri et portae civitatum” (the muri and portae are from Inst. 2. 1.
10). Ibid. f. 207 b: “Item tenementorum quoddam nec sacrum, nec sanctum, sed
publicum alicuius, scilicet universitatis vel communionis vel omnium et non alicuius
hominis privati vel singularis, sicut sunt theatra et stadia vel loca publica, sive sunt in
civitatibus vel extra.” Ibid. f. 228 b: “Item [servitus poterit esse] personalis tantum . . .
item localis et non certis personis sicut alicuius universitatis, burgensium et civium, et
omnes conqueri possunt et unus sub nomine universitatis” (this concerning
“servitudes,” in particular common of pasture). Ibid. f. 56 b: “Item esto quod dominus
rex (here we come to something practical), duobus concesserit aliquam libertatem, ut
si alicui universitati, sicut civibus vel burgensibus vel aliquibus aliis quod mercatum
habeant vel feriam in villa sua, civitate, vel burgo . . . si postmodum concedat
consimilem libertatem aliquibus in regno suo . . . secundum quod praedictum est
videndum erit qui illorum praeferri debeant in tali libertate.” Ibid. f. 102: a real action
may be brought “nomine alicuius universitatis sicut in rem communem.” Ibid. f. 171
b, if the king errs the “universitas regni et baronagium” may perhaps correct his errors
“in curia domini Regis.” The passage on f. 8 in which Bracton draws a distinction
between two kinds of res universitatis is horribly mangled in the printed text (for
usualia read alia). See Bracton and Azo, pp. 87, 90, 95.

[336 ] As to the whole of this matter, see Stutz, Geschichte des kirchlichen
Benefizialwesens, Berlin, 1895, and the review by Hinschius of this important book in
Zeitschrift d. Sav.-Stift., Germ. Abt. xvii. 135. Also see Dr. Stutz’s brilliant lecture
Die Eigenkirche, Berlin, 1895.

[337 ] Stutz, Benefizialwesen, i. 89. Some information about this matter comes from
Iceland.

[338 ] Schmid, Gesetze, p. 388.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 528 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[339 ] D. B. i. 34 b, 35.

[340 ] D. B. ii. 290 b.

[341 ] Bracton, f. 53.

[342 ] It is not contended that as regards every parish church this is the history of its
advowson. The Eigenkirche (the owned church) begins to affect the whole system of
law, and the bishop’s power over churches that perhaps had never been owned now
begins to look proprietary; they are “his” churches. So too kings assert a patronage
over ancient cathedrals, and the emperor may even wish to treat the church of Rome
as “his” church.

[343 ] Kemble, Cod. Dipl. No. 1; Stubbs and Haddan, iii. 52.

[344 ] Cod. 1. 2 (de SS. Ecclesiis), 26. The form came down from the pagan classical
law; “Deos heredes instituere non possumus praeter eos quos senatus-consulto
constitutionibusve principum instituere concessum est, sicuti Iovem Tarpeium” etc.
Ulp. Reg. xxii. § 6.

[345 ] Gierke, ii. pp. 542–45. See e.g. Kemble, Cod. Dipl. No. 847: “ic wille ðæt ðæt
land æt Merseham . . . ligce into Cristes circean on Cantwarabyrig.” D. B. i. 91 b: “in
aecclesia Carentone iacet una hida et dimidia . . . in aecclesia de Curi est dimidia
hida.” Ibid. 210 b: “Haec terra fuit in aecclesia S. Benedicti.”

[346 ] D. B. ii. 13: “Aliam Nessetocham tenuit Turstinus Ruffus . . . modo Sanctus
Paulus invasit.” We might compare this to those phrases current at Oxford and
Cambridge which tell how Magdalene has won a cricket match and the like; but there
is less of conscious abbreviation in the one case than in the other.

[347 ] D. B. i. 121.

[348 ] D. B. ii. 416 b.

[349 ] D. B. i. 104: “Terra S. Stefani de Cadomo: Ecclesia Cadomonensis tenet de
Rege Northam.”

[350 ] D. B. i. 165: “Terra aecclesiae de Bade: S. Petrus de Bada tenuit Alvestone.”

[351 ] D. B. i. 164 b.

[352 ] D. B. i. 91.

[353 ] D. B. i. 103 b: “Terra aecclesiae de Tavestoch . . . Ipsa aecclesia tenet
Middeltone . . . Goisfridus tenet de abbate Lideltone . . . Ipsa aecclesia tenet Adrelie .
. . Radulfus tenet de abbate Torneberie.”

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 529 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[354 ] D. B. i. 136: “Canonici Lundonienses tenent.” Ibid. 146: “Canonici de
Oxeneford tenent.” Ibid. 157: “Canonici S. Fridesvidae tenent.” Ibid. 247 b:
“Canonici de Hantone tenent.”

[355 ] D. B. i. 17: “Canonici de Cicestre tenent communiter.”

[356 ] Gierke, D. G. R. iii. 195; “parietes possessionem retineant.” Ibid. 252: “bona
ipsa sunt loci inclusi muro, ad instar vacantis hereditatis, quae vicem personae
obtinet.”

[357 ] As to all this see Gierke, D. G. R. iii. § 8.

[358 ] Gierke, D. G. R. iii. 343, 402, 491. Why the law should create “fictions” which
commit torts and crimes, must always be a difficult question, though when once
breach of contract or wrongful possession has been attributed to a corporation the
plunge has been made. If, however, wrong-doing was to be ascribed to an ecclesia,
there was convenience in the theory that this “church” was only nomen iuris or an
intellectual device and not a member of the body of Christ.

[359 ] Gierke, D. G. R. iii. 271, says that this personification of the sedes or dignitas
did not introduce a second and independent category of juristic persons beside the
corporation; rather the canonist’s idea of a corporation was already so much the idea
of an institution [not of an organized body of men] that the corporate element in it
might disappear altogether without any essential change becoming necessary. True, he
continues, the personified dignitas was not directly subsumed under the title of a
corporation [this is just what did happen in England], but it was regarded as a
phenomenon analogous to a corporation, and to some extent as a variation on the
same theme. So far as we are aware the “corporation sole” begins to appear eo nomine
only in the later Year Books.

[360 ] Placit. Abbrev. 304 (Norff.). Y. B. 21–22 Edw. I. p. 33: “le eglise est dedeinz
age.” Comp. Bract. f. 226 b: “Et cum ecclesia fungatur vice minoris, acquiritur per
rectorem et retinet per eundem, sicut minor per tutorem. Et quamvis moriatur rector,
non tamen cadit ecclesia a seisitna sua, de aliquo de quo rector seisitus moritur
nomine ecclesiae suae, non magis quam minor si custos suus moriatur.” Thus it is to
Bracton a matter of indifference whether the church be seised by the instrumentality
of its rector, or the rector be seised on behalf of his church; the two phrases are
equivalent.

[361 ] Co. Lit. 300 b, 301 a.

[362 ] The same is true of an independent priory; the prior is its representative before
the law.

[363 ] See e.g. cc. 1, 2, 3, X. 3, 10; two of these three passages deal with English
cases.

[364 ] For the writs of entry “sine assensu” see Bracton, f. 323; Note Book, pl. 866,
1727; Reg. Brev. Orig. f. 230.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 530 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[365 ] Stat. Marlb. c. 28. This came of our having no “real” action for movables.

[366 ] Placit. Abbrev. 49 (temp. Joh.): “Dominus episcopus Londoniensis . . . petit . . .
unam sokam . . . ut ius suum quod pertinet ad baroniam suam quam tenet de
episcopatu suo.”

[367 ] The usual form of a royal charter makes this clear; the grant is “to God and the
church of St. Mary and the bishop of Salisbury and his successors; to God and the
church of SS. Mary and Ethelbert of Hereford and Giles bishop of the said church and
his successors”; Rot. Cart. 67, 106.

[368 ] D. B. i. 135: “Terra Roberti Episcopi de Cestre. Episcopus de Cestre tenet
Mimmine . . . Hoc manerium non est de episcopatu, sed fait Raynerii patris Roberti
episcopi.”

[369 ] We shall return to this point in the next section.

[370 ] The Epistolae Cantuarienses contain a long account from the twelfth century of
the litigation between the Archbishop and the monks of Christ Church touching a
partition of their territory. In this case even Domesday Book shows a partition; the
Archbishop has land and “the monks of the Archbishop” have other land.

[371 ] Y. B. 40 Edw. III. f. 28 per Finchden; Prynne, Records, ii. 764.

[372 ] Early cases of prebendaries suing are Placit. Abbrev. 62 (Dorset); Note Book,
pl. 411. As to the division of land between bishop and chapter, see 25 Ass. f. 116, pl.
8.

[373 ] Placit. Abbrev. 53 (Hereford), action against the canons of Hereford; Note
Book, pl. 482, 493, 654, 692, 886, actions by and against “the dean and chapter” of St.
Paul’s.

[374 ] Bracton’s best passage about this matter (f. 374 b) runs as follows:—If an
abbot, prior, or other collegiate men demand land or an advowson or the like in the
name of their church on the seisin of their predecessors, they say “And whereof such
an abbot was seised in his demesne etc.” They do not in their count trace a descent
from abbot to abbot, or prior to prior, nor do they mention the abbots or priors
intermediate [between themselves and him on whose seisin they rely,] for in colleges
and chapters the same body endures for ever, although all may die one after the other,
and others may be placed in their stead; just as with flocks of sheep, the flock remains
the same though the sheep die; nor does one succeed to another by right of succession
as when a right descends heritably, for the right always belongs to the church and the
church is permanent: and this one sees in charters, where the gift is made first and
foremost to God and such a church, and only in a secondary way to the monks or
canons.

[375 ] Glanv. x. c. 12; Britton, i. 164–66.

[376 ] Chron. Jocelini de Brakelonda, pp. 2, 4, 22.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 531 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[377 ] Y. B. Mich. 15 Edw. II. f. 452.

[378 ]Dr. Bonham’s Case, 8 Rep. 118 a; 2nd Inst. 587–88.

[379 ] Fitz. Abr. Annuitie, pl. 41 (apparently from an unprinted Y. B.).

[380 ] Gierke, D. G. R. iii. 322, 392, 470.

[381 ] Bracton, f. 228 b.

[382 ] See Gierke, D. G. R. ii. 562–68.

[383 ] Y. B. 20–21 Edw. I. p. 57: “Mes yl ne tendy nul averement pur le Roy, pur coe
ke le Roy sy est prerogatyf”; p. 69 “Le Roy est prerogatif; par quey nul prescripcion
de tens ne court encontre ly”; p. 112 “You can not, in this writ of right, demand on the
seisin of Kings Richard and John and Henry, in such wise that if one fail, you may
hold to the others.” “Sir, we can, for the king is prerogative.” Y. B. 33–35 Edw. I. p.
407: “Le roi est en sa terre si prerogatif qil ne voet aver nul sur luy” . . . “Pur sa
prerogativeté ne serrioms mie oustez de nos services.”

[384 ] Bracton, f. 132 b: “Non enim poterit rex gratiam facere cum iniuria et damno
aliorum. Poterit quidem dare quod suum est, hoc est pacem suam, . . . quod autem
alienum est dare non potest per suam gratiam.”

[385 ] Bracton, f. 107: “Ad hoc autem creatus est et electus, ut iustitiam faciat
universis.”

[386 ] P. Q. W. 389. See also Note Book, pl. 199, where “the young king,” Henry son
of Henry II., is mentioned in the pedigree; “et de ipso Henrico [secundo] descendit ius
illius advocacionis Henrico Regi filio suo et de ipso Henrico Regi Ricardo fratri suo.”

[387 ] Glanvill, vii. 3.

[388 ] Bracton, f. 267 b, 282, 327 b; Note Book, pl. 230, 982. In the Très ancien
coutumier, ed. Tardif, p. 13 we find “Filius, licet postgenitus, heres propinquior est
hereditatis patris sui quam nepotes, filii fratris sui primogeniti”; but a glossator adds
“sicut contingit de Johanne, rege Anglico, et de multis aliis, et hoc est falsissimum
iudicium.”

[389 ] Y. B. 20–21 Edw. I. p. 73: “Nota ke nul home ne put chalanger la descente
encontre le Roy, tot seyt coe en un bref de dreit.”

[390 ] Note Book, pl. 1127, 1227, 1273.

[391 ] See the Processus Scotiae, Foedera, i. 762. Bruce at one turn in the argument
asserted “quod mulier regnare non debet, quia officium regiminis exercere non
potest.” The theory that the kingdom was partible was but the second string to his
bow. At another turn he asserted that the ordinary rules of inheritance were

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 532 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

inapplicable and that the canons for the inheritance of a kingdom should be found in
“the law of nature.”

[392 ] Bract. f. 108: “Dictum est supra de ordinaria iurisdictione, quae pertinet ad
regem: consequenter dicendum est de iurisdictione delegata.”

[393 ] Bract. f. 107.

[394 ] Plac. Abbrev. p. 107 (25 Hen. III.): “Et quia dominus rex absens fuit, nec
fuerunt ibi nisi pauci de consilio domini Regis, noluerunt illi qui praesentes fuerunt
adiudicare duellum nec aliud in absentia ipsius domini Regis vel maioris consilii sui.”

[395 ] Rot. Cl. i. 114: writ pardoning Jacob of Poterne.

[396 ] Rot. Cur. Reg. (ed. Palgrave) i. 47 (ad 1194): “Et dominus Cantuariensis
[Hubert Walter, chief justiciar,] dicit quod ipse accepit ab ore domini Regis quod ipse
redderet seisinam terrae . . . Consideratum est quod magis ratum habetur quod
dominus Rex ore praecepit quam quod per litteras mandavit.” Note Book, pl. 239 (ad
1234): “testificatio domini Regis per cartam vel viva voce omnem aliam probationem
excedit.”

[397 ] See the cautious passage in Bracton, f. 171 b.

[398 ] See the violent passage in Bracton, f. 34 and Fleta, p. 17. For reasons given in
the Introduction to Bracton’s Note Book, i. 29–33, we do not believe that this was part
of Bracton’s original text and gravely doubt whether he wrote it.

[399 ] Y. B. 33–35 Edw. I. p. 471: “en auncien temps chescun bref e de dreit e de
possessioun girreit ben ver le roi.”

[400 ] Bl. Comm. iii. 184: “In the times of our Saxon ancestors, the right of
possession seems only to have been recoverable by writ of entry.”

[401 ] Y. B. 22 Edw. III. f. 3 (Hil. pl. 25); 24 Edw. III. f. 55 (Trin. pl. 40); 43 Edw.
III. f. 22 (Mich. pl. 12). The passages are given by Allen, Prerogative, 190.

[402 ] Bracton, f. 5 b: “Si autem ab eo [sc. a rege] petatur, cum breve non currat
contra ipsum, locus erit supplicationi.” Again f. 382 b: “summoneri non potest per
breve.” See also f. 52, 107, 171 b, 368, 412; also Note Book, i. pp. 26–33.

[403 ] Note Book, pl. 1108.

[404 ] Rot. Cl. i. 549.

[405 ] Bacon, Case de Rege Inconsulto (Works, ed. Spedding, vii. 694): “for you will
not revive old fables (as Justinian calls things of that nature) Praecipe Henrico Regi
etc. ”

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 533 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[406 ] Bracton, f. 171 b. Note Book, pl. 401, 1106, 1108, 1133, 1141, 1236, 1593,
1766. Y. B. 30–31 Edw. I. p. 172; 33–35 Edw. I. p. 539. Reg. Brev. Orig. 221–22.

[407 ] Note Book, pl. 1183: “vocat inde ad warantum dominum Regem.” Contrast pl.
393: “Rex debet ei warentizare si ausus esset illum vocare ad warantum sicut alium
hominem.” Bracton, f. 382 b; Y. B. 21–22 Edw. I. p. 287.

[408 ] Bacon, Works, ed. Spedding, vii. 693.

[409 ] Britton, i. 221: “Rois ausi ne porraint rien aliener des dreitz de lour coroune ne
de lour reauté, qe ne soit repellable par lour successours.” See above, p. 406.

[410 ] See Luchaire, Manuel des institutions, p. 49. This notion begets the ius spolii,
droit de dépouilles, of continental law.

[411 ] Magna Vita S. Hugonis, p. 334.

[412 ] Second Charter of Stephen: Stubbs, Select Charters; Statutes, vol. i. (Charters)
p. 3.

[413 ] Diceto, ii. 12. He cites the rubric of Dig. 2. 2.

[414 ] Mat. Par. Chron. Maj. iv. 522, 604.

[415 ] We make our nearest approach to the personification of a temporal office when
some officer attempts to prescribe for fees or perquisites. In 7 Edw. I. a castellan of
Bamborough is charged with holding certain pleas which, according to general law,
belong to the sheriff. He replies, “I found the said castle seised of this custom.” Here
Bamborough castle is personified. But this is not a fruitful idea. Northumberland
Assize Rolls, 353.

[416 ] See the protests of 1301 and 1366; Foedera, i. 926; Rolls of Parliament, ii. 290.
Stubbs, Const. Hist. § 700: “John’s surrender and subsequent homage first created the
shadow of a feudal relation, which was respected by Henry III., but repudiated by the
parliaments of Edward I. and Edward III.” As to Richard’s transactions with the
Emperor, it was easy for an Englishman to hold them “void for duress”; they were
“contra leges, contra canones, contra bonos mores”; Diceto, ii. 113.

[417 ] See above, p. 366.

[418 ] Will of Edward III., Nicolas, Royal Wills, p. 59. He distinguishes between
“debita nostra contemplacione personae nostrae contracta” and “debita racione regni
seu guerrarum nostrarum contracta.”

[419 ] Henry died late on Wednesday. Edward’s peace was proclaimed in
Westminster Hall early on Thursday. But he dates his reign from the next Sunday, on
which day his father was buried and the magnates took the oath of fealty. Foedera, i.
497.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 534 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[420 ] Select Pleas of the Crown (Seld. Soc.), pl. 84. In John’s day an appellor alleges
a crime committed during the late interregnum but after “the peace of the King then
Duke of Normandy and Lord of England” had been sworn.

[421 ] Note Book, pl. 1500 (ad 1221): “Loquela ista remaneat ad aetatem domini
Regis ut tunc faciat inde voluntatem suam.” Ibid. pl. 1639 (ad 1223): “Iudicium
ponitur in respectum usque ad aetatem domini Regis.”

[422 ] Mat. Par. (from Wendover) iii. 75–76, 91, 122.

[423 ] Note Book, pl. 1221. The king of Scots petitions for a wardship, urging in his
favour something that happened during the minority. Henry’s council replies that this
happened “tempore Huberti de Burgo Comitis Kantiae qui amicus fuit et familiaris
ipsi Regi Scotiae et qui regnum Angliae habuit in manu sua.” Therefore it is of no
avail.

[424 ] This point will be further discussed in our next chapter where we deal with
borough charters.

[425 ] See above, pp. 475–76.

[426 ] Rolls of Parliament, i. 102–5: “Episcopus Dunelmensis dupplicem habet
statum, scilicet, temporalem et spiritualem, et ad statum illum temporalem
incarcerationes et imprisonamenta per ministros eiusdem Episcopi pertinent
facienda.”

[427 ] P. Q. W. 429–30. Thornton the king’s counsel pleads that the king “est alterius
condicionis quam prius fuit et quasi altera persona.” The earl replies, “Una et eadem
persona est tam in statu regio quam in statu quo vocabatur communiter Dominus
Edwardus”—King Edward is the same person as the Lord Edward of former times.

[428 ] Bracton, f. 55 b: “Est enim corona regis facere iusticiam et iudicium et tenere
pacem, et sine quibus corona consistere non potest, nec tenere.”

[429 ] Placit. Abbrev. p. 339 (15 Edw. II.): “de iure coronae suae etc., quae semper est
quasi minoris aetatis.”

[430 ] Chronicles of Edward I. and Edward II., ed. Stubbs, i. p. 153, ii. p. 33, 65;
Statutes of the Realm, i. 182; Calvin’s Case, 7 Coke’s Rep. 11; see also In re Stepney
Election Petition, 17 Q. B. D. 54.

[431 ] Gierke, D. G. R. ii. 564–68.

[1 ] Y. B. 18 Edw. II. f. 571: “le Priour fuit son justisable.” Stat. 28 Edw. III. c. 11:
“celui qe est sovereign de la ville.”

[2 ] Bracton, f. 107–8.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 535 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[3 ] Bracton, f. 108: “Dictum est in proximo de ordinaria iurisdictione quae pertinet ad
regem, consequenter dicendum est de iurisdictione delegata.”

[4 ] This is not strictly true, for the vill may well extend into two or three hundreds
and into two counties. For some examples see Committee on Parish Boundaries, Parl.
Pap. 1873, vol. 8, p. 225.

[5 ] See Stubbs, Const. Hist. i. 122.

[6 ] A great deal of information may be gained from Schedule M to the Statute 2–3
Will. IV. c. 64.

[7 ] In 1269 the under-sheriff of Staffordshire is charged with taking a vill out of one
hundred to put it in another which he farmed in fee; Staffordshire Collections (Salt
Soc.), iv. 170.

[8 ] Stubbs, Const. Hist. i. 389–94; Round, Geoffrey de Mandeville, 287.

[9 ] The continued use of the English title sheriff might be sufficiently proved by its
reappearance on the surface of legal history in later days; but even in the thirteenth
century we hear of local exactions which are known as shirreves welcome,
scirrewescot, chiryveschot, i.e. auxilium vicecomitis; R. H. i. 157, 454, 484.

[10 ] Reference is here made to the chapter De heretochiis (Schmid, cap. 32 a)
interpolated into some copies of the Leges Edwardi Confessoris. As to hereditary
sheriffs, see Stubbs, Const. Hist. i. 295; as to elective sheriffs, ibid. ii. 206–8.

[11 ] Stubbs, Const. Hist. i. 505. Though we see no reason to reject the common
doctrine that the general institution of coroners is due to the measure of 1194, still the
office of keeping the pleas of the crown may have been known at an earlier time. See
Gross, Coroners’ Rolls (Seld. Soc.) Introduction.

[12 ] Calendarium Genealogicum, p. 487; a lady ends a document with these words
“In cuius rei testimonium sigillum meum praesentibus apposui, et quia sigillum meum
est incognitum sigillum comitatus Devoniae apponi procuravi.” At a later time the
hundreds have seals, but these are the outcome of a statute relating to the transmission
of vagrants.

[13 ] Rot. Cart. 122, 132. Rot. Cl. i. 457; ii. 25, 169. Henry II. by charter granted to
the men of Derbyshire that their county court should be held at Derby instead of at
Nottingham.

[14 ] It will be remembered that to this day the county is an indictable unit, though no
corporation. The difficulty occasioned by the fact that the county could not hold land
was met by a statute of 1858 (21 and 22 Vic. c. 92), which provided for lands being
held by the clerk of the peace. At a much earlier time we find the judges puzzled by
the question how damages under the Statute of Winchester can be recovered from the
county; Y. B. Pasch. 17 Edw. II. f. 539.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 536 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[15 ] Select Pleas of the Crown, i. pl. 38. This volume contains many other
illustrations of the same principle. See also Madox, Exch. i. 567.

[16 ] Note Book, pl. 40, 212, 243, 445, 955, 1019, 1130, 1412, 1436, 1672, 1730.
Observe in pl. 1019 “Et comitatus hoc defendit praecise,” and in pl. 1412 “Et
comitatus dicit quod tale fuit recordum.”

[17 ] Madox, Exch. i. 556 (31 Hen. III.); the whole county of Norfolk owes £11 for a
false judgment.

[18 ] See Stubbs, Const. Hist. ii. 208–232.

[19 ] Maitland, The Suitors of the County Court, E. H. R. iii. 418.

[20 ] In some cases it is quite clear that the immunity excuses not only the grantee
himself but also his tenants from suit of court; in other cases this is left in some doubt.
See our first edition, i. 523.

[21 ] Charter of 1217, cap. 42: “Nullus comitatus de cetero teneatur nisi de mense in
mensem, et ubi maior terminus esse solebat, maior sit.”

[22 ] Note Book, pl. 1730: “Comitatus Lincolniae semper solet sedere de xl. diebus in
xl. dies.”

[23 ] Note Book, pl. 40.

[24 ] Statutes, i. 118; Ann. Dunstap. p. 139.

[25 ] Edward ii. 8.

[26 ] Edgar i. 1.

[27 ] Edgar iii. 5.

[28 ] Cnut ii. 18.

[29 ] Writ in Select Charters; Liebermann, Quadripartitus, 165.

[30 ] Leg. Henr. 7, 8, 51 § 2.

[31 ] In an action for land in a local court, the person in possession was often allowed
“three summonses, three defaults and three essoins before appearance” (Select Pleas
in Manorial Courts, i. 107, 112–20) so that if the court sat but twice a year he would
have some four years before the day for answering the demandant would arrive. The
ms Book of Cerne in Camb. Univ. Libr. tells of a suit between the Abbot of Cerne and
the Prior of St. Swithin’s which has come before ten successive county courts and yet
seems far from a judgment.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 537 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[32 ] Bracton, f. 125 b. This rule which required that the outlawry should not take
place until the fifth, or according to another mode of reckoning the fourth, county
court, is recognized in a case of 1221: Select Pleas of the Crown, vol. i. pl. 129. So
also there is constant mention in the A.-S. dooms of the voucher of successive
warrantors, and each voucher must have involved at least one adjournment.

[33 ] See e.g. the account of Oxfordshire, R. H. ii. 835–77; of many of the landowners
it is said “facit duos adventus ad magnos comitatus Oxoniae,” or “facit bis sectam ad
duos magnos comitatus Oxoniae.” So in Yorkshire; “facere solebant unum adventum
singulis annis ad generalem comitatum Eboraci”; P. Q. W. 217.

[34 ] The difficulty noticed in this paragraph is discussed by Stubbs, Const. Hist. i.
649. All that we can add to his explanations is the fact that long after 1217 two half-
yearly meetings of the county court are distinguished as “the great counties” from the
ordinary monthly meetings, and the suggestion that, though the Leges Henrici speak
only of the great half-yearly meetings, there may also have been monthly meetings
attended only by a small body of suitors. The history of the Frankish courts supplies
analogies.

[35 ] R. H. ii. 483: “W. G. holds two virgates of the Abbot of Ramsey. For one virgate
he does suit to the county of Cambridge and the hundred and pays 12 d. towards the
sheriff’s aid. For the other virgate he pays 5 s. a year to the Abbot and does suit to the
Abbot’s court at Broughton.” Y. B. Trin. 7 Edw. II. f. 243: “Your predecessor
enfeoffed William of the one virgate to hold by homage, fealty, three shillings a year
and suit to his court, and for the other virgate, to do suit to the hundred of A. and the
county of Hertford for the vill of L.”

[36 ] Testa de Nevill, 404–5. The word translated as doomsman is iudex, instead of
which index is too frequently printed.

[37 ] R. H. ii. 488.

[38 ] R. H. i. 455. See also the hundred of Humbleyard, ibid. 471.

[39 ] R. H. i. 498.

[40 ] P. Q. W. 730.

[41 ] Thus Baldwin Wake holds a manor of Nicholas de Meynill who holds of Peter
de Maulay; Peter does suit to the county of York by his steward for all his tenants;
therefore none is due from Baldwin; P. Q. W. 199. In the fifteenth century the
stewards of the great lords seem to have been the electors for the county of York. See
Stubbs, Const. Hist., iii. 424, as to the peculiar character of the Yorkshire elections.

[42 ] It may be necessary to warn the reader that the “suit real” of old books, which is
contrasted with “suit service,” suggests a falsehood to us moderns. The word “real” in
this context means “royal,” and an attempt was made at times to prevent this “suit
royal” from becoming “real” in the sense in which we use that word. See Y. B. 33–35
Edw. I. p. 91.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 538 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[43 ] Petition of the Barons, c. 24.

[44 ] Provisions of Westminster, c. 1, 2, 3; Stat. Marlb. c. 9.

[45 ] Writ of 43 Hen. III. found in ms Registrum Brevium; Camb. Univ. Lib. Kk. v.
33.

[46 ] The Court Baron (Selden Soc.), pp. 80–81.

[47 ] See Riess, Geschichte des Wahlrechts, cap. 3; but Riess, to our thinking, passes
too lightly by the duty of suit of court.

[48 ] For the form of the summons see Rot. Cl. i. 380, 473, 476; ii. 151, 213; Bracton,
f. 109 b. It runs thus:—“Summone per bonos summonitores omnes archiepiscopos,
episcopos, comites, et barones, milites et libere tenentes de tota bailliva tua et de
qualibet villa iiij. legales homines et praepositum et de quolibet burgo xij. legales
burgenses per totam ballivam tuam et omnes alios de bailliva tua qui coram
iusticiariis nostris itinerantibus venire solent et debent.” Now to say “Summon all the
archbishops, bishops, earls, barons, knights and freeholders of your bailiwick and all
others of your bailiwick who are wont and ought to attend the justices” is to use a
phrase which is not too precise. May it not mean “Summon those (freeholders and
others) who are wont and ought to come”?

[49 ] Thus a tenant of the Abbot of Gloucester is bound to acquit the whole vill from
suit to all courts of the hundred or of the county or of justices and all other suits which
pertain to the said vill; Cart. Glouc. i. 386. At Northleach a tenant of the abbot is
bound to do suit for his lord to the county and the hundred and must remain before the
justices in eyre during the whole of their session; ibid. iii. 180.

[50 ] Leg. Hen. 7 § 2.

[51 ] The vicedomini may possibly be the vicecomites, the sheriffs, who, if this be not
so, are omitted from the list; but the three titles vicedomini, vicarii, centenarii coming
together suggest that the writer is using up all the titles that he knows, whether French
or English. Neither the vidame nor the viguier took root in En gland; the centenarii
may be the bailiffs of the hundreds, but the conjunction of these three titles is rather
French or Frankish than English. Stapleton, Norman Exchequer Rolls, i. xxxv, says
that the titles vicarius and centenarius are not met with in Norman diplomas of a later
date than the eleventh century.

[52 ] Neither the theory that the vavassor must needs be a vassal’s vassal, nor the
derivation of his name from vassi vassorum can be regarded as certain. In England the
word is rare. We said somewhat more of it in our first edition, i. 532. It is very
remarkable that in the list of titles now under discussion milites does not occur.

[53 ] Thus in the Pipe Roll of 31 Hen. I., p. 28, there is mention of the “minuti iudices
et iuratores,” whose misdoings have rendered them liable for a sum of more than 300
marks. Elsewhere the same document uses the terms “minuti homines” and
“smalemanni” as though they represent a well-recognized class: thus p. 103,

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 539 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

“iuratores et minuti homines”; p. 132, “de tainis et dreinnis [thegns and drengs] et
smalemannis inter Tinam et Teodam.”

[54 ] The difficulty is increased by Leg. Hen. Prim. 29 § 1, where it is said that the
king’s judges are to be the barons of the county who have free lands, while villeins,
cotsets, farthinglanders (ferdingi) and other unsubstantial folk (viles vel inopes
personae) are not to act as judges. This passage seems to contemplate the existence of
no class intermediate between barones and villani; but, unless both of these terms are
used with enormous licence, such a class there certainly was.

[55 ] Leg. Hen. 7 § 7.

[56 ] Stat. Mert. c. 10.

[57 ] Leg. Hen. c. 7 § 7.

[58 ] Thus the Prior of Deerhurst owes a single suit to the county of Oxford for his
manor of Taynton; this is done for him by J. S., his attorney enfeoffed for this purpose
in ancient times; R. H. ii. 733.

[59 ] In one of the Phillipps mss of Bracton, No. 3510, f. 36 d., a note from the early
years of the fourteenth century says that when the county is fined for false judgment,
“tunc soli liberi homines per quos iudicia talia redduntur divites et pauperes pro
aequalibus portionibus contribuunt, nullo modo disenarii, i.e. custumarii”; but “soli
custumarii et non liberi homines” pay the murder fine.

[60 ] See Hazlitt’s edition of Blount’s Tenures, p. 174, citing the Hundred Roll of
Hereford; “solebat facere sectam ad hundredum praedictum et esse unus doomsman
de eodem hundredo.” But this has not been found in the printed Hundred Roll.

[61 ] Hazlitt’s Blount, pp. 46, 152, “per servitium inveniendi unum iudicatorem”;
Select Pleas in Manorial Courts, i. p. lxv, “pro defectu iudicatorum.” In the Pipe Roll
of 31 Hen. I. we find p. 27, “iudicatores comitatus,” p. 28 “minuti iudices,” p. 34
“iudices et iuratores de Eborascira,” p. 97 “de iudicibus comitatus et hundretorum.”

[62 ] In Normandy the contrast is between the iusticiarius and the iudiciarii. See
Somma, pp. 31–32.

[63 ] When a peccant vicar choral of Salisbury is brought before the dean and chapter,
the dean asks the canons for a judgment: Reg. St. Osmund, ii. 24.

[64 ] Hengham Magna, cap. iv.

[65 ] Note Book, pl. 1730. See also pl. 212.

[66 ] Smyth, Lives of the Berkeleys, iii. 12.

[67 ] The Court Baron (Selden Soc.), p. 48.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 540 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[68 ] Placit. Abbrev. 268–69.

[69 ] Placit. Abbrev. 229, 287.

[70 ] Leg. Henr. c. 5 § 6.

[71 ] Leg. Henr. c. 31 § 2: “vincat sententia meliorum et cui iustitia magis
acquieverit.” Even if iustitia here means “justice” and not “the justice,” still it would
be for the justice to decide on which side justice lay. In these Leges the title iustitia
seems to be often given to the sheriff or other president of the court. The general
theory of the time demands that the prevailing opinion shall be that of the maior et
sanior pars. See above p. 536. Also see the Norman Somma, p. 33: if the discreter
folk are in the minority, judgment shall be deferred to another session.

[72 ] Leg. Henr. c. 31 § 7: “Unusquisque per pares suos est iudicandus, et eiusdem
provinciae; peregrina vero iudicia modis omnibus submovemus.” Ibid. c. 32 § 1: “nec
summorum quispiam minorum iudicatione dispereat.”

[73 ] Leg. Henr. c. 31 § 8: “In quibusdam locis utrumque eligitur iudicium, medietas
ab eis quorum est negotium.” The history of Ramsey Abbey, c. xlvii. p. 79, describes
an action brought in the days before the Conquest: “xxxvi barones de amicis utriusque
partis pari numero electos ipsi iudices constituerunt.”

[74 ] Bracton, f. 115 b.

[75 ] Placit. Abbrev. p. 85. The word occurs twice in the record.

[76 ] Britton, i. 155; Fleta, 133.

[77 ] Stat. 6 Edw. I. c. 8.

[78 ] Maitland, History of the Register, Harv. L. R., iii. 112.

[79 ] Maitland, Glanvill Revised, Harv. L. R. vol. vi.

[80 ] John Wilkes was outlawed in the county court of Middlesex “at the Three Tons
in Brook Street near Holborne in the county of Middlesex”: Burrow’s Reports, p.
2530.

[81 ] Stubbs, Const. Hist. ii. 208–216.

[82 ] Northumberland Assize Rolls, p. 208.

[83 ] Select Pleas of the Crown, pl. 176.

[84 ] Rot. Parl. i. 397.

[85 ] Hengham Magna, cap. 4: “quia frequenter evenit quod comitatus tenentur in
silvis et campestribus foris villis et alibi.”

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 541 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[86 ] Rot. Parl. i. 379; see also Stat. 19 Hen. VII. c. 24.

[87 ] P. Q. W. 159.

[88 ] See above, p. 578.

[89 ] Rot. Parl. i. 296.

[90 ] R. H. i. 142.

[91 ] Northumberland Assize Rolls (Surtees Soc.), p. 196: “infra quatuor bancos.” In
the borough court at Totnes proceedings take place “inter quatuor scamna gildhallae”;
Third Rep. Hist. mss Ap. 342. In later days the suitors of a court baron are sometimes
called its “benchers.”

[92 ] Population Abstract, 1831, vol. i. pp. xiv–xv.

[93 ] Thus the hundred of Barclay seems to consist of the parish of Biddenden: ibid. i.
266.

[94 ] Leg. Hen. 7 § 4.

[95 ] See above, pp. 566–67.

[96 ] R. H. ii. 318.

[97 ] Smyth, Lives of the Berkeleys, iii. 13.

[98 ] R. H. ii. 214, 217.

[99 ] R. H. ii. 204–5.

[100 ] R. H. ii. 230–38.

[101 ] Rot. Parl. i. 381.

[102 ] Stat. Wint. 13 Edw. I.

[103 ] Maitland, Domesday Book and Beyond, p. 355.

[104 ] Leg. Henr. c. 8.

[105 ] Charter of 1217, c. 42.

[106 ] So in the court leet the bailiff is sole judge—“judge for the day”: Y. B. 21–22
Edw. I. p. 25: “le baylif en ceo jor ad le regal e dorra jugement.”

[107 ] Select Pleas in Manorial Courts, pp. xxvii–xxxviii.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 542 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[108 ] Fortescue, De Laudibus, cap. 24: “Hundreda vero dividuntur per villas, sub
quarum appellatione continentur et burgi atque civitates . . . Vix in Anglia est locus
aliquis qui non infra villarum ambitus contineatur, licet privilegiati loci infra villas de
eisdem villis pars esse non censentur.” The general theory appears in the rule which
expects that everyone who brings an action for land will be able to name the vill or
vills in which the land lies. The law about this matter, however, was elaborate; in
some actions it was enough to name a hamlet, not so in others; see Y. B. Mich. 15
Edw. II. f. 450. We hear of a spot in which the sheriff held his turn which was in no
vill but was common to several vills, Y. B. Pasch. 17 Edw. II. f. 536 (a folio so
numbered which seemingly ought to be numbered 544).

[109 ] That the Saladin tithe of 1188 was collected from the parishes is no real
exception; payment of it was enforced as a religious duty by excommunication.

[110 ] This process begins with Stat. 14 Car. II. c. 12, sec. 21. At length in 1889 the
rule is laid down that in statutes the word “parish” is to mean prima facie “a place for
which a separate poor rate is or can be made, or for which a separate overseer is or
can be appointed”; Stat. 52 and 53 Vic. c. 63, sec. 5; see also 29 and 30 Vic. c. 113,
sec. 18. We could wish our newly invented “parish councils” a better name.

[111 ] See the very interesting map of Donisthorpe given in Gomme, Village
Community, p. 288, and at the end of the Report of the Committee on Commons’
Inclosure, Parl. Pap. 1844, vol. 5. See also Report of Committee on Boundaries of
Parishes, Parl. Pap. 1873, vol. 8, Minutes of Evidence, p. 85, where Col. Leach
mentions a case in Gloucestershire, of which the present writer has some
knowledge:— some ten parishes were intermixed in the most intricate fashion.

[112 ] Col. Leach, loc. cit. p. 85.

[113 ] Report of Committee on Parish Boundaries, Appendix, pp. 217–19.

[114 ] Ibid. App. p. 242.

[115 ] Y. B. 15 Edw. II. f. 450.

[116 ] The so-called Statute of Exeter, Statutes of the Realm, vol. i. p. 210, ordains an
inquiry which is to be made by vills, demi-vills and hamlets, a vill being represented
by eight men, a demi-vill by six, a hamlet by four. But this seems exceptional. The
meaning of a demi-vill will become plainer hereafter.

[117 ] Domesday and Beyond, pp. 10 ff.

[118 ] The notion that villata is a diminutive of villa is groundless. North Riding
Records, vol. iv. [N.S.] p. 174: “et si villate villarum predictarum non veniant . . .”

[119 ] Thus P. Q. W. 293, the communitas of a vill goes to the sheriff’s turn by its
tithing-man; R. H. i. 275, the coroner’s clerk exacted money from the communa of the
vill of Sutton.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 543 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[120 ] Summons of the Eyre, Stubbs, Select Charters, ann. 1231; Maitland, Pleas of
the Crown for the County of Gloucester, passim.

[121 ] See writ of 1234, Ann. Dunstap. p. 139; R. H. ii. 29, presentments of the crown
are made in the county court by the four neighbouring vills (i.e. neighbouring the
scene of the crime) and if they do not come they are amerced; they are amerced once
more when the justices in eyre come round; this is matter of complaint.

[122 ] Bracton, f. 121 b. Gross, Coroners’ Rolls, passim.

[123 ] See below, p. 598.

[124 ] See Statute 3 Hen. VII. c. 1; Coke, 3rd Institute, 53; Hale, Pleas of the Crown,
i. 448. The rule seems to be an ancient one; see Gloucestershire Pleas of the Crown,
pp. 60, 147.

[125 ] Select Pleas of the Crown, pl. 173.

[126 ] Ibid. pl. 135.

[127 ] Madox, Hist. Exch. i. 541–68.

[128 ] Stubbs, Select Charters: “cum arcubus et sagittis et aliis levibus armis quae
debent provideri ad custum totius villae et quae semper remaneant ad opus praedictae
villae.”

[129 ] The documents of 1181, 1233, 1252, 1253, 1285 are all printed in the Select
Charters.

[130 ] R. H. i. 308.

[131 ] Pipe Roll, 12 Hen. II. p. 49.

[132 ] Note Book, pl. 1170.

[133 ] R. H. ii. 666.

[134 ] R. H. ii. 497–98: “Thomas de Bodeham appropriavit sibi de communa de
Borewelle.” This is a little ambiguous and perhaps should be translated by “T. de B.
has appropriated part of Burwell common.”

[135 ] R. H. i. 54.

[136 ] Bracton, f. 124–25.

[137 ] Bracton, f. 124 b; “clericus, liber homo et huiusmodi.”

[138 ] Du Cange’s examples s.v. manupastus are almost exclusively from England or
Normandy.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 544 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[139 ] Bracton, f. 124 b. He is here making use of Leg. Edw. Conf. 20 (19).

[140 ] See the facsimile of a part of a Norwich frankpledge roll in Leet Jurisdiction in
Norwich (Selden Soc.), p. xlvii.

[141 ] See the Hundred Roll for Kent, where the borgha seems often to be a tract of
land. Thus, p. 202, a murder has been committed “in borgha de Patrichesburn.”

[142 ] Palgrave, Engl. Commonwealth, vol. ii. pp. cxx–cxxvi; Stubbs, Const. Hist. i.
91–95; Maitland, Pleas of the Crown for Gloucester, p. xxxi.

[143 ] Palgrave, Engl. Commonwealth, vol. i. pp. cxxiii–iv; Stubbs, Const. Hist. i. 95.
In Leg. Edw. Conf. 20 (19), it is said that what the English (Angli) call frithborgas the
Yorkshiremen (Eboracenses) call tenmannetale. But whatever may be the origin of
this latter word, we only find it elsewhere as the name of a money payment. Thus
Hoveden, iii. 242: in 1194 Richard imposed a tax of two shillings on the carucate
“quod ab antiquis nominatur Temantale.” See Rievaulx Cartulary, p. 142: “Danegeld
id est Themanetele”; compare Whitby Cartulary, i. 196–97. In northern charters the
word occurs commonly enough in the list of immunities.

[144 ] Ass. Clarend. c. 9. There is to be no one within castle or without, no, not even
in the honour of Wallingford, who shall deny the sheriff’s right to enter his court or
his land to view the frankpledges; all are to be under pledges and are to be placed in
free pledge before the sheriff.

[145 ] Sometimes the tithing-man was elected by the men of the tithing. Rot. Hund. i.
212 (Kent): “J. B. distrinxit J. de E. ut esset borgesaldre sine electione borgae suae.”
In some boroughs, e.g. Norwich, men who were in every sense freemen were in
frankpledge, see Hudson, Leet Jurisdiction in Norwich (Selden Soc.), p. lxvii. But on
the plea rolls of some counties, e.g. Staffordshire, we find entries which state that a
man is not in frankpledge “quia liber.”

[146 ] Select Pleas in Manorial Courts, p. 169.

[147 ] Leg. Edw. Conf. 26 (28). This in all probability is mere fable.

[148 ] A similar distinction is drawn for France by Esmein, Histoire du droit français,
ed. 2, p. 259.

[149 ] Bracton, f. 55 b.

[150 ] Select Pleas in Manorial Courts, pp. xviii–xxii, lxxvii.

[151 ] P. Q. W. 308. Thornton makes the same point against the Abbot of Ramsey; P.
Q. W. 305.

[152 ] P. Q. W. 86; see also 10, 87, 88, 105, 242.

[153 ] P. Q. W. 4.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 545 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[154 ] Bracton, f. 56.

[155 ] P. Q. W. 4, 259, 303.

[156 ] This curious argument is used by William Inge against the Abbot of St. Mary’s,
York; P. Q. W. 122: by Gilbert Thornton, ibid. 671: and more than once by Hugh
Lowther, ibid. 676–77. Thus against the Bishop of Coventry, Lowther says, “The
bishop can not show that any of his predecessors came with the Conqueror and
obtained these liberties by [the] conquest (per conquestum), for the bishop and all his
predecessors were, as one may say, men of religion (quasi religiosi, i.e. in the same
category as professed monks) and they and their church were enfeoffed by others, and
therefore they cannot claim these franchises from time immemorial.” These
arguments about liberties obtained by conquest afforded some ground for the Earl of
Warenne’s famous assertion that the sword was his warantus.

[157 ] P. Q. W. 305.

[158 ] Bracton, f. 34 § 3.

[159 ] Thus the charter of 1199 for the Templars (Rot. Cart. p. 1) specially mentions,
besides the minor local dues, aids of the king and of the sheriffs, hidage, carucage,
danegeld, horngeld, scutage, and tallage. See also the charter of the Hospitallers, ibid.
p. 15, and that for Sempringham, p. 18.

[160 ] See the charters of the Templars and Hospitallers and the Peterborough charter,
Rot. Cart. 82.

[161 ] Rot. Cart. 49.

[162 ] See above, pp. 290, 370.

[163 ] Rot. Cart. 204 (ad 1215).

[164 ] Cart. Rams. ii. 62 (ad 1202).

[165 ] Cart. Rams. passim, e.g. i. 456: “et sciendum quod omnes terrae hydatae
praeter dominicum et terras liberorum dant ad auxilium vicecomitis; terris autem
liberorum remisit . . . Hugo Abbas . . . praedictum auxilium.”

[166 ] Maitland, Domesday Book and Beyond, 278 ff.

[167 ] Charter of the Hospitallers (1199), Rot. Cart. p. 15: “et hamsoka et grithbrige et
blodwita et ficthwita et flictwita et fredwita et hengwita et leirwita et flemenesfrith et
murdro et latrocinio et ordel et oreste.”

[168 ] Cnut, ii. 12–15.

[169 ] Rot. Cart. 2, 20, 22, 32, 33.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 546 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[170 ] A comparison of the Exposiciones Vocabulorum or glossaries of Anglo-Saxon
law terms will be found in the Red Book of the Exchequer iii. 1032. It is clear that in
the thirteenth century there was but little agreement as to the meaning of these terms,
whence we may draw the inference that they had become of small value. Thus Henry
III. granted a charter to the Abbot of Colchester for the purpose of explaining the
words frithsokne, infangenethef and flemenefremth contained in a charter of Richard
I.; see Rot. Cart. Introduction p. xxxvii. There was much doubt as to what was meant
by hengwite and as to the exact limits of the right of utfangenethef. In cases of quo
waranto the king’s advocates are fond of puzzling their adversaries by asking them to
explain what they mean by these old words. Thus the Prior of Drax is asked to
construe sak sok tol et them; “et Prior nichil dicit”; P. Q. W. 211. Still on examination
of the Charter Rolls it will appear that these words were not thrown about quite at
haphazard; thus utfangenethef was much rarer than infangenethef. William Marshall
makes a liberal grant of jurisdiction to Tintern Abbey, but expressly reserves
utfangenethef to himself; Monast. v. 269.

[171 ] Thus compare in Rot. Cart. the charters for the Temple (p. 1), the Hospital (p.
15), Christ Church, Canterbury (p. 24), St. Edmunds (p. 38), which convey grithbrice
etc., with those for Dereham (p. 22), Fontevraud (p. 72), Norwich (p. 81), which
declare that the land is to be free of these things. Sometimes we find an intermediate
formula, e.g. in the charter for Sempringham (p. 18); the land is to be held free of
gritbriche, blodwite etc., and the monks are to have flemenesfrit etc. The point to
which attention is drawn is well illustrated by the charter for the Bishop of Salisbury
(p. 66); the land is to be exempt from blodwite etc. and frankpledge; but on this
follows the qualification “but so that the view of frankpledge be made in the bishop’s
court before our serjeant.” The natural result of declaring the bishop’s land to be free
of frankpledge would be to give the bishop the right of holding the view without the
interference of any royal official. The Bishop of Winchester is asked by what warrant
he claims view of frankpledge; he produces a charter acquitting his lands of
frankpledge; the king’s advocate insists that this does not give him the view and
craves judgment: judgment is reserved; P. Q. W. 83. The same point is taken against
the Hospitallers, ibid. 92: and against the Prior of Coventry, ibid. 242: but in each
case judgment is reserved.

[172 ] Leg. Edw. Conf. 22: “ Tol, quod nos vocamus theloneum, scilicet libertatem
emendi et vendendi in terra sua”; P. Q. W. 275: “ Thol, quite de toun doner”; P. Q. W.
511: “ Tol . . . pro voluntate sua tallagium de villanis suis.”

[173 ] P. Q. W. 275: “ Them, aver progeny de vos humes”; Fleta, f. 62: “ Them
acquietantiam amerciamentorum sequelae propriorum suorum.”

[174 ] Hoveden, ii. 242: “Sackke, interpretatur iurisdictio, id est, curt et justise.”
Camb. Univ. Lib. ms Dd. vii. 6. f. 63 b: “quia sake anglice encheson gallice, et dicitur
for wych sake pur quele encheson.” At Manchester we find a payment called sakfe
(sake-fee): “debet ei sakfe et sectam ad curiam”; Roll for Pasch. 34 Hen. III. (No.
140) m. 7.

[175 ] Maitland, Domesday Book and Beyond, pp. 80, 258.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 547 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[176 ] P. Q. W. 245: “sak, sok, toll et theam quae quidem verba habent referri ad
cur[iam] baron[is] et non ad visum franciplegii.” Keilway’s Reports, 150 b: “chescun
seignior de commen droit avera tiels choses.”

[177 ] The use that could be made of such a word as bloodwite is shown by a case in
P. Q. W. 381–82. The Earl of Lincoln claims to hold plea of all trespasses committed
within his fee, and to proceed either at the suit of a plaintiff or ex officio, provided that
the word bloodwite be not mentioned: if it is mentioned, then his court does not
meddle with the case any more, but leaves it for the county court. Thereupon he is
asked whether he claims to punish a trespasser for wounds or bloodshed. Yes, he
answers, provided that the plaintiff makes no mention of bloodwite. This from
Edward I.’s day.

[178 ] See above p. 608. An early instance is found in Henry II.’s charter for Hurley,
Monast. iii. 434: “Praeterea praecipio et firmiter defendo ne francos suos plegios prior
et homines sui alibi annuatim recenseant nisi in eadem curia S. Mariae et sua.”

[179 ] P. Q. W. 235 (Abbot of Colchester), 275 (Abbot of Westminster); Rot. Cart.
Introd. p. xxxvii.

[180 ] Rot. Cart. 80; John grants to the monks of Norwich “quod visus franciplegii
fiat in curia eorum coram serviente nostro sine admixtione hominum alieni homagii.”

[181 ] P. Q. W. 85, 89, 90, 91, 293–95.

[182 ] P. Q. W. 5, 6, 7, 293.

[183 ] P. Q. W. 297.

[184 ] P. Q. W. 672.

[185 ] P. Q. W. 12.

[186 ] P. Q. W. 125–26, 189, 191–93, 196, 220, 226, 417, 599.

[187 ] Local Government Act 1888, sec. 46; the eastern division of Suffolk (which
represents the liberty of St. Edmund), the isle of Ely, the soke of Peterborough, are
still “administrative counties.”

[188 ] In old documents returnus is certainly commoner than returna.

[189 ] Select Pleas in Manorial Courts, pp. xxv–xxvi; but it was the Abbot of By-land,
not of Kirkstall, who required the king’s justices to sit at Clifton.

[190 ] P. Q. W. 198.

[191 ] Stat. Marlb. c. 9.

[192 ] Select Pleas in Manorial Courts, p. xlviii.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 548 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[193 ] See above, p. 247.

[194 ] As to all this matter, see Select Pleas in Manorial Courts, Introduction. A good
instance of the abandonment of a honorial court is given in Winchcombe Landboc, i.
13: “Aliquando autem omnes liberi maneriorum solebant sequi curiam Winchecombe
de tribus septimanis in tres. Et Abbas Johannes concessit quod face-rent sectam illam
in maneriis.”

[195 ] See above, p. 156.

[196 ] See Hengham Magna, cap. 3. See also Note Book, e.g. pl. 26, proceedings in
the court of the Earl of Warenne carried as far as the first blows of the duel when a
concord was made; pl. 40, proceedings in the court of Margery de Sumery irregularly
removed into the county court; pl. 212, proceedings in the court of the Earl of
Warenne removed into the county court; pl. 1436, lengthy and repeated litigation in
the court of the Bp. of Bath; in one instance the first blows of the duel were struck; pl.
1847, proceedings in the court of the Constable of Chester stayed by a forged writ.
Then see Y. B. Edw. II., f. 263 (Droit), 524 (Droit), 633 (Faux jugement), and 244
(Droit); in this last case a judgment was given in the lord’s court. Though the process
of removing a writ of right from the feudal court was easily accomplished, it involved
an assertion that the lord had made default in justice, and to this the demandant
pledged his oath. A Registrum Brevium in the Cambridge Library, Mm. i. 27,
describes the process thus—The demandant shall come with the bailiff of the hundred
to the lord’s court and bring in his hand his writ and a book [presumably the gospels]
and shall stand on the threshold of the court and swear on the book that he will plead
no further in that court by the writ which he holds in his hand, since the court has
failed to do him justice; and then he shall have a writ to the bailiffs and the sheriff
stating that he has abjured the court and proved its default.

[197 ] See The Court Baron (Selden Soc.), p. 119, where the form of a writ of entry
ad terminum qui praeteriit is adopted.

[198 ] Select Pleas in Manorial Courts, pp. 17, 34, 39, 123, 173.

[199 ] See the precedents in The Court Baron.

[200 ] Y. B. 44 Edw. III. f. 19 (Trin. pl. 14). The same suggestion is made in Y. B.
21–22 Edw. I. p. 157. The answer is “The court is judge.”

[201 ] See above, p. 373.

[202 ] See above, p. 370.

[203 ] Select Pleas in Manorial Courts, i. 49, 50; Mat. Par. Chron. Maj. vi. 438.

[204 ] Select Pleas in Manorial Courts, Introduction, p. lviij. See also Rot. Cur. Regis,
i. 357.

[205 ] The Court Baron, pp. 121, 134.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 549 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[206 ] Select Pleas in Manorial Courts, i. 126 (ad 1301).

[207 ] See above, p. 365.

[208 ] Durham Halmotes, i. pp. xi, xii.

[209 ] Lit. Cantuar. ii. 84, 86, 98, 108.

[210 ] Ibid. 272.

[211 ] Mat. Par. Chron. Maj. vi. 438.

[212 ] See The Court Baron (Selden Soc.).

[213 ] Bracton, f. 98.

[214 ] Select Pleas in Manorial Courts, vol. i. p. lxii; add to the references Y. B. 7
Edw. II. f. 238: six suitors are not enough for a little writ of right in a manor on the
ancient demesne.

[215 ] Munimenta Gildhallae, i. 116.

[216 ] Select Pleas in Manorial Courts, vol. i. pp. lx–lxxiii.

[217 ] The Court Baron, pp. 100, 110.

[218 ] Ibid. p. 101.

[219 ] Select Pleas in Manorial Courts, vol. i. pp. lx–lxxiii.

[220 ] Bracton, f. 212, 434 b.

[221 ] Maitland, Domesday Book and Beyond, 107 ff; and, to the contrary, Tait, E. H.
R. xii. 768.

[222 ] Thus Scriven, Copyholds, i. 1:—“A manor . . . is the district . . . granted by the
ancient kings of this realm to the lords or barons, with liberty to parcel the land out to
inferior tenants, reserving such duties and services as they thought convenient, and
with power to hold a court (from thence called a court baron), for redressing
misdemeanours, punishing the offences of their tenants and settling any disputes of
property between them.” With such a definition as this we cannot face the
question—Why is it said of some tenant in chief that he has fifteen manors, no more
and no less?

[223 ] See above, p. 384.

[224 ] See the instances given by Blakesley in L. Q. R. v. 114–15. Select Pleas in
Manorial Courts, p. 44: “et insuper ad portam manerii dicti domini . . . hutesium
levavit.” Durham Halmote Rolls, p. 11: “homines de Dalton solebant habere

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 550 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

communam cum animalibus suis a porta manerii versus viam de Hesilden.” Ibid. p.
36: “et portas eiusdem manerii fregerunt.” R. H. ii. 578; the Abbot of G holds a manor
in the vill of S which contains 5 acres, and he has in the same vill a garden which
contains 3 acres, and he has there in demesne 8 score acres of land, 20 acres of
pasture, and 4 acres of meadow, and he holds the said manor in almoin; he has also
freehold and servile tenants. At the present day such a name as Dale Manor is often
enough the name of a house.

[225 ] Bracton, f. 212, 434 b.

[226 ] Bodleian, Suffolk Court Rolls, No. 3. It is not here implied that the Eng. hall,
A.-S. heal, has any etymological connexion with Lat. aula; nevertheless the two
words seem to have been treated as exactly equivalent.

[227 ] R. H. ii. 487.

[228 ] Cart. Glouc. iii. 103, et passim. See also in R. H. ii. 695, the Templars’ estate at
Bradwell; ibid. 714, Sampson Foliot holds the manor (expressly so called) of Albury
but has no free tenant; ibid. 715, the Templars’ estate at Merton; ibid. 723, the
Templars’ estate at Littlemore, they have no freeholder, the customary tenants attend
their court.

[229 ] R. H. ii. 638–39; Chron. Petrob. (Camden Soc.), 160, 165.

[230 ] R. H. ii. 620.

[231 ] R. H. ii. 491.

[232 ] R. H. ii. 875.

[233 ] D. B. i. 336.

[234 ] R. H. i. 66.

[235 ] Maitland, Domesday Book and Beyond, 116.

[236 ] R. H. ii. 751.

[237 ] D. B. i. 154.

[238 ] R. H. ii. 160–69.

[239 ] D. B. ii. 283.

[240 ] R. H. i. 265.

[241 ] D. B. i. 338 b.

[242 ] D. B. i. 87 b.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 551 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[243 ] See Note Book, pl. 695.

[244 ] Ord. Vital. ii. 223.

[245 ] Leg. Hen. c. 7 § 7.

[246 ] See the documents of 1188 and 1198 in Stubbs, Select Charters.

[247 ] Stat. 28 Edw. III. c. 11: “et enquestes soient auxint prises en villes . . . par celui
qe est sovereign de la ville.” Compare Stat. 23 Edw. III. (of Labourers) c. 4: “et si
domini villarum vel maneriorum.”

[248 ] Bodleian, Suffolk Court Rolls No. 3:—“Villata dicit quod P. S. et E. C.
fodierunt communam de H. . . . et quia consuetudo villae non est talis, consideratum
est quod P. et E. distringantur.” Duchy of Lancaster Court Rolls, Bundle 62, No.
750:—“Consideratum est per totam villatam.” Select Pleas in Manorial Courts, i. 11:
“Villata presentat.”

[249 ] As a matter of fact the title of the court on its roll will seldom use any of these
terms. The court is simply the court of Mickleton or of Littleton.

[250 ] Bracton, f. 211, speaks of the formation of new vills. Seemingly if in the vill of
A a new group of houses is formed, this may come to be known as the vill of B; but
these houses will be also in the vill of A. In pleading one may describe them
indifferently as in A or in B.

[251 ]Sir Moyle Finch’s Case, 6 Co. Rep. 64. The Statute Quia Emptores had the
effect of preventing the creation (otherwise than by “act of law”) of new manors. But,
in laying down the rule that even the king could not create a new manor, lawyers,
being in this case unable to rely on the statute, invented the wholesome, if
unhistorical, principle that a manor can only come to perfection by continuance of
time.

[252 ] The differentiation of the two terms is marked by a case in Y. B. Edw. II. f. 65.
Counsel says that in ancient times a man might levy a fine of a vill. This remark,
which is true (for see e.g. Fines, ed. Hunter, i. 259), seems to imply that a vill was no
longer regarded as a subject for conveyance. In the case before the court Henry Percy
pleaded that the Abp. of Canterbury held of him four vills. This was rejected, and he
tried to amend his plea by substituting for the four vills a manor to which three vills
are appurtenant.

[253 ] Bracton, f. 434.

[254 ] Durham Halmote Rolls, Introd. p. viii.

[255 ] Thus the tenants of the manor of Bampton Pogeys which is held by Robert
Pogeys must once a year appear in the court of Robert’s lord William of Valence; R.
H. ii. 689.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 552 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[256 ] R. H. ii. 821.

[257 ] R. H. i. 33.

[258 ] R. H. i. 286.

[259 ] R. H. i. 364.

[260 ] R. H. i. 52.

[261 ] R. H. i. 220.

[262 ] Rot. Parl. i. 428.

[263 ] Gage, History of Suffolk, p. xii. ff.

[264 ] R. H. i. 255–56.

[265 ] R. H. i. 8. Entries which seem to imply that if a lord withdraws his land or his
men from the scot and lot of the vill, the rest of the vill suffers, are common enough;
thus e.g. R. H. i. 18, the whole of Eton from Baldwin’s bridge to Windsor bridge used
to be at scot and lot with Windsor, but now it is “subtracted” by the King of Almain.

[266 ] Among the best of the many pamphlets on this subject are, W. H. Hale, The
Antiquity of the Church Rate System (1837); W. Goode, A Brief History of Church
Rates (1838); Robert Swan, The Principle of Church Rates (1837).

[267 ] The first clear tidings that we get as to the incidence of the duty that is cast
upon the parishioners tell us that they contribute “secundum portionem terrae quam
possident in eadem parochia”; Synod of Exeter (1287), Wilkins, Concilia, ii. 138.
John de Athona, Const. Othoboni, can. improbam, gloss. ad v. peragendam, doubts
whether the burden is “real” or “personal,” decides in favour of reality, but on either
side alleges nothing beyond ineptitudes out of Cole and Digest. In 1275 the township
of Graveley contracts with a mason for the repair of a wall of the church; he is to have
3 s. 2 d. for the work and a garb of wheat from every house; “the attorney of the
township” sued him in the fair of St. Ives; Select Pleas in Manorial Courts, p. 150. In
1370 we see parishioners assembled, making a regular rate and distraining for it; but it
seems exceedingly doubtful whether their resolution binds one who has not assented
to it; Y. B. 44 Edw. III. f. 18 (Trin. pl. 13). This case does not look as if a “vestry”
had an old and well-established power of granting, assessing and enforcing a rate. As
to the church-wardens, they become prominent enough in the Year Books of the
fifteenth century; but even then some elementary principles seem to be in dispute; see
e.g. Y. B. 11 Hen. IV. f. 12 (Mich. pl. 23); 8 Hen. V. f. 4 (Hil. pl. 15); 37 Hen. VI. f.
30 (Trin. pl. 11). The Synod of Exeter in 1287 (see above) had said, “Ornamenta
ecclesiae securae custodiae committantur, non tamen sub custodia laicorum, nisi id
necessitas maior expostulaverit.” The Church-wardens’ Accounts edited by Bishop
Hobhouse in 1890 for the Somerset Record Society point to the conclusion that in the
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries the making and enforcement of a compulsory
church-rate was a rare event; indeed the learned editor (p. 231) says that he knows of

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 553 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

but one case before the reign of Elizabeth. The church-wardens seem to have got the
money that they needed by means of voluntary gifts and legacies and of “church-ales”
which opened the purses of the parishioners.

[268 ] The very fact that the mode of assessment was often changed points to the
conclusion that there was no permanent organization apt for the purpose. In 1188 the
individual taxpayer assesses himself but is liable to be checked by the lord’s steward
and the parish priest; if they dispute the correctness of his estimate, four or six of his
fellow parishioners are sworn to assess him. In 1198 the vill is represented by the lord
of the vill or his bailiff, the reeve and four men. In 1207 the taxpayers declare their
own liability. So in 1225 the taxpayer swears as to his own goods and those of two of
his next neighbours, differences being referred to a jury of twelve. In 1232 four men
are to be chosen (eligantur) in each vill, and they with the reeve are to make the
assessment. In 1237 four men are to be chosen (eligi) in each vill to make the
assessment. See the writs in Stubbs, Select Charters.

[269 ] Rot. Parl. i. 239, 240, 269, 442, 445, 450, 457; ii. 447.

[270 ] Rot. Parl. ii. 184–89, 213.

[271 ] Statute of Winchester, 13 Edw. I.

[272 ] Stat. 27 Eliz. c. 13. sec. 4: “And although the whole hundred where such
robberies and felonies are committed . . . are by the said statutes . . . charged with the
answering to the party robbed his damages; yet nevertheless the recovery and
execution . . . is had against one or a very few persons of the said inhabitants, and he
and they . . . have not heretofore by law had any mean or way to have any
contribution of or from the residue of the said hundred.”

[273 ] Agricultural Community (transl. Ouvry), p. 60.

[274 ] R. H. ii. 529–34.

[275 ] Note Book, pl. 174, 330, 628, 839, 971, 1721; Year Book, Edw. II. f. 170, 183,
314, 327, 330. In Somersham the Bp of Ely had a great wood of 300 acres in which
the men of the townships of Warboys, Woodhurst, Waldhurst, St. Ives, Needingworth
and Holywell, all of which belonged to the Abbot of Ramsey, had common together
with the men of the bishop’s large soke of Somersham; R. H. ii. 605; Cart. Rams. i.
283. See also Domesday Book and Beyond, 355.

[276 ] Note Book, pl. 174. The jurors cannot tell the limits of Billinghay and North
Kyme in Lincolnshire, for there are marshes in which the men of these two vills
intercommon.

[277 ] Reg. Malmesb. ii. 153–65. For another instance see ibid. ii. 185.

[278 ] In general a man could not get to a strip in the middle of an open field without
crossing the strips of his neighbours. Only as a rare exception was the strip bounded
by a cart-track.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 554 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[279 ] Williams, Rights of Common, p. 31.

[280 ] Scrutton, Commons and Common Fields, ch. 2.

[281 ] Bracton, f. 230, 230 b; Note Book, pl. 561. Bracton says that if in the same vill
there are two neighbours who hold of the same barony and the same fee, then there is
common between them, or rather not common, but a right which he prefers to call
vicinitas, vicinage. Strictly construed this will mean that if in the same vill there are
two freehold tenements held of the same manor there will be this “vicinage-right”
between them, for if the two tenements are of the same manor then they must be of
the same barony and the same [great] fee, unless indeed there is no barony or honour
in the case at all. Also strictly construed it will mean that a freehold tenant of a manor
will always have common or “vicinage-right” over any waste of his lord that lies in
the same vill, and that the lord will have a similar right over his tenant’s waste, for
lord and tenant will be neighbours holding of the same barony or honour, though they
stand on different degrees of the feudal scale. Thus we should get the rule that in any
usual case the freeholder has a right to turn out beasts on his lord’s waste without
proving grant or prescription. It may be doubted, however, whether Bracton meant so
much as this. The case that he had in view seems to have been that of two peers of the
same tenure each of whom has a manor in one and the same vill. But his doctrine is
not very plain.

[282 ] Vinogradoff, Villainage, 265–72.

[283 ] It is true that the often-discussed case Fitz. Abr. Comen, 26 (now printed in
Bracton’s Note Book, pl. 1975), may look the other way; but the language of the
Statute, of Bracton’s text, of the note in Note Book, pl. 1881, and the following
extract from a plea roll of 1221, are in favour of what is here said. “De illis qui habent
magnas terras et non possunt essartare de terra sua vel pastura pro illis qui habent
unam virgatam terrae cum sufficienter habere poterunt communam.” This is found on
a roll which was formerly numbered as Coram Rege Roll, Hen. III. No. 14, m. 31. It
seems to be a note made by justices in eyre of a matter that requires reform.

[284 ] Oxford English Dictionary.

[285 ] Note Book, pl. 1662.

[286 ]Gateward’s Case, 6 Co. Rep. 59 b.

[287 ] We gave an account of this case in our first edition, vol. i. p. 623.

[288 ] See Fitz. Abridg. Assise, pl. 413, an extremely ill-printed case, seemingly of
Edward I.’s time. Apparently however a freeholder was held bound by a by-law to
which he had not assented, directing that trenches in the fen in which he had a right of
cutting turf should be filled up. See also Y. B. 44 Edw. III. f. 18, 19 (Trin. pl. 13),
where it is asserted and denied that commoners would be bound by a by-law to the
effect that no one should turn out his beasts before a certain day.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 555 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[289 ] This point is brought out by some of the manorial extents, e.g. those in Cart.
Rams., where it is specially noted of some freeholder that he participates wholly or in
part “cum villata.”

[290 ] Nasse, Agricultural Community (transl. Ouvry), pp. 42–45. But we cannot find
any evidence of oxen that belonged to the community. As to the “common boat” of
Newton, which Nasse mentions, doubtless the lord was the owner of it.

[291 ] Durham Halmotes, pp. 23, 29, 34 etc.:—“reddendo antiquam firmam et
faciendo domino et vicinis quae incumbunt.” In this paragraph we shall cite these
interesting rolls, though they belong to the fourteenth century.

[292 ] Ibid. pp. 56, 63:—“nec aliqua vicinitas inde fit vicinis”; “nec invenire unum
tenentem qui potest tenere vicinitatem.”

[293 ] Durham Halmotes, passim.

[294 ] Ibid. p. 83.

[295 ] Ibid. p. 20.

[296 ] Ibid. p. 22.

[297 ] See Skeat, Dict. s.v. by-law. There seems no doubt that the word bylaw means
townshiplaw; it often occurs in the form byrlawe.

[298 ] See e.g. Durham Halmotes, where two formulas are constantly repeated,
“Iniunctum est omnibus tenentibus villae,” “Ordinatum est ex communi assensu.”

[299 ] Durham Halmotes, p. 45.

[300 ] Ibid. p. 45.

[301 ] Ibid. p. 90.

[302 ] Ibid. pp. 39, 49.

[303 ] Ibid. p. 35.

[304 ] Ibid. pp. 49, 50.

[305 ] Ibid. pp. 35, 39.

[306 ] Ibid. pp. 33, 40. Two men have just been proved to be nativi when a command
against the use of this word is issued.

[307 ] There are many cases on the Littleport rolls in which offenders are “removed
from the vill.”

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 556 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[308 ] Durham Halmotes, p. 46: G. F. is ordered to manure his land and to remove the
crops that are growing on it without the lord’s licence and to behave like his
neighbours on pain of losing the land.

[309 ] Note Book, pl. 161: “Nota quod liber homo non tenetur sequi molendinum
domini sui nisi gratis velit.”

[310 ] Durham Halmotes, p. 69.

[311 ] Ibid. p. 109.

[312 ] Ibid. pp. 51, 73, 75.

[313 ] Madox, Firma Burgi, 54–56.

[314 ] Worcester Register, p. 47 a: “Curia cum pertinenciis et duae carucatae terrae de
dominico cum pratis et proventibus et herietis et vilenagio traditae sunt villanis ad
firmam.”

[315 ] See the survey of Hallow; on p. 49 b the firmarius is mentioned.

[316 ] R. H. ii. 307: “ballivi de Tychill nunquam cessaverunt occasionare villatam de
Blida, gravando illam villatam per plures districtiones iniustas sibi factas.”

[317 ] What is the legal nature of the old German community (Genossenschaft)? Is it
a group of co-owners? Is it an universitas? Is it tertium quid? This question raised by
Beseler (Volksrecht und Juristenrecht, Leipzig, 1843, pp. 158 ff.) has of late found
many answers. See Gierke, Deutsche Genossenschaftsrecht; Heusler, Institutionen, i.
253 ff.; Sohm, Die deutsche Genossenschaft, Leipzig, 1889.

[318 ] Ann. Dunstap. 378.

[319 ] Ibid. 392.

[320 ] See also Madox, Firma Burgi, 41. Under Edward III. it was alleged that the
community of the vill of Tetsworth, in Oxfordshire, had given a house and garden to
the church of that vill; but the Bishop of Lincoln proved that this was untrue; he and
his predecessors had always been seised of the premises.

[321 ] Firma Burgi, 110.

[322 ] Assize Roll, Lincoln, No. 481 (57 Hen. III.): “ A. B. et C. D. pro se et tota
communitate villatae de Helpingham optulerunt se versus E. F. et totam
communitatem villae de Donyngton, et G. H., J. K. de Bykere et totam communitatem
eiusdem villae de placito, quare cum mariscus de Helpingham exaquari vel assewari
debeat et soleat per cursum cuiusdam aquae in mariscum in Donington et Bykere
secundum consuetudinem et usum marisci quem cursum praedicti A. B. et alii et
praedictae communitates reparare et sustinere debent et solebant etc.” The necessity

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 557 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

of maintaining sewers, sluices, and water-gates sometimes gave rise to elaborate
treaties between the freeholders of a large district. See, e.g. Selby Coucher, ii. 286.

[323 ] Actions by or against “the men” of places that are not boroughs will be found
in Placit. Abbrev. pp. 2, 3, 24, 32, 95, 133, 140. The case on p. 95 is instructive:—
”The men of Thanet” complain that the Abbot of St. Augustine’s has exacted undue
services, and they put in their place thirty named men to sue for them; their claim fails
and they are adjudged to be in mercy, “save the other men of Thanet who took the
abbot’s part.” Thus, after all, the plaintiffs are not all the men of Thanet, nor do they
represent all. Then on p. 140 there is an action of trespass by the Abbot of Faversham
against “the alderman and the whole community of that vill.” Judgment for damages
is given against “all the men of Faversham” except four named persons. Here again,
each individual “man” is acquitted or convicted on his own merits. See also Madox,
Firma Burgi, 65: the king and “the king’s men of Headington” complain in the
Exchequer that the Prior of St. Frideswide has withheld from the said men a
customary dinner. No doubt many other instances might be found; but, having regard
to the number of vills in England and to the frequency of actions in which the
boroughs take part, such instances seem very rare.

[324 ] Domesday Book and Beyond, pp. 221 ff.

[325 ] E. A. Freeman, Macmillan’s Magazine, 1889, p. 20.

[326 ] Parl. Writs, i. 119, 120.

[327 ] Madox, Firma Burgi, p. 128.

[328 ] Placit. Abbrev. p. 98; Co. Lit. 109 b.

[329 ] Firma Burgi, chap. vi.

[330 ] See Gross, Bibliography of Municipal History (Harvard Historical Studies,
1897).

[331 ] In Gierke’s Genossenschaftsrecht the student will find an admirable model for
the work that has yet to be done for England; it has induced us to recast this section of
our book. Many sides of the subject have been excellently treated by Madox, Dr.
Stubbs, Dr. Gross and Mrs. Green; but just the legal side has received too little
attention. The History of Boroughs by Merewether and Stephens seems to us, for all
its industry, to be a long mistake.

[332 ] See Maitland, Domesday Book, p. 172; also Maitland, Township and Borough,
Cambridge, 1898.

[333 ] Not necessarily of one of the counties of a later time.

[334 ] For these knights, see Gross, Gild Merchant, i. 183. For arguments against this
theory see Tait, E. H. R. xii. 773.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 558 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[335 ] It is not implied that all of these characteristics would be found in every
borough. It is highly improbable that strict definition was possible in the tenth and
impossible in the thirteenth century.

[336 ] The king can convey away his lordship; but in England it is not common to
find a borough of high rank that has been mediatized. Leicester is the great example.

[337 ] See Liebermann, Das englische Gilde im achten Jahrhundert, Archiv für das
Studium der neueren Sprachen, xcvi. 333; also Gross, Gild Merchant, i. 174 ff.

[338 ] In very recent days Ipswich was “bossed” by a Wellington Club and
Cambridge by a Rutland Club. See also the story of Coventry as told by Mrs. Green,
Town Life, ii. 205 ff.

[339 ] See Flach, Les origines de l’ancienne France, ii. 213 ff., especially 348. Also
the entry touching Rhuddlan in D. B. i. 269, and Somma, p. 98. At this point Les
Coutumes de Lorris, ed. Prou, 1884, are full of instructive matter.

[340 ] Thus the Abbot of Bec has burgage tenants at Atherstone in Warwickshire:
Select Pleas in Manorial Courts, i. 40–41. So the Abbot of Malmesbury had burgage
tenants at Pilton in Devonshire, Reg. Malmesb. ii. 34.

[341 ] In Edward III.’s reign the men of Bakewell in Derbyshire successfully prove
their right to appear by twelve men; P. Q. W. 138. The eyre and hundred rolls show a
good many “manors,” especially ancient demesne manors, appearing in this way, and
it must be remembered that the manors of the ancient demesne were in some respects
taxed like cities and boroughs.

[342 ] Riess, Geschichte des Wahlrechts zum englischen Parlament, 19, 20.

[343 ] Riess, op. cit. 23.

[344 ] Jocelin of Brakeland, p. 73. The charter is given in a Bury Register; Camb.
Univ. Lib. Ff. ii. 33, f. 64 b.

[345 ] Parl. Writs, i. 123.

[346 ] Gross, Gild Merchant, ii. 33–35.

[347 ] See Pike, Introduction to Y. B. 16 Edw. III., Vol. 1, for an interesting
discussion of the case of Wells.

[348 ] Co. Lit. 108 b. See Stubbs, Const. Hist. iii. 448–50; Riess, Geschichte des
Wahlrechts.

[349 ] Besides the various borough charters we shall rely on the Munimenta
Gildhallae, the Domesday of Ipswich (Black Book of the Admiralty, vol. ii.), the
Records of Nottingham (ed. Stevenson), the Records of Northampton (ed. 1898), the
Records of Leicester, of which by Miss Bateson’s permission we have seen proof-

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 559 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

sheets, the Leet Jurisdiction in Norwich (Selden Soc.), a Norwich Custumal, a
manuscript copy of which has been kindly lent to us by the Rev. W. Hudson, the
Winchester Custumal (the French version of which is given by Smirke, Archaeol.
Journal, ix. 69, and the English version by Toulmin Smith, English Gilds, 349), the
Custumals of the Cinque Ports printed at the end of Lyon’s History of Dover, vol. ii.,
and the Custumal of Preston, printed in Dobson and Harland, History of Preston
Guild. Dr. Gross’s Bibliography of Municipal History, New York, 1897, is an
admirable guide.

[350 ] Munimenta Gildhallae, i. 102–12. Mr. Riley in his marginal notes misses the
distinction between compurgation and trial by jury. Select Pleas of the Crown, i. pl.
82.

[351 ] Munim. Gild. i. 114, 195; Ipswich Domesday, p. 66; Norwich Custumal, c. 17;
Records of Northampton, i. 234, 477.

[352 ] Reg. Brev. Orig. f. 2 b.

[353 ] Riley, Chronicle, p. 51. Select Pleas in Manorial Courts, i. 138–60.

[354 ] See the account of the eyre of Edward II.’s day at the Tower of London which
lasted for twenty-four weeks; Munimenta Gildhallae, vol. ii. pp. lxxxiv–c., 285–432.

[355 ] Records of Nottingham, i. 40. Only in 1255 did Nottingham acquire it.
Northampton in 1257: Records of Northampton, i. 46. Cambridge in 1256: Cooper,
Annals, i. 46.

[356 ] Maitland, Township and Borough, p. 71.

[357 ] Placit. Abbrev. 310 (London).

[358 ] R. H. i. 354.

[359 ] Munim. Gild. i. 64–65.

[360 ] P. Q. W. 456.

[361 ] P. Q. W. 472.

[362 ] P. Q. W. 472. Munim. Gild. ii. 149–51.

[363 ] Records of Nottingham, i. 124, 186.

[364 ] Records of Nottingham, i. 70, 100.

[365 ] Lyon, Dover, ii. 274.

[366 ] Maitland, Possession for Year and Day, Law Quarterly Review, v. 253. This
privilege was granted to Bury by the abbot; the person protected must have “legally

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 560 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

acquired” the tenement; Registrum Sacristae, Camb. Univ. Libr. Ff. ii. 33. f. 64 b. See
also Customs of Winchester, Archaeol. Journal, ix. 74; apparently when a citizen of
Winchester wishes to make a conveyance of land he presents the charter to the
aldermen; thereupon “the ban” is cried; then after three days the charter is sealed with
the city’s seal; then after quiet possession for year and day the purchaser is safe. See
also as to the custom of Northampton, a note by Mr. Green in L. Q. R. xiii. 116, and
Records of Northampton, i. 459 ff.

[367 ] Records of Northampton, i. 214.

[368 ] As to the London “gavelet” see Muniment. Gildh. i. 62; see also the Winchester
custom, Archaeol. Journal, ix. 76, and the Reading custom, Cunningham, Growth of
English Industry, ed. 3, i. 618, and the Northampton custom, Records of
Northampton, i. 218.

[369 ] See above, p. 453.

[370 ] Records of Nottingham, i. 1.

[371 ] Leg. Will. Conq. iii. c. 13 (Schmid, p. 356.)

[372 ] On this subject see Stubbs, Hoveden, vol. ii. p. xxxviii. It is true that we read in
Glanvill and a few charters of the privilege as existing in certain boroughs before we
hear of it as existing on the royal demesne lands; but in general the peculiarities of the
ancient demesne are regarded as very ancient; they are supposed to represent the
conquest settlement. In 1313 the would-be law or charter of the Conqueror was
pleaded by persons who were living in Norwich: Placit. Abbrev. p. 316. In 1308
Simon of Paris was imprisoned as a villein; he brought an action and the plea that he
was a citizen and alderman of London was not received: Y. B. 1 Edw. II. f. 4. At
Norwich no one could become a citizen unless he was already a freeman: Norwich
Custumal, cap. 36. This was true of London also: Munim. Gildh. i. 33. See Gross,
Gild Merchant, i. 30.

[373 ] Maitland, Township and Borough, p. 213.

[374 ] D. B. i. 1.

[375 ] Firma Burgi, 18–20; Gross, Gild Merchant, i. 6.

[376 ] The transaction is sometimes called a feoffment; e.g. R. H. i. 61: King John
enfeoffed the burgesses of Derby.

[377 ] As to the escheat of lauds in London, see above, pp. 679–80.

[378 ] R. H. ii. 356 ff.

[379 ] R. H. ii. 392.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 561 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[380 ] The doctrine which gives the soil of high-ways to the owners of the adjoining
lands is not, we are persuaded, of very ancient origin; but this matter cannot be
discussed here.

[381 ] R. H. i. 124–26.

[382 ] See Beckettv.Corporation of Leeds, L. R. 7 Ch. 421.

[383 ] See the account of Lincoln, R. H. i. 397–98. Ibid. i. 203, Canterbury.

[384 ] Munimenta Gildhallae, ii. 95, 274.

[385 ] As to all this matter see Maitland, Township and Borough, 185 ff.

[386 ] Gross, Gild Merchant, ii. 122.

[387 ] Ibid. ii. 192.

[388 ] Maitland, Township and Borough, 161.

[389 ] It is in this quarter that Bracton, f. 228 b, already sees some specific peculiarity
of the cities and boroughs, “Item [servitus poterit esse] personalis tantum . . . item
localis et non certis personis, sicut alicuius universitatis burgensium et civium.” The
context shows that he is thinking of pasture rights. In the case of a borough you have a
right of pasture that is not “real,” nor “personal,” but “local.” It is not annexed to a
house, nor granted to specific persons, but is exercised by all members of an
universitas.

[390 ] Small fees taken from those who turned out beasts might go toward the
provision of a town bull.

[391 ] Stat. 15 Ric. II. c. 5.

[392 ] See above, p. 353.

[393 ] In our first edition too little notice was taken of the right which the burgensic
community (ut universitas) may have in the “waste” or “common” land of the vill.
See Green, Town Life, ii. 237. An attempt has been made to repair the default
elsewhere: Maitland, Township and Borough.

[394 ] Maitland, Township and Borough, pp. 77–79. See also Records of
Northampton, i. 96.

[395 ] At a later time many of the rents were reduced on the score of the poverty of
the towns, and, though we must not believe all the plaintive tales that the burgesses
tell about the “destruction” of their bailiffs, it seems fairly plain that the rents were
heavy. See e.g. the story of Bedford, where the rent was reduced from £46 to £20;
Munic. Com. Rep. 1835, iv. 2104; also Maitland, Township and Borough, 77; Hist.
ms Com. xi. 3, p. 4, Southampton.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 562 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[396 ] The Records of Leicester are especially valuable at this point.

[397 ] Maitland, Township and Borough, 205 ff.; for Lynn, Hist. ms Com. xi. 3, p.
213 ff.

[398 ] See Gierke, D. G. R. ii. 754.

[399 ] See the section on Movable Goods in our second volume. The quasi-
corporateness of our modern clubs etc. is rendered possible by a law of trusts which is
not medieval.

[400 ] Schmid, Gesetze, p. 434. See Round, Geoffrey de Mandeville, p. 347.

[401 ] Stubbs, Const. Hist. i. 674.

[402 ] See above, p. 517.

[403 ] Hudson, Archaeological Journal, vol. xlvi. p. 293.

[404 ] See the extracts from the Mickletorn rolls in Records of Nottingham, vol. i.

[405 ] Norwich was divided into four leets. See Leet Jurisdiction in Norwich (Selden
Soc.).

[406 ] See Nottingham Records, e.g. vol. i. p. 315, and compare Hudson’s
Introduction to Leet Jurisdiction in Norwich.

[407 ] Manchester Court Leet Records; Leader, Records of Sheffield, p. xl.

[408 ] Green, Town Life, ii. 341 (Nottingham); Dormer Harris, Life in an Old English
Town (Coventry).

[409 ] Gross, Gild Merchant, ii. 115.

[410 ] Ipswich Domesday, p. 167.

[411 ] For London, see Stubbs, Const. Hist. iii. § 809.

[412 ] Perhaps we may have to distinguish cases in which an old body of dooms-men
or lawmen develops into a council from others in which a council is newly and
deliberately instituted. In Germany the relation of the Stadtrat to an older
Schöffenkolleg has been much discussed. See Keutgen, Ursprung der deutschen
Stadtverfas-sung, 218 ff.

[413 ] Munic. Corp. Rep. 1835, vol. ii. p. 899 (Winchester); p. 760 (Maidstone, where
the general assembly bears the name of Burghmote); vol. iv. p. 2188 (Cambridge); p.
2306 (Ipswich).

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 563 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[414 ] We must carefully distinguish between (a) the development of a council within
the burgensic body, and (b) the differentiation of a definite, and it may be small,
burgensic body from the mass of inhabitants. Of the latter change we shall speak
below. Though both processes may result in “oligarchy,” they are very different. For
the town councils of the fifteenth century, see Green, Town Life, ii. 268 ff.

[415 ] Munim. Gildh. i. pp. xxx. 319.

[416 ] Ibid. ii. 86.

[417 ] Munim. Gild. ii. 64.

[418 ] Ibid. ii. 385–407.

[419 ] Ibid. ii. 405.

[420 ] Riley, Chronicles of Old London, p. 171.

[421 ] Munim. Gildh. ii. 386. The fishmongers of the Fish Wharf say that they can get
no redress in the city courts for their adversaries “sount mestres et menours de la dite
cité.”

[422 ] See Select Pleas of the Crown, pl. 137, for an early instance. In 1221 the men
of Worcester confess to having “provided” that no one shall sell victuals before the
hour of prime. At Norwich there might be no buying or selling until the bell had rung
for the mass of our Lady: Norwich Custumal, c. 37. The Ipswich Domesday contains
a good many rules which are said to be ordained by the commonalty, though as a
whole it was regarded as a statement of ancient customs. It was to contain (p. 18) “the
laws and usages of the town beforetime used so near as the same could be set forth (a
plus pres que hom les peot par bon avisement estimer).”

[423 ] R. H. i. 108: the citizens of Scarborough have taken murage for two years
beyond the time for which it was granted to them. In 1325 a request for murage
preferred by the same burgesses is refused by the king; Rot. Parl. i. 423.

[424 ] R. H. i. 403 ff. especially 411. There is a great deal about this matter in the
Liber de Antiquis Legibus. See also the complaint from Northampton, R. H. ii. 2.

[425 ] However in 1237 the Londoners had already been engaged in making a conduit
to bring the Tyburn water to the city; Munimenta Gildhallae, vol. ii. p. 66.

[426 ] See the passages descriptive of scot and lot in Gross, Gild Merchant, i. 53–59.

[427 ] Munim. Gildh. vol. ii. p. 273.

[428 ] Gross, Gild Merchant, ii. 115–23.

[429 ] Rot. Cart. 56.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 564 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[430 ] Gross, Gild Merchant, i. 22; Hudson, Constitution of Norwich, Archaeol.
Journ. vol. xlvi. p. 324. See also Mr. Stevenson’s remark in Records of Nottingham, i.
188. The Ipswich Domesday seems to show that in that town the gild had nothing to
do with governmental affairs.

[431 ] Rot. Cart. 57.

[432 ] See the complaint against the community of Lynn; R. H. i. 461; also the
complaint against the men of Bedford; P. Q. W. 18.

[433 ] See in Gross, Gild Merchant, vol. ii. under Andover, Guildford, Leicester,
Totnes; also Records of Leicester (ed. Bateson) passim, e.g. p. 180.

[434 ] Riley, Chronicles, pp. 11, 15, 18, 22.

[435 ] Munim. Gildh. i. 251 ff.; see especially pp. 280–98.

[436 ] R. H. i. 309, 315, 322.

[437 ] P. Q. W. 18. See the assertion of the Abbot of Bury, Gross, Gild Merchant, ii.
34.

[438 ] See Gross, Gild Merchant, i. 93.

[439 ] See above, p. 529.

[440 ] Must we say, for example, that the University of Cambridge (which is a
corporation by prescription) is feigned by the law to be a person, because the law first
feigns that by some charter granted before the time of Richard I. some king said in
effect that there was to be this fiction? That this story would contradict some known
facts in the history of the University seems the least of its demerits.

[441 ] Stubbs, Const. Hist. i. 454.

[442 ] Even the Italian lawyers, whose doctrines at a later time affect our English law,
are inclined to admit that there are certain kinds of corporations which are permitted
by the general law, and which therefore can and may be formed without any special
licence from the ruler. The universitas requires at his hands approbation, rather than
creation, and this approbation may be considered as given in advance and by general
law to corporations formed for certain laudable objects. See Gierke, D. G. R. iii. 206,
288, 368, 436. Many legists admitted that the corporate character can be acquired by
prescription. Ibid. 369.

[443 ] Ipswich Domesday, p. 129.

[444 ] For the parallel process in Germany, see Gierke, D. G. R. ii. 692. King John
had licensed the sworn commune in many French towns; see Giry, Établissements de
Rouen, passim.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 565 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[445 ] It seems highly improbable that the oath to maintain the liberties of the town
was developed out of the oath of allegiance.

[446 ] See the early instances from Ipswich in Gross, Gild Merchant, ii. 123 ff. See
also Ipswich Domesday, p. 153; Norwich Customal, c. 36. For a complaint of the sale
of citizenship in London, see R. H. i. 405.

[447 ] Sometimes a charter bestows privileges on the son of a burgess in his father’s
lifetime; see for Newcastle, Acts of Parl. of Scotland, i. 33, 34; Records of
Chesterfield, 33. Compare Gierke, D. G. R. ii. 694; and Records of Leicester, p. 219.

[448 ] They were Schutzgenossen, but not Vollgenossen. So in the German towns
there will be “passive burghers,” Bürger ohne Bürgerrecht. See Gierke, D. G. R. ii.
299, 702. The position of the Scholars in the universitas of Masters and Scholars is
similar.

[449 ] Registr. Malmesbur. ii. 34.

[450 ] See above, p. 272.

[451 ] Rot. Cart. 206.

[452 ] Y. B. 49 Edw. III. f. 6 (Hil. pl. 10); Gross, Gild Merchant, ii. 177 ff.

[453 ] Note Book, pl. 16, 145.

[454 ] Note Book, 294, 314, 489, 577, 589, 952, 1429. The Norwich Custumal c. 13
provides that when cognizance is claimed for the civic court the costs of the
proceeding shall be paid by the defendant, but, if he cannot pay, then the chamberlain
of the city must pay. The claim of cognizance is treated as a matter which is of great
importance to all the citizens.

[455 ] An early example, from 1225, will be found in Nottingham Records, i. 18– 20:
the burgesses of Retford and their successors are to hold of the burgesses of
Nottingham and their successors. See Gross, Gild Merchant, i. 95. The new phrase
makes its way but slowly into royal charters; the chancery was conservative.
However, for an early example of “heirs and successors” in a royal document see
John’s charter for Waterford: Chartae, Privilegia et Immunitates, Irish Record
Commission, p. 13.

[456 ] The phrase which tells us how a corporation may “hold land in succession” is a
misdescription of what really happens. Littleton and Coke make some good remarks
about the use of the words “and their successors” in Y. B. 39 Hen. VI. f. 13 (Mich. pl.
17).

[457 ] Apparently in Germany the style which purports to grant liberties “to the
citizens, their heirs and successors” yielded at what Englishmen must call a very early
date to the style which treats “the city” as the recipient of the chartered rights. See
Gierke, D. G. R. ii. 627 ff.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 566 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[458 ] Thus, in spite of Mrs. Green’s able arguments (Town Life, ii. 231), we are
inclined to think that in early documents the same thought can be and is expressed by
(1) Nos maior et burgenses, (2) Nos maior et communitas villae, (3) Nos maior et
burgenses et tota communitas villae. The last of these phrases aims at showing that
the mayor and burgesses are not to be taken ut singuli, but are, as we should say,
“acting in their corporate capacity.”

[459 ] Riley, Chronicles, p. 84: the Londoners prayed that only the guilty might be
punished.

[460 ] P. Q. W. 160.

[461 ] Placit. Abbrev. 199.

[462 ] Placit. Abbrev. 273.

[463 ] Stat. 49 & 50 Vic. c. 38. The claim for compensation is now made to “the
police authority” and paid out of the police rate.

[464 ] The talk about “fictitious” personality did not prevent the legists nor, with
some exceptions, the canonists from holding that an universitas can commit a crime
and be punished for it. On the contrary, they went great lengths in the punishment of
corporations; some of them were prepared to say that if a civitas commits a capital
crime, such as treason, aratro decapitetur. See Gierke, D. G. R. iii. 234, 342, 402,
491, 738. In modern America the old doctrines which would deprive a corporation of
corporate existence if it abused its power have borne new fruit, and joint-stock
companies have learned the meaning of quo waranto.

[465 ] Firma Burgi, c. 3. See above, p. 661.

[466 ] Firma Burgi, p. 157.

[467 ] See above, p. 689.

[468 ] Stat. West. ii. c. 18, which introduces the writ of elegit.

[469 ] In the fifteenth century the notion of pure corporate liability was being grasped;
see above, p. 520. For the growth of Italian doctrine, see Gierke, D. G. R. iii. 214,
379. A subsidiary liability of the singuli for the debt of the universitas was maintained
by many writers.

[470 ] Note Book, pl. 16: the burgesses of Scarborough complain of the bailiffs of
York; the complaint is answered by the mayor, reeve and bailiffs; pl. 145: the
burgesses of Beverley complain of the bailiffs of Lincoln; the complaint is answered
by the mayor and bailiffs. Placit. Abbrev. p. 148: the whole county of
Huntingdonshire sues the burgesses of Huntingdon. See Firma Burgi, ch. 7. For cases
in which the homines of places that are not boroughs appear, see above, p. 666. In
1275 the little township of Graveley “by its attorney” brings an action in the court of
the Fair of St. Ives; Select Pleas in Manorial Courts, p. 150.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 567 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[471 ] Placit. Abbrev. 65 (temp. Joh.).

[472 ] Firma Burgi, p. 96.

[473 ] Firma Burgi, p. 97 (temp. Edw. II.).

[474 ] Y. B. 19 Hen. VI. f. 80 (Trin. pl. 11).

[475 ] Bracton, f. 228 b.

[476 ] Placit. Abbrev. 273 (temp. Edw. I.): “et factum maioris in hiis que tangunt
communitatem est factum ipsius communitatis.”

[477 ] R. H. ii. 5.

[478 ] Select Pleas in Manorial Courts, pp. 134–35; but the remarks there made about
the gild merchant are withdrawn. This is the point of a clause common in borough
charters to the effect that a burgess shall not be distrained for a debt for which he is
neither principal debtor nor pledge. See in particular Records of Nottingham, i. 40. In
1275 (Stat. West. I. c. 23) this was made a general statutory rule so far as Englishmen
were concerned. Not until 1353 was the benefit of the new rule extended to alien
merchants. See Stat. 27 Edw. III. st. 2, c. 17; Fleta, p. 136; Coke, Second Institute,
204.

[479 ] Madox, Firma Burgi, c. 8: “Anciently a corporate community might be
answerable for the trespass or debt of particular persons members thereof; and
particular members for the trespass or debt of the community.” Sohm, Die deutsche
Genossenschaft, p. 19: “Die Genossenschaft haftet für die Schulden der Genossen,
und der Genosse haftet für die Schulden der Genossenschaft. Beide Sätze gehen durch
das ganze Mittelalter.”

[480 ] Gross, Gild Merchant, ii. 119, 121.

[481 ] An impression of the common seal used at Nottingham in 1225 may be seen in
the frontispiece of Nottingham Records, vol. i.

[482 ] See above, p. 563.

[483 ] Merewether and Stephens, History of Boroughs, p. 443, mention fifteen places
which had seals, but “which have never been incorporated.” But most, if not all, of
them had at one time or another a claim to be called boroughs, and many of them
were told to send members to Parliament in Edward I.’s reign. As early as 1296 the
parishioners of St. Mary Magdalen at Oxford had a common seal. See Blakiston,
Durham College Rolls, Oxford Hist. Soc. Collectanea, iii. pp. vi, 26.

[484 ] See above, pp. 663–64.

[485 ] For the development of practice and theory touching the power of majorities,
see Gierke, D. G. R. ii. 478; iii. 220, 322, 392, 470.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 568 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313



Online Library of Liberty: The History of English Law before the Time of Edward I, vol. 1

[486 ] See above, p. 687.

[487 ] Take for instance the transaction chronicled in Reg. Malmesb. ii. 150–55. The
abbot and convent quit-claim “to the burgesses who are of the gild merchant of
Malmesbury their heirs and assigns” all right of pasture in certain land. On the other
hand, A. B, alderman of the gild, C. D and E. F, stewards of the gild, seventeen other
named persons, “and the whole intrinsic community of the said vill and of the gild
merchant,” declare that “they” have quit-claimed to the abbey part of “their” heath
called Portmanneshethe, and that none of the said community nor any of their
successors or heirs will claim any right therein, and thereto they set their common
seal.

[488 ] Records of Nottingham, i. 19.

[489 ] See above, pp. 523, 688.

[490 ] We are not hinting at any formal or thorough reception of the Italian doctrine,
but certain of its phrases became part of the common inheritance of educated
mankind. Every one knew that a corporation is persona ficta, or even nomen iuris,
that it cannot sin, will not be damned, and so forth.

[491 ] Bracton, f. 171 b.

PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 569 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/2313