the oxford edition of blackstone


General Editor

Wilfrid Prest



Commentaries on

the Laws of engLand





The oxford edition of Blackstone


General Editor

Wilfrid Prest

Editorial Board

sir John Baker, Paul Brand, Joshua Getzler,

John langbein, and steven sheppard

Book i: Of the rights of Persons

Volume editor: david lemmings

Book ii: Of the rights of things

Volume editor: simon stern

Book iii: Of Private Wrongs

Volume editor: Thomas P. Gallanis

Book iV: Of Public Wrongs

Volume editor: ruth Paley





Commentaries on


the Laws of engLand



BOOk iV: Of PuBlic WrOnGs



William BlackstOne



WitH an intrOductiOn, nOtes,

and teXtual aPParatus BY

rutH PaleY



1





1


Great clarendon street, Oxford, OX2 6dP,

united kingdom

Oxford university Press is a department of the university of Oxford.

it furthers the university’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship,

and education by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a registered trade mark of

Oxford university Press in the uk and in certain other countries

© r. Paley (editor’s introduction, notes, and textual apparatus) 2016

© W. Prest (note to the reader) 2016

The moral rights of the author have been asserted

first edition published in 2016

impression: 1

all rights reserved. no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the

prior permission in writing of Oxford university Press, or as expressly permitted

by law, by licence or under terms agreed with the appropriate reprographics

rights organization. enquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the above should be sent to the rights department, Oxford university Press, at the

address above

You must not circulate this work in any other form

and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer

crown copyright material is reproduced under class licence

number c01P0000148 with the permission of OPsi

and the Queen’s Printer for scotland

Published in the united states of america by Oxford university Press 198 madison avenue, new York, nY 10016, united states of america

British library cataloguing in Publication data

data available

library of congress control number: 2015947706

isBn 978–0–19876900–2 (hardback)

isBn 978–0–19960102–8 (paperback)

isBn 978–0–19960103–5 (hardback set)

isBn 978–0–19960098–4 (paperback set)

Printed and bound by

cPi Group (uk) ltd, croydon, cr0 4YY

links to third party websites are provided by Oxford in good faith and

for information only. Oxford disclaims any responsibility for the materials

contained in any third party website referenced in this work





Contents




Editor’s Introduction to Book IV vii

Note to the Reader xxvii

Abbreviations xxix

chapter 1: Of the nature of crimes; and their Punishment 1

chapter 2: Of the Persons capable of committing crimes 13

chapter 3: Of Principals and accessories 22

chapter 4: Of Offences against God and religion 27

chapter 5: Of Offences against the law of nations 44

chapter 6: Of High treason 49

chapter 7: Of felonies, injurious to the king’s Prerogative 62

chapter 8: Of Praemunire 68

chapter 9: Of misprisions and contempts, affecting the king and Government 79

chapter 10: Of Offences against Public Justice 85

chapter 11: Of Offences against the Public Peace 94

chapter 12: Of Offences against Public trade 101

chapter 13: Of Offences against the Public Health, and the Public Police or Oeconomy 106

chapter 14: Of Homicide 116

chapter 15: Of Offences against the Persons of individuals 136

chapter 16: Of Offences against the Habitations of individuals 146

chapter 17: Of Offences against Private Property 152

chapter 18: Of the means of Preventing Offences 165

chapter 19: Of courts of a criminal Jurisdiction 169

chapter 20: Of summary convictions 183

chapter 21: Of arrests 189

chapter 22: Of commitment and Bail 193

chapter 23: Of the several modes of Prosecution 196

chapter 24: Of Process upon an indictment 206

chapter 25: Of arraignment, and its incidents 209

chapter 26: Of Plea, and issue 215

chapter 27: Of trial, and conviction 221

chapter 28: Of the Benefit of clergy 236

chapter 29: Of Judgment, and its consequences 242

chapter 30: Of reversal of Judgment 252

chapter 31: Of reprieve, and Pardon 254

chapter 32: Of execution 260

chapter 33: Of the rise, Progress, and Gradual improvements, of the

laws of england 263

appendix: sample forms and instruments 287

Varia 293

Table of Cases 357

Table of Statutes 361

Index of Persons and Places 373

Editor’s Introduction to Book IV



Book iV of the Commentaries deals with what Blackstone termed ‘Public Wrongs’, a term which his very first sentence defines as being synonymous with crime and mis-demeanours. This in itself is something of a conceptual innovation. The terms ‘crime’ and ‘criminal law’ were of course widely used by lawyers and general public alike, but they were not part of the technical legal vocabulary, which preferred to recognize general categories such as felonies and misdemeanours and to concentrate on the procedural niceties of prosecution and choice of venue. indeed, although the words ‘crime’ and ‘criminal’ are scattered throughout Giles Jacob’s New Law Dictionary (1739), neither is defined. nor did Jacob define the word ‘prosecute’ or ‘prosecution’. to prosecute or to bring a prosecution in modern parlance is indicative of a process under criminal law; in the eighteenth century both words were often used in the sense of carrying forward a process and in connection with civil suits as well as with a criminal action. Prosecutions by indictment were brought in the name of the mon-arch, but the initiative to prosecute, decisions about just what to allege in the indict-ment (and hence to choose both the category of crime and the venue at which it could be tried), and payment of associated costs were matters for private individuals. furthermore, prosecutions for non-felonious offences were regularly settled out of court for an agreed compensatory payment. even felonies, including heinous offences such as murder, could be prosecuted at the suit of a private individual by means of ‘appeal’ (for which see further iV. 202–5).

The distinction between a criminal and civil action was thus not an easy one to

make.1 Prosecutions qui tam (whereby the prosecution was brought in the name of an individual as well as of the monarch) were particularly difficult to categorize. Giles Jacob listed them under civil actions but added that they ‘may be rank’d under criminal actions’.2 Blackstone mentions them in Book iV, but only in terms of a stat-utory limitation on the time within which a prosecution had to be commenced. for a slightly more detailed explanation, he refers his readers to his consideration of private (or civil) wrongs in Book iii (chapter 9). in neither account does he indicate the extraordinarily wide range of offences that could be prosecuted in this way. nor does he indicate the suspicions of perjury that frequently attached to those who pros-ecuted such offences in expectation of a share of the reward.

nevertheless, contemporaries clearly accepted that it was possible to differentiate

between civil and criminal law, even if the distinction was ill-defined and the usage

1 for more extensive discussion of these issues see G. r. elton, ‘introduction: crime and the Historian’, in

J. s. cockburn (ed.), Crime in England, 1550–1800 (1977), 1–14; d. lieberman, ‘Blackstone and the categories of english Jurisprudence’ in n. landau (ed.), Law, Crime and English Society, 1660–1830 (cambridge, 2002), 139–61; J. m. Beattie, Crime and the Courts in England 1660–1800 (Oxford, 1986), 457; n. landau, ‘indictment for fun and Profit’, Law and History Review, 17 (1999), passim. Books cited were published in london unless otherwise noted.

viii book iv

of terms so varied as to suggest that no firm boundary existed to distinguish what was specifically criminal law from the wider scope of english jurisprudence. The later seventeenth and eighteenth centuries saw something of an explosion in the avail-ability of printed legal works, and, among these, books that concentrated on consid-erations of what the various authors considered to be the criminal law. They included influential treatises clearly aimed an audience of professional lawyers or would-be lawyers, such as the classic works by coke, Hale, and Hawkins,3 as well as guides for practitioners, such as sir John tremaine’s Placita Coronae or Pleas of the Crown (1723) or the many editions of William stubbs’s Crown Circuit Companion (first published 1738). a wider audience was served by Giles Jacob’s The Modern Justice, containing the business of a justice of the peace in all its parts (first published 1716), followed later in the century by the now largely forgotten manuals by lord dudley and Ward and ralph Heathcote,4 and the far more successful Justice of the Peace and Parish Officer by richard Burn (first published 1755). Then too there were guides with a narrower focus, such as collections of penal statutes relating to non-anglicans, customs and excise offences, or more general overviews of the penal statutes concerning the maintenance of law and order, by leading metropolitan magistrates.5 additionally some texts, such as Joshua fitzsimmonds’s Free and Candid Disquisitions on the Nature and Execution of the Laws of England (1751) and Henry dagge’s Considerations on the Criminal Law (1772), consid-ered the criminal justice system in very general terms.

Book iV of the Commentaries, like its three predecessors, serves a very different

purpose. like them, it purports to be a general introductory text. for those who intended to pursue the study of the law as a profession, it offered a gateway to the more complex traditional works like coke’s Institutes, which were considered to pro-vide the necessary foundations for legal practitioners. at the same time, Book iV provides the general introduction to the law that Blackstone considered necessary for young gentlemen who would not become professional lawyers, but would never-theless be called upon to play their part in the working of the criminal justice system: men who needed to apply the law in practice, and thus to understand what did and did not amount to theft, the difference between murder and excusable homicide, and under what circumstances offenders were entitled to claim benefit of clergy; men who might even play a role as legislators.

The fourth book of the Commentaries had been long in the making before it was

published in 1769.6 defending himself against criticisms of his treatment of the legal

3 e. coke , Institutes of the Lawes of England (1628–44); m. Hale, Historia Placitorum Coronæ, or The History of

the Pleas of the Crown (first published 1694; emlyn’s edition, 1736); m. Hale, The History of the Common Law of England (1713); W. Hawkins, A Treatise of Pleas of the Crown (1716–21).

4 J. Ward (Viscount dudley and Ward), The Law of a Justice of Peace and Parish Officer (1769); r. Heathcote,

The Irenarch, or Justice of the Peace’s Manual (1774).

5 J. Walthoe, A Summary of the Penal Laws relating to Nonjurors, Papists, Popish Recusants and

Nonconformists … (1716); A Collection of most of the Penal Laws relating the Customs and Excise (1726); J. fielding, Extracts from such of the Penal Laws, as particularly relate to the Peace and Good Order of this Metropolis (1761); W. addington, An Abridgment of the Penal Statutes … (1775).

6 Book iV was advertised as ‘preparing for the press’ in various newspapers in may 1768, and as ‘in the press’

in the following november: Gazetteer, 11 may 1768, St James’ Chronicle, 24–26 november 1768. The full four-

editor’s introduction to book iv ix

status of dissent (Protestant nonconformity to the established church of england) in chapter 4, Blackstone stated that parts of that chapter had been written some fif-teen years earlier. This was clearly true: ‘public wrongs’ had figured as the final part in the private course of lectures that he had first given at Oxford in the 1753–4 aca-demic year. The general plan of Book iV follows the schema of his lectures and of his subsequent Analysis of the Laws of England (Oxford, 1766–71). One of Blackstone’s stated motivations for publication was the circulation of manuscript copies of notes taken by students attending his lectures; it is a tribute to the popularity of the lectures that this practice appears to have continued even after publication of the Com­ mentaries. a copy of notes from Blackstone’s lectures supposedly taken by edward Williames Vaughan salisbury survives in the Harvard law school library, but salisbury can hardly have attended Blackstone’s lectures, since he himself did not matriculate until seven years after Blackstone’s death in 1780.7

The originality of Book iV stems from the way in which it imposed a coherent

structure on matters that had previously seemed arcane. unlike conventional legal treatises, Blackstone considered the question of crime in a logical sequence, begin-ning with the nature of crimes, proceeding through the question of criminal respon-sibility and the various types of offence in ascending order of gravity, followed by the way in which a defendant was processed through the courts to ultimate conviction and punishment. This was a novel approach, one that was clearly born of the enlight-enment emphasis on analysis and rationality. for this very reason it aroused some suspicion among his fellow lawyers, many of whom tended to regard the common law as an intricate system of forms that could not be reduced to any simplistic set of rules and principles.8 it was a craft rather than a science, best learned by studying (and mastering) traditional practice-oriented, legal treatises, whose disorderly and rambling nature reflected the inherent complexity of the common law.

for all its originality in terms of structure, Book iV naturally does rely for much of

its content on coke, Hale, and Hawkins. Blackstone also made use of influential international texts of his own generation, some of which, such as montesquieu’s Spirit of the Laws and Beccaria’s On Crimes and Punishments, we now regard as sem-inal, while others were and remain less well known, such as the Grand Instructions for Framing a New Code of Laws for the Russian Empire (1768). However, Book iV is far more wide-ranging than either a legal treatise or a philosophical discussion of the aims and purposes of a criminal justice system. Blackstone wrote as an educated man of his times, addressing an audience which shared a common cultural heritage. accordingly he cited a wide range of classical texts, alongside historical and literary allusions with which he expected his readers to be more or less familiar. He did not, for example, think it necessary in chapter 4 to explain swift’s allegory of Jack on a great horse eating custard, presumably taking it for granted that his readers would fully understand this reference to a lord mayor of london who made no effort to hide his Presbyterianism (iV. 35, note x).

7 Harvard law school library, ms 4175; Alumni Oxonienses, 1500–1714, ed. J. foster (1891–2), iv. 1245. x book iv

although the full title of the Commentaries refers only to the laws of England,

Book iV is full of allusions to the laws and customs of the ancient world as well as to the laws extant in other countries and to natural law. Blackstone made very clear his belief that the fallen nature of man meant that crime is an ever-present threat to the tranquillity of society; hence the laws that have evolved to deal with it address uni-versal issues. Whether based on common law or roman law traditions, whether devised by ancient or modern societies, systems of criminal justice all sprang from the same social needs. Thus it was possible for Blackstone to identify a common thread running from cicero to montesquieu.

This somewhat awkward marriage of tradition and reason is further underlined by

Blackstone’s treatment of english history. The more sweeping references derive from Blackstone’s belief that in order to understand the then current state of the law it was necessary to understand its past. accordingly, he was determined to trace the origins and development of institutions back to at least anglo-saxon times, if not before—a process ridiculed by Jeremy Bentham in his long unpublished Comment on the Commentaries as savouring of ‘the pompous nothingness of half-learned pedants’,9 but one which fits with Blackstone’s belief in the universality of sin and crime, as well as with the common trope of the norman yoke, that appears explicitly in his final chapter:

i have endeavoured to delineate some rude outlines of a plan for the history of our

laws and liberties; from their first rise, and gradual progress, among our British and

saxon ancestors, till their total eclipse at the norman conquest; from which they have

gradually emerged, and risen to the perfection they now enjoy …10

Blackstone’s ‘rude outlines’ divided english history into distinct phases, making explicit the historical framework that underpins the earlier chapters. The first phase was from the time of the ancient Britons to the saxons, a period which, according to Blackstone, saw the original evolution of the common law ‘which is doubtless of saxon parentage’ (iV. 266). This was followed by the ‘violent alteration of the english constitution’ (iV. 268) attributable to the norman conquest and the introduction of ‘a scheme of servility’ from which ‘it has been the work of generations for our ances-tors, to redeem themselves’ (iV. 271). That redemption began not with magna carta but with the reign of edward i, ‘our english Justinian’ (iV. 274), and continued under Henry Viii with the creation of a Protestant church of england, ‘the usurped power of the pope being now for ever routed and destroyed’ (iV. 277), although other aspects of the royal prerogative meant that the final years of Henry Viii were ‘times of the greatest despotism, that have been known in this island since the death of William the norman’ (iV. 280). attempts to exploit the worst aspects of the preroga-tive and religious divisions led to the civil wars and execution of charles i. The fifth phase began with the restoration of the monarchy in 1660, when a combination of the abolition of both the writ de haeretico comburendo, and military tenures, together

9 A Comment on the Commentaries (collected Works of Jeremy Bentham), ed. J. H. Burns and H. l. a. Hart

(1977), 168.

editor’s introduction to book iv xi

with the passage of the Habeas corpus act amounted to nothing less than ‘a second magna carta’ (iV. 282–3). strangely, Blackstone made only a passing mention of the executive’s controversial uses of the law during the reign of charles ii, such as the quo warranto campaign to purge borough corporations in the aftermath of the disso-lution of parliament in 1681, merely attributing the ‘many very iniquitous proceed-ings, contrary to all law, in that reign’ to ‘the artifice of wicked politicians’ (iV. 283). The last phase to be considered was that from the revolution of 1688 to Blackstone’s own time—a period that he characterized as one of major progress towards the per-fection of the laws. Both in chapter 33 and elsewhere, Blackstone reveals a remarka-bly detailed knowledge of events of the later seventeenth century. He clearly assumes that his references to the career of the earl of danby (iV. 171), the execution of algernon sidney (iV. 53), the assassination plot (iV. 38), and even the relatively obscure condemnation of the non-jurors cook and snatt (iV. 81) would be readily understood by his contemporaries; even after the passage of nearly a century, mem-ories of the political tumult that preceded the Hanoverian succession were clearly still common currency.

despite the title of the final chapter, ‘Of the rise, Progress, and Gradual improve-

ments, of the laws of england’, Blackstone nevertheless sounded a note of caution. some ten years before John dunning made his famous motion in the commons that ‘the influence of the crown has increased, is increasing, and ought to be diminished’,11 Blackstone wrote that although the various reforms since the revolution had ‘in appearance and nominally, reduced the strength of the executive power … the crown has, gradually and imperceptibly, gained almost as much in influence, as it has appar-ently lost in prerogative’ (iV. 284). elsewhere (iV. 183–4) he expressed unease about the expansion of summary offences, not only because of the tendency to erode jury trial but also because of the increased workload created thereby for lay magistrates and the consequent growing reluctance of gentlemen to take on the duties of a mag-istrate. a further diversion from a narrative structure that was designed to extol a vision of progressive improvement was Blackstone’s diatribe against the game laws. in chapter 13 Blackstone had described the game laws, which dated largely from 1706,12 and which restricted the right to hunt to substantial landholders, as of a ‘question-able … nature’ and as ‘many and various, and not a little obscure and intricate’ (iV. 114–15). He noted, with clear disgust, that the provisions of the game laws meant the property qualification that enabled an individual to kill a partridge was fifty times greater than that required to vote. He concluded that the only rational explanation why taking game should be regarded as a crime was ‘that in low and indigent persons it promotes idleness’ (iV. 115). He added a footnote to the fifth edition of 1773 about the 1770 statute that prescribed three months’ imprisonment and heavy fines for any-one who killed game between sunset and an hour before sunrise, concluding some-what incredulously that ‘This statute hath now continued three sessions of parliament unrepealed’ (iV. 315–16).

11 Parliamentary Register, xvii. 453.

xii book iv

for Blackstone the game laws were a retrograde step, one that flew in the face of a

basic common law principle whereby wild birds and animals (ferae naturae) could not be regarded as private property. in his final chapter Blackstone went far beyond mere description, making it clear that by separating the ownership of land from the ability to exercise rights over it, the game laws had erected a new kind of tyranny. after the norman conquest the forest laws had vested all game in the crown; those laws were obsolete by Blackstone’s time, but nevertheless,

from this root has sprung a bastard slip, known by the name of the game law, now

arrived to and wantoning in its highest vigour: both founded upon the same unrea-

sonable notions of permanent property in wild creatures; and both productive of the

same tyranny to the commons: but with this difference; that the forest laws established

only one mighty hunter throughout the land, the game laws have raised a little nimrod

in every manor. and in one respect the antient law was much less unreasonable than

the modern: for the king’s grantee of a chase or free-warren might kill game in every

part of his franchise; but now … a freeholder of less than 100l. a year is forbidden to kill

a partridge upon his own estate (iV. 268).

Blackstone was occasionally guilty of showing off the extent of his knowledge. He could not resist, for example, a discussion, arising from his own researches, of what he himself admitted was the obsolete criminal jurisdiction of the university of Oxford, where he had once served as judge of the chancellor’s court (chapter 19) or of the law of treason in scotland (chapter 29). in chapter 19 he included a long digression on the origins of the term star chamber. in chapter 23, ‘Of the several modes of prosecution’, he added an account of the virtually obsolete process of pros-ecution by appeal, prefacing his remarks with the statement that ‘as it is very little in use … i shall treat of it very briefly’ (iV. 202). His brief account nevertheless stretched to four pages and he added an extra paragraph in the fifth edition. likewise in chapter 27 he included an account of trial by ordeal and trial by purgation, both of which were long since abolished.

He was also sometimes guilty of manipulating his sources, adding citations that

did not quite support the text. in chapter 2 he cited roman law as making allowances for drunken acts in order to contrast it to the law of england which ‘will not suffer any man thus to privilege one crime by another’ (iV. 17), but the source, Justinian’s Digest, quite specifically refers to military law and to the fate of individuals who had attempted suicide whilst inebriated. sometimes he is simply mistaken. The same chapter effectively plagiarized Hale’s discussion of advancing a defence based on ignorance of the relevant law,13 while adding as his own contribution a reference to Justinian which purportedly demonstrated that the maxim ‘ignorance of the law, which everybody is supposed to know, is no excuse’ was common to both roman and english law. But as Peter Brett pointed out half a century ago, Blackstone’s refer-ences ‘scarcely bear out the proposition which is allegedly based on them’. The english case Brett v Rigden (1568), originally cited by Hale, was not a criminal case at all. sergeant manwood had argued that when Giles Brett made his will and devised lands

editor’s introduction to book iv xiii

then in his possession, he should have known that the will would take effect at his death and that the devise would therefore include lands that he acquired between the date of the will and the date of his death. This contention did not relate to the princi-ples of criminal law and was in any case rejected by the court. The citation to roman law is similarly flawed, in that it is concerned with civil rather than criminal law.14

as Brett pointed out, there are many different scenarios in which ignorance of the

law would have different meanings, and there is a dearth of authority to confirm that the maxim was genuinely applicable to every such scenario. indeed, it seems likely that it was not until well after Blackstone’s death that the judges began to accept and apply a strict definition of the maxim. after all, until 1793, statutes were held to take effect from the beginning of the parliamentary session in which they were passed. Promulgation was desultory.15 it was perfectly possible therefore for an individual to commit a crime against a statute before that act of parliament had received the royal assent, let alone had been promulgated, or of which he was quite legitimately igno-rant. in 1852 it was held that foreigners who acted as seconds in a duel, in a manner that would have been lawful and honourable in their own country, could not plead ignorance of english law.16 Yet ignorance of english law does appear to have been a factor in the pardon awarded to John Wannberg in 1787.17 Blackstone was very clear that drunkenness could not be used as a defence to a criminal charge, writing in chapter 2 that ‘our law looks upon this as an aggravation of the offence, rather than as an excuse for any criminal misbehaviour’ (iV. 16); however, intoxication was clearly a factor in weighing up whether James Oakes had formed a felonious intent when he stole a bundle of calico in 1785, and it earned him a pardon.18 These cases occurred after Blackstone’s death, suggesting that the law cannot have been quite as clear during his lifetime as he suggested.

at other times he was selective about the full import of his sources, because the

fine detail either detracted from or was irrelevant to his argument. a minor example occurs in chapter 12 (iV. 103), where various medieval punishments for fraudulent traders are listed, in order to contrast them with the modern mode of punishment by fine. He therefore omits any reference to the existence of a medieval fine for brewers of bad beer, preferring instead to lay his emphasis on the use of the cucking stool. another instance of selective inclusion relates to Blackstone’s reference in chapter 17 (iV. 158) to transportation for those convicted of larceny under the provisions of 4 Geo. i c. 11. What he did not mention was his doubts about whether that act was being properly interpreted. a year after Book iV was first published he wrote to the former attorney general, sir fletcher norton, who had recently been elected as speaker of the

14 P. Brett, ‘mistake of law as a criminal defence’, Melbourne University Law Review, 5 (1965–7), 179. i am

indebted to simon stern for bringing this article to my attention.

15 J. Prest, ‘The Promulgation of the statutes’, Parliamentary History, 17 (1998), 106–12; s. devereux, ‘The

Promulgation of the statutes in late Hanoverian Britain’, in d. lemmings (ed.), The British and their Laws (Woodbridge, 2005), 80–101.

16 In the matter of Etienne Barronet and Edmond Allain, In the matter of Emanuel Barthelemy and Philip Eugene

Morney (1852) 1 el. & Bl. 2, 118 er 337.

17 The national archives, kew (hereafter tna), HO 27/6/127, ff. 430–3. xiv book iv

commons. in that letter he questioned whether the terms of that act applied to women and those convicted of petty larceny and offered a draft declaratory clause which would have retrospective effect ‘and obviate this doubt for the future’.19

The most blatant example of selective omission occurs in Blackstone’s discussion

of the case of William York, a ten-year-old convicted of murder in 1748. Blackstone makes it clear that the fear of ‘propagating a notion that children might commit such atrocious crimes with impunity’ led all the judges to agree that his crime deserved a death sentence (iV. 15). What he did not point out was that the judges were so dis-turbed by the prospect of putting a child to death that the sentence was repeatedly respited and that York was eventually pardoned on condition of entering the navy. seen in context with Blackstone’s other comments on the use of capital punishment, this appears to be a deliberate literary device intended to shock the reader at the thought that so young a child could be executed. in his very first chapter Blackstone had described the use of the death penalty as ‘a wanton effusion of human blood’ and questioned both its deterrent value and its moral basis:

to shed the blood of our fellow creature is a matter that requires the greatest deliber-

ation, and the fullest conviction of our own authority: for life is the immediate gift of

God to man; which neither he can resign, nor can it be taken from him, unless by the

command or permission of him who gave it; either expressly revealed, or collected

from the laws of nature or society by clear and indisputable demonstration. (iV. 7)

He also went out of his way in chapter 14 to explain that an authorized officer who put an individual to death pursuant to a capital sentence was acting out ‘of necessity, and even of civil duty; and therefore not only justifiable, but commendable, where the law requires it’ (iV. 117).

Blackstone did not neglect the problems of preventing crime, agreeing with

Beccaria that ‘preventive justice is upon every principle, of reason, of humanity, and of sound policy, preferable in all respects to punishing justice’ (iV. 165). chapter 18 consists of a pragmatic account of the existing provisions of the criminal law designed to prevent crime. One of these was the use of punishment, which (he stressed) should not be designed for expiation or revenge but for ‘the amendment of the offender himself, or to deprive him of any power to do future mischief, or to deter others by his example’ (iV. 165). Otherwise the only preventive measure Blackstone could offer was the power to take sureties for keeping the peace or good behaviour.

nevertheless, Blackstone did have more ambitious ideas about crime prevention.

like many of his reform-minded contemporaries he believed that imprisonment could be used to teach habits of industry and thereby reform offenders. Between 1775 and 1776 he played a pivotal role in the process of drafting and lobbying that resulted in the Penitentiary act of 1779.20 Blackstone did not mention his own involvement in the passage of the act when he gave a brief account of it in the ninth edition, where somewhat surprisingly he placed these remarks in chapter 28, which is concerned



19 The Letters of Sir William Blackstone, ed. W. Prest (2006), 141–2.

editor’s introduction to book iv xv

with benefit of clergy and the mitigation of punishments, rather than in chapter 18, which focuses on the prevention of crime. The alteration is almost certainly Blackstone’s own since richard Burn, Blackstone’s first editor, added clear signposts to his own changes to the text. Blackstone obviously had high hopes that the act would have a positive impact on reducing crime.

in forming the plan of these penitentiary houses, the principal objects have been, by

sobriety, cleanliness, and medical assistance, by a regular series of labour, by solitary

confinement during the intervals of work, and by due religious instruction, to pre-

serve and amend the health of the unhappy offenders, to inure them to habits of indus-

try, to guard them from pernicious company, to accustom them to serious reflection,

and to teach them both the principles and practice of every christian and moral duty.

and if the whole of this plan be properly executed, and its defects be timely supplied,

there is reason to hope that such a reformation may be effected in the lower classes of

mankind, and such a gradual scale of punishment be affixed to all gradations of guilt,

as may in time supersede the necessity of capital punishment, except for very atro-

cious crimes. (iV. 350).



The Varia

Blackstone altered his text in successive editions for a variety of reasons. He corrected typographical errors and, when he became aware of them, his own errors or omissions. in chapter 17, for example, he referred to the Waltham Black act as having its origins from incidents in epping forest near Waltham in essex, but in the fifth edition he corrected this to Waltham in Hampshire (iV. 329). He also habitually added extra citations, either to cases or to treatises. it seems likely that some changes are attribut-able to the compositor rather than to Blackstone himself. in chapter 14 Blackstone correctly referred to chapter 3 in locke’s Essay on Civil Government but this was changed to 5 in editions seven (1775) and eight (1778) before being corrected back to 3 in the posthumous ninth edition of 1783. The most likely explanation for the change is that during the print run the typeface became damaged and was replaced; a dam-aged ‘3’ is easily misread as ‘5’. On occasion Blackstone took advantage of the oppor-tunities offered by a new edition to expand on his original text. The simple statement in chapter 28 that ‘in general, all offences must be enquired into as well as tried in the county where the fact is committed’ (iV. 197) was expanded in the fifth edition (1773) and in the seventh becomes a detailed account of all offences that could be tried in jurisdictions other than the one in which the alleged crime occurred (iV. 338–40).

Often he merely improved his literary style, choosing more suitable words—‘hang-

ing’ instead of ‘suspension’, for example (iV. 143, 321). constant attention to literary detail meant that he sometimes rephrased parts of the text for no other reason than to improve the rhythm of the phrasing. But he also made minute technical changes to the construction of his sentences: it is clearly more accurate to refer to ‘any woman, being maid, widow, or wife’ rather than ‘any woman, maid, widow, or wife’ (iV. 138, 319), although it would be difficult to misunderstand the sense of the original word-ing. sometimes he changed his mind and reverted to the original: as when he wrote xvi book iv

that excuses ought not to be ‘strained’, changing this to ‘restrained’ in the seventh edition and then back to ‘strained’ in the ninth (iV. 125). literary style was an inte-gral part of the attraction of the Commentaries to readers. a long extract from chapter 3 of Book iii even appeared in a compilation of pieces designed both to edify readers and to illustrate ‘elegant, correct and fine writing’.21

Blackstone’s more substantial alterations reflected the need constantly to update

his text. at its most basic this involved adding details of the continual accretions of statute law. in chapter 21 of the seventh edition, for example, he added brief details of the 1773 statute that enabled warrants issued in england to be executed against offenders who had fled to scotland, which was (as it still is) a different legal jurisdic-tion. However, given the vast range of the criminal law and the constant stream of new legislation it is scarcely surprising that Blackstone sometimes failed to keep up to date. in his discussion of the offence of pulling down turnpike gates in chapter 11 he cited statutes of 1718 and 1732, apparently unaware that neither were in force at the time of writing. in the fifth edition he amended his reference to the 1732 statute, sub-stituting instead a more recent statute of 1767. Yet by the time that edition appeared, the statute of 1767 had been superseded. Only in the ninth, posthumous edition did richard Burn point out that the 1718 statute had expired in 1748, while the 1767 act was superseded by another of 1773 (iV. 95, 309).

Blackstone’s text also reflected changes in the operation of the criminal justice

system. The Commentaries were produced at a time of considerable evolution in the nature and conduct of criminal trials, particularly in the use of defence counsel. accordingly, in the eighth edition Blackstone altered the statement in chapter 27 that the judges ‘seldom’ refused the assistance of counsel to defendants to read that they ‘never’ refused such assistance (iV. 229–30, 345–6). The effect of wider world events on the criminal justice system in england was revealed by the omission of a few words in the discussion of punishments in the ninth edition of chapter 29. Previous editions had referred to transportation to the american colonies; in a silent acknowledgement of Britain’s loss of those colonies, the ninth edition, published after the conclusion of the american rebellion, merely mentioned transportation without reference to a destination (iV. 243, 352).

another significant change in the operation of the criminal justice system was the

way the courts treated the testimony of the victims in cases of the alleged rape of young girls (neither Blackstone nor the courts seem to have considered the possibil-ity of the rape of boys). The original text followed Hale, who advocated admitting the testimony of a child even if that child were too young to understand the nature of an oath. The rationale was that ‘the law allows what the child told her mother, or other relations, to be given in evidence, since the nature of the case admits frequently of no better proof; and there is much more reason for the court to hear the narration of the child herself, than to receive it at second hand ... . and indeed it is now settled, that infants of any age are to be heard’ (iV. 142). in the fifth edition, Blackstone made minor changes in wording, turning the absolute statement ‘it is now settled’ into the

editor’s introduction to book iv xvii

more qualified ‘it seems now to be settled’. a substantive change occurred, however, in the ninth edition. Blackstone continued to refer to Hale’s opinion that a child’s evidence could be heard unsworn, but in the light of a recent (1779) ruling by the twelve judges added that practice was now quite the opposite as ‘it is now settled, that no hearsay evidence can be given of the declarations of a child who hath not capacity to be sworn, nor can such child be examined in court without oath: and that there is no determinate age, at which the oath of a child ought either to be admitted or rejected’ (iV. 319–20). as the ruling occurred during Blackstone’s lifetime and the alteration is not flagged as one introduced by Burn, we may be reasonably confident that it was penned by Blackstone himself.

later in the same chapter Blackstone considered (male) homosexual acts, accept-

ing the then conventional theology that extrapolated from the fate of sodom and Gomorrah to conclude that they were against ‘the express law of God’ (iV. 143). in his original text he made it clear that homosexual acts were more often prosecuted as attempted sexual assaults than as actual sexual assaults ‘on account of the difficulty of proof’ (iV. 144). The implication was that the sex in such cases was non-consensual. it is therefore interesting that the ninth edition includes a reference to consensual homosexual acts. in such cases, Blackstone noted, both parties could be prosecuted, one for intent to commit, the other with intent to suffer ‘the commission of the abominable crime’ (iV. 320).

in stark contrast to this kind of piecemeal alteration, chapters 4 and 17 underwent

wholesale authorial revision, though for very different reasons. chapter 17 concerns offences against private property. a haphazard accumulation of statutory changes made this a messy subject and resulted in a text that became increasingly convoluted and difficult to follow. The author’s changes add virtually nothing to the content. instead, almost like a miniature version of the imposition of structure on the law that made the Commentaries so readable, Blackstone re-arranged his original text, remov-ing many of the references to statutes to footnotes, in order to construct a more coherent and accessible version for his readers.

The alterations to chapter 4—‘Of Offences against God and religion’—are of a

very different order. Blackstone was a convinced anglican and references through-out this volume reveal the depth of his loathing for the roman catholic church. He variously described the power of the pope as ‘arbitrary’ (iV. 30) or ‘usurped’ (iV. 277), and in yet another reference to the ‘norman yoke’ blamed the conquest for increas-ing the influence of the pope by virtue of the appointment of ‘prelates, who, being bred abroad in the doctrine and practice of slavery, had contracted a reverence and regard for it, and took a pleasure in rivetting the chains of a free-born people’ (iV. 69). in chapter 4 he made it clear that the various laws that prevented roman catholics from taking their full part in english society were entirely justified and that there could be no toleration for catholics as long as their principles extended

to a subversion of the civil government. if once they could be brought to renounce the

supremacy of the pope, they might quietly enjoy their seven sacraments, their purga-

tory, and auricular confession; their worship of reliques and images; nay even their

transubstantiation. But while they acknowlege a foreign power, superior to the xviii book iv

sovereignty of the kingdom, they cannot complain if the laws of that kingdom will not

treat them upon the footing of good subjects. (iV. 36)

He then went on to list the various anti-catholic statutes that were still in force, even though these statutes had been passed in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries when Protestant fears of ‘popery’ were at their height and, apart from the ban on holding public office, went largely unenforced in Blackstone’s england. His reference in the ninth edition to the ‘Papists’ act’ of 1778 underlined the identification of catholicism as a potential source of rebellion, by stressing that the relaxation of pen-alties made by that act applied only to such catholics as were willing to take steps to demonstrate their loyalty to the Hanoverian regime and to repudiate the pope’s claims to any civil authority.

it was not, however, Blackstone’s vitriolic condemnation of popery but his com-

ments on the laws concerning the Protestant nonconformists, also known as dissenters (i.e. those who were not members of the anglican, or episcopal, church) that attracted criticism. Blackstone distrusted dissenters almost as much as catholics. Those who differed from the church of england ‘as well in one extreme as the other, are equally and totally destructive of those ties and obligations by which all society is kept together’ (iV. 68). somewhat simplistically, given the complexity of the political situation that led to the upheavals of the seventeenth century, Blackstone blamed the religious bigotry of Protestant sectaries for the seventeenth-century civil wars that overturned ‘church and monarchy [and] shook every pillar of law, justice, and private property’ (iV. 69). in his fourth chapter Blackstone’s account of offences against God by nonconformists is divided into two parts: the ‘positive’ offence of reviling the church’s ordinances and the ‘negative’ offence of failing to participate in anglican worship. in some ways dissenters were more culpable than catholics, since catholics acted on ‘material, though erroneous reasons’, whilst many of the reasons for Protestant nonconformity stemmed from disagreement with certain points of the liturgy and so on ‘matters of indifference or, in other words, upon no reason at all’ (iV. 34). Blackstone considered that the various statutes against nonconformists were still in effect, although suspended by the toleration act of 1689, so effectively enabling him to describe dissenters as criminals whose guilt was tolerated rather than punished.

Within months of the first printing of this volume, the nonconformist theologian

and scientist Joseph Priestley had published a response that was highly critical of Blackstone’s text.22 Priestley was prompted to respond by a fear that Blackstone’s sen-timents were shared by the government of the day, suggesting the possibility ‘that some design is formed to establish a system of civil and ecclesiastical tyranny’ by reviving and enforcing statutes that had long been regarded as obsolete. Priestley particularly complained of Blackstone’s remarks on the crime of reviling the ordi-nances of the church of england:

Why may i not speak in derogation of the book of common-prayer, or even in con-

tempt of it, if i really think it a defective and contemptible performance? Where is the

editor’s introduction to book iv xix

crime, if, insulted as the dissenters have always been, with the malice, and nonsense

of high churchmen, they should, now and then, speak, or even write in their own vin-

dication …23

He also challenged Blackstone’s simplistic account of the events that led up to the civil wars, observing that ‘the nation not the dissenters only, asserted their natural and civil rights’ and that the end result would have been the same even if the army had ‘consisted of mahometans’.24

Priestley was not the only critic to take issue with Blackstone over chapter 4. The

legal writer, Owen ruffhead, who was himself an anglican rather than a dissenter, reviewed Book iV for the Monthly Review shortly before his death in October 1769. in the course of the review, he regretted Blackstone’s ‘narrow and somewhat illiberal turn of mind in relation to Protestant dissenters’ and condemned his ‘littleness and peevishness of spirit’.25 a much lengthier, more closely argued and wide-ranging response to Blackstone was published the following year by the dissenting minister, Philip furneaux, who maintained that religious truths could not be established by means of legal penalties.26 Yet, for all his liberal sentiments furneaux agreed that anti-catholic laws were essential; in the 1771 edition of his letters he agreed ‘that to guard against the prevalence of popery, by every method which appears to be calcu-lated for that end … is mere self-defence’.27

Blackstone had never before engaged with his critics in public, though he did in

private.28 He preferred either to ignore them ‘if i thought them mistaken or trifling’ or simply to correct his text in a subsequent edition.29 But already embroiled in con-troversy over his support of the expulsion of John Wilkes from the House of commons,30 he decided to respond directly and speedily to Priestley’s ‘very angry pamphlet’, probably because Priestley was a public figure who was well-known out-side dissenting circles and whose criticism could do real damage. Blackstone explained his public response by referring to Priestley’s ‘reputation in the literary world’ and insisted that he did not write ‘with an intention to enter into personal altercation with dr Priestley’. Blackstone was particularly anxious to establish that his text was not meant to be a personal attack on Priestley and to acquit himself of accusations of being ‘a bigotted High-churchman and of a persecuting spirit in mat-ters of religious differences’. although maintaining somewhat pedantically that the various laws against nonconformists were still in force against those who did not comply with the provisions of the act of toleration, he stressed that Priestley had misinterpreted his survey of the relevant statutes, which had merely been intended

23 J. Priestley, Remarks on some paragraphs in the fourth volume of Dr. Blackstone’s Commentaries on the laws of

England, relating to the Dissenters (1769), 7.

24 Priestley, Remarks, 29, 31.

25 Monthly Review, 41 (1769), 295.

26 P. furneaux, Letters to the Honourable Mr Justice Blackstone (1770). 27 furneaux, Letters (1771 edn.), 127.

28 see for example his response to charles Yorke in 1766 and to Granville sharp in 1769: Letters, ed. Prest,

11–12, 138–9.

29 W. Blackstone, Reply to Dr Priestley’s Remarks (1769), 4. xx book iv

to provide a historical context to explain their passage.31 nevertheless, he admitted that on re-reading his text it did seem

somewhat incorrect and confused; and might lead a willing critic to conclude, that a

general reflection was intended on the spirit, the doctrines, and the practice of the

body of our modern dissenters. a reflection which i totally disapprove … and so far

am i from wishing to perpetuate or widen our unhappy differences, that i shall make

it my care, in every subsequent edition of this volume so to rectify the clause in ques-

tion, as to render it more expressive of that meaning which i here avow; and which, if

read with a due degree of candour, might before have been easily discerned.32

Blackstone’s rather barbed reference to Priestley’s failure to appreciate the finer nuances of his text was repeated at the end of the pamphlet, where he commented that only a ‘superficial and captious reader’ would have misunderstood his intent and hoped that Priestley would come to wish he had written less hastily.

Priestley’s response, published in the London Chronicle of 10–12 October, described

the Reply as ‘a genteel and liberal answer to a pamphlet written, as you candidly and justly conjecture, in great haste’ and then went on to reiterate his critique of Black-stone’s text. Priestley adopted a restrained and civil tone, but his response was more than a little prickly:

if i mistook your meaning, in supposing that your reflections were intended for the

modern dissenters, i can assure you, that, superficial and captious as you take me to

be, i was far from being singular in that mistake. it was the construction that every

person, that i have yet conversed with upon the subject, put upon them; and the par-

agraphs i have animadverted upon were actually considered, by many persons, as a

notification to dissenters, in what light they were considered by those who are now in

power. They even gave offence to many worthy and distinguished members of the

established church …

Blackstone was as good as his word. The next edition of Book iV, published the fol-lowing year, contained substantial revisions that were clearly intended to placate his dissenting critics. His remarks about reviling the ordinances of the church were softened by referring to the indecency of ‘virulent and factious’ opposition to the anglican church, rather than of opposition per se (iV. 33, 295). He qualified his jus-tification of the continuance of the laws against nonconformists by making it clear that they were there in terrorem, as a warning against treating the church with contempt rather than to prevent ‘rational and dispassionate enquiries’ (iV. 33, 296). even this needed to be further softened in the fifth edition, almost certainly in response to furneaux, who had remarked that ‘if any one say, it is right to keep a rod in terrorem, though it would be injustice or inhumanity to use it: i should be apt to suspect, that, notwithstanding his fair pretences, when a proper opportunity offers, he will not fail to use it.’33 accordingly, from the fifth edition onwards, Blackstone no longer referred

31 Blackstone, Reply, 3–5, 9–11.

32 Blackstone, Reply, 10–11. The remainder of the pamphlet re-states Blackstone’s arguments, originally

expressed in Book i, that the liturgy of the church of england was frozen at the union of england and scotland in 1707 and that any attempt to change it would amount to a dissolution of the union.

editor’s introduction to book iv xxi

to the old laws being kept in terrorem, and only justified the continuance of ‘the milder penalties’.

a far more significant alteration was the omission in the fourth edition of

Blackstone’s comparison of the principles of catholics and dissenters, which had ended with a condemnation of the dissenters, whose role in the political upheavals of the seventeenth century meant that they had achieved what catholics had failed to do, ‘the ruin of our church and monarchy’ (iV. 34, 297). instead he expanded on his arguments to the effect that the various penal laws against dissenters were still in force but were suspended so that all those ‘who will approve themselves no papists or oppugners of the trinity, are left at full liberty to act as their consciences shall direct them’ (iV. 35, 297). Presumably the omission was specifically aimed at quieting his critics rather than as an indication of his own change of heart. neither in the fourth nor in any subsequent edition did he change the sentences in chapter 8 that, like the original text of chapter 4, blamed dissenters for the civil wars and execution of charles i. nor did he change other derogatory references. He continued to imply that dissenters had ‘weak consciences’ (iV. 34), overtly accused them of the sin of schism and attributed their beliefs to ‘weakness of intellect … misdirected piety … perverse-ness and acerbity of temper’ or to hopes of ‘a prospect of secular advantage in herding with a party’—a reference to the identification of dissenters as Whig sym pathizers (iV. 34–5). Whether intended or not, his analysis of the reasons for the laws against dissenters provided ammunition for the debates over the repeal of the test and corporation acts that prevented catholics from holding public office and which would occupy politicians over the next several decades.34



reception

Blackstone’s remarks on dissent and dissenters seems to have been the only aspect of Book iV that drew significant criticism in his own day. Jeremy Bentham’s Comment on the Commentaries remained unfinished and was available only in manuscript until publication in the early twentieth century. Bentham’s Fragment on Government published in 1776 attacked Blackstone’s ‘universal inaccuracy and confusion’ and ‘obscure and crooked reasoning’, but the critique was pinned on the introduction to Book i and, unlike Priestley, Bentham was relatively unknown and lacking in influence. to be sure, Bentham did mention Book iV, but more as a matter of point-scoring than sustained critique. He picked holes in Blackstone’s logic, using as one example Blackstone’s discussion of burglary in chapter 16 when ‘after telling us, in express terms, there must be an “actual breaking” to make burglary, he tells us, in the same breath, and in terms equally express, where burglary may be without actual breaking; and this because “the law will not suffer itself to be trifled with” ’.35

34 [anon.], The Danger of Repealing the Test Act (1790), 5–6. 35 A Fragment on Government (collected Works of Jeremy Bentham), ed. J. H. Burns and H. l. a. Hart (1988), xxii book iv

Bentham’s strictures do not appear to have been influential during Blackstone’s

own lifetime or even in the immediate aftermath of his death; indeed Bentham him-self described the Commentaries as having ‘a more extensive circulation, have obtained a greater share of esteem, of applause, and consequently of influence (and that by a title on many grounds so indisputable) than any other writer who on that subject has ever yet appeared’.36 By 1779 Blackstone was being quoted in the latest edition of Hale’s History of the Common Law. Both his prose and his organizational schema were heavily plagiarized by subsequent writers: his prose turns up in tomlyn’s Law Dictionary whilst in 1780 the Commentaries inspired the little-known london lawyer, William ayres, to publish a work comparing the operation of the law in england and ireland as well as addressing the issue of the power of the British parlia-ment over the irish parliament.37 The Commentaries similarly formed the model for Zephaniah swift’s System of the Laws of Connecticut (1795–6). Other works that cited Book iV with approval included John macarthur’s Treatise of the Principles and Practice of Naval Courts Martial (1795) and Thomas Gisborne’s An Enquiry into the Duties of Men in the Higher and Middle Classes of Society in Great Britain (1795). When samuel Glasse published his Magistrate’s Assistant in 1788 he specifically referred to Blackstone’s ‘ingenious, elegant and learned commentaries’ and the resultant hope that ‘the chair of magistracy will in future more easily be filled by persons of consequence and respectability’.38 a new and revised issue of a treatise on the jury quoted ‘that great man, Judge Blackstone’ and his remarks on the value of the jury in Book iii at length for the benefit of those who ‘though they ought, may not perhaps be possessed of his valuable Commentaries’.39

Yet praise for Blackstone was not entirely unqualified. a manual for trainee barris-

ters credited him for ‘bringing darkness to light’ and reducing ‘to system a farrago of legal knowledge scattered over a vast range of black-lettered lore’. nevertheless the author was anxious to emphasize that Blackstone had merely provided an introduc-tion to the subject. The serious student of law was advised to interleave the pages with blank paper so that

The marginal references to the authorities should be examined, the books referred to, be

consulted; notes should be entered of errors, if any be found; together with what add-

itional ideas may be collected on the subject, which the writer of a compendium only

might think it unnecessary to insert. The topic should not even then be considered as

finished, but subsequent notices should be inserted, as future reading, observation and

practice, may tend to render the knowledge of the law, on each head, more full, or present

determinations in any wise alter the doctrine laid down by precedents of past times …40

similar remarks were made by st George tucker when he produced an edition that he had revised to be suitable for the nascent us republic. The Commentaries had

36 Fragment on Government, 4.

37 W. t. ayres, A Comparative View of the Differences between the English and Irish Statute and Common Law.

In a series of analogous Notes on the Commentaries of Sir W. Blackstone’ (1780).

38 s. Glasse, Magistrate’s Assistant (1788), p. xiv.

39 J. Hawles, Hamilton’s Jury Guide or the Englishman’s Right (1794), preface.

editor’s introduction to book iv xxiii

produced ‘the semblance of a regular system’ but had also had pernicious conse-quences, since ‘it has contributed to usher into the profession a great number, whose superficial knowledge of the law has been almost as soon forgotten, as acquired’.41

The ‘regular system’ to which Blackstone reduced the laws did not go far enough

for later commentators who, like Bentham, have found Blackstone lacking in con-ceptual rigour. as simon stern has recently written, ‘Blackstone’s interest in present-ing the conceptual basis of the criminal law often seems to promise more than it delivers.’42 Yet for the student of the eighteenth-century english criminal justice sys-tem what is remarkable about Blackstone’s account is not so much the limitations of its conceptual approach to the criminal law, but rather the limitations he imposed on his own text by remaining firmly within a descriptive narrative. This was very much a reflection of the relatively undeveloped state of the criminal law. although the prosecution was required to provide evidence of guilt, it was largely up to the defend-ant to demonstrate his or her innocence. trials were quickly over. Beattie noted that at the surrey assizes on 18 august 1751, ten cases were heard in the space of seven hours, two of which resulted in capital sentences. Over the space of just four days, the court disposed of forty-three cases: thirty-seven felonies and six misdemeanours. That disposition could be so speedy is attributable to the way in which criminal trials were regarded as simple fact-finding exercises.43 defendants thus had little option but to plead the general issue, since they either were or were not guilty of the facts as alleged. Judges (and juries) were wary of confessions obtained through force or favour and were equally wary of uncorroborated evidence given by accomplices in return for a pardon or immunity, but the rules of evidence were somewhat crude. much that would be crucial to a modern trial was irrelevant in Blackstone’s day.

at its simplest, one might well be surprised by Blackstone’s statements (iV. 198)

about the need for indictments to be of ‘precise and sufficient certainty’, since he must have known what historians have long since established, that eighteenth- century indictments were full of legal fictions. fulfilling the ‘precise’ requirements of the law did not mean that the information about an individual’s occupation or residence had to be accurate. furthermore, although statutory offences were distinguished from common law ones by the phrase ‘against the statute’, the statute in question was never specified. Blackstone’s encomiums in chapter 27 on the role of the grand and petty jury in protecting defendants from the crown (or prosecution) sit somewhat oddly against his discussion of informations ex officio—that is, prosecutions initiated by the crown’s law officers in the court of king’s Bench. such prosecutions were con-troversial because they were perceived to be repressive, as they bypassed the grand jury and were usually reserved for political offences.44 Yet Blackstone justified their



41 st G. tucker, Blackstone’s Commentaries with Notes of Reference to the Constitution and Laws of the Federal

Government of the United States (Philadelphia, 1803), pp. iii–iv.

42 s. stern, ‘Blackstone’s criminal law: common law Harmonization and legislative reform (1769)’, in m. d.

dubber (ed.), Foundational Texts in Modern Criminal Law (Oxford, 2014), 65.

43 J. m. Beattie, Crime and the Courts in England 1660–1800 (Oxford, 1986), 339, 341, 377. xxiv book iv

use as ‘necessary, not only to the ease and safety but even to the very existence of the executive magistrate’ (iV. 200).

although Blackstone referred on several occasions to cases that were ultimately

decided by the twelve judges of the central common law courts (king’s Bench, common Pleas, and exchequer), he made no attempt to explain the process by which a jury returned a special verdict or by which a judgment was reserved by the presiding judge for further consideration. a special verdict occurred when the jury returned a statement of facts but professed themselves uncertain of how the law should be applied to those facts. The statement of facts was then subject to collective deliberation by the twelve judges at serjeants’ inn.45 The closest Blackstone came to a discussion of such cases was a few sentences in chapter 27 which described a special verdict as one where the jury ‘doubt the matter of law, and therefore chuse to leave it to the determination of the court’ (iV. 232–3). He did not indicate that on the rare occasions on which a special verdict was returned it was at the direction of the presiding judge, so leaving it to be implied that this was an example of the jury exercising power in its own right. interestingly, given the emphasis throughout on describing procedure, he did not go on to explain how such a verdict then came before the twelve judges for resolution.

a further striking omission in Blackstone’s account of the way in which the crim-

inal justice system processed defendants occurred in his very limited discussion of the appellate process. as noted above, defence counsel were only just beginning to appear in criminal trials. coupled with the rapidity of trials, this meant that defendants were almost always at a disadvantage: despite the maxim, repeated by Blackstone himself, that it were better that ten guilty men go free than that one innocent man be con-victed, miscarriages of justice must have been commonplace.46 as Blackstone indi-cated, the only method available to set aside a judgment was by writ of error to king’s Bench. a writ of error dealt only with mistakes on the face of the record which, since the record did not recite the evidence on which a verdict had been based, was of very little use to a defendant who had been wrongfully convicted. They were extremely rare in criminal cases.47 Blackstone identified a further layer of appeal, in that it was pos-sible to remove a verdict in king’s Bench to the House of lords. This was technically correct but it seems highly unlikely that criminal cases were ever taken to the House of lords, though the final conclusion on that issue must await further research.

Yet the absence of a formal appellate system does not mean that there was no way

to challenge a guilty verdict, even though Blackstone omitted discussing it. appeals were mounted, and mounted successfully, but the mechanism by which this was

45 J. Oldham, ‘informal law-making in england by the twelve Judges in the late 18th and early 19th centuries’,

Law and History Review, 29 (2011), 181–220.

46 The ratio of ten guilty men to one innocent was well established throughout the British isles long before

Blackstone included it in his writings. it can be found as early as 1694 in a sermon delivered in scotland, and was mentioned in a private letter from Jonathan swift to alexander Pope in 1721: J. Webster, A Sermon preached in the High Church of Edinburgh at the Election of Magistrates of the City (edinburgh, 1694), 8; The Works of Alexander Pope Esq. (1752), ix. 29.

47 i rely here on my own unpublished research into the metropolitan jurisdiction of king’s Bench. it should also

be noted that douglas Hay’s survey of staffordshire cases heard in king’s Bench between 1740 and 1800 does not

editor’s introduction to book iv xxv

done was through applications for clemency. in chapter 1 Blackstone referred to the judges respiting half of those capitally convicted through ‘compassion’, but petitions for clemency were made, and granted, on a far wider range of grounds than compas-sion alone. Petitions for clemency and the judges’ reports on them are found fitfully in the state papers before 1784; they survive in greater numbers in a discrete series after Blackstone’s death (covering 1784 to 1830). recurring themes both during Blackstone’s life and earlier were the previous good character of the defendant and his or her age (whether old age or youth).48 They also, as one might expect, included claims of innocence—effectively an appeal under another name. The petitions were referred to the judge who presided over the trial in question and the ensuing reports sometimes took on an appellate character, as they included a review of the evidence as well as of the credibility and reliability of witnesses.

although the character of the criminal trial was changing during the eighteenth

century it seems likely that the character of requests for clemency did not. in 1685, in response to the petition of John and Hanna clyatt, the presiding judge at their trial certified that the evidence against them was doubtful.49 in 1728 the bishop of exeter petitioned on behalf of defendants who had been found guilty of murder, alleging that the evidence was insufficient and the conviction was made against the direction of the presiding judge.50 Joseph smith received a conditional pardon in 1789 in part because the witness against him was of ‘bad character’.51 Occasionally the judges even considered fresh evidence. in august 1769—shortly after the publication of Book iV—a temporary reprieve was issued for moses alexander when new evidence sug-gested his innocence.52 michael Gough was pardoned in 1789 as the judge was convinced, following an investigation by ‘a gentleman of credit & fortune’, that the sole witness was ‘mistaken as to the person of the prisoner’.53 George shawell was convicted of assault with intent to extort after he failed to convince a grand jury that charles Henry Brawn was guilty of an attempted homosexual act. He was pardoned in 1786 when subsequent events, attested by ‘three irreproachable witnesses’, sug-gested that Brawn was guilty of a sexual assault on a young boy, leading to the belief that shawell had indeed been the victim of a homosexual predator.54

The afterlife of the Commentaries

much of Book iV is irrelevant to any modern jurist. its references to specific statutes meant that it required constant updating, even (as has been seen) during Blackstone’s lifetime, let alone in the centuries since. What is left is, as it were, the more complex,

48 for a wider discussion of the social function of clemency, see d. Hay, ‘Property, authority and the criminal

law’, in d. Hay, P. linebaugh et al., Albion’s Fatal Tree (1975).

49 Calendar of State Papers. Domestic Series: James II: 1685, pp. 114–15. 50 tna, sP 36/5/7.

51 tna, HO 9/26, ff. 115–16.

52 Calendar of Home Office Papers, 1766–9, p. 486. 53 tna, HO 47/8/2, ff. 2–3.

xxvi book iv

and arguably rather more important, containing text—the wider attempts to explain the laws and to supply a historical context and rationale for them.

it is this that gives Book iV an enduring afterlife. The Commentaries continue in

some respects to be regarded as authoritative, in that Blackstone is thought to have produced an accurate picture of english law as it was practised and understood in eighteenth-century england. This is particularly true of the usa, where, despite the strictures of st George tucker and Thomas Jefferson, originalists (those who main-tain that the american constitution should be interpreted as if its meaning were fixed at its enactment) somewhat surprisingly hold that Blackstone, who was a tory, a committed monarchist, and enemy of american independence, provided a portrait of english law as it would have been understood—and accepted—by the founding fathers. indeed, Jessie allen has recently pointed out that the rise of originalism is amongst the factors that have resulted in the Commentaries undergoing ‘a renais-sance at the supreme court’.55

The difficulties of such a renaissance are readily illustrated by reference to just two

supreme court citations. in one case, for example, Justice alito quoted coke and Blackstone for a definition of extortion.56 The citation to Blackstone is superfluous because it is circular. Blackstone referenced his definition to Hawkins; Hawkins refer-enced it to coke, and indeed Blackstone’s wording is far closer to coke than to Hawkins.

a more disconcerting example is Justice scalia’s dissenting opinion in Roper v

Simmons, in which he cited Blackstone and Hale in support of the notion that in 1791, when the eighth amendment (prohibiting cruel and unusual punishments) was passed, ‘the death penalty could theoretically be imposed for the crime of a seven-year-old, though there was a rebuttable presumption of incapacity to commit a capi-tal (or other) felony until the age of fourteen’.57 The operative word, of course, is ‘theoretically’, for Blackstone was simply paraphrasing Hale. Hale can scarcely be used as evidence of opinion in 1791; by that date he had been dead for over a century. Blackstone’s examples of minors who were actually executed also came from Hale and belonged to what was then already a distant past. nor was this past one to be emulated, for it is quite clear from his other references that Blackstone was extremely uneasy about capital punishment, even for adults, let alone for minors. as already noted (p. xiv), his one reference to a sentence of death passed on a minor in his own lifetime was to the case of William York, whose life was spared precisely because the execution of children was indeed repugnant to jurists half a century before the pas-sage of the eighth amendment.

One is tempted to repeat Thomas ruggles’ injunction to interleave blank pages so

that the reader can track and take note of Blackstone’s citations. Perhaps the best advice one can offer about using the Commentaries for modern purposes is ‘treat with care’.

ruth Paley

55 J. allen, ‘reading Blackstone in the twenty-first century’, in W. Prest (ed.), Re­interpreting Blackstone’s

Commentaries (Oxford, 2014), 215.

56 sekhar v united states, 133 s. ct 2720 (2012).





Note to the Reader





This edition seeks to identify Blackstone’s changes to the text of the Commentaries between the first edition of 1765–9 and the ninth and first posthumous edition which appeared in 1783 under the editorship of dr richard Burn.1 all such authorial ‘varia’ are marked in each chapter by a preceding numeral enclosed in angled brackets. These cues are keyed to sequential lists, similarly numbered and grouped by chapter, at the end of each volume. Here, every item is preceded by the number of the edition in which the authorial change first occurred, enclosed in square brackets. The listing commences with the relevant word, clause, sentence, or longer passage from the first edition, followed by a vertical divider | separating the original from the altered text. Omitted text or footnotes are annotated accordingly, or indicated by an omission on the right-hand side of the divider. textual changes to the same sentence or paragraph over more than one edition are represented by inserting the relevant information in square brackets, or listed sequentially following the first numbered entry.

to keep the varia lists within manageable proportions, the following are generally

ignored: (i) changes in punctuation and/or spelling; (ii) unambiguous typographical errors, including misspellings, omissions, and erroneous repetition of single words corrected in subsequent editions; (iii) incorporation of footnotes in text or vice versa; (iv) changes in cross-references due to different pagination in later editions; (v) alterations made in one edition reversed in the next or following editions; (vi) changes of form which do not change meaning, as where adjacent words are transposed, or para graphs are recast.

no attempt has been made to modernize Blackstone’s language. While his spelling

often does not accord with current usage, most variants are simply phonetic equivalents of the modern form. except for removing the apostrophe from the possessive ‘it’s’, a similar policy applies to punctuation, italics, and the use of capital letters, although evident misspellings and typographical errors are silently corrected.

Blackstone’s footnotes present difficulties of a different kind. apart from the use of

lower-case letters of the alphabet rather than numerals, both for in-text cues and foot-of-page markers (usually, but not always, without the letters ‘j’ and ‘v’), the notes themselves include often cryptic and inconsistent bibliographical citations, to which no key was originally provided. While the following list of abbreviations identifies most such references, a few uncertainties remain. it should also be noted that Blackstone’s quotation marks often denote paraphrases rather than verbatim transcriptions.

editorial annotations and interventions are enclosed in square brackets, while

editorial footnotes are placed below those of Blackstone. Where his footnotes refer to published reports of identifiable law cases, the case name is added before the citation. an appended table of cases provides dates and, where possible, a reference to the xxviii book iv

corresponding volume of the English Reports (although Blackstone sometimes cites differently paginated early editions of the nominate reports reproduced in that stand-ard series), the yearbooks, or other sources. The table of statutes, also found at the end of the volume, is a chronological list and page index of charters and parliamentary legislation mentioned both in the text and footnotes.

in the text, the original pagination is indicated by numbers placed in the margins.

in the footnotes Blackstone’s own cross-references are retained, but supplemented with editorial cross-references keyed to the pagination of this edition.

The Commentaries use the old-style Julian calendar, in which each new year began

on 25 march rather than 1 January, for events and parliamentary statutes before 1752, when Great Britain adopted the Gregorian calendar. Thus the Bill of rights, presented to William and mary in february 1689 according to our modern calendar, is dated by Blackstone to the previous year.

Wilfrid Prest





Abbreviations




Books listed were published in london, unless otherwise noted; the date given is that of first publication, together with the date of any later edition which appears to have been owned or used by Blackstone; for relevant book lists see Prest, Blackstone, 36–9. Books of the Bible (king James version) are not separately listed.

General Abbreviations

abr. abridgment

a.r. anno regni [regnal year]

append. appendix

b. book

B.r. Bancum Regis [king’s Bench, court of] c., ch., cap. chapter

d. penny; died

f. folio

fl. flourished

H., Hil. Hilary (term)

in calc to the end

l., l., lib. book or pound sterling

l., ll leges [laws]

m., mich. michaelmas (term)

OBO The Proceedings of the Old Bailey, www.oldbaileyonline.org Ot Old testament

pl. plea(s), pleading

s. shilling

stat. statute

t., tit. title

tr. tract; translated

trin. trinity (term)

Westm. Westminster

YB, Yearb. yearbook

Bibliographical Abbreviations

anders., and. Les Reports du Treserudite Edmund Anderson, 2 vols (1664–5) ass., ass. Pl. Liber Assisarum et Placitorum Coronae (c. 1514; 1678) Bac. elem., elem. f. Bacon, The Elements of the Common Lawes of England (1630) Bacon, of english gov n. Bacon, An Historical and Political Discourse of the Laws and Government

of England (1689)

Barr., Barrington on the statutes d. Barrington, Observations on the … Statutes (1766) Becc., Beccar. c. Beccaria, Dei Delitti e del Pene (1764), tr. as On Crimes and Punishments

(1767)

Bracton Bract., H. de Bracton [attrib.], De Legibus et Consuetudinibus Angliæ (1569) Brad. Hist. r. Brady, A Continuation of the Complete History of England (1700) Briton Britt., Summa de Legibus Anglie que vocatur Bretone (c. 1530; 1640) Bro., Bro Abr. r. Brooke, La Graunde Abridgement (1573) Brownl. [r. Brownlow and J. Goldesborough], Reports of … Cases in Law, 2 parts

(1651–2)

Bulstr. Reports of Edward Bulstrode (1657–9) Burn., Burn’s Justice r. Burn, The Justice of the Peace and Parish Officer, 2 vols (1755) xxx book iv

Burnet’s Hist. [G. Burnet], Bishop Burnet’s History of His Own Time, 2 vols

(1724–34)

Burr. J. Burrow, Reports of Cases … in the Court of King’s Bench, Part the

Fourth, 5 vols (1766–80)

caesar de bell. Gall. caesar, Commentarii de Bello Gallico carte, life of Ormond t. carte, An History of … James, Duke of Ormonde, 3 vols (1735–6) cic. cicero

cic. de LL. cicero, De Legibus Claus., claus see Rot. claus. co. litt. e. coke, The First Part of the Institutes of the Laws of England, or A

Commentary upon Littleton (1628)

Cod. cod. Codex Justinianus com. Journ. Journals of the House of Commons (1742–) comyns dig. J. comyns, Digest of the Laws of England, 5 vols (1762–7) Co nsid., Considerations on

the law of forfeiture, Law of forfeit. [c. Yorke], Some Considerations on the Law of Forfeiture for High

Treason (1744)

Cosmogr. s. munster, Cosmographia (1574) cowp. H. cowper, Reports of Cases … King’s Bench (1783) cro. car. The Reports of Sir George Croke Knight (1657) crompt. a. fitzherbert and r. crompton, LOffice et Aucthoritie de Iustice de

Peace (1583)

dal. W. dalison, Les Reports des divers special Cases (1689) dalt. Just. m. dalton, The Countrey Justice (1618; rev. edn. by W. nelson, 1727) dav. J. davies, Le Primer Report des Cases & Matters en Ley … en les Courts

del Roy en Ireland (dublin, 1615)

De M. G., de mor. Germ. see tacitus de off. cicero, De Officiis decret. Decretum Gratiani Decretal. Decretals, collected (various editions) Dialog. de Scacch Dialogus de Scaccario in t. madox, The History and Antiquities of the

Exchequer (1711)

domat. publ. law. J. domat, Les Loix Civiles dans leur Ordre Naturel (Paris, 1689), tr. as

The Civil Law in its Natural Order, 2 vols (1720)

dr. & st. c. st German, Doctor and Student: Or, Dialogues between a Doctor of

Divinity and a Student in the Laws of England (1528–31; 1697)

duck de authorit. jur. civ. a. duck, De Usu et Authoritate Juris Civilis Romanorum (1653) dufresne. Gloss c. du fresne du cange, Glossarium ad Scriptores Mediae & Infimae

Latinitatis, 6 vols (Paris, 1678; 1733–6)

dyer [J. dyer], Cy Ensount Ascuns Novel Cases (1585) eadm. eadmer, Historia Novorum in Anglia , ed. J. selden (1623) eir., eirenarch see lamb. Eir. ellys, Of english liberty a. ellys, The Spiritual and Temporal Liberty of Subjects in England

(1765)

ess. on gov. J. locke, Two Treatises of Government (1689) Extrav. Extravagantes [papal decretals] f. n. B. a. fitzherbert, La Novelle Natura Brevium (1534; 1635) farr. t. farresley, Modern Cases Argued and Adjudged in the Court of

King’s Bench (1716)

Festus V. flaccus, De Verborum Significatione, ed. s. P. festus (The Lexicon of

Festus)

Feud. Libri Feudorum Ff. Justinian’s Digest fitzh. survey John fitzherbert, Boke of Surveying (first printed 1523) fitzherbert see crompt. finch. l H. finch, Law, or a Discourse Thereof (1627; 1678) flet. Fleta, seu Commentarius Iuris Anglicani, ed. J. selden (1647) fo rtesc. de LL. Angl., de laude LL. Angl. J. fortescue, De Laudibus Legum Angliae (1543?) abbreviations xxxi

fost. foster. foster rep. m. foster, A Report of Some Proceedings … for the Trial of the

Rebels in the Year 1746, to which are Added Discourses Upon a Few

Branches of the Crown Law (Oxford, 1762) [foster’s Crown Law]

fox, acts and mon. J. foxe, The Book of Martyrs, the Acts and Monuments of the

Church (1563)

Gilb. exch. G. (or J.) Gilbert, A Treatise on the Court of Exchequer (1759) Gilb. Hist. c. P. G. (or J.) Gilbert, The History and Practice of the Court of Common

Pleas (1737)

Glanv., Glanvil ranulf de Glanvill [attrib.], Tractatus de Legibus et

Consuetudinibus Regni Angliae (c. 1554)

Gloss., Glossar sir Henry spelman, Glossarium Archaiologicum (1664) Grand coustumier Le Grand Coutumier … de Normandie (rouen, c. 1483); also ed. G.

le rouillé (rouen, 1539)

Gr and instructions for framing a new

code of laws for the russian empire [catherine ii], The Grand Instructions to the Commissioners

appointed to frame a new Code of Laws, tr. m. tatischeff (1768)

Gravin. Orig., orig. jur.civ. G. Gravina, Originum Juris Civilis, 2 vols (naples, 1713) Grotius, On numb. Hugonis Grotii Annotationes in Vetus & Novum Testamentum

(1727)

Grotius, de j. b. & p.; de jure b. & p. H. Grotius, De Jure Belli ac Pacis (Paris, 1625; amsterdam, 1720) Guicciard. Hist f. Guicciardini, The Historie of Guicciardine, conteining the Warres

of Italie (1579); The History of Italy, 10 vols (1754)

Hal. Hist. c. l. m. Hale, The History of the Common Law of England (1713) Hal. P. c., Hal. sum m. Hale, Historia Placitorum Coronae. The History of the Pleas of

the Crown, ed. s. emlyn, 2 vols (1736)

Hawk P.c. W. Hawkins, A Treatise of the Pleas of the Crown, 2 vols (1716–21) Hengham r. de Hengham, Magna and Parva, ed. J. selden, in J. fortescue,

De Laudibus Legum Angliae (1616)

Hist. of reb. e. Hyde, earl of clarendon, The History of the Rebellion and Civil

Wars in England, 3 vols (Oxford, 1702–4)

Hob. The Reports of That Learned Sir Henry Hobart (1641) Holingsh. r. Holingshed, Chronicles, 2 vols (1577) Hor. ad Aug Horace, Ad Augustum Hughes The Works of Mr. Edmund Spenser, ed. J. Hughes, 6 vols (1715) Hume, Hume Hist. of G. B. d. Hume, The History of Great Britain, 2 vols (1754–7) Hutt. The Reports of … Sir Richard Hutton (1656) Ingulph Rerum Anglicarum Scriptores post Bedam … Ingulphi Abbatis

Croylandensis Historiarum lib. I, ed. H. savile (1596)

inst. e. coke, Institutes of the Lawes of England, 4 vols (1628–44) Jon. Les Reports de Sir William Jones (1675) t. Jones t. Jones, Les Reports de Divers Special Cases (1695), tr. as Reports of

Several Special Cases (1729)

Judic. Civit. Lund. Wilk. see Wilk. LL. Ang. Sax. keilw. Relationes quorundam Casuum Selectorum ex Libris Roberti

Keilwey (1602)

kel, kelyng, kelynge J. kelyng, A Report of Divers Cases in Pleas of the Crown (1708) kitch. of courts J. kitchin, Le Court Leete, et Court Baron (1580), tr. as Jurisdictions:

Or The Lawful Authority of Courts (1651)

lamb. arch. W. lambarde, Archeion, or A Discourse upon the High Courts of

Justice in England (1635)

lamb. eir. W. lambarde, Eirenarcha: or, Of the Office of the Justices of Peace

(1581)

LL. Athelstan., Aethelst., Edm.,

Edw. Conf., Edw., Aelfr., Aelfredi,

Alured, Inae, Cnuti, Canut see Wilk. LL. Ang. Sax.

lord kaymes [H. Home, lord kaymes], Historical Law Tracts, 2 vols

(edinburgh, 1758)

lords Journ. Journals of the House of Lords (1767–) xxxii book iv

lyndewode W. lyndwood, Constitutiones Provinciales Ecclesiae Anglicanae

(Oxford, 1483; 1679)

mirr., mirror a. Horne [attrib.], The Booke Called, the Mirrour of Justices (1646) mod. modern reports. or select cases, 12 vols (1682–1741) mod. un. Hist., mod. univ. Hist. The Modern Part of an Universal History, from the Earliest Account of

Time, 44 vols (1759–66)

montague, lady m.W. lett. Letters of the Right Honourable Lady M[ar]y W[ortle]y M[ontagu]e, 3

vols (1763)

montesq. sp. l. c.-l. de secondat, Baron de montesquieu, L’Esprit des Loix (Paris,

1748); tr. as The Spirit of Laws, 2 vols (1750)

moor. Cases Collect and Report per Sir Fra[ncis] Moore (1663) north’s life of lord Guilford r. north, The Life of the Right Honourable Francis North, Baron of

Guilford (1742)

Nov. Justinian’s Novellae Constitutiones P. Wms W. Peere Williams, Reports of Cases … in the High Court of Chancery,

3 vols (1741–6)

Petit. LL. Attic. s. Petit, Leges Atticae (Paris, 1635) Plato de LL., de Leg. Plato, Of the Laws Plowd. Les Comentaries, ou les Reportes de Edmund Plowden, 2 vols (1571–8) Plutarch in vit. Plutarch, Lives Pop., Poph. Reports and Cases Collected by the Learned Sir John Popham (1656) Po tter, Pott. ant., Potter. antiq.,

Potter. antiqu. J. Potter, Archaeologiae Graecae or the Antiquities of Greece (Oxford, 1697)

PROME The Parliament Rolls of Medieval England 1275–1504, ed c.

Given-Wilson, 16 vols (2005)

Pryn. on 4 inst W. Prynne, Brief Animadversions on … the Fourth Part of the Institutes

of the Lawes of England … compiled by … Sir E. Cooke (1669)

Pryn. rec. append. W. Prynne, An Exact Chronological Vindication and Historical

Demonstration, 3 vols (1665–8) [Prynne’s records]

Pu ff., Puffendorf, Law of Nat.

and N., Puff. L of N., L. of

Nat. and N., L. of N. s. von Pufendorf, De Jure Naturae et Gentium (lund, 1672), tr. as Of

the Law of Nature and Nations (1703)

Qu. curt. Quintus curtius, Histories of Alexander the Great rast. ent. W. rastell, A Colleccion of Entrees (1566) raym. t. raymond, The Reports of Divers Special Cases (1696) rep. Les Reports de Edward Coke, 13 vols (1600–59) robertson. cha. V W. robertson, The History of the Reign of the Emperor Charles V, 3

vols (1769)

roll. rep Les Reports de Henry Rolle, 2 vols (1675–6) Rot. claus. Rotuli Clausarum (close rolls) Rot. Parl. Rotuli Parliamentorum, 7 vols (1767–77) Rushw., rushw. coll. J. rushworth, Historical Collections, 7 vols (1659–1701) rym., rym. feod. t. rymer and r. sanderson, eds., Foedera, Conventiones, Literae, 20

vols (1727–35)

salk. W. salkeld, Reports of Cases adjudg’d in the Court of King’s Bench, 3

vols (1717–24)

saund. Les Reports du … Edmund Saunders (1686) scobell A Collection of Acts and Ordinances, ed. H. scobell, 2 vols (1657–8) [selden] de legib. Hebræor J. selden, De Jure Naturali et Gentium juxta Disciplinam Hebraeorum

(1640)

seld. In Flet. Fleta, seu Commentarius Juris Anglicani, ed. J. selden (1647) selden, judic. in parl. J. selden, Of the Judicature in Parliaments (1681) seld. tit. of hon. J. selden, Titles of Honor (1614) [selden] Uxor Ebraic. J. selden Uxor Hebraica (1646; 1673) show. The Reports of Sir Bartholomew Shower, 2 vols (1708–20) sid., siderf. t. siderfin, Les Reports des Divers Special Cases … en le Court del Bank

le Roy, 2 parts (1683–4)

smith’s common. t. smith, De Republica Anglorum (1583) abbreviations xxxiii

sp. l. see montesq. spelm. Gloss. H. spelman, Glossarium Archaiologicum (1664; 1687) Spelman Cod. see Wilk. LL. Ang. Sax spencer’s state of ireland see Hughes st German see dr. & st. st. tr., state tr., st A Complete Collection of State Trials, ed. s. emlyn et al., 10 vols

(1730–66)

staundf. P. c. W. staunford, Les Plees del Coron (1557) st iernhook, de jure Sueon.,

stiernh. de jure Sueon.,

stiernhook, de jure Goth. J. stiernhöök, De Jure Sueonum et Gothorum Vetusto (stockholm, 1672)

st., stra. J. strange, Reports of Adjudged Cases, 2 vols (1755) styl. rep. W. style, Narrationes Modernae, or Modern Reports (1658) tacitus, de M. G., de More Germ. tacitus, Germania Tho. rudborne Hist. maj. Winton. t. rudborne, Historia Major de Fundatione et Successione Ecclesiae

Wintoniensis (1691)

tovey’s Angl. judaic. d. tovey, Anglia Judaica: or the History and Antiquities of the Jews in

England (Oxford, 1738)

tully see cic.

utop. t. more, Utopia (Glasgow, 1750) Valer. maxim. Valerii Maximi de Factorum Dictorumque Memorabilium Exemplis

Libri Novem (Paris, 1588; london, 1673)

Vern. Cases Argued … in the High Court of Chancery, 2 vols (1726) Voltaire Siecl. Louis xiv Voltaire, Le Siècle de Louis XIV (Berlin, 1751) Vouglans P.-f. m. de Vouglans, Institutes au droit criminel (Paris, 1757) West. symbol. W. West, Symbolaeographia (1590) Wilk. concil. d. Wilkins, Concilia Magnae Britanniae et Hiberniae, 446–1717, 4 vols

(1737)

Wilk. LL. Ang. Sax. d. Wilkins, Leges Anglo­Saxonicae Ecclesiasticae et Civiles …

subjungitur Henr. Spelmanni Codex Legum Veterum Statutorum Regni Angliae … (1721)





Commentaries


on the



Laws

of



engLand.



BOOk tHe fOurtH.



BY

William BlackstOne, esq.

solicitor general to her majesty.



OXfOrd,

printed at the clarendon press.

m. dcc. xlix.





chapter the first. 1




of the nature of crimes;

and their punishment.

We are now arrived at the fourth and last branch of these commentaries; which treats of public wrongs, or crimes and misdemesnors. For we may remember that, in the beginning of the preceding volumea, wrongs were 〈1〉 divided into two sorts or species; the one private, and the other public. Private wrongs, which are frequently termed civil injuries, were the subject of that entire book: we are now therefore, lastly, to proceed to the consideration of public wrongs, or crimes and misdemesnors; with the means of their prevention and punishment. In the pursuit of which subject I shall consider, in the first place, the general nature of crimes and punishments; secondly, the persons capable of committing crimes; thirdly, their several degrees of guilt, as 2 principals or accessories; fourthly, the several species of crimes, with the punishment annexed to each by the laws of England; fifthly, the means of preventing their perpetration; and, sixthly, the method of inflicting those punishments, which the law has annexed to each several crime and misdemesnor.

First, as to the general nature of crimes and their punishment: the discussion and

admeasurement of which forms in every country the code of criminal law; or, as it is more usually denominated with us in England, the doctrine of the pleas of the crown: so called, because the king, in whom centers the majesty of the whole community, is supposed by the law to be the person injured by every infraction of the public rights belonging to that community, and is therefore in all cases the proper prosecutor for every public offenceb.

The knowlege of this branch of jurisprudence, which teaches the nature, extent,

and degrees of every crime, and adjusts to its adequate and necessary penalty, is of the utmost importance to every individual in the state. For (as a very great master of the crown lawc has observed upon a similar occasion) no rank or elevation in life, no uprightness of heart, no prudence or circumspection of conduct, should tempt a man to conclude, that he may not at some time or other be deeply interested in these researches. The infirmities of the best among us, the vices and ungovernable passions of others, the instability of all human affairs, and the numberless unforeseen events, which the compass of a day may bring forth, will teach us (upon a moment’s reflection) that to know with precision what the laws of our country have forbidden, and the deplorable consequences to which a wilful disobedience may expose us, is a matter of universal concern.

a Book III. ch. 1.

b See Vol. I. p. 268 [I. 173].

c Sir Michael Foster. pref. to rep. [Foster, Crown Law, iii.]

2 of public wrongs

In proportion to the importance of the criminal law, ought also to be the care and

3 attention of the legislature in properly forming and enforcing it. It should be founded

upon principles that are permanent, uniform, and universal; and always conformable to the dictates of truth and justice, the feelings of humanity, and the indelible rights of mankind: though it sometimes (provided there be no transgression of these eternal boundaries) may be modified, narrowed, or enlarged, according to the local or occasional necessities of the state which it is meant to govern. And yet, either from a want of attention to these principles in the first concoction of the laws, and adopting in their stead the impetuous dictates of avarice, ambition, and revenge; from retaining the discordant political regulations, which successive conquerors or factions have established, in the various revolutions of government; from giving a lasting efficacy to sanctions that were intended to be temporary, and made (as lord Bacon1 expresses it) merely upon the spur of the occasion; or from, lastly, too hastily employing such means as are greatly disproportionate to their end, in order to check the progress of some very prevalent offence; from some, or from all, of these causes it hath happened, that the criminal law is in every country of Europe more rude and imperfect than the civil. I shall not here enter into any minute enquiries concerning the local constitutions of other nations; the inhumanity and mistaken policy of which have been sufficiently pointed out by ingenious writers of their ownd. But even with us in England, where our crown-law is with justice supposed to be more nearly advanced to perfection; where crimes are more accurately defined, and penalties less uncertain and arbitrary; where all our accusations are public, and our trials in the face of the world; where torture is unknown, and every delinquent is judged by such of his equals, against whom he can form no exception nor even a personal dislike;—even here we shall occasionally find room to remark some particulars, that seem to want revision and amendment. These have chiefly arisen from too scrupulous an adherence to some rules of the antient common law, when the reasons have ceased upon which those

4 rules were founded; from not repealing such of the old penal laws as are either

obsolete or absurd; and from too little care and attention in framing and passing new ones. The enacting of penalties, to which a whole nation shall be subject, ought not to be left as a matter of indifference to the passions or interests of a few, who upon temporary motives may prefer or support such a bill; but be calmly and maturely considered by persons, who know what provisions the law has already made to remedy the mischief complained of, who can from experience foresee the probable consequences of those which are now proposed, and who will judge without passion or prejudice how adequate they are to the evil. It is never usual in the house of peers even to read a private bill, which may affect the property of an individual, without first referring it to some of the learned judges, and hearing their report thereoe. And

d Baron Montesquieu, marquis Beccaria, &c. e See Vol. II. p. 345 [II. 234–5].

1 According to Francis Bacon, Henry VII’s laws were ‘deep, and not vulgar; not made upon the spur of a

particular occasion for the present, but out of providence of the future, to make the estate of his people still more





chapter 1 3


surely equal precaution is necessary,2 when laws are to be established, which may affect the property, the liberty, and perhaps even the lives, of thousands. Had such a reference taken place, it is impossible that in the eighteenth century it could ever have been made a capital crime, to break down (however maliciously) the mound of a fishpond, whereby any fish shall escape; or to cut down a cherry tree in an orchardf. Were even a committee appointed but once in an hundred years to revise the criminal law, it could not have continued to this hour a felony without benefit of clergy,3 to be seen for one month in the company of persons who call themselves, or are called, Egyptiansg.4

It is true, that these outrageous penalties, being seldom or never inflicted, are hardly

known to be law by the public: but that rather aggravates the mischief, by laying a snare for the unwary. Yet they cannot but occur to the observation of any one, who hath undertaken the task of examining the great outlines of the English law, and tracing them up to their principles: and it is the duty of such a one to hint them with decency to those, 5

whose abilities and stations enable them to apply the remedy. Having therefore premised this apology for some of the ensuing remarks, which might otherwise seem to savour of arrogance, I proceed now to consider (in the first place) the general nature of crimes.

I. A crime, or misdemesnor, is an act committed, or omitted, in violation of a

public law, either forbidding or commanding it. This general definition comprehends both crimes and misdemesnors; which, properly speaking, are mere synonymous terms: though, in common usage, the word, “crimes,” is made to denote such offences as are of a deeper and more atrocious dye; while smaller faults, and omissions of less consequence, are comprized under the gentler name of “misdemesnors” only.

The distinction of public wrongs from private, of crimes and misdemesnors from

civil injuries, seems principally to consist in this: that private wrongs, or civil injuries, are an infringement or privation of the civil rights which belong to individuals, considered merely as individuals; public wrongs, or crimes and misdemesnors, are a breach and violation of the public rights and duties, due to the whole community, considered as a community, in its social aggregate capacity. As if I detain a field from another man, to which the law has given him a right, this is a civil injury, and not a crime; for here only the right of an individual is concerned, and it is immaterial to the public, which of us is in possession of the land: but treason, murder, and robbery are properly ranked among crimes; since, besides the injury done to individuals, they strike at the very being of society; which cannot possibly subsist, where actions of this sort are suffered to escape with impunity.

In all cases the crime includes an injury: every public offence is also a private

wrong, and somewhat more; it affects the individual, and it likewise affects the

f Stat. 9 Geo. I. c. 22. 31 Geo. II. c. 42.

g Stat. 5 Eliz. c. 20.

2 Since 1706 procedure in the House of Lords (where most private bills originated) had required the judges to

scrutinize and report on every such bill before it could be considered by the House. 3 See further IV. 236–41.

4 i.e. the Romani, those travelling people whose supposed Egyptian origins led to the term ‘gypsy’, now widely 4 of public wrongs

6 community. Thus treason in imagining the king’s death involves in it conspiracy

against an individual, which is also a civil injury: but as this species of treason in its consequences principally tends to the dissolution of government, and the destruction thereby of the order and peace of society, this denominates it a crime of the highest magnitude. Murder is an injury to the life of an individual; but the law of society considers principally the loss which the state sustains by being deprived of a member, and the pernicious example thereby set, for others to do the like. Robbery may be considered in the same view: it is an injury to private property; but, were that all, a civil satisfaction in damages might atone for it: the public mischief is the thing, for the prevention of which our laws have made it a capital offence. In these gross and atrocious injuries the private wrong is swallowed up in the public: we seldom hear any mention made of satisfaction to the individual; the satisfaction to the community being so very great. And indeed, as the public crime is not otherwise avenged than by forfeiture of life and property, it is impossible afterwards to make any reparation for the private wrong; which can only be had from the body or goods of the aggressor. But there are crimes of an inferior nature, in which the public punishment is not so severe, but it affords room for a private compensation also: and herein the distinction of crimes from civil injuries is very apparent. For instance; in the case of battery, or beating another, the aggressor may be indicted for this at the suit of the king, for disturbing the public peace, and be punished criminally by fine and imprisonment: and the party beaten may also have his private remedy by action of trespass for the injury, which he in particular sustains, and recover a civil satisfaction in damages. So also, in case of a public nusance, as digging a ditch across a highway, this is punishable by indictment, as a common offence to the whole kingdom and all his majesty’s subjects: but if any individual sustains any special damage thereby, as laming his horse, breaking his carriage, or the like, the offender

7 may be compelled to make ample satisfaction, as well for the private injury, as for

the public wrong.

Upon the whole we may observe, that in taking cognizance of all wrongs, or

unlawful acts, the law has a double view: viz. not only to redress the party injured, by either restoring to him his right, if possible; or by giving him an equivalent; the manner of doing which was the object of our enquiries in the preceding book of these commentaries: but also to secure to the public the benefit of society, by preventing or punishing every breach and violation of those laws, which the sovereign power has thought proper to establish, for the government and tranquillity of the whole. What those breaches are, and how prevented or punished, are to be considered in the present book.

II. The nature of crimes and misdemesnors in general being thus ascertained

and distinguished, I proceed in the next place to consider the general nature of punishments: which are evils or 〈2〉 inconveniences consequent upon crimes and misdemesnors; being devised, denounced, and inflicted by human laws, in con-sequence of disobedience or misbehaviour in those, to regulate whose conduct such laws were respectively made. And herein we will briefly consider the power, the end, and the measure of human punishment.





chapter 1 5


1. As to the power of human punishment, or the right of the temporal legislator to

inflict discretionary penalties for crimes and misdemesnorsh. It is clear, that the right of punishing crimes against the law of nature, as murder and the like, is in a state of mere nature vested in every individual. For it must be vested in somebody; otherwise the laws of nature would be vain and fruitless, if none were empowered to put them in execution: and if that power is vested in any one, it must also be vested in all mankind; since all are by nature equal. Whereof the first murderer Cain was so 8 sensible, that we find himi expressing his apprehensions, that whoever should find him would slay him.5 In a state of society this right is transferred from individuals to the sovereign power; whereby men are prevented from being judges in their own causes, which is one of the evils that civil government was intended to remedy. Whatever power therefore individuals had of punishing offences against the law of nature, that is now vested in the magistrate alone; who bears the sword of justice by the consent of the whole community. And to this precedent natural power of individuals must be referred that right, which some have argued to belong to every state, (though, in fact, never exercised by any) of punishing not only their own subjects, but also foreign embassadors, even with death itself; in case they have offended, not indeed against the municipal laws of the country, but against the divine laws of nature, and become liable thereby to forfeit their lives for their guiltk.

As to offences merely against the laws of society, which are only mala prohibita

[wrong because forbidden], and not mala in se [intrinsically wrong]; the temporal magistrate is also empowered to inflict coercive penalties for such transgressions: and this by the consent of individuals; who, in forming societies, did either tacitly or expressly invest the sovereign power with a right of making laws, and of enforcing obedience to them when made, by exercising, upon their non-observance, severities adequate to the evil. The lawfulness therefore of punishing such criminals is founded upon this principle, that the law by which they suffer was made by their own consent; 〈3〉 it is part of the original contract into which they entered, when first they engaged in society; it was calculated for, and has long contributed to, their own security.

This right therefore, being thus conferred by universal consent, gives to the state

exactly the same power, and no more, over all its members, as each individual member had naturally over himself or others. Which has occasioned some to doubt, 9 how far a human legislature ought to inflict capital punishments for positive offences; offences against the municipal law only, and not against the law of nature; since no individual has, naturally, a power of inflicting death upon himself or others for actions in themselves indifferent. With regard to offences mala in se, capital punishments are in some instances inflicted by the immediate command of God himself to all mankind; as, in the case of murder, by the precept delivered to Noah, their common ancestor and representative, “whoso sheddeth man’s blood, by man

h See Grotius, de j. b. & p. l. 2. c. 20. Puffendorf, L. of Nat. and N. b. 8. c. 3. i Gen. iv. 14.

k See Vol. I. pag. 254 [I. 164–5].

6 of public wrongs

shall his blood be shedl.” In other instances they are inflicted after the example of the creator, in his positive code of laws for the regulation of the Jewish republic; as in the case of the crime against nature.6 But they are sometimes inflicted without such express warrant or example, at the will and discretion of the human legislature; as for forgery, for 〈4〉 robbery, and sometimes for offences of a lighter kind. Of these we are principally to speak: as these crimes are, none of them, offences against natural, but only against social, rights; 〈5〉 not even robbery itself, unless it be a robbery from one’s person: all others being an infringement of that right of property, which, as we have formerly seenm, owes its origin not to the law of nature, but merely to civil society.

The practice of inflicting capital punishments, for offences of human institution,

is thus justified by that great and good man, sir Matthew Halen: “when offences grow enormous, frequent, and dangerous to a kingdom or state, destructive or highly pernicious to civil societies, and to the great insecurity and danger of the kingdom or its inhabitants, severe punishment and even death itself is necessary to be annexed to laws in many cases by the prudence of lawgivers.” It is therefore the enormity, or dangerous tendency, of the crime, that alone can warrant any earthly legislature in

10 putting him to death that commits it. It is not its frequency only, or the difficulty of

otherwise preventing it, that will excuse our attempting to prevent it by a wanton effusion of human blood. For, though the end of punishment is to deter men from offending, it never can follow from thence, that it is lawful to deter them at any rate and by any means; since there may be unlawful methods of enforcing obedience even to the justest laws. Every humane legislator will be therefore extremely cautious of establishing laws that inflict the penalty of death, especially for slight offences, or such as are merely positive. He will expect a better reason for his so doing, than that loose one which generally is given; that it is found by former experience that no lighter penalty will be effectual. For is it found upon farther experience, that capital punishments are more effectual? Was the vast territory of all the Russias worse regulated under the late empress Elizabeth, than under her more sanguinary pre-decessors? Is it now, under Catherine II, less civilized, less social, less secure? And yet we are assured, that neither of these illustrious princesses have, throughout their whole administration, inflicted the penalty of death: and the latter has, upon full 〈6〉 experience of its being useless, nay even pernicious, given orders for abolishing it entirely throughout her extensive dominionso. But indeed, were capital punishments proved by experience to be a sure and effectual remedy, that would not prove the necessity (upon which the justice and propriety depend) of inflicting them upon all occasions when other expedients fail. I fear this reasoning would extend a great deal too far. For instance, the damage done to our public roads by loaded waggons is

l Gen. ix. 6.

m Book II. ch. 1.

n 1 Hal. P. C. 13.

o Grand instructions for framing a new code of laws for the Russian empire. §. 210 [tr. M. Tatischeff, 1768].

6 The general reference is to Mosaic law, as found in early books of the Old Testament; ‘the crime against nature’





chapter 1 7


universally allowed, and many laws have been made to prevent it; none of which have hitherto proved effectual.7 But it does not therefore follow, that it would be just for the legislature to inflict death upon every obstinate carrier, who defeats or eludes the provisions of former statutes. Where the evil to be prevented is not adequate to the violence of the preventive, a sovereign that thinks seriously can never justify such a 11

law to the dictates of conscience and humanity. To shed the blood of our fellow creature is a matter that requires the greatest deliberation, and the fullest conviction of our own authority: for life is the immediate gift of God to man; which neither he can resign, nor can it be taken from him, unless by the command or permission of him who gave it; either expressly revealed, or collected from the laws of nature or society by clear and indisputable demonstration.

I would not be understood to deny the right of the legislature in any country to

inforce its own laws by the death of the transgressor, though persons of some abilities have doubted it; but only to suggest a few hints for the consideration of such as are, or may hereafter become, legislators. When a question arises, whether death may be lawfully inflicted for this or that transgression, the wisdom of the laws must decide it: and to this public judgment or decision all private judgments must submit; else there is an end of the first principle of all society and government. The guilt of blood, if any, must lie at their doors, who misinterpret the extent of their warrant; and not at the doors of the subject, who is bound to receive the interpretations, that are given by the sovereign power.

2. As to the end, or final cause of human punishments. This is not by way of

atonement or expiation for the crime committed; for that must be left to the just determination of the supreme being: but as a precaution against future offences of the same kind. This is effected three ways: either by the amendment of the offender himself; for which purpose all corporal punishments, fines, and temporary exile or imprisonment are inflicted: or, by deterring others by the dread of his example from offending in the like way, “ut poena (as Tullyp expresses it)8 ad paucos, metus ad omnes perveniat [punishment for a few puts all in dread];” which gives rise to all ignominious punishments, and to such executions of justice as are open and public: or, lastly, by depriving the party injuring of the power to do future mischief; which is 12

effected by either putting him to death, or condemning him to perpetual confinement, slavery, or exile. The same one end, of preventing future crimes, is endeavoured to be answered by each of these three species of punishment. The public gains equal security, whether the offender himself be amended by wholsome correction; or whether he be disabled from doing any farther harm: and if the penalty fails of both these effects, as it may do, still the terror of his example remains as a warning to other

p pro Cluentio. 46.

7 Blackstone refers to laws regulating e.g. the width of wheels and the number of horses to pull carts. In a

criminal justice system dependent on private prosecution, such ‘victimless’ crimes were enforced by encouraging informers to prosecute in return for a share of the fines imposed.

8 Cicero’s speech was made in 66 bc in defence of Aulus Cluentius Habitus Minor, accused of murdering his 8 of public wrongs

citizens. The method however of inflicting punishment ought always to be pro-portioned to the particular purpose it is meant to serve, and by no means to exceed it: therefore the pains of death, and perpetual disability by exile, slavery, or impris-onment, ought never to be inflicted, but when the offender appears incorrigible: which may be collected either from a repetition of minuter offences; or from the perpetration of some one crime of deep malignity, which of itself demonstrates a disposition without hope or probability of amendment: and in such cases it would be cruelty to the public, to defer the punishment of such a criminal, till he had an opportunity of repeating perhaps the worst of villanies.

3. As to the measure of human punishments. From what has been observed in the

former articles we may collect, that the quantity of punishment can never be absolutely determined by any standing invariable rule; but it must be left to the arbitration of the legislature to inflict such penalties as are warranted by the laws of nature and society, and such as appear to be the best calculated to answer the end of precaution against future offences.

Hence it will be evident, that what some have so highly extolled for its equity, the

lex talionis or law of retaliation, can never be in all cases an adequate or permanent rule of punishment. In some cases indeed it seems to be dictated by natural reason;

13 as in the case of conspiracies to do an injury, or false accusations of the innocent: to

which we may add that law of the Jews and Egyptians, mentioned by Josephus and Diodorus Siculus, that whoever without sufficient cause was found with any mortal poison in his custody, should himself be obliged to take it. But, in general, the difference of persons, place, time, provocation, or other circumstances, may enhance or mitigate the offence; and in such cases retaliation can never be a proper measure of justice. If a nobleman strikes a peasant, all mankind will see, that if a court of justice awards a return of the blow, it is more than a just compensation. On the other hand, retaliation may sometimes be too easy a sentence; as, if a man maliciously should put out the remaining eye of him who had lost one before, it is too slight a punishment for the maimer to lose only one of his: and therefore the law of the Locrians,9 which demanded an eye for an eye, was in this instance judiciously altered; by decreeing, in imitation of Solon’s lawsq, that he who struck out the eye of a one-eyed man, should lose both his own in return. Besides, there are very many crimes, that will in no shape admit of these penalties, without manifest absurdity and wickedness. Theft cannot be punished by theft, defamation by defamation, forgery by forgery, adultery by adultery, and the like. And we may add, that those instances, wherein retaliation appears to be used, even by the divine authority, do not really proceed upon the rule of exact retribution, by doing to the criminal the same hurt he has done to his neighbour, and no more; but this correspondence between the crime and punishment is barely a consequence from some other principle. Death is ordered to be punished with death; not because one is equivalent to the other, for that would be expiation, and not punishment. Nor is death always an equivalent for death: the

q Pott. Ant. b. 1, c. 26.





chapter 1 9


execution of a needy decrepit assassin is a poor satisfaction for the murder of a nobleman in the bloom of his youth, and full enjoyment of his friends, his honours, and his fortune. But the reason upon which this sentence is grounded seems to be, that this is the highest penalty that man can inflict, and tends most to the 〈7〉 security 14

of the world; by removing one murderer from the earth, and setting a dreadful example to deter others: so that even this grand instance proceeds upon other principles than those of retaliation. And truly, if any measure of punishment is to be taken from the damage sustained by the sufferer, the punishment ought rather to exceed than equal the injury: since it seems contrary to reason and equity, that the guilty (if convicted) should suffer no more than the innocent has done before him; especially as the suffering of the innocent is past and irrevocable, that of the guilty is future, contingent, and liable to be escaped or 〈8〉 evaded. With regard indeed to crimes that are incomplete, which consist merely in the intention, and are not yet carried into act, as conspiracies and the like; the innocent has a chance to frustrate or avoid the villany, as the conspirator has also a chance to escape his punishment: and this may be one reason why the lex talionis [law of retaliation] is more proper to be inflicted, if at all, for crimes that consist in intention, than for such as are carried into act. It seems indeed consonant to natural reason, and has therefore been adopted as a maxim by several theoretical writersr, that the punishment, due to the crime of which one falsely accuses another, should be inflicted on the perjured informer. Accordingly, when it was once attempted to introduce into England the law of retaliation, it was intended as a punishment for such only as preferred malicious accusations against others; it being enacted by statute 37 Edw. III. c. 18. that such as preferred any suggestions to the king’s great council should put in sureties of taliation; that is, to incur the same pain that the other should have had, in case the suggestion were found untrue. But, after one year’s experience, this punishment of taliation was rejected, and imprisonment adopted in its steads.

But though from what has been said it appears, that there cannot be any regular

or determinate method of rating the quantity of punishments for crimes, by any one 15 uniform rule; but they must be referred to the will and discretion of the legislative power: yet there are some general principles, drawn from the nature and circumstances of the crime, that may be of some assistance in allotting it an adequate punishment.

As, first, with regard to the object of it: for the greater and more exalted the object

of an injury is, the more care should be taken to prevent that injury, and of course under this aggravation the punishment should be more severe. Therefore treason in conspiring the king’s death is by the English law punished with greater rigour than even actually killing any private subject. And yet, generally, a design to transgress is not so flagrant an enormity, as the actual completion of that design. For evil, the nearer we approach it, is the more disagreeable and shocking; so that it requires more obstinacy in wickedness to perpetrate an unlawful action, than barely to entertain the thought of it: and it is an encouragement to repentance and remorse, even till the

r Beccar. c. 15.

10 of public wrongs

last stage of any crime, that it never is too late to retract; and that if a man stops even here, it is better for him than if he proceeds: for which 〈9〉 reasons an attempt to rob, to ravish, or to kill, is far less penal than the actual robbery, rape, or murder. But in the case of a treasonable conspiracy, the object whereof is the king’s majesty, the bare intention will deserve the highest degree of severity: not because the intention is equivalent to the act itself; but because the greatest rigour is no more than adequate to a treasonable purpose of the heart, and there is no greater left to inflict upon the actual execution itself.

Again: the violence of passion, or temptation, may sometimes alleviate a crime; as

theft, in case of hunger, is far more worthy of compassion, than when committed through avarice, or to supply one in luxurious excesses. To kill a man upon sudden and violent resentment is less penal, than upon cool deliberate malice. The age, education, and character of the offender; the repetition (or otherwise) of the offence;

16 the time, the place, the company wherein it was committed; all these, and a thousand

other incidents, may aggravate or extenuate the crimet.

Farther: as punishments are chiefly intended for the prevention of future crimes,

it is but reasonable that among crimes of different natures those should be most severely punished, which are the most destructive of the public safety and happinessv: and, among crimes of an equal malignity, those which a man has the most frequent and easy opportunities of committing, which cannot be so easily guarded against as others, and which therefore the offender has the strongest inducement to commit: according to what Cicero observesu, “ea sunt animadvertenda peccata maxime, quae difficillime praecaventur.”10 Hence it is, that for a servant to rob his master is in more cases capital, than for a stranger: if a servant kills his master, it is a species of treason; in another it is only murder: to steal a handkerchief, or other 〈10〉 trifle, privately from one’s person, is made capital; but to carry-off a load of corn from an open field, though of fifty times greater value, is punished with transportation only. And in the island of Man, this rule was formerly carried so far, that to take away an horse or an ox was there no felony, but a trespass; because of the difficulty in that little territory to conceal them or carry them off: but to steal a pig or a fowl, which is easily done, was a capital misdemesnor, and the offender was punished with deathw.

Lastly, as a conclusion to the whole, we may observe that punishments of

unreasonable severity, especially when indiscriminately inflicted, have less effect in preventing crimes, and amending the manners of a people, than such as are more

17 merciful in general, yet properly intermixed with due distinctions of severity. It is the

sentiment of an ingenious writer, who seems to have well studied the springs of

t Thus Demosthenes (in his oration against Midias) finely works up the aggravations of the insult he had received. “I was abused, says he, by my enemy, in cold blood, out of malice, not by heat of wine, in the morning, publicly, before strangers as well as citizens; and that in the temple, whither the duty of my office called me.” v Beccar. c. 6.

u pro Sexto Roscio, 40.

w 4 Inst. 285.

10 ‘Those offences should be most severely punished, which it is most difficult to guard against.’ The speech





chapter 1 11


human actionx, that crimes are more effectually prevented by the certainty, than by the severity, of punishment. For the excessive severity of laws (says Montesquieu)y hinders their execution: when the punishment surpasses all measure, the public will frequently out of humanity prefer impunity to it. 〈11〉 Thus the statute 1 Mar. st. 1. c. 1. recites in its preamble, “that the state of every king consists more assuredly in the love of the subject towards their prince, than in the dread of laws made with rigorous pains; and that laws made for the preservation of the commonwealth without great penalties are more often obeyed and kept, than laws made with extreme punishments.” Happy had it been for the nation, if the subsequent practice of that deluded princess in matters of religion, had been correspondent to these sentiments of herself and parliament, in matters of state and government! We may farther observe that san-guinary laws are a bad symptom of the distemper of any state, or at least of its weak constitution. The laws of the Roman kings, and the twelve tables of the decemviri,11 were full of cruel punishments: the Porcian law, which exempted all citizens from sentence of death, silently abrogated them all.12 In this period the republic flourished: under the emperors severe punishments were revived; and then the empire fell.

It is moreover absurd and impolitic to apply the same punishment to crimes of

different malignity. A multitude of sanguinary laws (besides the doubt that may be entertained concerning the right of making them) do likewise prove a manifest defect either in the wisdom of the legislative, or the strength of the executive power. It is a kind of quackery in government, and argues a want of solid skill, to apply the same universal remedy, the ultimum supplicium [ultimate punishment], to every case of difficulty. It is, it must be owned, much easier to extirpate than to amend mankind: 18 yet that magistrate must be esteemed both a weak and a cruel surgeon, who cuts off every limb, which through ignorance or indolence he will not attempt to cure. It has been therefore ingeniously proposedz, that in every state a scale of crimes should be formed, with a corresponding scale of punishments, descending from the greatest to the least: but, if that be too romantic an idea, yet at least a wise legislator will mark the principal divisions, and not assign penalties of the first degree to offences of an inferior rank. Where men see no distinction made in the nature and gradations of punishment, the generality will be led to conclude there is no distinction in the guilt. Thus in France the punishment of robbery, either with or without murder, is the samea: hence it is, that though perhaps they are therefore subject to fewer robberies, yet they never rob but they also murder.13 In China murderers are cut to pieces, and

x Beccar. c. 7.

y Sp. L. b. 6. c. 13.

z Beccar. c. 6.

a Sp. L. b. 6. c. 16.

11 Literally ‘ten men’, that is, that is, the ten commissioners supposedly responsible for compiling the earliest

written statement of Roman law.

12 The three Porcian laws, named after P. Porcius Laeca, and passed in or after 195 bc, exempted Roman citizens

from degrading and shameful forms of punishment.

13 Cf. The Spirit of Laws. Translated from the French of M. de Secondat, Baron de Montesquieu by Mr. Nugent,

2 vols (1750 and later edns), ii. 131: ‘It is a great abuse amongst us to condemn to the same punishment a person 12 of public wrongs

robbers not: hence in that country they never murder on the highway, though they often rob. And in England, besides the additional terrors of a speedy execution, and a subsequent exposure or dissection, robbers have a hope of transportation, which seldom is extended to murderers. This has the same effect here as in China; in preventing frequent assassination and slaughter.

Yet, though in this instance we may glory in the wisdom of the English law, we

shall find it more difficult to justify the frequency of capital punishment to be found therein; inflicted (perhaps inattentively) by a multitude of successive independent statutes, upon crimes very different in their natures. It is a melancholy truth, that among the variety of actions which men are daily liable to commit, no less than an hundred and sixty have been declared by act of parliamentb to be felonies without benefit of clergy; or, in other words, to be worthy of instant death. So dreadful a list,

19 instead of diminishing, increases the number of offenders. The injured, through com-

passion, will often forbear to prosecute: juries, through compassion, will sometimes forget their oaths, and either acquit the guilty or mitigate the nature of the offence: and judges, through compassion, will respite one half of the convicts, and recommend them to the royal mercy. Among so many chances of escaping, 〈12〉 the needy or hardened offender overlooks the multitude that suffer; he boldly engages in some desperate attempt, to relieve his wants or supply his vices; and, if unexpectedly the hand of justice overtakes him, he deems himself peculiarly unfortunate, in falling at last a sacrifice to those laws, which long impunity has taught him to contemn.

b See Ruffhead’s index to the statutes, (tit. felony) and the acts which have since been made [i.e. The Statutes at Large, from Magna Charta, to the end of the Last Parliament, 1761, ed. O. Ruffhead, 8 vols (1763)].





chapter the second. 20




of the persons capable

of committing crimes.

Having, in the preceding chapter, considered in general the nature of crimes, and punishments, we are next led, in the order of our distribution, to enquire what persons are, or are not, capable of committing crimes; or, which is all one, who are exempted from the censures of the law upon the commission of those acts, which in other persons would be severely punished. In the process of which enquiry, we must have recourse to particular and special exceptions: for the general rule is, that no person shall be excused from punishment for disobedience to the laws of his country, excepting such as are expressly defined and exempted by the laws themselves.

All the several pleas and excuses, which protect the committer of a forbidden act

from the punishment which is otherwise annexed thereto, may be reduced to this single consideration, the want or defect of will. An involuntary act, as it has no claim to merit, so neither can it induce any guilt: the concurrence of the will, when it has its choice either to do or to avoid the fact in question, being the only thing that renders human actions either praiseworthy or culpable. Indeed, to make a complete 21 crime, cognizable by human laws, there must be both a will and an act. For though, in foro conscientiae [in the court of conscience], a fixed design or will to do an unlawful act is almost as heinous as the commission of it, yet, as no temporal tribunal can search the heart, or fathom the intentions of the mind, otherwise than as they are demonstrated by outward actions, it therefore cannot punish for what it cannot know. For which reason in all temporal jurisdictions an overt act, or some open evidence of an intended crime, is necessary, in order to demonstrate the depravity of the will, before the man is liable to punishment. And, as a vitious will without a vitious act is no civil crime, so, on the other hand, an unwarrantable act without a vitious will is no crime at all. So that to constitute a crime against human laws, there must be, first, a vitious will; and, secondly, an unlawful act consequent upon such vitious will.

Now there are three cases, in which the will does not join with the act: 1. Where

there is a defect of understanding. For where there is no discernment, there is no choice; and where there is no choice, there can be no act of the will, which is nothing else but a determination of one’s choice, to do or to abstain from a particular action: he therefore, that has no understanding, can have no will to guide his conduct. 2. Where there is understanding and will sufficient, residing in the party; but not called forth and exerted at the time of the action done: which is the case of all offences committed by chance or ignorance. Here the will sits neuter; and neither concurs with the act, nor disagrees to it. 3. Where the action is constrained by some outward force and violence. Here the will counteracts the deed; and is so far from concurring 14 of public wrongs

with, that it loaths and disagrees to, what the man is obliged to perform. It will be the business of the present chapter briefly to consider all the several species of defect in will, as they fall under some one or other of these general heads: as infancy, idiocy,

22 lunacy, and intoxication, which fall under the first class; misfortune, and ignorance,

which may be referred to the second; and compulsion or necessity, which may properly rank in the third.

I. First, we will consider the case of infancy, or nonage; which is a defect of the

understanding. Infants, under the age of discretion, ought not to be punished by any criminal prosecution whatevera. What the age of discretion is, in various nations is matter of some variety. The civil law distinguished the age of minors, or those under twenty five years old, into three stages: infantia, from the birth till seven years of age; pueritia [childhood] from seven to fourteen; and pubertas [sexual maturity] from fourteen upwards. The period of pueritia, or childhood, was again subdivided into two equal parts; from seven to ten and an half was aetas infantiae proxima [the age nearest infancy]; from ten and an half to fourteen was aetas pubertati proxima [the age approaching puberty]. During the first stage of infancy, and the next half stage of childhood, infantiae proxima, they were not punishable for any crimeb. During the other half stage of childhood, approaching to puberty from ten and an half to fourteen, they were indeed punishable, if found to be doli capaces, or capable of mischief; but with many mitigations, and not with the 〈1〉 utmost rigor of the law. During the last stage (at the age of puberty, and afterwards) minors were liable to be punished, as well capitally, as otherwise.

The law of England does in some cases privilege an infant, under the age of twenty

one, as to common misdemesnors; so as to escape fine, imprisonment, and the like: and particularly in cases of omission, as not repairing a bridge, or a highway, and other similar offencesc: for, not having the command of his fortune till twenty one, he wants the capacity to do those things, which the law requires. But where there is any notorious breach of the peace, a riot, battery, or the like, (which infants, when full

23 grown, are at least as liable as others to commit) for these an infant, above the age of

fourteen, is equally liable to suffer, as a person of the full age of twenty one.

With regard to capital crimes, the law is still more minute and circumspect;

distinguishing with greater nicety the several degrees of age and discretion. By the antient Saxon law, the age of twelve years was established for the age of possible discretion, when first the understanding might opend: and from thence till the offender was fourteen, it was aetas pubertati proxima, in which he might, or might not, be guilty of a crime, according to his natural capacity or incapacity. This was the dubious stage of discretion: but, under twelve, it was held that he could not be guilty in will, neither after fourteen could he be supposed innocent, of any capital crime which he in fact committed. But by the law, as it now stands, and has stood at least

a 1 Hawk. P. C. 2.

b Inst. 3. 20. 10. [recte 3. 19. 10.]

c 1 Hal. P. C. 20, 21, 22.





chapter 2 15


ever since the time of Edward the third, the capacity of doing ill, or contracting guilt, is not so much measured by years and days, as by the strength of the delinquent’s understanding and judgment. For one lad of eleven years old may have as much cunning as another of fourteen; and in these cases our maxim is, that “malitia supplet aetatem [malice makes up for age].” Under seven years of age indeed an infant cannot be guilty of felony e; for then a felonious discretion is almost an impossibility in nature: but at eight years old he may be guilty of felonyf. Also, under fourteen, though an infant shall be prima facie [at first sight] adjudged to be doli incapax [incapable of crime]; yet if it appear to the court and jury, that he was doli capax, and could discern between good and evil, he may be convicted and suffer death. Thus a girl of thirteen has been burnt for killing her mistress: and one boy of ten, and another of nine years old, who had killed their companions, have been sentenced to death, and he of ten years actually hanged; because it appeared upon their trials, that the one hid himself, and the other hid the body he had killed; which hiding manifested a consciousness of guilt, and a discretion to discern between good and evilg. And there was an instance 24

in the last century, where a boy of eight years old was tried at Abingdon for firing two barns;1 and, it appearing that he had malice, revenge, and cunning, he was found guilty, condemned, and hanged accordinglyh. Thus also, in very modern times, a boy of ten years old was convicted on his own confession of murdering his bedfellow;2 there appearing in his whole behaviour plain tokens of a mischievous discretion: and, as the sparing this boy merely on account of his tender years might be of dangerous consequence to the public, by propagating a notion that children might commit such atrocious crimes with impunity, it was unanimously agreed by all the judges that he was a proper subject of capital punishmenti. But, in all such cases, the evidence of that malice, which is to supply age, ought to be strong and clear beyond all doubt or contradiction.

II. The second case of a deficiency in will, which excuses from the guilt of crimes,

arises also from a defective or vitiated understanding, viz. in an idiot or a lunatic. For the rule of law as to the latter, which may easily be adapted also to the former, is, that “furiosus furore solum punitur [the madness of the insane is punishment enough].” In criminal cases therefore idiots and lunatics are not chargeable for their own acts, if committed when under these incapacities: no, not even for treason itself k. Also, if a man in his sound memory commits a capital offence, and before arraignment for it, he becomes mad, he ought not to be arraigned for it; because he is not able to plead

e Mirr. c. 4, §. 16; 1 Hal. P. C. 27.

f Dalt. Just. c. 147.

g 1 Hal. P. C. 26, 27.

h Emlyn on 1 Hal. P. C. 25.

i Foster. 72.

k 3 Inst. 6.

1 The case cited in note h derives from a manuscript report of the trial on 23 February 1629 of eight-year-old John Dean for firing barns at Windsor.

2 William York was tried at Bury assizes in 1748 for murdering his foster sister aged about four or five. Found guilty on his own confession, York was sentenced to death but given a temporary reprieve pending a judges’

16 of public wrongs

to it with that advice and caution that he ought. And if, after he has pleaded, the prisoner becomes mad, he shall not be tried; for how can he make his defence? If, after he be tried and found guilty, he loses his senses before judgment, judgment shall not be pronounced; and if, after judgment, he becomes of nonsane [unsound] memory, execution shall be stayed: for peradventure, says the humanity of the English law, had the prisoner been of sound memory, he might have alleged some

25 thing in stay of judgment or executionl. Indeed, in the bloody reign of Henry the

eighth, a statute was madem, which enacted, that if a person, being compos mentis [of sound mind], should commit high treason, and after fall into madness, he might be tried in his absence, and should suffer death, as if he were of perfect memory. But this savage and inhuman law was repealed by the statute 1 & 2 Ph. & M. c. 10. “For, as is observed by sir Edward Coken, the execution of an offender is for example, ut poena ad paucos, metus ad omnes perveniat [punishment for a few puts all in dread]: but so it is not when a madman is executed; but should be a miserable spectacle, both against law, and of extreme inhumanity and cruelty, and can be no example to others.” But if there be any doubt, whether the party be compos or not, this shall be tried by a jury. And if he be so found, a total idiocy, or absolute insanity, excuses from the guilt, and of course from the punishment, of any criminal action committed under such deprivation of the senses: but, if a lunatic hath lucid intervals of understanding, he shall answer for what he does in those intervals, as if he had no deficiency o. Yet, in the case of absolute madmen, as they are not answerable for their actions, they should not be permitted the liberty of acting unless under proper control; and, in particular, they ought not to be suffered to go loose, to the terror of the king’s subjects. It was the doctrine of our antient law, that persons deprived of their reason might be confined till they recovered their sensesp, without waiting for the forms of a commission or other special authority from the crown: and now, by the vagrant actsq, a method is chalked out for imprisoning, chaining, and sending them to their proper homes.

III. Thirdly; as to artificial, voluntarily contracted madness, by drunkenness or

intoxication, which, depriving men of their reason, puts them in a temporary phrenzy; our law looks upon this as an aggravation of the offence, rather than as an

26 excuse for any criminal misbehaviour. A drunkard, says sir Edward Coker, who is

voluntarius daemon [voluntarily mad], hath no privilege thereby; but what hurt or ill soever he doth, his drunkenness doth aggravate it: nam omne crimen ebrietas, et incendit, et detegit [for drunkenness both inflames and discloses every crime]. It hath been observed, that the real use of strong liquors, and the abuse of them by drinking to excess, depend much upon the temperature of the climate in which we live. The same indulgence, which may be necessary to make the blood move in Norway, would make an Italian mad. A German therefore, says the president Montesquieus, drinks

l 1 Hal. P. C. 34.

m 33 Hen. VIII. c. 20.

n 3 Inst. 6.

o 1 Hal. P. C. 31.

p Bro. Abr. tit. corone. 101.

q 17 Geo. II. c. 5.





chapter 2 17


through custom, founded upon constitutional necessity; a Spaniard drinks through choice, or out of the mere wantonness of luxury: and drunkenness, he adds, ought to be more severely punished, where it makes men mischievous and mad, as in Spain and Italy, than where it only renders them stupid and heavy, as in Germany and more northern countries. And accordingly, in the 〈2〉 warmer climate of Greece, a law of Pittacus enacted, “that he who committed a crime, when drunk, should receive a double punishment;” one for the crime itself, and the other for the ebriety which prompted him to commit itt. The Roman law indeed made great allowances for this vice: “per vinum delapsis capitalis poena remittitur [capital punishment is abated, where the crime has been occasioned by wine]u”.3 But the law of England, considering how easy it is to counterfeit this excuse, and how weak an excuse it is, (though real) will not suffer any man thus to privilege one crime by anotherw.

IV. A fourth deficiency of will, is where a man commits an unlawful act by

misfortune or chance, and not by design. Here the will observes a total neutrality, and does not co-operate with the deed; which therefore wants one main ingredient of a crime. Of this, when it affects the life of another, we shall find more occasion to speak hereafter; at present only observing, that if any accidental mischief happens to follow from the performance of a lawful act, the party stands excused from all 27 guilt: but if a man be doing any thing unlawful, and a consequence ensues which he did not foresee or intend, as the death of a man or the like, his want of foresight shall be no excuse; for, being guilty of one offence, in doing antecedently what is in itself unlawful, he is criminally guilty of whatever consequence may follow the first misbehaviourx.

V. Fifthly, ignorance or mistake is another defect of will; when a man, intending

to do a lawful act, does that which is unlawful. For here the deed and the will acting separately, there is not that conjunction between them, which is necessary to form a criminal act. But this must be an ignorance or mistake of fact, and not an error in point of law. As if a man, intending to kill a thief or housebreaker in his own house, by mistake kills one of his own family, this is no criminal actiony: but if a man thinks he has a right to kill a person excommunicated or outlawed, wherever he meets him, and does so; this is wilful murder. For a mistake in point of law, which every person of discretion not only may, but is bound and presumed to know, is in criminal cases no sort of defence. Ignorantia juris, quod quisque tenetur scire, neminem excusat [Ignorance of the law, which everybody is supposed to know, is no excuse], is as well the maxim of our own lawz,4 as it was of the Romana.

t Puff. L. of N. b. 8. c. 3 [para. 21].

u Ff. 49. 16. 6.

w [Reiniger v Fogossa] Plowd. 19.

x 1 Hal. P. C. 39.

y [Cook’s case] Cro. Car. 538.

z [Brett v Rigden ] Plowd. 343.

a Ff. 22. 6. 9.

3 The quotation is from a section of Justinian’s Digest relating to military affairs, and specifically to soldiers who have attempted to commit suicide.

18 of public wrongs

VI. A sixth species of defect of will is that arising from compulsion and inevitable

necessity. These are a constraint upon the will, whereby a man is urged to do that which his judgment disapproves; and which, it is to be presumed, his will (if left to itself) would reject. As punishments are therefore only inflicted for the abuse of that free-will, which God has given to man, it is highly just and equitable that a man should be excused for those acts, which are done through unavoidable force and compulsion.

28 1. Of this nature, in the first place, is the obligation of civil subjection, whereby the

inferior is constrained by the superior to act contrary to what his own reason and inclination would suggest: as when a legislator establishes iniquity by a law, and commands the subject to do an act contrary to religion or sound morality. How far this excuse will be admitted in foro conscientiae, or whether the inferior in this case is not bound to obey the divine, rather than the human law, it is not my business to decide; though the question I believe, among the casuists, will hardly bear a doubt.5 But, however that may be, obedience to the laws in being is undoubtedly a sufficient extenuation of civil guilt before the municipal tribunal. The sheriff, who burnt Latimer and Ridley, in the bigotted days of queen Mary, was not liable to punishment from Elizabeth, for executing so horrid an office; being justified by the commands of that magistracy, which endeavoured to restore superstition under the holy auspices of its merciless sister, persecution.6

As to persons in private relations; the principal case, where constraint of a superior

is allowed as an excuse for criminal misconduct, is with regard to the matrimonial subjection of the wife to her husband: for neither a son or a servant are excused for the commission of any crime, whether capital or otherwise, by the command or coercion of the parent or masterb, though in some cases the command or authority of the husband, either express or implied, will privilege the wife from punishment, even for capital offences. And therefore if a woman commit theft, burglary, or other civil offences against the laws of society, 〈3〉 by the coercion of her husband; or merely by his command, which the law construes a coercion; or even in his company, his example being equivalent to a command; she is not guilty of any crime: being considered as acting by compulsion and not of her own willc. Which doctrine is at least a thousand years old in this kingdom, being to be found among the laws of

29 king Ina the West Saxond. And it appears that, among the northern nations on the

continent, this privilege extended to any woman transgressing in concert with a man, and to any servant that committed a joint offence with a freeman: the male or freeman only was punished, the female or slave dismissed; “proculdubio quod alterum libertas, alterum necessitas impelleret [doubtless because free choice impelled one, necessity the other]e.” But (besides that in our law, which is a stranger to slavery, no impunity is

b 1 Hawk. P. C. 3.

c 1 Hal. P. C. 45.

d [Laws of Ina in Wilkins, Leges Anglo-Saxonicæ] cap. 57.

e Stiernhook de jure Sueon. l. 2. c. 4.

5 Casuists dealt with cases of conscience, or moral dilemmas; although the term was often associated with

specious reasoning by Jesuit theologians, Blackstone does not seem to use it in a pejorative sense.





chapter 2 19


given to servants, who are as much free agents as their masters) even with regard to wives, this rule admits of an exception in crimes that are mala in se [bad in themselves], and prohibited by the law of nature, as murder and the like: not only because these are of a deeper dye; but also, since in a state of nature no one is in subjection to another, it would be unreasonable to screen an offender from the punishment due to natural crimes, by the refinements and subordinations of civil society. In treason also, (the highest crime which a member of society can, as such, be guilty of) no 〈4〉 plea of coverture shall excuse the wife; no presumption of the husband’s coercion shall extenuate her guiltf: as well because of the odiousness and dangerous consequence of the crime itself, as because the husband, having broken through the most sacred tie of social community by rebellion against the state, has no right to that obedience from a wife, which he himself as a subject has forgotten to pay. In inferior misde-mesnors also, we may remark another exception; that a wife may be indicted and set in the pillory with her husband, for keeping a brothel: for this is an offence touching the domestic oeconomy or government of the house, in which the wife has a principal share; and is also such an offence as the law presumes to be generally conducted by the intrigues of the female sexg. And in all cases, where the wife offends alone, without the company or 〈5〉 command of her husband, she is responsible for her offence, as much as any feme-sole.

2. Another species of compulsion or necessity is what our law calls duress per 30

minas [compelled by threats]h; or threats and menaces, which induce a fear of death or other bodily harm, and which take away for that reason the guilt of many crimes and misdemesnors; at least before the human tribunal. But then that fear, which compels a man to do an unwarrantable action, ought to be just and well grounded; such, “qui cadere possit in virum constantem, non timidum et meticulosum [as might be felt by a resolute man, not one who is timid and cowardly],” as Bracton expresses iti, in the words of the civil lawk. Therefore, in time of war or rebellion, a man may be justified in doing many treasonable acts by compulsion of the enemy or rebels, which would admit of no excuse in the time of peacel. This however seems only, or at least principally, to hold as to positive crimes, so created by the laws of society; and which therefore society may excuse; but not as to natural offences, so declared by the law of God, wherein human magistrates are only the executioners of divine punishment. And therefore though a man be violently assaulted, and hath no other possible means of escaping death, but by killing an innocent person; this fear and force shall not acquit him of murder; for he ought rather to die himself, than escape by the murder of an innocentm. But in such a case he is permitted to kill the assailant; for there the law of nature, and self-defence its primary canon, have made him his own protector.

f 1 Hal. P. C. 47.

g 1 Hawk. P. C. 2, 3.

h See Vol. I. pag. 131 [I. 89].

i l. 2. f. 16.

k Ff. 4. 2. 5, & 6.

20 of public wrongs

3. There is a third species of necessity, which may be distinguished from the

actual compulsion of external force or fear; being the result of reason and reflection, which act upon and constrain a man’s will, and oblige him to do an action, which without such obligation would be criminal. And that is, when a man has his choice of two evils set before him, and, being under a necessity of choosing one, he chuses

31 the least pernicious of the two. Here the will cannot be said freely to exert itself, being

rather passive, than active; or, if active, it is rather in rejecting the greater evil than in choosing the less. Of this sort is that necessity, where a man by the commandment of the law is bound to arrest another for any capital offence, or to disperse a riot, and resistance is made to his authority: it is here justifiable and even necessary to beat, to wound, or perhaps to kill the offenders, rather than permit the murderer to escape, or the riot to continue. For the preservation of the peace of the kingdom, and the apprehending of notorious malefactors, are of the utmost consequence to the public; and therefore excuse the felony, which the killing would otherwise amount ton.

4. There is yet another case of necessity, which has occasioned great speculation

among the writers upon general law; viz. whether a man in extreme want of food or clothing may justify stealing either, to relieve his present necessities. And this both Grotiuso and Puffendorf p, together with many other of the foreign jurists, hold in the affirmative; maintaining by many ingenious, humane, and plausible reasons, that in such cases the community of goods by a kind of tacit concession of society is revived. And some even of our own lawyers have held the sameq, though it seems to be an unwarranted doctrine, borrowed from the notions of some civilians: at least it is now antiquated, the law of England admitting no such excuse at presentr. And this its doctrine is agreeable not only to the sentiments of many of the wisest antients, particularly Ciceros, who holds that “suum cuique incommodum ferendum est, potius quam de alterius commodis detrahendum [every one should bear their own dis-comforts, rather than detract from the comforts of another];” but also to the Jewish law, as certified by king Solomon himself t: “if a thief steal to satisfy his soul when he

32 is hungry, he shall restore sevenfold, and shall give all the substance of his house:”

which was the ordinary punishment for theft in that kingdom. And this is founded upon the highest reason: for men’s properties would be under a strange insecurity, if liable to be invaded according to the wants of others; of which wants no man can possibly be an adequate judge, but the party himself who pleads them. In this country especially, there would be a peculiar impropriety in admitting so dubious an excuse: for by our laws such sufficient provision is made for the poor by the power of the civil magistrate, that it is impossible that the most needy stranger should ever be reduced to the necessity of thieving to support nature.7 This case of a stranger is, by the way,

n 1 Hal. P. C. 53.

o de jure b. & p. l. 2. c. 2.

p L. of Nat. and N. l. 2. c. 6.

q Briton, c. 10. Mirr. c. 4. §. 16.

r 1 Hal. P. C. 54.

s de off. l. 3. c. 5 [recte 6].

t Prov. vi. 30.





chapter 2 21


the strongest instance put by baron Puffendorf, and whereon he builds his principal arguments: which, however they may hold upon the continent, where the parsimo-nious industry of the natives orders every one to work or starve, yet must lose all their weight and efficacy in England, where charity is reduced to a system, and inter-woven in our very constitution. Therefore our laws ought by no means to be taxed with being unmerciful, for denying this privilege to the necessitous; especially when we consider, that the king, on the representation of his ministers of justice, hath a power to soften the law, and to extend mercy in cases of peculiar hardship. An advantage which is wanting in many states, particularly those which are democratical: and these have in its stead introduced and adopted, in the body of the law itself, a multitude of circumstances tending to alleviate its rigour. But the founders of our constitution thought it better to vest in the crown the power of pardoning particular objects of compassion, than to countenance and establish theft by one general undistinguishing law.

VII. 〈6〉 In the several cases before-mentioned, the incapacity of committing

crimes arises from a deficiency of the will. To these we may add one more, in which the law supposes an incapacity of doing wrong from the excellence and perfection of the person; which extend as well to the will as to the other qualities of his mind. 33

I mean the case of the king: who, by virtue of his royal prerogative, is not under the coercive power of the lawu, which will not suppose him capable of committing a folly, much less a crime. We are therefore, out of reverence and decency, to forbear any idle enquiries, of what would be the consequence if the king were to act thus and thus: since the law deems so highly of his wisdom and virtue, as not even to presume it possible for him to do any thing inconsistent with his station and dignity; and therefore has made no provision to remedy such a grievance. But of this sufficient was said in a former volumew, to which I must refer the reader.

u 1 Hal. P. C. 44.

w Book I. ch. 7. pag. 244 [I. 158–9].



34 chapter the third.



of principals and

accessories.

It having been shewn in the preceding chapter what persons are, or are not, upon account of their situation and circumstances, capable of committing crimes, we are next to make a few remarks on the different degrees of guilt among persons that are capable of offending; viz. as principal, and as accessory.

I. A man may be principal in an offence in two degrees. A principal, in the first

degree, is he that is the actor, or absolute perpetrator of the crime; and, in the second degree, 〈1〉 he who is present, aiding, and abetting the fact to be donea. Which presence need not always be an actual immediate standing by, within sight or hearing of the fact; but there may be also a constructive presence, as when one commits a robbery or murder, and another keeps watch or guard at some convenient distanceb. And this rule hath also other exceptions: for, in case of murder by poisoning, a man may be a principal felon, by preparing and laying the poison, 〈2〉 or giving it to another (who is ignorant of its poisonous quality)c for that purpose; and yet not administer it himself, nor be present when the very deed of poisoning is committedd. And the

35 same reasoning will hold, with regard to other murders committed in the absence of

the murderer, by means which he had prepared before-hand, and which probably could not fail of their mischievous effect. As by laying a trap or pitfall for another, whereby he is killed; letting out a wild beast, with an intent to do mischief, or exciting a madman to commit murder, so that death thereupon ensues; in every of these cases the party offending is guilty of murder as a principal, in the first degree. For he cannot be called an accessory, that necessarily pre-supposing a principal; and the poison, the pitfall, the beast, or the madman cannot be held principals, being only the instruments of death. As therefore he must be certainly guilty, either as principal or accessory, and cannot be so as accessory, it follows that he must be guilty as principal: and if principal, then in the first degree; for there is no other criminal, much less a superior in the guilt, whom he could aid, abet, or assiste.

II. An accessory is he who is not the chief actor in the offence, nor present at its

performance, but is someway concerned therein, either before or after the fact committed. In considering the nature of which degree of guilt, we will, first, examine, what offences admit of accessories, and what not: secondly, who may be an accessory before the fact: thirdly, who may be an accessory after it: and, lastly, how accessories, considered merely as such, and distinct from principals, are to be treated.

a 1 Hal. P. C. 615.

b Foster. 350.

c Ibid. 349.

d 3 Inst. 138.





chapter 3 23


1. And, first, as to what offences admit of accessories, and what not. In high

treason there are no accessories, but all are principals: the same acts, that make a man accessory in felony, making him a principal in high treason, upon account of the heinousness of the crimef. Besides it is to be considered, that the bare intent to commit treason is many times actual treason; as imagining the death of the king, or conspiring to take away his crown. And, as no one can advise and abet such a crime without an intention to have it done, there can be no accessories before the fact; since the very 36

advice and abetment amount to principal treason. But this will not hold in the inferior species of high treason, which do not amount to the legal idea of compassing the death of the king, queen, or prince. For in those no advice to commit them, unless the thing be actually performed, will make a man a principal traitorg. In petit treason, murder, and 〈3〉 felonies of all kinds, there may be accessories: except only in those offences, which by judgment of law are sudden and unpremeditated, as manslaughter and the like; which therefore cannot have any accessories before 〈4〉 the facth. But in petit larciny, or minute thefts, and all other crimes under the degree of felony, there are no accessories; but all persons concerned therein, if guilty at all, are principalsi: the same rule holding with regard to the highest and lowest offences; though upon different reasons. In treason all are principals, propter odium delicti [on account of the hatefulness of the offence]; in trespass all are principals, because the law, quae de minimis non curat [which takes no notice of trifles], does not descend to distinguish the different shades of guilt in petty misdemesnors. It is a maxim, that accessorius sequitur naturam sui principalis [the accessory follows the nature of his principal]k: and therefore an accessory cannot be guilty of a higher crime than his principal; being only punished, as a partaker of his guilt. So that if a servant instigates a stranger to kill his master, this being murder in the stranger as principal, of course the servant is accessory only to the crime of murder; though, had he been present and assisting, he would have been guilty as principal of petty treason, and the stranger of murderl.

2. As to the second point, who may be an accessory before the fact; sir Matthew

Halem defines him to be one, who being absent at the time of the crime committed, doth yet procure, counsel, or command another to commit a crime. Herein absence is necessary to make him an accessory; for if such procurer, or the like, be present, he is guilty of the crime as principal. If A then advises B to kill another, and B does it in 37

the absence of A, now B is principal, and A is accessory in the murder. And this holds, even though the party killed be not in rerum natura [in existence] at the time of the advice given. As if A, the reputed father, advises B the mother of a bastard child, unborn, to strangle it when born, and she does so; A is accessory to this murdern.



f 3 Inst. 138. 1 Hal. P. C. 613.

g Foster. 342.

h 1 Hal. P. C. 615.

i Ibid. 613.

k 3 Inst. 139.

l 2 Hawk. P. C. 315.

m 1 Hal. P. C. 615, 616.

24 of public wrongs

And it is also settledo, that whoever procureth a felony to be committed, though it be by the intervention of a third person, is an accessory before the fact. It is likewise a rule, that he who in any wise commands or counsels another to commit an unlawful act, is accessory to all that ensues upon that unlawful act; but is not accessory to any act distinct from the other. As if A commands B to beat C, and B beats him so that he dies; B is guilty of murder as principal, and A as accessory. But if A commands B to burn C’s house; and he, in so doing, commits a robbery; now A, though accessory to the burning, is not accessory to the robbery, for that is a thing of a distinct and unconsequential naturep. But if the felony committed be the same in substance with that which is commanded, and only varying in some circumstantial matters; as if, upon a command to poison Titius, he is stabbed or shot, 〈5〉 that he dies; the commander is still accessory to the murder, for the substance of the thing commanded was the death of Titius,1 and the manner of its execution is a mere collateral circumstanceq.

3. An accessory after the fact may be, where a person, knowing a felony to have

been committed, receives, relieves, comforts, or assists the felonr. Therefore, to make an accessory ex post facto [after the deed], it is in the first place requisite that he knows of the felony committeds. In the next place, he must receive, relieve, comfort, or assist him. And, generally, any assistance whatever given to a felon, to hinder his

38 being apprehended, tried, or suffering punishment, makes the assistor an accessory.

As furnishing him with a horse to escape his pursuers, money or victuals to support him, a house or other shelter to conceal him, or open force and violence to rescue or protect himt. So likewise to convey instruments to a felon to enable him to break gaol, or to bribe the gaoler to let him escape, makes a man an accessory to the felony. But to relieve a felon in gaol with clothes or other necessaries, is no offence: for the crime imputable to this species of accessory is the hindrance of public justice, by assisting the felon to escape the vengeance of the law u. To buy or receive stolen goods, knowing them to be stolen, falls under none of these descriptions: it was therefore at common law, a mere misdemesnor, and made not the receiver accessory to the theft, because he received the goods only, and not the felonw but now by the statutes 5 Ann. c. 31. and 4 Geo. I. c. 11. all such receivers 〈6〉 are made accessories, and may be 〈7〉 transported for fourteen years. In France this is punished with death: and the Gothic constitutions distinguished also three sorts of thieves, “unum qui consilium daret, alterum qui contrectaret, tertium qui receptaret et occuleret; pari poenae singulos obnoxiosx.”2

o [Case of Macdaniel and others] Foster. 125.

p 1 Hal. P. C. 617.

q 2 Hawk. P. C. 316.

r 1 Hal. P. C. 618.

s 2 Hawk. P. C. 319.

t 2 Hawk. P. C. 317, 318.

u 1 Hal. P. C. 620, 621.

w 1 Hal. P. C. 620.

x Stiernhook de jure Goth. l. 3. c. 5.

1 ‘Titius’, the conventional name traditionally given to one of the parties in hypothetical cases in Roman law, is

also used by Blackstone in other contexts: see I. 37; II. 139.





chapter 3 25


The felony must be complete at the time of the assistance given; else it makes not

the assistant an accessory. As if one wounds another mortally, and after the wound given, but before death ensues, a person assists or receives the delinquent: this does not make him accessory to the homicide, for till death ensues there is no felony committedy. But so strict is the law where a felony is actually complete, in order to do effectual justice, that the nearest relations are not suffered to aid or receive one another. If the parent assists his child, or the child his parent, if the brother receives 〈8〉 his brother, the master his servant, or the servant his master, or even if the husband relieves his wife, who have any of them committed a felony, the receivers 39 become accessories ex post factoz. But a feme covert cannot become an accessory by the receipt and concealment of her husband; for she is presumed to act under his coercion, and therefore she is not bound, neither ought she, to discover her lorda.

4. The last point of enquiry is, how accessories are to be treated, considered

distinct from principals. And the general rule of the antient law (borrowed from the Gothic constitutions)b is this, that accessories shall suffer the same punishment as their principals: if one be liable to death, the other is also liablec: as, by the laws of Athens, delinquents and their abettors were to receive the same punishmentd. Why then, it may be asked, are such elaborate distinctions made between accessories and principals, if both are to suffer the same punishment? For these reasons. 1. To distinguish the nature and denomination of crimes, that the accused may know how to defend himself when indicted: the commission of an actual robbery being quite a different accusation, from that of harbouring the robber. 2. Because, though by the antient common law the rule is as before laid down, that both shall be punished alike, yet now by the statutes relating to the benefit of clergy3 a distinction is made between them: accessories after the fact being still allowed the benefit of clergy 〈9〉 in all cases; which is denied to the principals, and accessories before the fact, in many cases; as in petit treason, murder, robbery, and wilful burninge. And perhaps if a distinction were constantly to be made between the punishment of principals and accessories, even before the fact, the latter to be treated with a little less severity than the former, it might prevent the perpetration of many crimes, by increasing the difficulty of finding a person to execute the deed itself; as his danger would be greater than that of his accomplices, by reason of the difference of his punishmentf. 3. Because formerly no 40

man could be tried as accessory, till after the principal was convicted, 〈10〉 or at least at the same time with him: though that law is now much altered, as will be shewn more fully in its proper place. 4. Because, though a man be indicted as accessory and



y 2 Hawk. P. C. 320.

z 3 Inst. 108; 2 Hawk. P. C. 320.

a 1 Hal. P. C. 621.

b See Stiernhook. ibid.

c 3 Inst. 138.

d Pott. Antiq. b. 1. c. 26.

e 1 Hal. P. C. 615.

f Beccar. c. 37.

26 of public wrongs

acquitted, he may afterwards be indicted as principal; for an acquittal of receiving or counselling a felon is no acquittal of the felony itself: but it is matter of some doubt, whether, if a man be acquitted as principal, he can be afterwards indicted as accessory before the fact; since those offences are frequently very near allied, and therefore an acquittal of the guilt of one may be an acquittal of the other alsog. But it is clearly held, that one acquitted as principal may be indicted as an accessory after the fact; since that is always an offence of a different species of guilt, principally tending to evade the public justice, and is subsequent in its commencement to the other. Upon these reasons the distinction of principal and accessory will appear to be highly necessary; though the punishment is still much the same with regard to principals, and such accessories 〈11〉 as offend a priori.

g 1 Hal. P. C. 625, 626; 2 Hawk. P. C. 373; Foster. 361.





chapter the fourth. 41




of offences against god

and religion.

In the present chapter we are to enter upon the detail of the several species of crimes and misdemesnors, with the punishment annexed to each by the laws of England. It was observed, in the beginning of this booka, that crimes and misdemesnors are a breach and violation of the public rights and duties, owing to the whole community, considered as a community, in its social aggregate capacity. And in the very entrance of these commentariesb it was shewn, that human laws can have no concern with any but social and relative duties; being intended only to regulate the conduct of man, considered under various relations, as a member of civil society. All crimes ought therefore to be estimated merely according to the mischiefs which they produce in civil societyc: and, of consequence, private vices, or the breach of mere absolute duties, which man is bound to perform considered only as an individual, are not, cannot be, the object of any municipal law; any farther than as by their evil example, or other pernicious effects, they may prejudice the community, and thereby become a species of public crimes. Thus the vice of drunkenness, if committed privately and alone, is beyond the knowlege and of course beyond the reach of human tribunals: but if committed publicly, in the face of the world, its evil example makes it liable to 42

temporal censures. The vice of lying, which consists (abstractedly taken) in a criminal violation of truth, and therefore in any shape is derogatory from sound morality, is not however taken notice of by our law, unless it carries with it some public inconvenience, as spreading false news; or some social injury, as slander and malicious prosecution, for which a private recompence is given. And yet drunkenness 〈1〉 and lying are in foro conscientiae [before the tribunal of conscience] as thoroughly criminal when they are not, as when they are, attended with public inconvenience. The only difference is, that both public and private vices are subject to the vengeance of eternal justice; and public vices are besides liable to the temporal punishments of human tribunals.

On the other hand, there are some misdemesnors, which are punished by the

municipal law, 〈2〉 that are in themselves nothing criminal, but are made so by the positive constitutions of the state for public convenience. Such as poaching, exportation of wool, and the like. These are naturally no offences at all; but their whole criminality consists in their disobedience to the supreme power, which has an undoubted right for the well-being and peace of the community to make some things unlawful, which were in themselves indifferent. Upon the whole therefore, though

a See pag. 5 [IV. 3].

b See Vol. I. pag. 123, 124 [I. 84].

c Beccar. ch. 8.

28 of public wrongs

part of the offences to be enumerated in the following sheets are offences against the revealed law of God, others against the law of nature, and some are offences against neither; yet in a treatise of municipal law we must consider them all as deriving their particular guilt, here punishable, from the law of man.

Having premised this caution, I shall next proceed to distribute the several

offences, which are either directly or by consequence injurious to civil society, and therefore punishable by the laws of England, under the following general heads: first, those which are more immediately injurious to God and his holy religion; secondly, such as violate and transgress the law of nations; thirdly, such as more especially

43 affect the sovereign executive power of the state, or the king and his government;

fourthly, such as more directly infringe the rights of the public or common wealth; and, lastly, such as derogate from those rights and duties, which are owing to particular individuals, and in the preservation and vindication of which the community is deeply interested.

First then, of such crimes and misdemesnors, as more immediately offend

Almighty God, by openly transgressing the precepts of religion either natural or revealed; and mediately, by their bad example and consequence, the law of society also; which constitutes that guilt in the action, which human tribunals are to censure.

I. Of this species the first is that of apostacy, or a total renunciation of christianity,

by embracing either a false religion, or no religion at all. This offence can only take place in such as have once professed the true religion. The perversion of a christian to judaism, paganism, or other false religion, was punished by the emperors Constantius and Julian1 with confiscation of goodsd; to which the emperors Theodosius and 〈3〉 Valennian added capital punishment, in case the apostate endeavoured to pervert others to the same iniquitye. 〈4〉 A punishment too severe for any temporal laws to inflict: and yet the zeal of our ancestors imported it into this country; for we find by Bractonf, that in his time apostates were to be burnt to death. Doubtless the preservation of christianity, as a national religion, is, abstracted from its own intrinsic truth, of the utmost consequence to the civil state: which a single instance will sufficiently demonstrate. The belief of a future state of rewards and punishments, the entertaining just ideas of the moral attributes of the supreme being, and a firm persuasion that he superintends and will finally compensate every action in human life (all which are clearly revealed in the doctrines, and forcibly inculcated by the

44 precepts, of our saviour Christ) these are the grand foundation of all judicial oaths;

which call God to witness the truth of those facts, which perhaps may be only known to him and the party attesting: all moral evidence therefore, all confidence in human veracity, must be weakened by irreligion, and overthrown by 〈5〉 total infidelity. Wherefore all affronts to christianity, or 〈6〉 endeavours to depreciate its efficacy, are

d Cod. 1. 7. 1.

e Ibid. 6.

f l. 3. c. 9.

1 The reference is to an edict jointly issued in 357 by the emperor Constantius II and his nephew and later

successor Julian (‘Julian the Apostate’, emperor 361–3), whereby Christians renouncing their faith for Judaism





chapter 4 29


highly deserving of human punishment. But yet the loss of life is a heavier penalty than the offence, taken in a civil light, deserves: and, taken in a spiritual light, our laws have no jurisdiction over it. This punishment therefore has long ago become obsolete; and the offence of apostacy was for a long time the object only of the ecclesiastical courts, which corrected the offender pro salute animae [for the soul’s health]. But about the close of the last century, the civil liberties to which we were then restored being used as a cloke of maliciousness, and the most horrid doctrines subversive of all religion being publicly avowed both in discourse and writings, it was 〈7〉 found necessary again for the civil power to interpose, by not admitting those miscreantsg to the privileges of society, who maintained such principles as destroyed all moral obligation. To this end it was enacted by statute 9 & 10 W. III. c. 32. that if any person educated in, or having made profession of, the christian religion, shall by writing, printing, teaching, or advised speaking, deny the christian religion to be true, or the holy scriptures to be of divine authority, he shall upon the first offence be rendered incapable to hold any office or place of trust; and, for the second, be rendered incapable of bringing any action, being guardian, executor, legatee, or purchaser of lands, and shall suffer three years imprisonment without bail. To give room however for repentance; if, within four months after the first conviction, the delinquent will in open court publicly renounce his error, he is discharged for that once from all disabilities.

II. A second offence is that of heresy; which consists not in a total denial of

christianity, but of some of its essential doctrines, publicly and obstinately avowed; 45 〈8〉 being defined, “sententia rerum divinarum humano sensu excogitata, palam docta, et pertinaciter defensa [doctrines of human invention concerning religion, openly taught and stubbornly defended]”h. And here it must also be acknowleged that particular modes of belief or unbelief, not tending to overturn christianity itself, or to sap the foundations of morality, are by no means the object of coercion by the civil magistrate. What doctrines shall therefore be adjudged heresy, was left by our old constitution to the determination of the ecclesiastical judge; who had herein a most arbitrary latitude allowed him. For the general definition of an heretic given by Lyndewodei, extends to the smallest deviations from the doctrines of holy church: “haereticus est qui dubitat de fide catholica, et qui negligit servare ea, quae Romana ecclesia statuit, seu servare decreverat”.2 Or, as the statute 2 Hen. IV. c. 15. expresses it in English, “teachers of erroneous opinions, contrary to the faith and blessed determinations of the holy church.” Very contrary this to the usage of the first general councils, which defined all heretical doctrines with the utmost precision and exactness. And what ought to have alleviated the punishment, the uncertainty of the crime, seems to have enhanced it in those days of blind zeal and pious cruelty. It is true, that the sanctimonious hypocrisy of the canonists went at first no farther than

g Mescroyantz in our antient law-books is the name of unbelievers.

h 1 Hal. P. C. 384.

i cap. de haereticis.

2 ‘A heretic is one who doubts the Catholic faith and who neglects to observe that which the Roman church has 30 of public wrongs

enjoining penance, excommunication, and ecclesiastical deprivation, for heresy; though afterwards they proceeded boldly to imprisonment by the ordinary, and confiscation of goods in pios usus [for pious uses]. But in the mean time they had prevailed upon the weakness of bigotted princes to make the civil power subservient to their purposes, by making heresy not only a temporal, but even a capital offence: the Romish ecclesiastics determining, without appeal, whatever they pleased to be heresy, and shifting off to the secular arm the odium and drudgery of executions; with which they themselves were too tender and delicate to intermeddle. Nay they pretended to intercede and pray, on behalf of the convicted heretic, ut citra mortis periculum sententia circa eum moderetur [that his sentence might be moderated so as

46 not to expose him to the danger of death]k: well knowing at the same time that they

were delivering the unhappy victim to certain death. Hence the capital punishments inflicted on the antient Donatists and Manichaeans3 by the emperors Theodosius and Justinianl: hence also the constitution of the emperor Frederic mentioned by Lyndewodem, adjudging all persons without distinction to be burnt with fire, who were convicted of heresy by the ecclesiastical judge. The same emperor, in another constitutionn, ordained that if any temporal lord, when admonished by the church, should neglect to clear his territories of heretics within a year, it should be lawful for good catholics to seise and occupy the lands, and utterly to exterminate the heretical possessors. And upon this foundation was built that arbitrary power, so long claimed and so fatally exerted by the pope, of disposing even of the kingdoms of refractory princes to more dutiful sons of the church. The immediate event of this constitution was something singular, and may serve to illustrate at once the gratitude of the holy see, and the just punishment of the royal bigot: for upon the authority of this very constitution, the pope afterwards expelled this very emperor Frederic from his kingdom of Sicily, and gave it to Charles of Anjouo.

Christianity being thus deformed by the daemon of persecution upon the

continent, we cannot expect that our own island should be entirely free from the same scourge. And therefore we find among our antient precedentsp a writ de haeretico comburendo [for burning a heretic], which is thought by some to be as antient as the common law itself. However it appears from thence, that the conviction of heresy by the common law was not in any petty ecclesiastical court, but before the archbishop himself in a provincial synod; and that the delinquent was delivered over to the king to do as he should please with him: so that the crown had a control over

47 the spiritual power, and might pardon the convict by issuing no process against him;

k Decretal. l. 5. t. 40. c. 27.

l Cod. l. 1. tit. 5.

m c. de haereticis.

n Cod. 1. 5. 4.

o Baldus in Cod. 1. 5. 4.

p F. N. B. 269.

3 Donatists were Christian schismatics in the African province of the Roman Empire during the fourth–fifth

centuries ad. Manichaeism, named for its founder Manes (c. 215–75), was a major religious movement between





chapter 4 31


the writ de haeretico comburendo being not a writ of course, but issuing only by the special direction of the king in councilq.

But in the reign of Henry the fourth, when the eyes of the christian world began

to open, and the seeds of the protestant religion (though under the opprobrious name of lollardy)r took root in this kingdom;4 the clergy, taking advantage from the king’s dubious title to demand an increase of their own power, obtained an act of parliaments, which sharpened the edge of persecution to its utmost keenness. For, by that statute, the diocesan alone, without the intervention of a synod, might convict of heretical tenets; and unless the convict abjured his opinions, or if after abjuration he relapsed, the sheriff was bound ex officio [by virtue of his office], if required by the bishop, to commit the unhappy victim to the flames, without waiting for the consent of the crown. By the statute 2 Hen. V. c. 7. lollardy was also made a temporal offence, and indictable in the king’s courts; which did not thereby gain an exclusive, but only a concurrent jurisdiction with the bishop’s consistory.

Afterwards, when the final reformation of religion began to advance, the power

of the ecclesiastics was somewhat moderated: for though what heresy is, was not then precisely defined, yet we are told in some points what it is not: the statute 25 Hen. VIII. c. 14. declaring, that offences against the see of Rome are not heresy; and the ordinary being thereby restrained from proceeding in any case upon mere suspicion; that is, unless the party be accused by two credible witnesses, or an indictment of heresy be first previously found in the king’s courts of common law. And yet the spirit of persecution was not then abated, but only diverted into a lay chanel. For in six years afterwards, by statute 31 Hen. VIII. c. 14. the bloody law of the six articles was made, which established the six most contested points of popery, transubstantiation, 48

communion in one kind, the celibacy of the clergy, monastic vows, the sacrifice of the mass, and auricular confession; which points were “determined and resolved by the most godly study, pain, and travail of his majesty: for which his most humble and obedient subjects, the lords spiritual and temporal and the commons, in parliament assembled, did not only render and give unto his highness their most high and hearty thanks,” but did also enact and declare all oppugners of the first to be heretics, and to be burnt with fire; and of the five last to be felons, and to suffer death. The same statute established a new and mixed jurisdiction of clergy and laity for the trial and conviction of heretics; the reigning prince being then equally intent on destroying the supremacy of the bishops of Rome, and establishing all other their corruptions of the christian religion.

I shall not perplex this detail with the various repeals and revivals of these

sanguinary laws in the two succeeding reigns; but shall proceed directly to the reign of queen Elizabeth; when the reformation was finally established with temper and

q 1 Hal. P. C. 395.

r So called not from lolium, 〈9〉 or tares, (which was afterwards devised, in order to justify the burning of them from Matth. xiii. 30.) but from one Walter Lolhard, a German reformer. Mod. Un. Hist. xxvi. 13. Spelm. Gloss. 371.

s 2 Hen. IV. c. 15.

4 A late medieval English religious reform movement, whose adherents were persecuted as heretics, Lollardy 32 of public wrongs

decency, unsullied with party rancour, or personal caprice and resentment. By statute 1 Eliz. c. 1. all former statutes relating to heresy are repealed, which leaves the jurisdiction of heresy as it stood at common law; viz. as to the infliction of common censures, in the ecclesiastical courts; and, in case of burning the heretic, in the provincial synod onlyt. Sir Matthew Hale is indeed of a different opinion, and holds that such power resided in the diocesan also; though he agrees, that in either case the writ de haeretico comburendo was not demandable of common right, but grantable or otherwise merely at the king’s discretionu. But the principal point now gained, was, that by this statute a boundary is for the first time set to what shall be accounted heresy; nothing for the future being to be so determined, but only such tenets, which have been heretofore so declared, 1. By the words of the canonical scriptures; 2. By

49 the first four general councils,5 or such others as have only used the words of the holy

scriptures; or, 3. Which shall hereafter be so declared by the parliament, with the assent of the clergy in convocation. Thus was heresy reduced to a greater certainty than before; though it might not have been the worse to have defined it in terms still more precise and particular: as a man continued still liable to be burnt, for what perhaps he did not understand to be heresy, till the ecclesiastical judge so interpreted the words of the canonical scriptures.

For the writ de haeretico comburendo remained still in force; and we have instances

of its being put in execution upon two anabaptists in the seventeenth of Elizabeth, and two Arians in the ninth of James the first.6 But it was totally abolished, and heresy again subjected only to ecclesiastical correction, pro salute animae [for the health of the soul], by virtue of the statute 29 Car. II. c. 9. For in one and the same reign, our lands were delivered from the slavery of military tenures; our bodies from arbitrary imprisonment by the habeas corpus act; and our minds from the tyranny of super-stitious bigotry, by demolishing this last badge of persecution in the English law.7

In what I have now said I would not be understood to derogate from the just rights

of the national church, or to favour a loose latitude of propagating any crude undigested sentiments in religious matters. Of propagating, I say; for the bare entertaining them, without an endeavour to diffuse them, seems hardly cognizable by any human authority. I only mean to illustrate the excellence of our present establishment, by looking back to former times. 〈10〉 Every thing is now as it should be: unless perhaps that heresy ought to be more strictly defined, and no prosecution permitted, even in the ecclesiastical courts, till the tenets in question are by proper authority previously declared to be heretical. Under these restrictions, it seems

t [Caudrey’s case] 5 Rep. 23. 12 Rep. 56. 92 [recte 93].

u 1 Hal. P. C. 405.

5 The first four councils of the Christian Church met to determine matters of doctrine at Nicaea (325),

Constantinople (381), Ephesus (431), and Chalcedon (451).

6 Two Flemish immigrants, Jan Pietersz and Hendrick Terwoort, were burned as Anabaptists (extreme radical

protestant sectaries, refusing infant baptism) at Smithfield in July 1575; Bartholomew Legate and Edward Wightman suffered similarly as anti-Trinitarian heretics (often termed Arians) in 1612.

7 Military tenures were abolished in 1660 (12 Car. II. c. 24); the habeas corpus act, which limited the ability of





chapter 4 33


necessary for the support of the national religion, that the officers of the church should have power to censure heretics, 〈11〉 but not to exterminate or destroy them. It has also been thought proper for the civil magistrate again to interpose, with regard 50

to one species of heresy, very prevalent in modern times: for by statute 9 & 10 W. III. c. 32. if any person educated in the christian religion, or professing the same, shall by writing, printing, teaching, or advised speaking, deny any one of the persons in the holy trinity to be God, or maintain that there are more Gods than one, he shall undergo the same penalties and incapacities, which were just now mentioned to be inflicted on apostacy by the same statute. And thus much for the crime of heresy.

III. Another species of offences against religion are those which affect the

established church. And these are either positive, or negative: 〈12〉 positive, as by reviling its ordinances: or negative, by non-conformity to its worship. Of both of these in their order.

1. And, first, of the offence of reviling the ordinances of the church. This is a crime

of a much grosser nature than the other of mere non-conformity: since it carries with it the utmost indecency, arrogance, and ingratitude: indecency, by setting up private 〈 13〉 judgment in opposition to public; arrogance, by treating with contempt and rudeness what has at least a better chance to be right, than the singular notions of any particular man; and ingratitude, by denying that indulgence 〈14〉 and liberty of conscience to the members of the national church, which the retainers to every petty conventicle8 enjoy. However it is provided by statutes 1 Edw. VI. c. 1. and 1 Eliz. c. 1. that whoever reviles the sacrament of the lord’s supper shall be punished by fine and imprisonment: and by the statute 1 Eliz. c. 2. if any minister shall speak any thing in derogation of the book of common prayer, 〈15〉 he shall be imprisoned six months, and forfeit a year’s value of his benefice; and for the second offence he shall be deprived. And if any person whatsoever shall in plays, songs, or other open words, speak any thing in derogation, depraving, or despising of the said 〈16〉 book, he shall forfeit for the first offence an hundred marks; for the second four hundred; and for the third shall forfeit all his goods and chattels, and suffer imprisonment for life. 51 These penalties were framed in the infancy of our present establishment; when the disciples of Rome and of Geneva united in inveighing with the utmost bitterness against the English liturgy: and the terror of these laws (for they seldom, if ever, were fully executed) proved a principal means, under providence, of preserving the purity as well as decency of our national worship. Nor can their continuance to this 〈17〉 time be thought too severe and intolerant; when we consider, that they are levelled at an offence, to which men cannot now be prompted by any laudable motive; not even by a mistaken zeal for reformation: since from political reasons, sufficiently hinted at in a former volumev, it would now be extremely unadvisable to make any alterations in the service of the church; unless it could be shewn that some manifest impiety or shocking absurdity would follow from continuing it in its present form. And therefore

v Vol. I. pag. 98 [I. 71].

34 of public wrongs

the virulent declamations of peevish or opinionated men on topics so often refuted, and of which the preface to the liturgy is itself a perpetual refutation,9 can be calculated for no other purpose, than merely to disturb the consciences, and poison the minds of the people.

2. Non-conformity to the worship of the church is the other, or negative branch

of this offence. And for this there is much more to be pleaded than for the former; being a matter of private conscience, to the scruples of which our present laws have shewn a very just and christian indulgence. For undoubtedly all persecution and oppression of weak consciences, on the score of religious persuasions, are highly unjustifiable upon every principle of natural reason, civil liberty, or sound religion. But care must be taken not to carry this indulgence into such extremes, as may endanger the national church: there is always a difference to be made between toleration and establishment.

Non-conformists are of two sorts: first, such as absent themselves 〈18〉 from the

52 divine worship in the established church, through total irreligion, and attend the

service of no other persuasion. These by the statutes of 1 Eliz. c. 2. 23 Eliz. c. 1. and 3 Jac. I. c. 4. forfeit one shilling to the poor every lord’s day they so absent themselves, and 20l. to the king if they continue such default for a month together. And if they keep any inmate,10 thus irreligiously disposed, in their houses, they forfeit 10l. per month.

The second species of non-conformists are those who offend through a mistaken

or perverse zeal. Such were esteemed by our laws, enacted since the time of the reformation, to be papists and protestant dissenters: both of which were supposed to be equally 〈19〉 schismatics in departing from the national church; with this difference, that the papists divide from us upon material, though erroneous, reasons; but many of the dissenters upon matters of indifference, 〈20〉 or, in other words, upon no reason at all. However the laws against the former are much more severe than against the latter; the principles of the papists being deservedly looked upon to be subversive of the civil government, but not those of the protestant dissenters. As to the papists, their tenets are undoubtedly calculated for the introduction of all slavery, both civil and religious: but it may with justice be questioned, whether the spirit, the doctrines, and the practice of the sectaries are better calculated to make men good subjects. One thing is obvious to observe, that these have once within the compass of the last century, effected the ruin of our church and monarchy; which the papists have attempted indeed, but have never yet been able to execute.11 Yet certainly our ancestors were mistaken in their plans of compulsion and intolerance. The sin of schism, as such, is by no means the object of temporal coercion and punishment. If through weakness of intellect, through misdirected piety, through perverseness and acerbity of temper, or (which is often the case) through a prospect of secular advantage in

9 Blackstone refers to the Book of Common Prayer of 1662, which contained the forms of service for the

Anglican/episcopal church.

10 i.e. a lodger.

11 Blackstone here attributes the civil wars of the 1640s and the execution of Charles I (1649) to the Puritan





chapter 4 35


herding with a party, men quarrel with the ecclesiastical establishment, the civil magistrate has nothing to do with it; unless their tenets and practice are such as threaten ruin or disturbance to the state. He is bound indeed to protect the 〈21〉 53

established church, by admitting none but its genuine members to offices of trust and emolument: for, if every sect was to be indulged in a free communion of civil employments, the idea of a national establishment would at once be destroyed, and the episcopal church would be no longer the church of England. But, this point being once secured, all persecution for diversity of opinions, however ridiculous or absurd they may be, is contrary to every principle of sound policy and civil freedom. The names and subordination of the clergy, the posture of devotion, the materials and colour of the minister’s garment, the joining in a known or an unknown form of prayer, and other matters of the same kind, must be left to the option of every man’s private judgment.

With regard therefore to protestant dissenters, although the experience of their

turbulent disposition in former times occasioned several disabilities and restrictions (which I shall not undertake to justify) to be laid upon them by abundance of statutesw, yet at length the legislature, with a spirit of true magnanimity, extended that indulgence to these sectaries, which they themselves, when in power, had held to be countenancing schism, and 〈23〉 denied to the church of England. The penalties are all of them suspended by the statute 1 W. & M. st. 2. c. 18. commonly called the toleration act; which exempts all dissenters (except papists, and such as deny the trinity) from all penal laws relating to religion, provided they take the oaths of allegiance and supremacy, and subscribe the declaration against popery, and repair to some congregation registered in the bishop’s court or at the sessions, the doors whereof must be always open: and dissenting teachers are also to subscribe the thirty nine articles, except those relating to church government and infant baptism.12 Thus are all persons, who will approve themselves no papists or oppugners of the trinity, left at full liberty to act as their conscience shall direct them, in the matter of religious worship. But by statute 5 Geo. I. c. 4. no mayor, or principal magistrate, must appear 54 at any dissenting meeting with the ensigns of his officex, on pain of disability to hold that or any other office: the legislature judging it a matter of propriety, that a mode of worship, set up in opposition to the national, when allowed to be exercised in peace, should be exercised also with decency, gratitude, 〈24〉 and humility.

As to papists, what has been said of the protestant dissenters would hold equally

strong for a general toleration of them; provided their separation was founded only

w 〈22〉 31 Eliz. c. 1. 17 Car. II. c. 2. 22 Car. II. c. 1.

x Sir Humphrey Edwin, a lord mayor of London, had the imprudence soon after the toleration-act to go to a presbyterian meeting-house in his formalities [i.e. in full regalia]: which is alluded to by dean [Jonathan] Swift, in his tale of a tub, under the allegory of Jack getting on a great horse, and eating custard. [Swift’s satire features a Dissenter named Jack (from John Calvin); Blackstone’s contemporaries would have recognized the reference to the annual London Lord Mayor’s Show, led by the lord mayor riding on a horse and followed by a feast at which custard, a luxury dish as it was made from fresh eggs, was traditionally served.]

12 The 39 ‘Articles of Religion’ (1571), promulgated in the Book of Common Prayer, are the Church of England’s

basic doctrinal statement. Government of the church by bishops and infant baptism were two main points on 36 of public wrongs

upon difference of opinion in religion, and their principles did not also extend to a subversion of the civil government. If once they could be brought to renounce the supremacy of the pope, they might quietly enjoy their seven sacraments, their purgatory, and auricular confession; their worship of reliques and images; nay even their transubstantiation. But while they acknowlege a foreign power, superior to the sovereignty of the kingdom, they cannot complain if the laws of that kingdom will not treat them upon the footing of good subjects.

Let us therefore now take a view of the laws in force against the papists; who may

be divided into three classes, persons professing popery, popish recusants convict, and popish priests. 1. Persons professing the popish religion, besides the former penalties for not frequenting their parish church, 〈25〉 are by several statutes, too numerous to be here recitedy, disabled from taking any lands either by descent or purchase, after eighteen years of age, until they renounce their errors; they must at the age of twenty one register their estates before acquired, and all future conveyances and wills relating to them; they are incapable of presenting to any advowson, or

55 granting to any other person any 〈26〉 avoidance of the same, in prejudice of the two

universities; they may not keep or teach any school under pain of perpetual imprisonment; they are liable also in some instances to pay double taxes; and, if they willingly say or hear mass, they forfeit the one two hundred, the other one hundred marks, and each shall suffer a year’s imprisonment. Thus much for persons, who, from the misfortune of family prejudices or otherwise, have conceived an unhappy attachment to the Romish church from their infancy, and publicly profess its errors. But if any evil industry is used to rivet these errors upon them, if any person sends another abroad to be educated in the popish religion, or to reside in any religious house abroad for that purpose, 〈27〉 or contributes any thing to their maintenance when there; both the sender, the sent, and the contributor, are disabled to sue in law or equity, to be executor or administrator to any person, to take any legacy or deed of gift, and to bear any office in the realm, and shall forfeit all their goods and chattels, and likewise all their real estate for life. And where these errors are also aggravated by apostacy, or perversion, where a person is reconciled to the see of Rome or procures others to be reconciled, the offence amounts to high treason. 2. Popish recusants, convicted in a court of law of not attending the service of the church of England, are subject to the following disabilities, penalties, and forfeitures, over and above those 〈28〉 before-mentioned. They can hold no office or employment; they must not keep arms in their houses, but the same may be seised by the justices of the peace; they may not come within ten miles of London, on pain of 100l.; they can bring no action at law, or suit in equity; they are not permitted to travel above five miles from home, unless by licence, upon pain of forfeiting all their goods; and they may not come to court,13 under pain of 100l. No marriage or burial of such recusant, or baptism of his child, shall be had otherwise than by the ministers of the church of England, under

y See Hawkins’s pleas of the crown, and Burn’s justice.





chapter 4 37


other severe penalties. A married woman, when recusant, shall forfeit two thirds of her dower or jointure, may not be executrix or administratrix to her husband, nor have any part of his goods; and during the coverture may be kept in prison, unless her 56 husband redeems her at the rate of 10l. a month, or the third part of all his lands. And, lastly, as a feme-covert recusant may be imprisoned, so all others must, within three months after conviction, either submit and renounce their errors, or, if required so to do by four justices, must abjure and renounce the realm: and if they do not depart, or if they return without the king’s licence, they shall be guilty of felony, and 〈29〉 suffer death as felons. There is also an inferior species of recusancy, (refusing to make the declaration against popery enjoined by statute 30 Car. II. st. 2. when tendered by the proper magistrate) which, if the party resides within ten miles of London, makes him an absolute recusant convict; or, if at a greater distance, suspends him from having any seat in parliament, keeping arms in his house, or any horse above the value of five pounds.14 This is the state, by the laws 〈30〉 now in being, of a lay papist. But, 3. The remaining species or degree, viz. popish priests, are in a still more dangerous condition. 〈31〉 By statute 11 & 12 W. III. c. 4. popish priests or bishops, celebrating mass or exercising 〈32〉 any parts of their functions in England, except in the houses of embassadors, are liable to perpetual imprisonment. And by the statute 27 Eliz. c. 2. any popish priest, born in the dominions of the crown of England, who shall come over hither 〈33〉 from beyond sea, or shall be in England three days without conforming and taking the oaths, is guilty of high treason: and all persons harbouring him are guilty of felony without the benefit of clergy.

This is a short summary of the laws against the papists, under their three several

classes, of persons professing the popish religion, popish recusants convict, and popish priests. Of which the president Montesquieu observesz, that they are so rigorous, though not professedly of the sanguinary kind, that they do all the hurt that can possibly be done in cold blood. But in answer to this it may be observed, (what foreigners who only judge from our statute book are not fully apprized of) that these laws are seldom exerted to their utmost rigor: and indeed, if they were, it would be 57 very difficult to excuse them. For they are rather to be accounted for from their history, and the urgency of the times which produced them, than to be approved (upon a cool review) as a standing system of law. The restless machinations of the jesuits during the reign of Elizabeth, the turbulence and uneasiness of the papists under the new religious establishment, and the boldness of their hopes and wishes for the succession of the queen of Scots,15 obliged the parliament to counteract so dangerous a spirit by laws of a great, 〈34〉 and perhaps necessary, severity. The powder-treason, in the succeeding reign, struck a panic into James I, which operated in different ways: it occasioned the enacting of new laws against the papists; but deterred him from putting them in execution.16 The intrigues of queen Henrietta in

z Sp. L. b. 19. c. 27.

14 Catholics, presumed to be sympathetic to the exiled Stuarts, were prevented from keeping weaponry or horses

of a quality suitable for military use which might assist a Jacobite rebellion.

15 Mary Stuart (Mary I of Scotland, better known as Mary Queen of Scots).

16 The ‘powder treason’ or Gunpowder Plot was an attempt to assassinate James I during the state opening of 38 of public wrongs

the reign of Charles I, the prospect of a popish successor in that of Charles II, the assassination-plot in the reign of king William, and the avowed claim of a popish pretender 〈35〉 to the crown, will account for the extension of these penalties at those several periods of our history. But if a time should ever arrive, and perhaps it is not very distant, when all fears of a pretender shall have vanished, and the power and influence of the pope shall become feeble, ridiculous, and despicable, not only in England but in every kingdom of Europe; it probably would not then be amiss to review and soften these rigorous edicts; at least till the civil principles of the roman-catholics called again upon the legislature to renew them: for it ought not to be left in the breast of every merciless bigot, to drag down the vengeance of these occasional laws upon inoffensive, though mistaken, subjects; in opposition to the lenient inclinations of the civil magistrate, and to the destruction of every principle of toleration and 〈36〉 religious liberty.

In order the better to secure the established church against perils from non-

conformists of all denominations, infidels, turks, jews, heretics, papists, and sectaries, there are however two bulwarks erected; called the corporation and test acts: by the

58 former of whicha no person can be legally elected to any office relating to the

government of any city or corporation, unless, within a twelvemonth before, he has received the sacrament of the lord’s supper according to the rites of the church of England: and he is also enjoined to take the oaths of allegiance and supremacy at the same time that he takes the oath of office: or, in default of either of these requisites, such election shall be void. The other, called the 〈37〉 test actb, directs all officers civil and military to take the oaths and make the declaration against transubstantiation, in the court of king’s bench or chancery, the next term, or at the next quarter sessions, or (by subsequent statutes) within six months, after their admission; and also within the same time to receive the sacrament of the lord’s supper, according to the usage of the church of England, in some public church immediately after divine service and sermon, and to deliver into court a certificate thereof signed by the minister and church-warden, and also to prove the same by two credible witnesses; upon forfeiture of 500l, and disability to hold the said office. And of much the same nature with these is the statute 7 Jac. I. c. 2. which permits no persons to be naturalized or restored in blood, but such as undergo a like test: which test having been removed in 1753, in favour of the Jews, was the next session of parliament restored again with some precipitation.17

Thus much for offences, which strike at our national religion, or the doctrine and

discipline of the church of England in particular. I proceed now to consider some gross impieties and general immoralities, which are taken notice of and punished by our municipal law; frequently in concurrence with the ecclesiastical, to which the

a Stat. 13 Car. II. st. 2. c. 1.

b Stat. 25 Car. II. c. 2.

17 Possibly prompted by the Whig administration’s gratitude to prominent Jewish supporters during the abortive

Jacobite rising of 1745, the act permitted Jews who had resided in England for three years to become naturalized





chapter 4 39


censure of many of them does also of right appertain; though with a view somewhat different: the spiritual court punishing all sinful enormities for the sake of reforming the private sinner, pro salute animae; while the temporal courts resent the public affront to religion and morality, on which all government must depend for support, 59 and correct more for the sake of example than private amendment.

IV. The fourth species of offences therefore, more immediately against God and

religion, is that of blasphemy against the Almighty, by denying his being or providence; or by contumelious reproaches of our Saviour Christ. Whither also may be referred all profane scoffing at the holy scripture, or exposing it to contempt and ridicule. These are offences punishable at common law by fine and imprisonment, or other infamous corporal punishmentc: for christianity is part of the laws of Englandd.

V. Somewhat allied to this, though in an inferior degree, is the offence of profane

and common swearing and cursing. By the last statute against which, 19 Geo. II. c. 21. which repeals all former ones, every labourer, sailor, 〈38〉 or soldier shall forfeit 1s. for every profane oath or curse, every other person under the degree of a gentleman 2s. and every gentleman or person of superior rank 5s. to the poor of the parish; and, on a second conviction, double; and, for every subsequent 〈39〉 conviction, treble the sum first forfeited; with all charges of conviction: and in default of payment shall be sent to the house of correction for ten days. Any justice of the peace may convict upon his own hearing, or the testimony of one witness; and any constable or peace officer, upon his own hearing, may secure any offender and carry him before a justice, and there convict him. If the justice omits his duty, he forfeits 5l., and the constable 40s. And the act is to be read in all parish churches, and public chapels, the sunday after every quarter day,18 on pain of 5l. to be levied by warrant from any justice. Besides this punishment for taking God’s name in vain in common discourse, it is enacted by statute 3 Jac. I. c. 21. that if in any stage play, interlude, or shew, the name of the holy trinity, or any of the persons therein, be jestingly or 60 profanely used, the offender shall forfeit 10l., one moiety to the king, and the other to the informer.19

VI. A sixth species of offences against God and religion, of which our antient

books are full, is a crime of which one knows not well what account to give. I mean the offence of witchcraft, conjuration, inchantment, or sorcery. To deny the possibility, nay, actual existence, of witchcraft and sorcery, is at once flatly to contradict the revealed word of God, in various passages both of the old and new testament: and the thing itself is a truth to which every nation in the world hath in its turn borne testimony, by either examples seemingly well attested, or prohibitory laws, which at least suppose the possibility of a commerce with evil spirits. The civil law punishes

c 1 Hawk. P. C. 7.

d [Taylor’s case] 1 Ventr. 293. [R. v Woolston] 2 Strange, 834.

18 The four English quarter days are 25 March (Lady Day), 24 June (Nativity of St John the Baptist), 29 September

(Michaelmas), and 25 December (Christmas Day).

19 Private prosecutions by informers were used to regulate behaviour considered harmful to society as a whole, but 40 of public wrongs

with death not only the sorcerers themselves, but also those who consult theme; imitat-ing in the former the express law of Godf, “thou shalt not suffer a witch to live.” And our own laws, both before and since the conquest, have been equally penal; ranking this crime in the same class with heresy, and condemning both to the flamesg. The president Montesquieuh ranks them also both together, but with a very different view: laying it down as an important maxim, that we ought to be very circumspect in the prosecution of magic and heresy; because the most unexceptionable conduct, the purest morals, and the constant practice of every duty in life, are not a sufficient security against the suspicion of crimes like these. And indeed the ridiculous stories that are generally told, and the many impostures and delusions that have been discovered in all ages, are enough to demolish all faith in such a dubious crime; if the contrary evidence were not also extremely strong. Wherefore it seems to be the most eligible way to conclude, with an ingenious writer of our owni, that in general there has been such a thing as witchcraft; though one cannot give credit to any particular modern instance of it.

61 Our forefathers were stronger believers, when they enacted by statute 33 Henry

VIII. c. 8. all witchcraft and sorcery to be felony without benefit of clergy; and again by statute 1 Jac. I. c. 12. that all persons invoking any evil spirit, or consulting, cove-nanting with, entertaining, employing, feeding, or rewarding any evil spirit; or taking up dead bodies from their graves to be used in any witchcraft, sorcery, charm, or inchantment; or killing or otherwise hurting any person by such infernal arts; should be guilty of felony without benefit of clergy, and suffer death. And, if any person should attempt by sorcery to discover hidden treasure, or to restore stolen goods, or to provoke unlawful love, or to hurt any man or beast, though the same were not effected, he or she should suffer imprisonment and pillory for the first offence, and death for the second. These acts continued in force till lately, to the terror of all antient females in the kingdom: and many poor wretches were sacrificed thereby to the prejudice of their neighbours, and their own illusions; not a few having, by some means or other, confessed the fact at the gallows. But all executions for this dubious crime are now at an end; our legislature having at length followed the wise example of Louis XIV in France, who thought proper by an edict to restrain the tribunals of justice from receiving informations of witchcraftk. And accordingly it is with us enacted by statute 9 Geo. II. c. 5. that no pro-secution shall for the future be carried on against any person for conjuration, witch-craft, sorcery, or inchantment. But the misdemesnor of persons pretending to use witchcraft, tell fortunes, or discover stolen goods by skill in the occult sciences, is still deservedly punished with a year’s imprisonment, and standing four times in the pillory.20

e Cod. l. 9. t. 18.

f Exod. xxii. 18.

g 3 Inst. 44.

h Sp. L. b. 12. c. 5.

i Mr Addison, Spect[ator]. N° 117.

k Voltaire 〈40〉 Siecl. Louis xiv. Mod. Univ. Hist. xxv. 215. Yet Vouglans, (de droit criminel, 353. 459.) still reckons

up sorcery and witchcraft among the crimes punishable in France.

20 Blackstone’s attempted reconciliation of his own perception of the occult to the then current state of the law

lacks clarity. The effect of 9 Geo. II. c. 5. was to create a legally irrefutable presumption that all attempts at con-





chapter 4 41


VII. A seventh species of offenders in this class are all religious impostors: such

as falsely pretend an extraordinary commission from heaven; or terrify and abuse 62 the people with false denunciations of judgments. These, as tending to subvert all religion, by bringing it into ridicule and contempt, are punishable by the temporal courts with fine, imprisonment, and infamous corporal punishmentl.

VIII. Simony, or the corrupt presentation of any one to an ecclesiastical benefice

for gift or reward, is also to be considered as an offence against religion; as well by reason of the sacredness of the charge which is thus profanely bought and sold, as because it is always attended with perjury in the person presentedm. The statute 31 Eliz. c. 6. (which, so far as it relates to the forfeiture of the right of presentation, was considered in a former book)n enacts, that if any patron, for money or any other corrupt consideration or promise, directly or indirectly given, shall present, admit, institute, induct, install, or collate any person to an ecclesiastical benefice or dignity, both the giver and taker shall forfeit two years value of the benefice or dignity; one moiety to the king, and the other to any one who will sue for the same. If persons also corruptly resign or exchange their benefices, both the giver and taker shall in like manner forfeit double the value of the money or other corrupt consideration. And persons who shall corruptly ordain or licence any minister, or procure him to be ordained or licenced, (which is the true idea of simony) shall incur a like forfeiture of forty pounds; and the minister himself of ten pounds, besides an incapacity to hold any ecclesiastical preferment for seven years afterwards. Corrupt elections and resignations in colleges, hospitals, and other eleemosynary corporations, are also punished by the same statute with forfeiture of the double value, vacating the place or office, and a devolution of the right of election for that turn to the crown.

IX. Profanation of the lord’s 〈41〉 day, or sabbath-breaking, is a ninth offence 63

against God and religion, punished by the municipal laws of England. For, besides the notorious indecency and scandal, of permitting any secular business to be publicly transacted on that day, in a country professing christianity, and the corruption of morals which usually follows its profanation, the keeping one day in seven holy, as a time of relaxation and refreshment as well as for public worship, is of admirable service to a state, considered merely as a civil institution. It humanizes by the help of conversation and society the manners of the lower classes; which would otherwise degenerate into a sordid ferocity and savage selfishness of spirit: it enables the industrious workman to pursue his occupation in the ensuing week with health and chearfulness: it imprints on the minds of the people that sense of their duty to God, so necessary to make them good citizens; but which yet would be worn out and defaced by an unremitted continuance of labour, without any stated times of recalling them to the worship of their maker. And therefore the laws of king Athelstano forbad all merchandizing on the lord’s day, under very severe penalties. And by the statute 27

l 1 Hawk. P. C. 7.

m 3 Inst. 156.

n See Vol. II. pag. 279 [II. 190].

42 of public wrongs

Hen. VI. c. 5. no fair or market shall be held on the principal festivals, good friday, or any sunday (except the four sundays in harvest) on pain of forfeiting the goods exposed to sale. And, since, by the statute 1 Car. I. c. 1. no persons shall assemble, out of their own parishes, for any sport whatsoever upon this day; nor, in their parishes, shall use any bull or bear baiting, interludes, plays, or other unlawful exercises, or pastimes; on pain that every offender shall pay 3s. 4d. to the poor. This statute does not prohibit, but rather impliedly allows, any innocent recreation or amusement, within their respective parishes, even on the lord’s day, after divine service is over. But by statute 29 Car. II. c. 7. no person is allowed to work on the lord’s day, or use any boat or barge, or expose any goods to sale; except meat in public houses, milk at

64 certain hours, and works of necessity or charity, on forfeiture of 5s. Nor shall any

drover, carrier, or the like, travel upon that day, under pain of twenty shillings.

X. Drunkenness is also punished by statute 4 Jac. I. c. 5. with the forfeiture of 5s.;

or the sitting six hours in the stocks: by which time the statute presumes the offender will have regained his senses, and not be liable to do mischief to his neighbours. And there are many wholsome statutes, by way of prevention, chiefly passed in the same reign of king James I, which regulate the licencing of ale-houses, and punish persons found tippling therein; or the masters of such houses permitting them.

XI. The last offence which I shall mention, more immediately against religion and

morality, and cognizable by the temporal courts, is that of open and notorious lewdness: either by frequenting houses of ill fame, which is an indictable offencep; or by some grossly scandalous and public indecency, for which the punishment is by fine and imprisonmentq. In the year 1650,21 when the ruling powers found it for their interest to put on the semblance of a very extraordinary strictness and purity of morals, not only incest and wilful adultery were made capital crimes; but also the repeated act of keeping a brothel, or committing fornication, were (upon a second conviction) made felony without benefit of clergyr. But at the restoration, when men from an abhorrence of the hypocrisy of the late times fell into a contrary extreme, of licentiousness, it was not thought proper to renew a law of such unfashionable rigour. And these offences have been ever since left to the feeble coercion of the spiritual court, according to the rules of the canon law; a law which has treated the offence of incontinence, nay even adultery itself, with a great degree of tenderness and lenity;

65 owing perhaps 〈42〉 to the celibacy of its first compilers. The temporal courts therefore

take no cognizance of the crime of adultery, otherwise than as a private injurys.

But, before we quit this subject, we must take notice of the temporal punishment

for having bastard children, considered in a criminal light; for with regard to the



p [Wheelhorse’s case] Poph. 208.

q [R. v Sir Charles Sidley] 1 Siderf. 168.

r Scobell. 121.

s See Vol. III. pag. 139 [III. 94].

21 The Adultery Act of 1650, ‘for suppressing the detestable sins of incest, adultery and fornication’, was passed

by the Rump Parliament which ruled the Commonwealth of England from 1649 until forcibly dissolved by Oliver





chapter 4 43


maintenance of such illegitimate offspring, which is a civil concern, we have formerly spoken at larget. By the statute 18 Eliz. c. 3. two justices may take order for the punishment of the mother and reputed father; but what that punishment shall be, is not therein ascertained: though the contemporary exposition was, that a corporal punishment was intendedu. By statute 7 Jac. I. c. 4. a specific punishment (viz. com-mitment to the house of correction) is inflicted on the woman only. But in both cases, it seems that the penalty can only be inflicted, if the bastard becomes chargeable to the parish: for otherwise the very maintenance of the child is considered as a degree of punishment. By the last mentioned statute the justices may commit the mother to the house of correction, there to be punished and set on work for one year; and, in case of a second offence, till she find sureties never to offend again.

t See Vol. I. pag. 458 [I. 296].

u Dalt. just. ch. 11.



66 chapter the fifth.



of offences against the

law of nations.

According to the method marked out in the preceding chapter, we are next to consider the offences more immediately repugnant to that universal law of society, which regulates the mutual intercourse between one state and another; those, I mean, which are particularly animadverted on, as such, by the English law.

the law of nations is a system of rules, deducible by natural reason, and established

by universal consent among the civilized inhabitants of the worlda, in order to decide all disputes, to regulate all ceremonies and civilities, and to insure the observance of justice and good faith, in that intercourse which must frequently occur between two or more independent states, and the individuals belonging to eachb. This general law is founded upon this principle, that different nations ought in time of peace to do one another all the good they can; and, in time of war, as little harm as possible, without prejudice to their own real interestsc. And, as none of these states will allow a superiority in the other, therefore neither can dictate or prescribe the rules of this law

67 to the rest; but such rules must necessarily result from those principles of natural

justice, in which all the learned of every nation agree: or they depend upon mutual compacts or treaties between the respective communities; in the construction of which there is also no judge to resort to, but the law of nature and reason, being the only one in which all the contracting parties are equally conversant, and to which they are equally subject.

In arbitrary states this law, wherever it contradicts or is not provided for by the

municipal law of the country, is enforced by the royal power: but since in England no royal power can introduce a new law, or suspend the execution of the old, therefore the law of nations (wherever any question arises which is properly the object of its jurisdiction) is here adopted in its full extent by the common law, and is held to be a part of the law of the land. And those acts of parliament, which have from time to time been made to enforce this universal law, or to facilitate the execution of its decisions, are not to be considered as introductive of any new rule, but merely as declaratory of the old fundamental constitutions of the kingdom; without which it must cease to be a part of the civilized world. Thus in mercantile questions, such as bills of exchange and the like; in all marine causes, relating to freight, average, demurrage, insurances, bottomry,1 and others of a similar nature; the law-merchantd,

a Ff. 1. 1. 9.

b See Vol. I. pag. 43 [I. 36].

c Sp. L. b. 1. c. 3.

d See Vol. I. pag. 273 [I. 176].





chapter 5 45


which is a branch of the law of nations, is regularly and constantly adhered to. So too in all disputes relating to prizes, to shipwrecks, to hostages, and ransom bills, there is no other rule of decision but this great universal law, collected from history and usage and such writers of all nations and languages as are generally approved and allowed of.

but, though in civil transactions and questions of property between the subjects

of different states, the law of nations has much scope and extent, as adopted by the law of England; yet the present branch of our enquiries will fall within a narrow compass, as offences against the law of nations can rarely be the object of the criminal 68

law of any particular state. For offences against this law are principally incident to whole states or nations: in which case recourse can only be had to war; which is an appeal to the God of hosts, to punish such infractions of public faith, as are committed by one independent people against another: neither state having any superior jurisdiction to resort to upon earth for justice. but where the individuals of any state violate this general law, it is then the interest as well as duty of the government under which they live, to animadvert upon them with a becoming severity, that the peace of the world may be maintained. For in vain would nations in their collective capacity observe these universal rules, if private subjects were at liberty to break them at their own discretion, and involve the two states in a war. It is therefore incumbent upon the nation injured, first to demand satisfaction and justice to be done on the offender, by the state to which he belongs; and, if that be refused or neglected, the sovereign then avows himself an accomplice or abettor of his subject’s crime, and draws upon his community the calamities of foreign war.

the principal offences against the law of nations, animadverted on as such by

the municipal laws of England, are of three kinds; 1. Violation of safe-conducts; 2. Infringement of the rights of embassadors; and, 3. Piracy.

I. As to the first, violation of safe-conducts or passports, expressly granted by the

king or his embassadorse to the subjects of a foreign power in time of mutual war; or, committing acts of 〈1〉 hostility against such as are in amity, league, or truce with us, who are here under a general implied safe-conduct; these are breaches of the public faith, without the preservation of which there can be no intercourse or commerce betweeen one nation and another: and such offences may, according to the writers upon the law of nations, be a just ground of a national war; since it is not in the power 69

of the foreign prince to cause justice to be done to his subjects by the very individual delinquent, but he must require it of the whole community. And as during the continuance of any safe-conduct, either express or implied, the foreigner is under the protection of the king and the law; and, more especially, as it is one of the articles of magna cartaf, that foreign merchants 〈2〉 shall be intitled to safe-conduct and security throughout the kingdom; there is no question but that any violation of either the person or property of such foreigner may be punished by indictment in the name of



e See Vol. I. pag. 260 [I. 168].

46 of public wrongs

the king, whose honour is more particularly engaged in supporting his own safe-conduct. And, when this malicious rapacity was not confined to private individuals, but broke out into general hostilities, by the statute 2 Hen. V. st. 1. c. 6. breaking of truce and safe-conducts, or abetting and receiving the truce-breakers, was (in affirm-ance and support of the law of nations) declared to be high treason against the crown and dignity of the king; and conservators of truce and safe-conducts were appointed in every port, and impowered to hear and determine such treasons (when committed at sea) according to the antient marine law then practised in the admiral’s court: and, together with two men learned in the law of the land, to hear and determine according to that law the same treasons, when committed within the body of any county. Which statute, so far as it made these offences amount to treason, was suspended by 14 Hen. VI. c. 8. and repealed by 20 Hen. VI. c. 11. but revived by 29 Hen. VI. c. 2. which gave the same powers to the lord chancellor, associated with either of the chief justices, as belonged to the conservators of truce and their assessors; and enacted that, notwith-standing the party be convicted of treason, the injured stranger should have resti-tution out of his effects, prior to any claim of the crown. And it is farther enacted by the statute 31 Hen. VI. c. 4. that if any of the king’s subjects attempt or offend, upon the sea, or in any port within the king’s obeysance, against any stranger in amity,

70 league, or truce, or under safe-conduct; and especially by attaching his person, or

spoiling him, or robbing him of his goods; the lord chancellor, with any of the justices of either the king’s bench or common pleas, may cause full restitution and amends to be made to the party injured.

It is to be observed, that the suspending and repealing acts of 14 & 20 Hen. VI, and

also the reviving act of 29 Hen. VI, were only temporary; so that it should seem that, after the expiration of them all, the statute 2 Hen. V continued in full force: but yet it is considered as extinct by the statute 14 Edw. IV. c. 4. which revives and confirms all statutes and ordinances made before the accession of the house of York against breakers of amities, truces, leagues, and safe-conducts, 〈3〉 with an express exception to the statutes of 2 Hen. V. but (however that may be) I apprehend it was finally repealed by the general statutes of Edward VI, and queen Mary for abolishing new-created treasons; though sir Matthew Hale seems to question it as to treasons committed on the seag. but certainly the statute of 31 Hen. VI remains in full force to this day.

II. As to the rights of embassadors, which are also established by the law of nations,

and are therefore matter of universal concern, they have formerly been treated of at largeh. It may here be sufficient to remark, that the common law of England recognizes them in their full extent, by immediately stopping all legal process, sued out through the ignorance or rashness of individuals, which may intrench upon the immunities of a foreign minister or any of his train. And, the more effectually to enforce the law of nations in this respect, when violated through wantonness or insolence, it is declared by the statute 7 Ann. c. 12. that all process whereby the person of any embassador, or of his domestic or domestic servant, may be arrested, or his

g 1 Hal. P. C. 267.





chapter 5 47


goods distreined or seised, shall be utterly null and void; and that all persons prosecuting, soliciting, or executing such process, being convicted by confession or the oath of one witness, before the lord chancellor and the chief justices, or any two 71

of them, shall be deemed violaters of the laws of nations, and disturbers of the public repose; and shall suffer such penalties and corporal punishment as the said judges, or any two of them, shall think fiti. Thus, in cases of extraordinary outrage, for which the law hath provided no special penalty, the legislature hath intrusted to the three principal judges of the kingdom an unlimited power of proportioning the punishment to the crime.

III. Lastly, the crime of piracy, or robbery and depredation upon the high seas,

is an offence against the universal law of society; a pirate being, according to sir Edward Cokek, hostis humani generis [an enemy to all mankind]. As therefore he has renounced all the benefits of society and government, and has reduced himself afresh to the savage state of nature, by declaring war against all mankind, all mankind must declare war against him: so that every community hath a right, by the rule of self-defence, to inflict that punishment upon him, which every individual would in a state of nature have been otherwise entitled to do, for any invasion of his person or personal property.

by the antient common law, piracy, if committed by a subject, was held to be a

species of treason, being contrary to his natural allegiance; and by an alien to be felony only: but now, since the statute of treasons, 25 Edw. III. c. 2. it is held to be only felony in a subjectl. Formerly it was only cognizable by the admiralty courts, which proceed by the rules of the civil lawm. but, it being inconsistent with the liberties of the nation, that any man’s life should be taken away, unless by the judgment of his peers, or the common law of the land, the statute 28 Hen. VIII. c. 15. established a new jurisdiction for this purpose; which proceeds according to the course of the common law, and of which we shall say more hereafter.

the offence of piracy, by common law, consists in committing those acts of rob- 72

bery and depredation upon the high seas, which, if committed upon land, would have amounted to felony theren. but, by statute, some other offences are made piracy also: as, by statute 11 & 12 W. III. c. 7. if any natural born subject commits any act of hostility upon the high seas, against others of his majesty’s subjects, under colour of a commission from any foreign power; this, though it would only be an act of war in an alien, shall be construed piracy in a subject. And farther, any commander, or other seafaring person, betraying his trust, and running away with any ship, boat, ordnance, ammunition, or goods; or yielding them up voluntarily to a pirate; or conspiring to do these acts; or any person 〈4〉 confining the commander of a vessel, to hinder him from fighting in defence of his ship, or to cause a revolt on board; shall, for each of these offences, be adjudged a pirate, felon, and robber, and shall suffer death, whether

i See the occasion of making this statute; Vol. I. pag. 255 [I. 165].

k 3 Inst. 113.

l Ibid.

m 1 Hawk. P. C. 98.

48 of public wrongs

he be principal 〈5〉 or accessory. by the statute 8 Geo. I. c. 24. the trading with known pirates, or furnishing them with stores or ammunition, or fitting out any vessel for that purpose, or in any wise consulting, combining, confederating, or corresponding with them; or the forcibly boarding any merchant vessel, though without seising or carrying her off, and destroying or throwing any of the goods overboard; shall be deemed piracy: and 〈6〉 all accessories to piracy, are declared to be principal pirates, and felons without benefit of clergy. by the same statutes also, (to encourage the defence of merchant vessels against pirates) the commanders or seamen wounded, and the widows of such seamen as are slain, in any piratical engagement, shall be entitled to a bounty, to be divided among them, not exceeding one fiftieth part of the value of the cargo on board: and such wounded seamen shall be entitled to the pension of Greenwich hospital;2 which no other seamen are, except only such as have served in a ship of war. And if the commander shall behave cowardly, by not defending the

73 ship, if she carries guns or arms, or shall discharge the mariners from fighting, so that

the ship falls into the hands of pirates, such commander shall forfeit all his wages, and suffer 〈7〉 six months imprisonment.

these are the principal cases, in which the statute law of England interposes, to

aid and enforce the law of nations, as a part of the common law; by inflicting an adequate punishment upon offences against that universal law, committed by private persons. We shall proceed in the next chapter to consider offences, which more immediately affect the sovereign executive power of our own particular state, or the king and government; which species of crimes branches itself into a much larger extent, than either of those of which we have already treated.

2 Greenwich Hospital was (and still is) a crown charity established in 1692 to support current and former naval

personnel and their dependants. besides housing naval veterans and educating their children, it administered sailors’ pensions.





chapter the sixth. 74




of high treason.

The third general division of crimes consists of such, as more especially affect the supreme executive power, or the king and his government; which amount either to a total renunciation of that allegiance, or at the least to a criminal neglect of that duty, which is due from every subject to his sovereign. In a former part of these commentariesa we had occasion to mention the nature of allegiance, as the tie or ligamen which binds every subject to be true and faithful to his sovereign liege lord the king, in return for that protection which is afforded him; and truth and faith to bear of life and limb, and earthly honour; and not to know or hear of any ill intended him, without defending him therefrom. And this allegiance, we may remember, was distinguished into 〈1〉 two sorts or species: the one natural and perpetual, which is inherent only in natives of the king’s dominions; the other local and temporary, which is incident to aliens also. Every offence therefore more immediately affecting the royal person, his crown, or dignity, is in some degree a breach of this duty of allegiance, whether natural and innate, or local and acquired by residence: and these may be distinguished into four kinds; 1. Treason. 2. Felonies injurious to the king’s prerogative. 3. Praemunire. 4. Other misprisions and contempts. Of which crimes the first and principal is that of treason.

Treason, proditio, in its very name (which is borrowed from the French)1 imports 75

a betraying, treachery, or breach of faith. It therefore happens only between allies, saith the mirrorb: for treason is indeed a general appellation, made use of by the law, to denote not only offences against the king and government, but also that accumulation of guilt which arises whenever a superior reposes a confidence in a subject or inferior, between whom and himself there subsists a natural, a civil, or even a spiritual relation; and the inferior so abuses that confidence, so forgets the obligations of duty, subjection, and allegiance, as to destroy the life of any 〈2〉 such his superior or lord. This is looked upon as proceeding from the same principle of treachery in private life, as would have urged him who harbours it to have conspired in public against his liege lord and sovereign: and therefore for a wife to kill her lord or husband, a servant his lord or master, and an ecclesiastic his lord or ordinary; these, being breaches of the lower allegiance, of private and domestic faith, are denominated petit treasons. But when disloyalty so rears its crest, as to attack even majesty itself, it is called by way of eminent distinction high treason, alta proditio; being equivalent to the crimen laesae majestatis [the crime of lese-majesty] of the Romans, as Glanvilc denominates it also in our English law.

a Book 1. ch. 10.

b c. 1. §. 7.

c l. 1. c. 2.

1 Trahison: treachery, treason, perfidy, breach of faith.

50 of public wrongs

As this is the highest civil crime, which (considered as a member of the community)

any man can possibly commit, it ought therefore to be the most precisely ascertained. For if the crime of high treason be indeterminate, this alone (says the president Montesquieu) is sufficient to make any government degenerate into arbitrary powerd. And yet, by the antient common law, there was a great latitude left in the breast of the judges, to determine what was treason, or not so: whereby the creatures of tyrannical princes had opportunity to create abundance of constructive treasons; that is, to

76 raise, by forced and arbitrary constructions, offences into the crime and punishment

of treason, which never were suspected to be such. Thus the accroaching, or attempting to exercise, royal power (a very uncertain charge) was in the 21 Edw. III. held to be treason in a knight of Hertfordshire, who forcibly assaulted and detained one of the king’s subjects till he paid him 90l.e: a crime, it must be owned, well deserving of punishment; but which seems to be of a complexion very different from that of treason. Killing the king’s father, or brother, or even his messenger, has also fallen under the same denominationf. The latter of which is almost as tyrannical a doctrine as that of the imperial constitution of Arcadius and Honorius,2 which determines that any attempts or designs against the ministers of the prince shall be treasong. But however, to prevent the inconveniences which began to arise in England from this multitude of constructive treasons, the statute 25 Edw. III. c. 2. was made; which defines what offences only for the future should be held to be treason: in like manner as the lex Julia majestatis [the Julian law of treason] among the Romans,3 promulged by Augustus Caesar, comprehended all the antient laws, that had before been enacted to punish transgressors against the stateh. This statute must therefore be our text and guide, in order to examine into the several species of high treason. And we shall find that it comprehends all kinds of high treason under seven distinct branches.

1. “When a man doth compass or imagine the death of our lord the king, of our lady

his queen, or of their eldest son and heir.” Under this description it is held that a queen regnant (such as queen Elizabeth and queen Anne) is within the words of the act, being invested with royal power and entitled to the allegiance of her subjectsi: but the husband

77 of such a queen is not comprized within these words, and therefore no treason can be

d Sp. L. b. 12. c. 7.

e 1 Hal P. C. 80.

f Britt. c. 22. 1 Hawk. P. C. 34.

g Qui de nece virorum illustrium, qui consiliis et consistorio nostro intersunt, senatorum etiam (nam et ipsi pars

corporis nostri sunt) vel cujuslibet postremo, qui militat nobiscum, cogitaverit: (eadem enim severitate voluntatem sceleris, qua effectum, puniri jura voluerunt) ipse quidem, utpote majestatis reus, gladio feriatur, bonis ejus omnibus fisco nostro addictis. (Cod. 9. 8. 5.) [He who shall meditate the death of any of those illustrious men who assist at our councils; likewise of the senators (for they are a part of ourself) or lastly of any of our companions in arms; shall, forasmuch as he is guilty of treason, perish by the sword, and all his goods be confiscated: for the law will punish the intention, and the perpetration of the crime with equal severity.]

h Gravin. Orig. 1. §. 34.

i 1 Hal. P. C. 101.

2 The brothers Honorius and Arcadius were respectively Roman emperors in the West (393–423) and in the

East (395–408).

3 Conventionally assigned to 48 bc and named for Julius Caesar (100–44 bc), ruler of Rome from 49 bc until





chapter 6 51


committed against himk. The king here intended is the king in possession, without any respect to his title: for it is held, that a king de facto [in fact, the king in possession] and not de jure [in law], or in other words an usurper that hath got possession of the throne, is a king within the meaning of the statute; as there is a temporary allegiance due to him, for his administration of the government, and temporary protection of the public: and therefore treasons committed against Henry VI were punished under Edward IV, though all the line of Lancaster had been previously declared usurpers by act of parliament. But the most rightful heir of the crown, or king de jure and not de facto, who hath never had plenary possession of the throne, as was the case of the house of York during the three reigns of the line of Lancaster,4 is not a king within this statute, against whom treasons may be committedl. And a very sensible writer on the crown-law carries the point of possession so far, that he holdsm, that a king out of possession is so far from having any right to our allegiance, by any other title which he may set up against the king in being, that we are bound by the duty of our allegiance to resist him. A doctrine which he grounds upon the statute 11 Hen. VII. c. 1. which is declaratory of the common law, and pronounces all subjects excused from any penalty or forfeiture, which do assist and obey a king de facto. But, in truth, this seems to be confounding all notions of right and wrong; and the consequence would be, that when Cromwell had murdered the elder Charles, and usurped the power (though not the name) of king, the people were bound in duty to hinder the son’s restoration:5 and were the king of Poland or Morocco to invade this kingdom, and by any means to get possession of the crown (a term, by the way, of very loose and indistinct signification) the subject would be bound by his allegiance to fight for his natural prince to-day, and by the same duty of allegiance to fight against him to-morrow. The true distinction seems to be, that the statute of Henry the seventh does 78

by no means command any opposition to a king de jure; but excuses the obedience paid to a king de facto. When therefore a usurper is in possession, the subject is excused and justified in obeying and giving him assistance: otherwise, under a usurpation, no man could be safe; if the lawful prince had a right to hang him for obedience to the powers in being, as the usurper would certainly do for disobedience. Nay farther, as the mass of people are imperfect judges of title, of which in all cases possession is prima facie evidence, the law compels no man to yield obedience to that prince, whose right is by want of possession rendered uncertain and disputable, till providence shall think fit to interpose in his favour, and decide the ambiguous claim: and therefore, till he is entitled to such allegiance by possession, no treason can be committed against him. Lastly, a king who has resigned his crown, such resignation being admitted and ratified in parliament,

k 3 Inst. 7. 1 Hal. P. C. 106.

l 3 Inst. 7. 1 Hal. P. C. 104.

m 1 Hawk. P. C. 36.

4 Armed clashes between rival branches of the ruling Plantagenet family, the houses of York and Lancaster (whose symbols were respectively a white and a red rose), began during the reign of the Lancastrian Henry VI in 1455. The Yorkist Edward IV gained the throne in 1461 and largely held it until his death in 1483. Civil war ended in 1485 when his brother, Richard III, was defeated by the Lancastrian claimant, who took the throne as Henry VII.

5 Blackstone here refers to the trial and execution of Charles I in 1649, the subsequent establishment of an English republic under the leadership of Oliver Cromwell, and the restoration of Charles II in 1660.

52 of public wrongs

is according to sir Matthew Hale no longer the object of treasonn. And the same reason holds, in case a king abdicates the government; or, by actions subversive of the constitution, virtually renounces the authority which he claims by that very constitution: since, as was formerly observedo, when the fact of abdication is once established, and determined by the proper judges, the consequence necessarily follows, that the throne is thereby vacant, and he is no longer king.6

Let us next see, what is a compassing or imagining the death of the king, &c. These

are synonymous terms; the word compass signifying the purpose or design of the mind or willp, and not, as in common speech, the carrying such design to effectq. And therefore an accidental stroke, which may mortally wound the sovereign, per infortunium [by misfortune], without any traiterous intent, is no treason: as was the

79 case of sir Walter Tyrrel, who, by the command of king William Rufus, shooting at a

hart, the arrow glanced against a tree, and killed the king upon the spotr. But, as this compassing or imagination is an act of the mind, it cannot possibly fall under any judicial cognizance, unless it be demonstrated by some open, or overt, act. And yet the tyrant Dionysius is recordeds to have executed a subject, barely for dreaming that he had killed him; which was held for a sufficient proof, that he had thought thereof in his waking hours. But such is not the temper of the English law; and therefore in this, and the three next species of treason, it is necessary that there appear an open or overt act of a more full and explicit nature, to convict the traitor upon. The statute expressly requires, that the accused “be thereof upon sufficient proof attainted of some open act by men of his own condition.” Thus, to provide weapons or ammunition for the purpose of killing the king, is held to be a palpable overt act of treason in imagining his deatht. To conspire to imprison the king by force, and move towards it by assembling company, is an overt act of compassing the king’s deathu, for all force, used to the person of the king, in its consequence may tend to his death, and is a strong presumption of something worse intended than the present force, by such as have so far thrown off their bounden duty to their sovereign: it being an old observation, that there is generally but a short interval between the prisons and the graves of princes. There is no question also, but that taking any measures to render such treasonable purposes effectual, as assembling and consulting on the means to kill the king, is a sufficient overt act of high treasonw.

How far mere words, spoken by an individual, and not relative to any treasonable

act or design then in agitation, shall amount to treason, has been formerly matter of

n 1 Hal. P. C. 104.

o Vol. I. pag. 212 [I. 137].

p By the antient law compassing or intending the death of any man, demonstrated by some evident fact, was

equally penal as homicide itself. (3 Inst. 5.)

q 1 Hal. P. C. 107.

r 3 Inst. 6.

s Plutarch. in vit.

t 3 Inst. 12.

u 1 Hal. P. C. 109.

w 1 Hawk. P. C. 38. 1 Hal. P. C. 119.

6 At the revolution of 1688 the flight of James II was held to amount to an abdication, thus giving some

semblance of legality to the assumption of the throne by the leader of the invading forces, William of Orange





chapter 6 53


doubt. We have two instances, in the reign of Edward the fourth, of persons executed 80

for treasonable words: the one a citizen of London, who said he would make his son heir of the crown, being the sign of the house in which he lived; the other a gentleman, whose favourite buck the king killed in hunting, whereupon he wished it, horns and all, in the king’s belly.7 These were esteemed hard cases: and the chief justice Markham rather chose to leave his place than assent to the latter judgmentx. But now it seems clearly to be agreed, that, by the common law and the statute of Edward III, words spoken amount only to a high misdemesnor, and no treason. For they may be spoken in heat, without any intention, or be mistaken, perverted, or mis-remembered by the hearers; their meaning depends always on their connexion with other words, and things; they may signify differently even according to the tone of voice, with which they are delivered; and sometimes silence itself is more expressive than any discourse. As therefore there can be nothing more equivocal and ambiguous than words, it would indeed be unreasonable to make them amount to high treason. And accordingly in 4 Car. I. on a reference to all the judges, concerning some very atrocious words spoken by one Pyne,8 they certified to the king, “that though the words were as wicked as might be, yet they were no treason: for, unless it be by some particular statute, no words will be treasony.” If the words be set down in writing, it argues more deliberate intention; and it has been held that writing is an overt act of treason; for scribere est agere [to write is to act]. But even in this case the bare words are not the treason, but the deliberate act of writing them. And such writing, though unpublished, has in some arbitrary reigns convicted its author of treason: particularly in the cases of one Peacham a clergyman, for treasonable passages in a sermon never preachedz, and of Algernon Sidney, for some papers found in his closet: which, had they been plainly relative to any previous formed design of dethroning or murdering the king, might doubtless have been properly read in evidence as overt acts of that treason, which was 81 specially laid in the indictmenta. But, being merely speculative, without any intention (so far as appeared) of making any public use of them, the convicting the authors of treason upon such an insufficient foundation has been universally disapproved. Peacham was therefore pardoned: and, though Sidney indeed was executed, yet it was to the general discontent of the nation; and his attainder was afterwards reversed by parliament.9 There was then no manner of doubt, but that the publication of such

x 1 Hal. P. C. 115.

y [Hugh Pyne’s case] Cro. Car. 125.

z [Peacham’s case] Ibid.

a Foster. 198.

7 The two ‘very hard judgments of treason’ mentioned by Hale to which Blackstone refers were the case of Walter Walker, a grocer at the sign of the Crown in London’s Cheapside, and Thomas Burdett, who (as Hale’s editor Sollom Emyln pointed out) was actually ‘indicted for calculating the king’s and prince’s nativity, and declaring that they would not live long’.

8 The Somerset barrister Hugh Pyne (1569/70–1628) was arrested in 1627 for speaking disparagingly of Charles I; but (as Blackstone indicates) he was never brought to trial for treason.

9 Although convicted of treason and condemned to death in 1615, Edmund Peacham’s sentence was never carried out; Blackstone is mistaken in suggesting that he was pardoned. Following discovery of the Rye House plot to assassinate Charles II, Algernon Sydney’s authorship of his unpublished ‘Discourses concerning Government’ was held to constitute high treason.

54 of public wrongs

a treasonable writing was a sufficient overt act of treason at the common lawb; though of late even that has been questioned.

2. The second species of treason is, “if a man do violate the king’s companion, or

the king’s eldest daughter unmarried, or the wife of the king’s eldest son and heir.” By the king’s companion is meant his wife; and by violation is understood carnal knowlege, as well without force, as with it: and this is high treason in both parties, if both be consenting; as some of the wives of Henry the eighth by fatal experience evinced.10 The plain intention of this law is to guard the blood royal from any suspicion of bastardy, whereby the succession to the crown might be rendered dubious: and therefore, when this reason ceases, the law ceases with it; for to violate a queen or princess dowager is held to be no treasonc: in like manner as, by the feodal law, it was a felony and attended with a forfeiture of the fief, if the vasal vitiated the wife or daughter of his lordd; but not so if he only vitiated his widowe.

3. The third species of treason is, “if a man do levy war against our lord the king in

his realm.” And this may be done by taking arms, not only to dethrone the king, but under pretence to reform religion, or the laws, or to remove evil counsellors, or other

82 grievances whether real or pretendedf. For the law does not, neither can it, permit any

private man, or set of men, to interfere forcibly in matters of such high importance; especially as it has established a sufficient power, for these purposes, in the high court of parliament: neither does the constitution justify any private or particular resistance for private or particular grievances; though in cases of national oppression the nation has very justifiably risen as one man, to vindicate the original contract subsisting between the king and his people.11 To resist the king’s forces by defending a castle against them, is a levying of war: and so is an insurrection with an avowed design to pull down all inclosures, all brothels, and the like;12 the universality of the design making it a rebellion against the state, an usurpation of the powers of government, and an insolent invasion of the king’s authorityg. But a tumult with a view to pull down a particular house, or lay open a particular enclosure, amounts at most to a riot; this being no general defiance of public government. So, if two subjects quarrel and 〈3〉 levy war against each other, it is only a great riot and contempt, and no treason. Thus it happened between the earls of Hereford and Glocester in 20 Edw. I. who raised each a little army, and committed outrages upon each others lands, burning houses, attended with the loss of many lives:13 yet this was held to be no high treason, but only

b 1 Hal. P. C. 118. 1 Hawk. P. C. 38.

c 3 Inst. 9.

d Feud. l. 1. t. 5.

e Ibid. t. 21.

f 1 Hawk. P. C. 37.

g 1 Hal. P. C. 132.

10 Two of Henry VIII’s wives (Anne Boleyn and Catherine Howard) were executed for infidelity.

11 A reference to the almost bloodless revolution of 1688 which removed James II from the throne.

12 In April 1688 the unpopular and somewhat nervous government of James II decided that a riotous attack on

London brothels amounted to a threat of insurrection and used precisely this logic to prosecute the rioters for treason.

13 Humphrey de Bohun (c. 1249–98), third earl of Hereford and Gilbert de Clare (1243–95), sixth earl of





chapter 6 55


a great misdemesnorh. A bare conspiracy to levy war does not amount to this species of treason; but (if particularly pointed at the person of the king or his government) it falls within the first, of compassing or imagining the king’s deathi.

4. “If a man be adherent to the king’s enemies in his realm, giving to them aid and

comfort in the realm, or elsewhere,” he is also declared guilty of high treason. This must likewise be proved by some overt act, as by giving them intelligence, by sending them provisions, by selling them arms, by treacherously surrendering a fortress, or the likek. By enemies are here understood the subjects of foreign powers with whom 83 we are at open war. As to foreign pirates or robbers, who may happen to invade our coasts, without any open hostilities between their nation and our own, and without any commission from any prince or state at enmity with the crown of Great Britain, the giving them any assistance is also clearly treason; either in the light of adhering to the public enemies of the king and kingdoml, or else in that of levying war against his majesty. And, most indisputably, the same acts of adherence or aid, which (when applied to foreign enemies) will constitute treason under this branch of the statute, will (when afforded to our own fellow-subjects in actual rebellion at home) amount to high treason under the description of levying war against the kingm. But to relieve a rebel, fled out of the kingdom, is no treason: for the statute is taken strictly, and a rebel is not an enemy; an enemy being always the subject of some foreign prince, and one who owes no allegiance to the crown of Englandn. And if a person be under circumstances of actual force and constraint, through a well-grounded apprehension of injury to his life or person, this fear or compulsion will excuse his even joining with either rebels or enemies in the kingdom, provided he leaves them whenever he hath a safe opportunityo.

5. “If a man counterfeit the king’s great or privy seal,” this is also high treason. But

if a man takes wax bearing the impression of the great seal off from one patent, and fixes it to another, this is held to be only an abuse of the seal, and not a counterfeiting of it; as was the case of a certain chaplain, who in such manner framed a dispensation for non-residence. But the knavish artifice of a lawyer much exceeded this of the divine. One of the clerks in chancery glewed together two pieces of parchment; on the uppermost of which he wrote a patent, to which he regularly obtained the great seal, the label going through both the skins. He then dissolved the cement; and taking 84

off the written patent, on the blank skin wrote a fresh patent, of a different import from the former, and published it as true.14 This was held no counterfeiting of the great seal, but only a great misprision; and sir Edward Cokep mentions it with some indignation, that the party was living at that day.

h Ibid. 136.

i 3 Inst. 9. Foster. 211. 213.

k 3 Inst. 10.

l Foster. 219.

m Ibid. 216.

n 1 Hawk. P. C. 38.

o Foster. 216.

p 3 Inst. 16.

56 of public wrongs

6. The sixth species of treason under this statute, is “if a man counterfeit the king’s

money; and if a man bring false money into the realm counterfeit to the money of England, 〈4〉 knowing the money to be false.” As to the first branch, counterfeiting the king’s money; this is treason, whether the false money be uttered in payment or not. Also if the king’s own minters alter the standard or alloy established by law, it is treason. But gold and silver money only are held to be within this statuteq. With regard likewise to the second branch, importing foreign counterfeit money, in order to utter it here; it is held that uttering it, without importing it, is not within the statuter. But of this we shall presently say more.

7. The last species of treason, ascertained by this statute, is “if a man slay the

chancellor, treasurer, or the king’s justices of the one bench or the other, justices in eyre, or justices of assize, and all other justices assigned to hear and determine, being in their places doing their offices.” These high magistrates, as they represent the king’s majesty during the execution of their offices, are therefore for the time equally regarded by the law. But this statute extends only to the actual killing of them, and not to wounding, or a bare attempt to kill them. It extends also only to the officers therein specified; and therefore the barons of the exchequer, as such, are not within the 〈5〉 protection of this acts.

Thus careful was the legislature, in the reign of Edward the third, to specify and

85 reduce to a certainty the vague notions of treason, that had formerly prevailed in our

courts. But the act does not stop here, but goes on. “Because other like cases of treason may happen in time to come, which cannot be thought of nor declared at present, it is accorded, that if any other case supposed to be treason, which is not above specified, doth happen before any judge; the judge shall tarry without going to judgment of the treason, till the cause be shewed and declared before the king and his parliament, whether it ought to be judged treason, or other felony.” Sir Matthew Halet is very high in his encomiums on the great wisdom and care of the parliament, in thus keeping judges within the proper bounds and limits of this act, by not suffering them to run out (upon their own opinions) into constructive treasons, though in cases that seem to them to have a like parity of reason; but reserving them to the decision of parliament. This is a great security to the public, the judges, and even this sacred act itself; and leaves a weighty memento to judges to be careful, and not overhasty in letting in treasons by construction or interpretation, especially in new cases that have not been resolved and settled. 2. He observes, that as the authoritative decision of these casus omissi [circumstances not covered] is reserved to the king and parliament, the most regular way to do it is by a new declarative act: and therefore the opinion of any one or of both houses, though of very respectable weight, is not that solemn declaration referred to by this act, as the only criterion for judging of future treasons.

In consequence of this power, not indeed originally granted by the statute of

Edward III, but constitutionally inherent in every subsequent parliament, (which

q 1 Hawk. P. C. 42.

r Ibid. 43.

s 1 Hal. P. C. 231.





chapter 6 57


cannot be abridged of any rights by the act of a precedent one) the legislature was extremely liberal in declaring new treasons in the unfortunate reign of king Richard the second: as, particularly, the killing of an embassador was made so; which seems to be founded upon better reason than the multitude of other points, that were then strained up to this high offence: the most arbitrary and absurd of all which was by the 86

statute 21 Ric. II. c. 3. which made the bare purpose and intent of killing or deposing the king, without any overt act to demonstrate it, high treason. And yet so little effect have over-violent laws to prevent any crime, that within two years afterwards this very prince was both deposed and murdered. And, in the first year of his successor’s reign, an act was passedu, reciting “that no man knew how he ought to behave himself, to do, speak, or say, for doubt of such pains of treason: and therefore it was accorded that in no time to come any treason be judged, otherwise than was ordained by the statute of king Edward the third.” This at once swept away the whole load of extravagant treasons introduced in the time of Richard the second.

But afterwards, between the reign of Henry the fourth and queen Mary, and

particularly in the bloody reign of Henry the eighth, the spirit of inventing new and strange treasons was revived; among which we may reckon the offences of clipping money; breaking prison or rescue, when the prisoner is committed for treason; burning houses to extort money; stealing cattle by Welchmen; counterfeiting foreign coin; wilful poisoning; execrations against the king; calling him opprobrious names by public writing; counterfeiting the sign manual or signet; refusing to abjure the pope; deflowering, or marrying without the royal licence, any of the king’s children, sisters, aunts, nephews, or nieces; bare solicitation of the chastity of the queen or princess, or advances made by themselves; marrying with the king, by a woman not a virgin, without previously discovering to him such her unchaste life; judging or believing (manifested by any overt act) the king to have been lawfully married to Anne of Cleve; derogating from the king’s royal stile and title; impugning his supremacy; and assembling riotously to the number of twelve, and not dispersing upon proclamation: all which new-fangled treasons were totally abrogated by the statute 1 Mar. c. 1. which once more reduced all treasons to the standard of the statute 25 Edw. III. Since which 87 time, though the legislature has been more cautious in creating new offences of this kind, yet the number is very considerably encreased, as we shall find upon a short review.

These new treasons, created since the statute 1 Mar. c. 1. and not comprehend ed

under the description of statute 25 Edw. III, I shall comprize under three heads. 1. Such as relate to papists. 2. Such as relate to falsifying the coin or other royal signatures. 3. Such as are created for the security of the protestant succession in the house of Hanover.

1. The first species, relating to papists, was considered in 〈6〉 the preceding chapter,

among the penalties incurred by that branch of non-conformists to the national church; wherein we have only to remember that by statute 5 Eliz. c. 1. to defend the pope’s jurisdiction in this realm is, for the first time, a heavy misdemesnor; and, if the

u Stat. 1 Hen. IV. c. 10.

58 of public wrongs

offence be repeated, it is high treason. Also by statute 27 Eliz. c. 2. if any popish priest, born in the dominions of the crown of England, shall come over hither 〈7〉 from beyond the seas; or shall tarry here three days without conforming to the church; he is guilty of high treason. And by statute 3 Jac. I. c. 4. if any natural born subject be withdrawn from his allegiance, and reconciled to the pope or see of Rome, or any other prince or state, both he and all such as procure such reconciliation shall incur the guilt of high treason. These were mentioned under the division before referred to, as spiritual offences, and I now repeat them as temporal ones also: the reason of distinguishing these overt acts of popery from all others, by setting the mark of high treason upon them, being certainly on a civil, and not on a religious, account. For every popish priest of course renounces his allegiance to his temporal sovereign upon taking orders; that being inconsistent with his new engagements of canonical obedience to the pope: and the same may be said of an obstinate defence of his

88 authority here, or a formal reconciliation to the see of Rome, which the statute

construes to be a withdrawing from one’s natural allegiance; and therefore, besides being reconciled “to the pope,” it also adds “or any other prince or state.”

2. With regard to treasons relative to the coin or other royal signatures, we may

recollect that the only two offences respecting the coinage, which are made treason by the statute 25 Edw. III. are the actual counterfeiting the gold and silver coin of this kingdom; or the importing such counterfeit money with intent to utter it, knowing it to be false. But these not being found sufficient to restrain the evil practices of coiners and false moneyers, other statutes have been since made for that purpose. The crime itself is made a species of high treason; as being a breach of allegiance, by infringing the king’s prerogative, and assuming one of the attributes of the sovereign, to whom alone it belongs to set the value and 〈8〉 determination of coin made at home, or to fix the currency of foreign money: and besides, as all money which bears the stamp of the kingdom is sent into the world upon the public faith, as containing metal of a particular weight and standard, whoever falsifies this is an offender against the state, by contributing to render that public faith suspected. And upon the same reasons, by a law of the emperor Constantinew, false coiners were declared guilty of high treason, and were condemned to be burned alive: as, by the laws of Athensx, all counterfeiters, debasers, and diminishers of the current coin were subjected to capital punishment. However, it must be owned, that this method of reasoning is a little overstrained: counterfeiting or debasing the coin being usually practiced, rather for the sake of private and unlawful lucre, than out of any disaffection to the sovereign. And therefore both this and its kindred species of treason, that of counterfeiting the seals of the crown or other royal signatures, seem better denominated by the later civilians a branch of the crimen falsi or forgery (in which they are followed by Glanvily, Bractonz,

89 and Fletaa) than by Constantine and our Edward the third, a species of the crimen

w C. 9. 24. 2. Cod. Theod. de falsa moneta, l. 9.

x Pott. Ant. l.1. c. 26.

y l. 14. c. 7.

z l. 3. c. 3. §. 1 & 2.





chapter 6 59


laesae majestatis or high treason.15 For this confounds the distinction and proportion of offences; and, by affixing the same ideas of guilt upon the man who coins a leaden groat and him who assassinates his sovereign, takes off from that horror which ought to attend the very mention of the crime of high treason, and makes it more familiar to the subject. Before the statute 25 Edw. III. the offence of counterfeiting the coin was held to be only a species of petit treasonb: but subsequent acts in their new extensions of the offence have followed the example 〈9〉 of that, and have made it equally high treason 〈10〉 as an endeavour to subvert the government, though not quite equal in its punishment.

In consequence of the principle thus adopted, the statute 1 Mar. c. 1. having at one

〈11〉 blow repealed all intermediate treasons created since the 25 Edw. III. it was thought expedient by statute 1 Mar. st. 2. c. 6. to revive two species thereof; viz. 1. That if any person falsely forge or counterfeit any such kind of coin of gold or silver, as is not the proper coin of this realm, but shall be current within this realm by consent of the crown; or, 2. shall falsely forge or counterfeit the sign manual, privy signet, or privy seal; such offences shall be deemed high treason. And by statute 1 & 2 P. & M. c. 11. if any persons do bring into this realm such false or counterfeit foreign money, being current here, knowing the same to be false, 〈12〉 and shall utter the same in payment, they shall be deemed offenders in high treason. The money referred to in these statutes must be such as is absolutely current here, in all payments, by the king’s proclamation; of which there is none at present, Portugal money being only taken by consent, as approaching the nearest to our standard, and falling in well enough with our divisions of money into pounds and shillings: therefore to counterfeit it is 〈13〉 no high treason, but another inferior offence.16 Clipping or defacing the genuine coin was not hitherto included in these statutes; though an offence equally pernicious to trade, and an equal insult upon the prerogative, as well as personal affront to the 90 sovereign; whose very image ought to be had in reverence by all loyal subjects. And therefore, among the Romansc, defacing or even melting down the emperor’s statues was made treason by the Julian law; together with other offences of the like sort, according to that vague 〈14〉 appendix, “aliudve quid simile si admiserint [or if they committed anything of the same kind].” And now, in England, by statute 5 Eliz. c. 11. clipping, washing, rounding, or filing, for wicked gain’s sake, any of the money of this realm, or other money suffered to be current here, shall be adjudged high treason; and 〈15〉 by statute 18 Eliz. c. 1. the same offence is described in other more general words; viz. impairing, diminishing, falsifying, scaling, and lightening; and made liable to the same penalties. By statute 8 & 9 W. III. c. 26. made perpetual by 7 Ann. c. 25. 〈 16〉 whoever shall knowingly make or mend, or assist in so doing, or shall buy or

b 1 Hal. P. C. 224.

c Ff. 48. 4. 6.

15 The full term is crimen laesae majestatis divinae, commonly rendered in English as ‘lese-majesty’. Probably

derived from Roman law of the imperial period, the phrase reflects the belief that the king was god’s earthly deputy, so impugning his dignity was a form of blasphemy.

16 The magistrate Sir John Fielding criticized the law’s leniency towards ‘coining Portugal Money’, when (as he 60 of public wrongs

sell, or have in his possession, any instruments proper only for the coinage of money; or shall convey such instruments out of the king’s mint; shall be guilty of high treason: which is by much the severest branch of the coinage law. The statute goes on farther, and enacts, that to mark any coin on the edges with letters, or otherwise, in imitation of those used in the mint; or to colour, gild, or case over any coin resembling the current coin, or even round blanks of base metal; shall be 〈17〉 construed high treason. And, lastly, by statute 15 & 16 Geo. II. c. 28. if any person 〈18〉 colours or alters any silver current coin of this kingdom, to make it resemble a gold one; or any copper coin, to make it resemble a silver one; this is also high treason: but the offender shall be pardoned, 〈19〉 in case he discovers and convicts two other offenders of the same kind.

3. The other new species of high treason is such as is created for the security of

the protestant succession, over and above such treasons against the king and government as were comprized under the statute 25 Edw. III. For this purpose, after

91 the act of settlement was made, for transferring the crown to the illustrious house of

Hanover, it was enacted by statute 13 & 14 W. III. c. 3. that the pretended prince of Wales, who was then thirteen years of age, and had assumed the title of king James III, should be attainted of high treason; and it was made high treason for any of the king’s subjects by letters, messages, or otherwise, to hold correspondence with him, or any person employed by him, or to remit any money for his use, knowing the same to be for his service.17 And by statute 17 Geo. II. c. 39. it is enacted, that if any of the sons of the pretender shall land or attempt to land in this kingdom, or be found in Great Britain, or Ireland, or any of the dominions belonging to the same, he shall be judged attainted of high treason, and suffer the pains thereof. And to correspond with them, 〈20〉 or remit money for their use, is made high treason in the same manner as it was to correspond with the father. By the statute 1 Ann. st. 2. c. 17. if any person shall endeavour to deprive or hinder any person, being the next in succession to the crown according to the limitations of the act of settlement, from succeeding to the crown, and shall maliciously and directly attempt the same by any overt act, such offence shall be high treason. And by statute 6 Ann. c. 7. if any person shall maliciously, advisedly, and directly, by writing or printing, maintain and affirm, that any other person hath any right or title to the crown of this realm, otherwise than according to the act of settlement; or that the kings of this realm with the authority of parliament are not able to make laws and statutes, to bind the crown and the descent thereof; such person shall be guilty of high treason. This offence (or indeed maintaining this doctrine in any wise, that the king and parliament cannot limit the crown) was once before made high treason, by statute 13 Eliz. c. 1. during the life of that princess.18 And after her decease it continued a high misdemesnor, punishable with forfeiture of goods and chattels, even in the most flourishing aera of indefeasible hereditary right

17 The statute was prompted by the death of the deposed James II, and the decision of Louis XIV to recognize his

son, James Francis Edward Stuart (1688–1766) as rightful king of England, Scotland, and Ireland.

18 The Elizabethan treason act of 1571 followed the queen’s excommunication by Pope Pius V, freeing Catholics

from allegiance to a ruler whom many already regarded as illegitimate, since Elizabeth’s mother Anne Boleyn had





chapter 6 61


and jure divino [divine right] succession. But it was again raised into high treason, by the statute of Anne before-mentioned, at the time of a projected invasion in favour of the then pretender; and upon this statute one Matthews,19 a printer, was convicted 92

and executed in 1719, for printing a treasonable pamphlet intitled vox populi vox Dei [the voice of the people is the voice of God]d.

Thus much for the crime of treason, or laesae majestatis, in all its branches; which

consists, we may observe, originally, in grossly counteracting that allegiance, which is due from the subject by either birth or residence: though, in some instances, the zeal of our legislators to stop the progress of some highly pernicious practices has occasioned them a little to depart from this its primitive idea. But of this enough has been hinted already: it is now time to pass on from defining the crime to describing its punishment.

The punishment of high treason in general is very solemn and terrible. 1. That the

offender be drawn to the gallows, and not be carried or walk; 〈21〉 though usually a sledge or hurdle is allowed, to preserve the offender from the extreme torment of being dragged on the ground or pavemente. 2. That he be hanged by the neck, and then cut down alive. 3. That his entrails be taken out, and burned, while he is yet alive. 4. That his head be cut off. 5. That his body be divided into four parts. 6. That his head and quarters be at the king’s disposalf.

The king may, and often doth, discharge all the punishment, except beheading,

especially where any of noble blood are attainted. For, beheading being part of the judgment, that may be executed, though all the rest be omitted by the king’s commandg. But where beheading is no part of the judgment, as in murder or other felonies, it hath been said that the king cannot change the judgment, although at the request of the party, from one species of death to anotherh. But of this we shall say 〈22〉 more hereafter. 93

In the case of coining, which is a treason of a different complexion from the rest,

the punishment is milder for male offenders; being only to be drawn, and hanged by the neck till deadi. But in treasons of every kind the punishment of women is the same, and different from that of men. For, as 〈23〉 the natural modesty of the sex forbids the exposing and publicly mangling their bodies, their sentence (which is to the full as terrible to sense as the other) is to be drawn to the gallows, and there to be burned alivek.

The consequences of this judgment, (attainder, forfeiture, and corruption of

blood) must be referred to the latter end of this book, when we shall treat of them all together, as well in treason as in other offences.

d State Tr. IX. 680.

e 1 Hal. P. C. 382.

f This punishment for treason sir Edward Coke tells us, is warranted by divers examples in scripture; for Joab was drawn, Bithan was hanged, Judas was embowelled, and so of the rest. (3 Inst. 211.)

g 1 Hal. P. C. 351.

h 3 Inst. 52.

i 1 Hal. P. C. 351.

k 2 Hal. P. C. 399.

19 John Matthews (c. 1701–19) had a history of involvement in seditious publications, but escaped punishment

for some three years before his trial in 1719 for printing 1,000 copies of the Jacobite tract Vox Populi. He remains

94 chapter the seventh.





of felonies, injurious to

the king’s prerogative.

As, according to the method I have adopted, we are next to consider such felonies as are more immediately injurious to the king’s prerogative, it will not be amiss here, at our first entrance upon this crime, to enquire briefly into the nature and meaning of felony; before we proceed upon any of the particular branches, into which it is divided.

Felony, in the general acceptation of our English law, comprizes every species of

crime, which occasioned at common law the forfeiture of lands or goods. This most frequently happens in those crimes, for which a capital punishment either is or was liable to be inflicted: for those felonies, which are called clergyable, or to which the benefit of clergy extends, were antiently punished with death in all lay, or unlearned, offenders; though now by the statute-law that punishment is for the first offence universally remitted. Treason itself, says sir Edward Cokea, was antiently comprized under the name of felony: and in confirmation of this we may observe, that the statute of treasons, 25 Edw. III. c. 2.

95 speaking of some dubious crimes, directs a reference to parliament; that it may be

there adjudged, “whether they be treason, or other felony.” All treasons therefore, strictly speaking, are felonies; though all felonies are not treason. And to this also we may add, that all offences, now capital, are in some degree or other 〈1〉 felony: and this is likewise the case with some other offences, which are not punished with death; as suicide, where the party is already dead; homicide by chancemedly,1 or in self-defence; and petit larceny, or pilfering; all which are (strictly speaking) felonies, as they subject the committers of them to forfeitures. So that upon the whole the only adequate definition of felony seems to be that which is before laid down; viz. an offence which occasions a total forfeiture of either lands, or goods, or both, at the common law; and to which capital or other punishment may be superadded, according to the degree of guilt.

To explain this matter a little farther: the word felony, or felonia, is of undoubted

feodal original, being frequently to be met with in the books of feuds, &c; but the derivation of it has much puzzled the juridical lexicographers, Prateus, Calvinus, and the rest:2 some deriving it from the Greek, φηλος, an impostor or deceiver; others from the Latin, fallo, fefelli, to countenance which they would have it called fallonia. Sir Edward Coke, as his manner is, has given us a still stranger etymology b, that it is

a 3 Inst. 15.

b 1 Inst. 391.

1 The term refers to a killing that results from a sudden and unpredicted encounter, thus neither murder nor

accident.

2 Prateus (Pardoux Duprat) was credited with the compilation of a Lexicon Juris Civilis et Canonici (first

published at Lyon, 1567); the Lexicon Juridicum of Calvinus (Johann Kahl, professor of law at the University of Heidelberg) was published from Frankfurt in 1600.





chapter 7 63


crimen animo felleo perpetratum [a crime perpetrated with bitterness], with a bitter or gallish inclination. But all of them agree in the description, that it is such a crime 〈2〉 as works a forfeiture of all the offender’s lands, or goods. And this gives great probability to sir Henry Spelman’s Teutonic or German derivation of itc: in which language indeed, as the word is clearly of feodal original, we ought rather to look for its signification, than among the Greeks and Romans. Fe-lon then, according to him, is derived from two northern words; fee, which signifies (we well know) the fief, feud, or beneficiary estate; and lon, which signifies price or value. Felony is therefore the same as pretium feudi [the price of the fief], the consideration for which a man 96 gives up his fief; as we say in common speech, such an act is as much as your life, or estate, is worth. In this sense it will clearly signify the feodal forfeiture, or act by which an estate is forfeited, or escheats, to the lord.

To confirm this we may observe, that it is in this sense, of forfeiture to the lord,

that the feodal writers constantly use it. For all those acts, whether of a criminal nature or not, which at this day are generally forfeitures of copyhold estatesd, are stiled feloniae in the feodal law: “scilicet, per quas feudum amittitur” [that is, by which the fief is lost]e. As, “si domino deservire noluerit [if he refuses to serve his lord]f; si per annum et diem cessaverit in petenda investitura [if he neglects to seek admission as tenant within a year and a day]g; si dominum ejuravit, i.e. negavit se a domino feudum habere [if he abjures his lord, namely denies that he holds the fief from the lord]h; si a domino, in jus eum vocante, ter citatus non comparuerit [if he were three times cited by the lord to come to court and does not appear]i;” all these, with many others, are still causes of forfeiture in our copyhold estates, and were denominated felonies by the feodal constitutions. So likewise injuries of a more substantial or criminal nature were denominated felonies, that is, forfeitures: as assaulting or beating the lordk; vitiating his wife or daughter, “si dominum cucurbitaverit, i.e. cum uxore ejus concubuerit [if he dishonour his lord, that is by sleeping with his wife]l;” all these are esteemed felonies, and the latter is expressly so denominated, “si fecerit feloniam, dominum forte cucurbitando [if he commit felony, as by dishonouring his lord]m.” And as these contempts, or smaller offences, were felonies or acts of forfeiture, of course greater crimes, as murder and robbery, fell under the same denomination. On the other hand, the lord might be guilty of felony, or forfeit his seignory to the vassal, by the same acts as the vassal would have forfeited his feud to the lord. “Si dominus commisit feloniam, per quam vasallus amitteret feudum si eam commiserit in dominum,



c Glossar. tit. Felon.

d See Vol. II. pag. 284 [II. 193].

e Feud. l. 2. t. 26. in calc.

f Feud. l. 1. t. 21.

g Feud. l. 2. t. 24.

h Feud. l. 2. t. 34. l. 2. t. 26. §. 3.

i Feud. l. 2. t. 22.

k Feud. l. 2. t. 24. §. 2.

l Feud. l. 1. t. 5.

m Feud. l. 2. t. 38. Britton. l. 1. c. 22.

64 of public wrongs

feudi proprietatem etiam dominus perdere debetn.”3 One instance given of this sort of felony in the lord is beating the servant of his vasal, so as that he loses his service;

97 which seems merely in the nature of a civil injury, so far as it respects the vasal. And

all these felonies were to be determined “per laudamentum sive judicium parium suorum” [by the verdict or judgment of his peers] in the lord’s court; as with us forfeitures of copyhold lands are presentable by the homage in the court-baron.

Felony, and the act of forfeiture to the lord, being thus synonymous terms in the

feodal law, we may easily trace the reason why, upon the introduction of that law into England, those crimes which induced such forfeiture or escheat of lands (and, by a small deflexion from the original sense, such as induced the forfeiture of goods also) were denominated felonies. Thus it was said, that suicide, robbery, and rape, were felonies; that is, the consequence of such crimes was forfeiture; till by long use we began to signify by the term of felony the actual crime committed, and not the penal consequence. And upon this system only can we account for the cause, why treason in antient times was held to be a species of felony: viz. because it induced a forfeiture.

Hence it follows, that capital punishment does by no means enter into the true

idea and definition of felony. Felony may be without inflicting capital punishment, as in the cases instanced of self-murder, excusable homicide, and petit larciny: and it is possible that capital punishments may be inflicted, and yet the offence be no felony; as 〈3〉 in the case of heresy by the common law, which, though capital, never worked any forfeiture of lands or goodso, an inseparable incident to felony. And of the same 〈4〉 nature is the punishment of standing mute, without pleading to an indictment; which is capital, but without any forfeiture, and therefore such standing mute is no felony. In short the true criterion of felony is forfeiture; for, as sir Edward Coke justly observesp, in all felonies which are punishable with death, the offender loses all his lands in fee-simple, and also his goods and chattels; in such as are not so punishable, his goods and chattels only.

98 The idea of felony is indeed so generally connected with that of capital punishment,

that we find it hard to separate them; and to this usage the interpretations of the law do now conform. And therefore if a statute makes any new offence felony, the lawq implies that it shall be punished with death, viz. by hanging, as well as with forfeiture: unless the offender prays the benefit of clergy; which all felons are entitled once 〈5〉 to have, unless the same is expressly taken away by statute. And, in compliance herewith, I shall for the future consider it also in the same light, as a generical term, including all capital crimes below treason; having premised thus much concerning the true nature and original meaning of felony, in order to account for the reason of those instances I have mentioned, of felonies that are not capital, and capital offences that are not felonies: which seem at first view repugnant to the general idea which we

n Feud. l. 2. t. 26 & 47.

o 3 Inst. 43.

p 1 Inst. 391.

q 1 Hawk. P. C. 107. 2 Hawk. P. C. 444.





chapter 7 65


now entertain of felony, as a crime to be punished by death; whereas properly it is a crime to be punished by forfeiture, and to which death may, or may not be, though it generally is, superadded.

I proceed now to consider such felonies, as are more immediately injurious to the

king’s prerogative. These are, 1. Offences relating to the coin, not amounting to treason. 2. Offences against the king’s council. 3. The offence of serving a foreign prince. 4. The offence of 〈6〉 imbezzling the king’s armour or stores of war. To which may be added a fifth, 5. Desertion from the king’s armies in time of war.

1. Offences relating to the coin, under which may be ranked some inferior

misdemesnors not amounting to felony, are thus declared by a series of statutes, which I shall recite in the order of time. And, first, by statute 27 Edw. I. c. 3. none shall bring pollards and crockards, which were foreign coins of base metal, into the realm, on pain of forfeiture of life and goods. By statute 9 Edw. III. st. 2. no sterling money shall be melted down, upon pain of 〈7〉 forfeiture thereof. By statute 14 Eliz. c. 3. such 99

as forge any foreign coin, although it be not made current here by proclamation, shall (with their aiders and abettors) be guilty of misprision of treason: a crime which we shall hereafter consider. By statute 13 & 14 Car. II. c. 31. the offence of melting down any current silver money shall be punished with forfeiture of the same, and also the double value: and the offender, if a freeman of any town, shall be disfranchised; if not, shall suffer six months imprisonment. By statute 6 & 7 W. III. c. 17. if any person buys or sells, or knowingly has in his custody, any clippings or filings of the coin, he shall forfeit the same and 500l.; one moiety to the king, and the other to the informer; and be branded in the cheek with the letter R.4 By statute 8 & 9 W. III. c. 26. if any person shall blanch, or whiten, copper for sale; (which makes it resemble silver) or buy or sell or offer to sale any malleable composition, which shall be heavier than silver, and look, touch, and wear like gold, but be beneath the standard: 〈8〉 or if any person shall receive or pay any counterfeit or 〈9〉 diminished money of this kingdom, not being cut in pieces, (an operation which every man is thereby empowered to perform) at a less rate than it shall import to be of: (which demonstrates a consciousness of its baseness, and a fraudulent design) all such persons shall be guilty of felony. But these precautions not being found sufficient to prevent the uttering of false or diminished money, which was only a misdemesnor at common law, it is enacted by statute 15 & 16 Geo. II. c. 28. that if any person 〈10〉 shall tender in payment any counterfeit coin, knowing it so to be, he shall for the first offence be imprisoned six months; and find sureties for his good behaviour for six months more: for the second offence, 〈11〉 shall be imprisoned and find sureties for two years: and, for the third offence, shall be guilty of felony without benefit of clergy. Also if a person knowingly tenders in payment any counterfeit money, and at the same time has more in his custody; or shall, within ten days after, knowingly tender other false money; 〈12〉 he shall for the first offence be imprisoned one year, and find sureties for his good behaviour for two years longer; and for the second, be guilty of felony without benefit of clergy. By the 100

4 The letter ‘R’ may stand for ‘retonsor’, the Latin term under which a coin-clipper would have been indicted, 66 of public wrongs

same statute it is also enacted, that, if any person counterfeits the copper coin, he shall suffer two years imprisonment, and find sureties 〈13〉 for two years more. Thus much for offences relating to the coin, as well misdemesnors as felonies, which I thought it most convenient to consider in one and the same view.

2. Felonies, against the king’s councilr, 〈14〉 are; first, by statute 3 Hen. VII. c. 14.

if any sworn servant of the king’s houshold conspires or confederates to kill any lord of this realm, or other person, sworn of the king’s council, he shall be guilty of felony. Secondly, by statute 9 Ann. c. 16. to assault, strike, wound, or attempt to kill, any privy counsellor in the execution of his office, is made felony without benefit of clergy.5

3. Felonies in serving foreign states, which service is generally inconsistent with

allegiance to one’s natural prince, are restrained and punished by statute 3 Jac. I. c. 4. which makes it felony for any person whatever to go out of the realm, to serve any foreign prince, without having first taken the oath of allegiance before his departure. And it is felony also for any gentleman, or person of higher degree, or who hath borne any office in the army, to go out of the realm to serve such foreign prince or state, without previously entering into a bond with two sureties, not to be reconciled to the see of Rome, or enter into any conspiracy against his natural sovereign. And farther, by statute 9 Geo. II. c. 30. enforced by statute 29 Geo. II. c. 17. if any subject of Great Britain shall enlist himself, or if any person shall procure him to be enlisted, in any foreign service, or detain or embark him for that purpose, without licence under the king’s sign manual, he shall be guilty of felony without benefit of clergy: but if the person, so enlisted or enticed, shall discover his seducer within fifteen days, so as he may be apprehended and convicted of the same, 〈15〉 he shall himself be

101 indemnified. By statute 29 Geo. II. c.17. it is moreover enacted, that to serve under

the French king, as a military officer, shall be felony without benefit of clergy; and to enter into the Scotch brigade, in the Dutch service, without previously taking the oaths of allegiance and abjuration, shall be a forfeiture of 500l.6

4. Felony, by 〈16〉 imbezzling the king’s armour or warlike stores, is so declared to

be by statute 31 Eliz. c. 4. which enacts, that if any person having the charge or custody of the king’s armour, ordnance, ammunition, or habiliments of war; or of any victual provided for victualling the king’s soldiers or mariners; shall, either for gain, or to impede his majesty’s service, imbezzle the same to the value of twenty shillings, such offence shall be felony. And the statute 22 Car. II. c. 5. takes away the benefit of clergy from 〈17〉 this offence, so far as it relates to naval stores. Other inferior imbezzlements and misdemesnors, that fall under this denomination, 〈18〉 are punished by statute 1 Geo. I. c. 25. with fine and imprisonment.

5. Desertion from the king’s armies in time of war, whether by land or sea, in

England or in parts beyond the seas, is by the standing laws of the land (exclusive

r See Vol. I. pag. 332 [I. 150].

5 The statute was passed in the wake of a knife attack on the chancellor of the exchequer, Robert Harley (shortly

to be created earl of Oxford) by a French refugee, the marquis de Guiscard.

6 The Scots brigade had served the Dutch republic since 1566, when it was formed to assist in the fight for





chapter 7 67


of the annual acts of parliament to punish mutiny and desertion) and particularly by statute 18 Hen. VI. c. 19. and 5 Eliz. c. 5. made felony, but not without benefit of clergy. But by the statute 2 & 3 Edw. VI. c. 2. clergy is taken away from such deserters, and the offence is made triable by the justices of every shire. The same statutes punish other inferior military offences with fines, imprisonment, and other penalties.



102 chapter the eighth.



of praemunire.

A third species of offence more immediately affecting the king and his government, though not subject to capital punishment, is that of praemunire: so called from the words of the writ preparatory to the prosecution thereof; “praemunirea facias A. B.” 〈 1〉 forewarn A. B. that he appear before us to answer the contempt wherewith he stands charged; which contempt is particularly recited in the preamble to the writb. It took its original from the exorbitant power claimed and exercised in England by the pope, which even in the days of blind zeal was too heavy for our ancestors to bear.

It may justly be observed, that religious principles, which (when genuine and

pure) have an evident tendency to make their professors better citizens as well as better men, have (when perverted and erroneous) been usually subversive of civil government, and been made both the cloak and the instrument of every pernicious design that can be harboured in the heart of man. The unbounded authority that was exercised by the Druids in the west, under the influence of pagan superstition, and the terrible ravages committed by the Saracens in the east, to propagate the religion

103 of Mahomet, both witness to the truth of that antient universal observation; that, in

all ages and in all countries, civil and ecclesiastical tyranny are mutually productive of each other. 〈2〉 And it is the glory of the church of England, as well as a strong presumptive argument in favour of the purity of her faith, that she hath been (as her prelates on a trying occasion once expressed it)c in her principles and practice ever most unquestionably loyal.1 The clergy of her persuasion, holy in their doctrines and unblemished in their lives and conversation, are also moderate in their ambition, and entertain just notions of the ties of society and the rights of civil government. As in matters of faith and morality they acknowledge no guide but the scriptures, so, in matters of external polity and of private right, they derive all their title from the civil magistrate; they look up to the king as their head, to the parliament as their law-giver, and pride themselves in 〈3〉 nothing so justly, as in being true members of the church, emphatically by law established. Whereas the principles of those who differ from them, as well in one extreme as the other, are equally and totally destructive of those ties and obligations by which all society is kept together; equally encroaching on those rights, which reason and the original contract of every free state in the universe have vested in the sovereign power; and equally aiming at a distinct independent supremacy of their own, where spiritual men and spiritual causes are concerned. The dreadful effects of such a religious bigotry, when actuated by erroneous principles,

a A barbarous word for praemonere [Latin: to warn].

b Old Nat. Brev. 101. edit. 1534.

c Address to James II. 1687.

1 Blackstone refers to the petition to James II from the archbishop of Canterbury and six other bishops in May

1688, justifying their refusal to publicize his declaration of indulgence to both Catholic and Protestant Dissenters.





chapter 8 69


even of the protestant kind, are sufficiently evident from the history of the anabaptists in Germany, the covenanters in Scotland,2 and that deluge of sectaries in England, who murdered their sovereign, overturned the church and monarchy, shook every pillar of law, justice, and private property, and most devoutly established a kingdom of the saints in their stead.3 But these horrid devastations, the effects of mere madness or of zeal that was nearly allied to it, though violent and tumultuous, were but of a short duration. Whereas the progress of the papal policy, long actuated by the steady counsels of successive pontiffs, took deeper root, and was at length in some places 104 with difficulty, in others never yet, extirpated. For this we might call to witness the black intrigues of the Jesuits, so lately triumphant over Christendom, but now universally abandoned by even the Roman catholic powers:4 but the subject of our present chapter rather leads us to consider the vast strides, which were formerly made in this kingdom by the popish clergy; how nearly they arrived to effecting their grand design; some few of the means they made use of for establishing their plan; and how almost all of them have been defeated or converted to better purposes, by the vigour of our free constitution, and the wisdom of successive parliaments.

The antient British church, by whomsoever planted, was a stranger to the bishop

of Rome, and all his pretended authority.5 But, the pagan Saxon invaders having driven the professors of christianity to the remotest corners of our island, their own conversion was afterwards effected by Augustin the monk, and other missionaries from the court of Rome. This naturally introduced some few of the papal corruptions in point of faith and doctrine; but we read of no civil authority claimed by the pope in these kingdoms, till the aera of the Norman conquest: when the then reigning pontiff 6 having favoured duke William in his projected invasion, by blessing his host and consecrating his banners, he took that opportunity also of establishing his spiritual encroachments; and was even permitted so to do by the policy of the conqueror, in order more effectually to humble the Saxon clergy and aggrandize his Norman prelates: prelates, who, being bred abroad in the doctrine and practice of slavery, had contracted a reverence and regard for it, and took a pleasure in rivetting the chains of a free-born people.7

The most stable foundation of legal and rational government is a due subordination

of rank, and a gradual scale of authority; and tyranny also itself is most surely

2 Supporters of the Scottish National Covenant of 1638, who pledged themselves to uphold Presbyterian church government, against attempts to introduce episcopacy and the English Book of Common Prayer.

3 Anabaptists (who denied the efficacy of infant baptism) were prominent in radical social movements follow-ing the German Peasants’ War, most notoriously in the town of Munster, 1534–5. The Scottish covenanters (Presbyterians) and English Puritan sects were associated with the English civil wars of the mid-seventeenth century.

4 Jesuits (members of the Society of Jesus, founded by Ignatius Loyola in the mid-sixteenth century), were feared by Protestants as agents of counter-Reformation Catholicism; the order also became increasingly unpopular in continental Europe, and was expelled from France and Spain during the 1760s.

5 From the Henrician reformation of the 1530s it became commonplace to denigrate the pope’s claim to universal authority by referring to him as mere bishop of Rome.

6 Anselmo da Baggio, who reigned as Pope Alexander II from 1062 to his death in 1073.

7 The idealization of ‘free’ Anglo-Saxon society, suppressed under the ‘Norman Yoke’ imposed by William the 70 of public wrongs

supported by a regular increase of despotism, rising from the slave to the sultan: with

105 this difference however, that the measure of obedience in the one is grounded on the

principles of society, and is extended no farther than reason and necessity will warrant; in the other it is limited only by absolute will and pleasure, without permitting the inferior to examine the title upon which it is founded. More effectually therefore to enslave the consciences and minds of the people, the Romish clergy themselves paid the most implicit obedience to their own superiors or prelates; and they, in their turns, were as blindly devoted to the will of the sovereign pontiff, whose decisions they held to be infallible, and his authority co-extensive with the christian world. Hence his legates a latere [from the side (of the pope), bearing the pope’s commission] were introduced into every kingdom of Europe, his bulles8 and decretal epistles became the rule both of faith and discipline, his judgment was the final resort in all cases of doubt or difficulty, his decrees were enforced by anathemas and spiritual censures, he dethroned even kings that were refractory, and denied to whole kingdoms (when undutiful) the exercise of christian ordinances, and the benefits of the gospel of God.

But, though the being spiritual head of the church was a thing of great sound, and

of greater authority, among men of conscience and piety, yet the court of Rome was fully apprized that (among the bulk of mankind) power cannot be maintained without property; and therefore its attention began very early to be rivetted upon every method that promised pecuniary advantage. The doctrine of purgatory was introduced, and with it the purchase of masses to redeem the souls of the deceased. New-fangled offences were created, and indulgences were sold to the wealthy, for liberty to sin without danger. The canon law took cognizance of crimes, injoined penance pro salute animae [for the health of the soul], and commuted that penance for money. Non-residence and pluralities among the clergy, and marriages among the laity related within the seventh degree,9 were strictly prohibited by canon; but dispensations were seldom denied to

106 those who could afford to buy them. In short, all the wealth of christendom was gradually

drained, by a thousand chanels, into the coffers of the holy see.

The establishment also of the feodal system in most of the governments of Europe,

whereby the lands of all private proprietors were declared to be holden of the prince, gave a hint to the court of Rome for usurping a similar authority over all the preferments of the church; which began first in Italy, and gradually spread itself to England. The pope became a feodal lord; and all ordinary patrons were to hold their right of patronage under this universal superior. Estates held by feodal tenure, being originally gratuitous donations, were at that time denominated beneficia: their very name as well as constitution was borrowed, and the care of the souls of a parish thence came to be denominated a benefice. Lay fees were conferred by investiture or delivery of corporal possession; and spiritual benefices, which at first were universally 〈4〉 donatives, now received in like manner a spiritual investiture, by institution from the bishop, and induction under his authority. As lands escheated to the lord, in defect of a legal tenant, so benefices lapsed to the bishop upon non-presentation by

8 A papal mandate, so called after the seal (bulla) that authenticates it.

9 That is, marital relationships deemed incestuous on the basis of injunctions in Lev. 18 and 20.





chapter 8 71


the patron, in the nature of a spiritual escheat.10 The annual tenths collected from the clergy were equivalent to the feodal render, or rent reserved upon a grant; the oath of canonical obedience was copied from the oath of fealty required from the vasal by his superior; and the primer seisins11 of our military tenures, whereby the first profits of an heir’s estate were cruelly extorted by his lord, gave birth to as cruel an exaction of first-fruits from the beneficed clergy. And the occasional aids and talliages, levied by the prince on his vasals, gave a handle to the pope to levy, by the means of his legates a latere, peter-pence and other taxations.12

At length the holy father went a step beyond any example of either emperor or

feodal lord. He reserved to himself, by his own apostolical authorityd, the presentation to all benefices which became vacant while the incumbent was attending the court of 107

Rome upon any occasion, or on his journey thither, or back again; and moreover such also as became vacant by his promotion to a bishoprick or abbey: “etiamsi ad illa personae consueverint et debuerint per electionem aut quemvis alium modum assumi.”13 And this last, the canonists declared, was no detriment at all to the patron, being only like the change of a life in a feodal estate by the lord. Dispensations to avoid these vacancies begat the doctrine of commendams: and papal provisions were the previous nomination to such benefices, by a kind of anticipation, before they became actually void; though afterwards indiscriminately applied to any right of patronage exerted or usurped by the pope. In consequence of which the best livings were filled by Italian and other foreign clergy, equally unskilled in and averse to the laws and constitution of England. The very nomination to bishopricks, that antient prerogative of the crown, was wrested from king Henry the first, and afterwards from his successor king John; and seemingly indeed conferred on the chapters belonging to each see: but by means of the frequent appeals to Rome, through the intricacy of the laws which regulated canonical elections, was eventually vested in the pope. And, to sum up this head with a transaction most unparalleled and astonishing in its kind, pope Innocent III had at length the effrontery to demand, and king John had the meanness to consent to, a resignation of his crown to the pope, whereby England was to become for ever St Peter’s patrimony; and the dastardly monarch re-accepted his sceptre from the hands of the papal legate, to hold as the vasal of the holy see, at the annual rent of a thousand marks.

Another engine set on foot, or at least greatly improved, by the court of Rome, was

a masterpiece of papal policy. Not content with the ample provision of tithes, which the law of the land had given to the parochial clergy, they endeavoured to grasp at the lands and inheritances of the kingdom, and (had not the legislature withstood them) would by this time have probably been masters of every foot of ground in the kingdom. 108

To this end they introduced the monks of the Benedictine and other rules, men of

d Extrav. l. 3. t. 2. c. 13.

10 See further II. 47–8.

11 See further II. 43–4.

12 Peter’s Pence, originally an annual tax of one penny paid by Anglo-Saxon householders for the papacy, became

after 1066 a country-wide levy of some £200 collected by the bishops.

72 of public wrongs

sour and austere religion, separated from the world and its concerns by a vow of per-petual celibacy, yet fascinating the minds of the people by pretences to extraordinary sanctity, while all their aim was to aggrandize the power and extend the influence of their grand superior the pope. And as, in those times of civil tumult, great rapines and violence were daily committed by overgrown lords and their adherents, they were taught to believe, that founding a monastery a little before their deaths would atone for a life of incontinence, disorder, and bloodshed. Hence innumerable abbeys and religious houses were built within a century after the conquest, and endowed, not only with the tithes of parishes which were ravished from the secular clergy, but also with lands, manors, lordships, and extensive baronies. And the doctrine inculcated was, that whatever was so given to, or purchased by, the monks and friers, was consecrated to God himself; and that to alienate or take it away was no less than the sin of sacrilege.

I might here have enlarged upon other contrivances, which will occur to the

recollection of the reader, set on foot by the court of Rome, for effecting an entire exemption of its clergy from any intercourse with the civil magistrate: such as the separation of the ecclesiastical court from the temporal; the appointment of its judges by merely spiritual authority, without any interposition from the crown; the exclusive jurisdiction it claimed over all ecclesiastical persons and causes; and the privilegium clericale, or benefit of clergy, which delivered all clerks from any trial or punishment except before their own tribunal. But the history and progress of ecclesiastical courtse, as well as of purchases in mortmainf, have already been fully discussed in the preceding volumes: and we shall have an opportunity of examining at large the nature of the privilegium clericale in the progress of the present book. And therefore I shall only

109 observe at present, that notwithstanding this plan of pontificial power was so deeply

laid, and so indefatigably pursued by the unwearied politics of the court of Rome through a long succession of ages; notwithstanding it was polished and improved by the united endeavours of a body of men, who engrossed all the learning of Europe for centuries together; notwithstanding it was firmly and resolutely executed by persons the best calculated for establishing tyranny and despotism, being fired with a bigoted enthusiasm, (which prevailed not only among the weak and simple, but even among those of the best natural and acquired endowments) unconnected with their fellow-subjects, and totally indifferent what might befal that posterity to which they bore no endearing relation;—yet it vanished into nothing, when the eyes of the people were a little enlightened, and they set themselves with vigour to oppose it. So vain and ridiculous is the attempt to live in society, without acknowleging the obligations which it lays us under; and to affect an intire independence of that civil state, which protects us in all our rights, and gives us every other liberty, that only excepted of despising the laws of the community.

Having thus in some degree endeavoured to trace out the original and subsequent

progress of the papal usurpations in England, let us now return to the statutes of praemunire, which were framed to encounter this overgrown yet encreasing evil.

e See Vol. III. pag. 61 [III. 40].

f See Vol. II. pag. 268 [II. 182].





chapter 8 73


King Edward I,14 a wise and magnanimous prince, set himself in earnest to shake off this servile yokeg. He would not suffer his bishops to attend a general council, till they had sworn not to receive the papal benediction. He made light of all papal bulles and processes: attacking Scotland in defiance of one; and seising the temporalties of his clergy, who under pretence of another refused to pay a tax imposed by parliament. He strengthened the statutes of mortmain; thereby closing the great gulph, in which all the lands of the kingdom were in danger of being swallowed. And, one of his 110 subjects having obtained a bulle of excommunication against another, he ordered him to be executed as a traitor, according to the antient law h. And in the thirty fifth year of his reign was made the first statute against 〈5〉 papal provisions, which, according to sir Edward Cokei, is the foundation of all the subsequent statutes of praemunire; which we rank as an offence immediately against the king, because every encouragement of the papal power is a diminution of the authority of the crown.15

In the weak reign of Edward the second the pope again endeavoured to encroach,

but the parliament manfully withstood him; and it was one of the principal articles charged against that unhappy prince, that he had given allowance to the bulles of the see of Rome. But Edward the third was of a temper extremely different; and, to remedy these inconveniences first by gentle means, he and his nobility wrote an expostulation to the pope: but receiving a menacing and contemptuous answer, withal acquainting him, that the emperor, (who a few years before at the diet of Nuremberg, a.d. 1323, had established a law against provisions16)k and also the king of France, had lately submitted to the holy see; the king replied, that if both the emperor and the French king should take the pope’s part, he was ready to give battel to them both, in defence of the liberties of 〈6〉 his crown. Hereupon more sharp and penal laws 〈7〉 were enacted against provisorsl, which enact severally, that the court of Rome 〈8〉 shall present or collate to no bishoprick or living in England; and that whoever disturbs any patron in the presentation to a living by virtue of a papal provision, such provisor shall pay fine and ransom to the king at his will; and be imprisoned till he renounces such provision: and the same punishment is inflicted on such as cite the king, or any of his subjects, to answer in the court of Rome. And when the holy see resented these 111 proceedings, and pope Urban V attempted to revive the vasalage and annual rent to which king John had subjected his kingdom, it was unanimously agreed by all the estates of the realm in parliament assembled, 40 Edw. III. that king John’s donation was null and void, being without the concurrence of parliament, and contrary to his coronation oath: and all the temporal nobility and commons engaged, that if the

g [R. v Lalor] Dav. 83, &c.

h Bro. Abr. tit. Coron. 115. Treason. 14. 5 Rep. part 1. fol. 12 [YB 30 Edw. III, Lib. Ass. pl. 19]. 3 [recte 30] Ass. 19.

i 2 Inst. 583.

k Mod. Univ. Hist. xxix. 293.

l Stat. 25 Edw. III. st. 6. 27 Edw. III. st. 1. c. 1. 38 Edw. III. st. 1. c. 4. & st. 2. c. 1, 2, 3, 4.

14 Edward I was often in conflict with the church and Archbishop Peckham, whose successor Robert Winchelsey

(1294–1313) led clerical resistance to the payment of taxes, in obedience to the bull of Pope Boniface VIII, but without support from Boniface’s successor.

15 The statute of Carlisle, 35 Edw. I c. 1 (1307).

16 ‘Provisions’ were papal appointments to ecclesiastical benefices not yet vacant.

74 of public wrongs

pope should endeavour by process or otherwise to maintain these usurpations, they would resist and withstand him with all their powerm.

In the reign of Richard the second, it was found necessary to sharpen and

strengthen these laws, and therefore it was enacted by statutes 3 Ric. II. c. 3. and 7 Ric. II. c. 12. first, that no alien should be capable of letting his benefice to farm; in order to compel such, as had crept in, at least to reside on their preferments: and, afterwards, that no alien should be capable to be presented to any ecclesiastical preferment, under the penalty of the statutes of provisors. By the statute 12 Ric. II. c. 15. all liegemen of the king, accepting of a living by any foreign provision, are put out of the king’s protection, and the benefice made void. To which the statute 13 Ric. II. st. 2. c. 2. adds banishment and forfeiture of lands and goods: and by c. 3. of the same statute, any person bringing over any citation or excommunication from beyond sea, on account of the execution of the foregoing statutes of provisors, shall be imprisoned, forfeit his goods and lands, and moreover suffer pain of life and member.

In the writ for the execution of all these statutes the words praemunire facias, being

〈 9〉 (as was said) used to command a citation of the party, have denominated in common speech, not only the writ, but the offence itself of maintaining the papal power, by the name of praemunire. And accordingly the next statute I shall mention,

112 which is generally referred to by all subsequent statutes, is usually called the statute

of praemunire. It is the statute 16 Ric. II. c. 5. which enacts, that whoever procures at Rome, or elsewhere, any translations, processes, excommunications, bulles, instru-ments, or other things which touch the king, against him, his crown, and realm, and all persons aiding and assisting therein, shall be put out of the king’s protection, their lands and goods forfeited to the king’s use, and they shall be attached by their bodies to answer to the king and his council; or process of praemunire facias shall be made out against them, as in other cases of provisors.

By the statute 2 Hen. IV. c. 3. all persons who accept any provision from the pope,

to be exempt from canonical obedience to their proper ordinary,17 are also subjected to the penalties of praemunire. And this is the last of our antient statutes touching this offence; the usurped civil power of the bishop of Rome being pretty well broken down by these statutes, as his usurped religious power was in about a century after-wards: the spirit of the nation being so much raised against foreigners, that about this time, in the reign of Henry the fifth, the alien priories, or abbies for foreign monks, were suppressed, and their lands given to the crown.18 And no farther attempts were afterwards made in support of these foreign jurisdictions.

A learned writer, before referred to, is therefore greatly mistaken, when he saysn,

that in Henry the sixth’s time the archbishop of Canterbury and other bishops offered to the king a large supply, if he would consent that all laws against provisors, and

m Seld, in Flet. 10. 4.

n Dav. 96.

17 i.e. ecclesiastical superior.

18 Alien priories were religious foundations, such as convents and monasteries, controlled by a foreign (often French)

religious house to which their incomes would be remitted. Henry V was responsible for suppressing alien priories





chapter 8 75


especially the statute 16 Ric. II. might be repealed; but that this motion was rejected.19 This account is incorrect in all its branches. For, first, the application, which he probably means, was made not by the bishops only, but by the unanimous consent of a provincial synod, assembled in 1439, 18 Hen. VI. that very synod which at the same time refused to confirm and allow a papal bulle, which then was laid before them. Next, the purport of it was not to procure a repeal of the statutes against provisors, or 113

that of Richard II in particular; but to request that the penalties thereof, which by a forced construction were applied to all that sued in the spiritual, and even in many temporal, courts of this realm, might be turned against the proper objects only; those who appealed to Rome or to any foreign jurisdictions: the tenor of the petition being, “that those penalties should be taken to extend only to those that commenced any suits or procured any writs or public instruments at Rome, or elsewhere out of England; and that no one should be prosecuted upon that statute for any suit in the spiritual courts or lay jurisdictions of this kingdom.” Lastly, the motion was so far from being rejected, that the king promised to recommend it to the next parliament, and in the mean time that no one should be molested upon this account. And the clergy were so satisfied with their success, that they granted to the king a whole tenth upon this occasiono.

And indeed so far was the archbishop, who presided in this synod, from

countenancing the usurped power of the pope in this realm, that he was ever a firm opposer of it. And, particularly, in the reign of Henry the fifth, he prevented the 〈10〉 king’s brother from being then made a cardinal, and legate a latere from the pope; upon the mere principle of its being within the mischief of papal provisions, and derogatory from the liberties of the English church and nation.20 For, as he expressed himself to the king in his letter upon that subject, “he was bound to oppose it by his ligeance, and also to quit himself to God, and the church of this land, of which God and the king had made him governor.” This was not the language of a prelate addicted to the slavery of the see of Rome; but of one, who was indeed of principles so very opposite to the papal usurpations, that in the year preceding this synod, 17 Hen. VI. [1438] he refused to consecrate a bishop of Ely, that was nominated by pope Eugenius IV.21 A conduct quite consonant to his former behaviour, in 6 Hen. VI, when he 114 refused to obey the commands of pope Martin V, who had required him to exert his endeavours to repeal the statute of praemunire; (“execrabile illud statutum [that abominable statute],” as the holy father phrases it) which refusal so far exasperated the court of Rome against him, that at length the pope issued a bulle to suspend him

o Wilk. Concil. Mag. Brit. III. 533.

19 Blackstone appears to conflate different events. Henry Chichele (c. 1362–1443), archbishop of Canterbury

from 1414, did propose the repeal of the Statute of Provisors, in response to pressure from Pope Martin V; however, he also joined other members of the king’s council in resisting any such change.

20 Henry Beaufort (c. 1325–1447) bishop of Winchester (1405–47), the illegitimate half-brother of Henry IV and

uncle of Henry V, was offered a cardinal’s hat by Pope Martin V in 1417, which the then king, Henry V, prevented him from accepting.

21 The see of Ely was granted in commendam (i.e. as a source of income) to Louis de Luxembourg (d. 1443), 76 of public wrongs

from his office and authority, which the archbishop disregarded, and appealed to a general council.22 And so sensible were the nation of their primate’s merit, that the lords spiritual, and temporal, and also the university of Oxford, wrote letters to the pope in his defence; and the house of commons addressed the king, to send an embassador forthwith to his holiness, on behalf of the archbishop, who had incurred the displeasure of the pope for opposing the excessive power of the court of Romep.

This then is the original meaning of the offence, which we call praemunire; viz.

introducing a foreign power into this land, and creating imperium in imperio [a state within a state], by paying that obedience to papal process, which constitutionally belonged to the king alone, long before the reformation in the reign of Henry the eighth: at which time the penalties of praemunire were indeed extended to more papal abuses than before; as the kingdom then entirely renounced the authority of the see of Rome, though not all the corrupted doctrines of the Roman church. And therefore by the several statutes of 24 Hen. VIII. c. 12. and 25 Hen. VIII. c. 19 & 21. to appeal to Rome from any of the king’s courts, which (though illegal before) had at times been connived at; to sue to Rome for any licence or dispensation; or to obey any process from thence; are made liable to the pains of praemunire. And, in order to restore to the king in effect the nomination of vacant bishopricks, and yet keep up the

115 established forms, it is enacted by statute 25 Hen. VIII. c. 20. that if the dean and





chapter refuse to elect the person named by the king, or any archbishop or bishop to confirm or consecrate him, they shall fall within the penalties of the statutes of praemunire. Also by statute 5 Eliz. c. 1. to refuse the oath of supremacy will incur the pains of praemunire; and to defend the pope’s jurisdiction in this realm, is a praemunire for the first offence, and high treason for the second. So too, by statute 13 Eliz. c. 2. to import any agnus Dei,23 crosses, beads, or other superstitious things pretended to be hallowed by the bishop of Rome, and tender the same to be used; or to receive the same with such intent, and not discover the offender; or if a justice of the peace, knowing thereof, shall not within fourteen days declare it to a privy counsellor; they all incur a praemunire. But importing, or selling mass books or other popish books, is by statute 3 Jac. I. c. 5. §. 25. 〈11〉 only a penalty of forty shillings. Lastly, to contribute to the maintenance of a jesuit’s college, or any popish seminary whatever, beyond sea; or any person in the same; or to contribute to the maintenance of any jesuit or popish priest in England, is by statute 27 Eliz. c. 2. made liable to the penalties of praemunire.


Thus far the penalties of praemunire seem to have kept within the proper bounds

of their original institution, the depressing the power of the pope: but, they being pains of no inconsiderable consequence, it has been thought fit to apply the same to

p See Wilk. Concil. Mag. Br. Vol. III. passim. and Dr Duck’s life of archbishop Chichele, who was the prelate here

spoken of, and the munificent founder of All Souls college in Oxford: in vindication of whose memory the author hopes to be excused this digression; if indeed it be a digression, to shew how contrary to the sentiments of so learned and pious a prelate, even in the days of popery, those usurpations were, which the statutes of praemunire and provisors were made to restrain.

22 Chichele’s legatine powers were suspended in 1427 and restored the following year.

23 Lit. ‘lamb of God’, referring to discs of wax, impressed with the figure of a lamb, which have been blessed by





chapter 8 77


other heinous offences; some of which bear more, and some less relation to this original offence, and some no relation at all.

Thus, 1. By the statute 1 & 2 Ph. & Mar. c. 8. to molest the possessors of abbey lands

granted by parliament to Henry the eighth, and Edward the sixth, is a praemunire. 2. So likewise is the offence of acting as a broker or agent in any usurious contract, where above ten per cent. interest is taken, by statute 13 Eliz. c. 10. 3. To obtain any stay of proceedings, other than by arrest of judgment or writ of error, in any suit for a monopoly, is likewise a praemunire, by statute 21 I. c. 3. 4. To obtain an exclusive 116 patent for the sole making or importation of gunpowder or arms, or to hinder others from importing them, is also a praemunire by two statutes; the one 16 Car. I. c. 21. the other 1 Jac. II. c. 8. 5. On the abolition, by statute 12 Car. II. c. 24. of purveyanceq, and the prerogative of preemption, or taking any victual, beasts, or goods for the king’s use, at a stated price, without consent of the proprietor, the exertion of any such power for the future was declared to incur the penalties of praemunire. 6. To assert, maliciously and advisedly, by speaking or writing, that both or either house of parliament have a legislative authority without the king, is declared a praemunire by statute 13 Car. II. c. 1. 7. By the habeas corpus act also, 31 Car. II. c. 2. it is a praemunire, and incapable of the king’s pardon, besides other heavy penaltiesr, to send any subject of this realm a prisoner into parts beyond the seas. 8. By the statute 1 W. & M. st. 1. c. 8. persons of eighteen years of age, refusing to take the new oaths of allegiance, as well as supremacy, upon tender by the proper magistrate, are subject to the penalties of a praemunire; and by statute 7 & 8 W. III. c. 24. serjeants, counsellors, proctors, attorneys, and all officers of courts, practising without having taken the oaths of allegiance and supremacy, and 〈12〉 subscribing the declaration against popery, are guilty of a praemunire, whether the oaths be tendered or not. 9. By the statute 6 Ann. c. 7. to assert maliciously and directly, by preaching, teaching, or advised speaking, that the then pretended prince of Wales, or any person other than according to the acts of settlement and union, hath any right to the throne of these kingdoms; or that the king and parliament cannot make laws to limit the descent of the crown; such preaching, teaching, or advised speaking is a praemunire: as writing, printing, or publishing the same doctrines amounted, we may remember, to high treason. 10. By statute 6 Ann. c. 23. if the assembly of peers of Scotland, convened to elect their sixteen representatives in the British parliament, shall presume to treat of any other 117 matter save only the election, they incur the penalties of a praemunire. 〈13〉 11. The last offence that has been made a praemunire, was by statute 6 Geo. I. c. 18. the year after the infamous south sea project had beggared half the nation.24 This therefore makes all unwarrantable undertakings by unlawful subscriptions, then commonly known by the name of bubbles, subject to the penalties of a praemunire.

q See Vol. I. pag. 287 [I. 184–5].

r See Vol. I. pag. 138 [I. 93]. Vol. III. pag. 137 [III. 93].

24 The 1720 statute to which Blackstone refers (the ‘Bubble Act’) was promoted by the South Sea Company itself

before the collapse of the speculative frenzy which took the price of South Sea stock to unsustainable levels, triggering a major financial crisis, amid revelations of pervasive corruption.

78 of public wrongs

Having thus enquired into the nature and several species of praemunire, its

punishment may be gathered from the foregoing statutes, which are thus shortly summed up by sir Edward Cokes: “that, from the conviction, the defendant shall be out of the king’s protection, and his lands and tenements, goods and chattels forfeited to the king: and that his body shall remain in prison at the king’s pleasure; or (as other authorities have it) during lifet”: both which amount to the same thing; as the king by his prerogative may any time remit the whole, or any part of the punishment, except in the case of transgressing the statute of habeas corpus. These forfeitures, here inflicted, do not (by the way) bring this offence within our former definition of felony; being inflicted by particular statutes, and not by the common law. But so odious, sir Edward Coke adds, was this offence of praemunire, that a man that was attainted of the same might have been slain by any other man without danger of law: because it was provided by lawu, that any man might do to him as to the king’s enemy; and any man may lawfully kill an enemy. However, the position itself, that it is at any time lawful to kill an enemy, is by no means tenable: it is only lawful, by the law of nature and nations, to kill him in the heat of battel, or for necessary self-defence. And, to obviate such savage and 〈14〉 mistaken notions, the statute 5 Eliz. c. 1. provides, that it shall not be lawful to kill any person attainted in a praemunire, any law, statute, opinion,

118 or exposition of law to the contrary notwithstanding. But still such delinquent, though

protected as a part of the public from public wrongs, can bring no action for any private injury, how atrocious soever; being so far out of the protection of the law, that it will not guard his civil rights, nor remedy any grievance which he as an individual may suffer. And no man, knowing him to be guilty, can with safety give him comfort, aid, or reliefw.

s 1 Inst. 129.

t (R. v Edward, Lord Vaux) 1 Bulstr. 199.

u Stat. 25 Edw. III. st. 5. c. 22.

w 1 Hawk. P. C. 55.





chapter the ninth. 119




of misprisions and

contempts, affecting the

king and government.

The fourth species of offences, more immediately against the king and government, are intitled misprisions and contempts.

Misprisions (a term derived from the old French, mespris, a neglect or contempt)

are, in the acceptation of our law, generally understood to be all such high offences as are under the degree of capital, but nearly bordering thereon: and it is said, that a misprision is contained in every treason and felony whatsoever; and that, if the king so please, the offender may be proceeded against for the misprision onlya. And upon the same principle, while the jurisdiction of the star-chamber subsisted, it was held that the king might remit a prosecution for treason, and cause the delinquent to be censured in that court, merely for a high misdemesnor: as happened in the case of Roger earl of Rutland,1 in 43 Eliz. who was concerned in the earl of Essex’s rebellionb. Misprisions are generally divided into two sorts; negative, which consist in the concealment of something which ought to be revealed; and positive, which consist in the commission of something which ought not to be done.

I. Of the first, or negative kind, is what is called misprision of treason; consisting 120

in the bare knowlege and concealment of treason, without any degree of assent thereto: for any assent makes the party a principal traitor; as indeed the concealment, which was construed aiding and abetting, did at the common law: in like manner as the knowlege of a plot against the state, and not revealing it, was a capital crime at Florence, and other states of Italy c. But it is now enacted by the statute 1 & 2 Ph. & Mar. c. 10. that a bare concealment of treason shall be only held a misprision. This concealment becomes criminal, if the party apprized of the treason does not, as soon as conveniently may be, reveal it to some judge of assise or justice of the peaced. But if there be any probable circumstances of assent, as if one goes to a treasonable meeting, knowing beforehand that a conspiracy is intended against the king; or, being in such company once by accident, and having heard such treasonable conspiracy, meets the same company again, and hears more of it, but conceals it; this is an implied assent in law, and makes the concealer guilty of 〈2〉 principal high treasone.

a 〈1〉 Yearb. 2 Ric. III. 10. Staundf. P. C. 37. 1 Hawk. P. C. 55, 56.

b Hudson of the court of star-chamber. MS. in Mus. Brit. [now British Library MS Harl. 1226].

c Guicciard. Hist. b. 3 & 13.

d 1 Hal. P. C. 372.

e 1 Hawk. P. C. 56.

1 Roger Manners, fifth earl of Rutland (1576–1612), was arrested, imprisoned, and fined £30,000 for his minimal 80 of public wrongs

There is also one positive misprision of treason, created so by act of parliament.

The statute 13 Eliz. c. 2. enacts, that those who forge foreign coin, not current in this kingdom, their aiders, abettors, and procurers, shall all be guilty of misprision of treason. For, though the law would not put foreign coin upon quite the same footing as our own; yet, if the circumstances of trade concur, the falsifying it may be attended with consequences almost equally pernicious to the public; as the counterfeiting of Portugal money would be at present: and therefore the law has made it an offence just below capital, and that is all. For the punishment of misprision of treason is loss of the profits of lands during life, forfeiture of goods, and imprisonment during lifef. Which

121 total forfeiture of the goods was originally inflicted while the offence amounted to

principal treason, and of course included in it a felony, by the common law; and therefore is no exception to the general rule laid down in a former chapterg, that wherever an offence is punished by such total forfeiture it is felony at the common law.

Misprision of felony is also the concealment of a felony which a man knows, but

never assented to; for, if he assented, this makes him either principal, or accessory. And the punishment of this, in a public officer, by the statute Westm. 1. 3 Edw. I. c. 9. is imprisonment for a year and a day; in a common person, imprisonment for a less discretionary time; and, in both, fine and ransom at the king’s pleasure: which pleasure of the king must be observed, once for all, not to signify any extrajudicial will of the sovereign, but such as is declared by his representatives, the judges in his courts of justice; “voluntas regis in curia, non in camerah [the king’s will in his court, not his chamber].”

There is also another species of negative misprisions; namely, the concealing of

treasure-trove, which belongs to the king or his grantees, by prerogative royal: the concealment of which was formerly punishable by deathj; but now only by fine and imprisonmenti.

II. Misprisions, which are merely positive, are generally denominated contempts

or high misdemesnors: of which

1. The first and principal is the mal-administration of such high officers, as are in

public trust and employment. This is usually punished by the method of parliamentary impeachment: wherein such penalties, short of death, are inflicted, as to the wisdom of the house of peers shall seem proper; consisting usually of banishment, impris-onment, fines, or perpetual disability.2 Hitherto also may be referred the offence of

122 imbezzling the public money, called among the Romans peculatus, which the Julian

law punished with death in a magistrate, and with deportation, or banishment, in a private personk. With us it is not a capital crime, but subjects the committer of it to a

f 1 Hal. P. C. 374.

g See pag. 94 [IV. 62].

h 1 Hal. P. C. 375.

j Glanv. l. 1. c. 2.

i 3 Inst. 133.

k Inst. 4. 18. 9.

2 Proceedings in parliamentary impeachment began on accusations brought by the House of Commons but





chapter 9 81


discretionary fine and imprisonment. Other misprisions are, in general, such con-tempts of the executive magistrate, as demonstrate themselves by some arrogant and undutiful behaviour towards the king and government. These are

2. Contempts against the king’s prerogative. As, by refusing to assist him for the

good of the public; either in his councils, by advice, if called upon; or in his wars, by personal service for defence of the realm, against a rebellion or invasionl. Under which class may be ranked the neglecting to join the posse comitatus, or power of the county, being thereunto required by the sheriff or justices, according to the statute 2 Hen. V. c. 8. which is a duty incumbent upon all that are fifteen years of age, under the degree of nobility, and able to travelm. Contempts against the prerogative may also be, by preferring the interests of a foreign potentate to those of our own, or doing or receiving any thing that may create an undue influence in favour of such extrinsic power; as, by taking a pension from any foreign prince without the consent of the kingn. Or, by disobeying the king’s lawful commands; whether by writs issuing out of his courts of justice, or by a summons to attend his privy council, or by letters from the king to a subject commanding him to return from beyond the seas, (for disobedience to which his lands shall be seised till he does return, and himself afterwards punished) or by his writ of ne exeat regnum [that he is not to leave the kingdom], or proclamation, commanding the subject to stay at homeo. Disobedience to any of these commands is a high misprision and contempt: and so, lastly, is disobedience to any act of parliament, where no particular penalty is assigned; for then it is punishable, like the rest of these contempts, by fine and imprisonment, at 123 the discretion of the king’s courts of justicep.

3. Contempts and misprisions against the king’s person and government, may be

by speaking or writing against them, cursing or wishing him ill, giving out scandalous stories concerning him, or doing any thing that may tend to lessen him in the esteem of his subjects, may weaken his government, or may raise jealousies between him and his people. It has been also held an offence of this species to drink to the pious memory of a traitor; or for a clergyman to absolve persons at the gallows, who there persist in the treasons for which they die: these being acts which impliedly encourage rebellion.3 And for this species of contempt a man may not only be fined and imprisoned, but suffer the pillory or other infamous corporal punishmentq: in like manner as, in the antient German empire, such persons as endeavoured to sow

l 1 Hawk. P. C. 59.

m Lamb. Eir. 315.

n 3 Inst. 144.

o See Vol. I. pag. 266 [I. 171].

p 1 Hawk. P. C. 60.

q Ibid.

3 In 1684 an unidentified individual who had drunk a health to the memory of Stephen College, ‘the Protestant joiner’ executed three years earlier for treason, was fined £1,000 and sent to the pillory. Cook, Snatt, and Collier, three clergymen who had refused to swear allegiance to William III and Queen Mary after the deposition of James II, were present when two plotters were executed for seeking to kill William III in 1696; to the horror of the government they pronounced absolution on the unrepentant conspirators: Anon. (1684), 87 ER 33; R. v Cook, 82 of public wrongs

sedition, and disturb the public tranquillity, were condemned to become the objects of public notoriety and derision, by carrying a dog upon their shoulders from one great town to another. The emperors Otho I. and Frederic Barbarossa inflicted this punishment on noblemen of the highest rankr.

4. Contempts against the king’s title, not amounting to treason or praemunire,

are the denial of his right to the crown in common and unadvised discourse; for, if it be by advisedly speaking, we have seens that it amounts to a praemunire. This heedless species of contempt is however punished by our law with fine and imprisonment. Likewise if any person shall in any wise hold, affirm, or maintain, that the common laws of this realm, not altered by parliament, ought not to direct the right of the crown of England; this is a misdemesnor, by statute 13 Eliz. c. 1. and punishable with forfeiture of goods and chattels. A contempt may also arise from refusing or neglecting to take the oaths, appointed by statute for the better securing the

124 government; and yet acting in a public office, place of trust, or other capacity, for

which the said oaths are required to be taken; viz. those of allegiance, supremacy, and abjuration: which must be taken within six calendar months after admission. The penalties for this contempt, inflicted by statute 1 Geo. I. st. 2. c. 13. are very little, if any thing, short of those of a praemunire: being an incapacity to hold the said offices, or any other; to prosecute any suit; to be guardian or executor; to take any legacy or deed of gift; and to vote at any election for members of parliament: and after conviction the offender shall also forfeit 500l. to him or them that will sue for the same. Members on the foundation of any college in the two universities,4 who by this statute are bound to take the oaths, must also register a certificate thereof in the college register, within one month after; otherwise, if the electors do not remove him, and elect another within twelve months, or after, the king may nominate a person to succeed him by his great seal or sign manual. Besides thus taking the oaths for offices, any two justices of the peace may by the same statute summon, and tender the oaths to, any person whom they shall suspect to be disaffected; and every person refusing the same, who is properly called a non-juror, shall be adjudged a popish recusant convict, and subjected to the same penalties that were mentioned in a former chaptert; which in the end may amount to the alternative of abjuring the realm, or suffering death as a felon.

5. Contempts against the king’s palaces or courts of justice have always been

looked upon as high misprisions: and by the antient law, before the conquest, fighting in the king’s palace, or before the king’s judges, was punished with deathv. So too, in the old Gothic constitution, there were many places privileged by law, quibus major reverentia et securitas debetur, ut templa et judicia, quae sancta habebantur,—arces

125 et aula regis,—denique locus quilibet praesente aut adventante regeu.5 And at present,

r Mod. Un. Hist. xxix. 28. 119.

s See pag. 91 [IV. 60–1].

t See pag. 55 [IV. 36–7].

v 3 Inst. 140. LL. Alured. cap. 7. & 34.

u Stiernh. de jure Goth. l. 3. c. 3.

4 i.e. Oxford and Cambridge.





chapter 9 83


with us, by the statute 33 Hen. VIII. c. 12. malicious striking in the king’s palace, wherein his royal person resides, whereby blood is drawn, is punishable by perpetual imprisonment, and fine at the king’s pleasure; and also with loss of the offender’s right hand, the solemn execution of which sentence is prescribed in the statute at length.

But striking in the king’s superior courts of justice, in Westminster-hall, or at the

assises, is made still more penal than even in the king’s palace. The reason seems to be, that those courts being antiently held in the king’s palace, and before the king himself, striking there included the former contempt against the king’s palace, and something more; viz. the disturbance of public justice. For this reason, by the antient common law before the conquestw, striking in the king’s courts of justice, or drawing a sword therein, was a capital felony: and our modern law retains so much of the antient severity, as only to exchange the loss of life for the loss of the offending limb. Therefore a stroke or a blow in such court of justice, whether blood be drawn or not, or even assaulting a judge, sitting in the court, by drawing a weapon, without any blow struck, is punishable with the loss of the right hand, imprisonment for life, and forfeiture of goods and chattels, and of the profits of his lands during lifex. A rescue also of a prisoner from any of the said courts, without striking a blow, is punished with perpetual imprisonment, and forfeiture of goods, and of the profits of lands during lifey: being looked upon as an offence of the same nature with the last; but only, as no blow is actually given, the amputation of the hand is excused. For the like reason an affray, or riot, near the said courts, but out of their actual view, is punished only with fine and imprisonmentz.

Not only such as are guilty of an actual violence, but of threatening or reproachful 126

words to any judge sitting in the courts, are guilty of a high misprision, and have been punished with large fines, imprisonment, and corporal punishmenta. And, even in the inferior courts of the king, an affray, or contemptuous behaviour, is punishable with a fine by the judges there sitting; as by the steward in a court-leet, or the likeb.

Likewise all such, as are guilty of any injurious treatment to those who are

immediately under the protection of a court of justice, are punishable by fine and imprisonment: as if a man assaults or threatens his adversary for suing him, a counsellor or attorney for being employed against him, a juror for his verdict, or a gaoler or other ministerial officer for keeping him in custody, and properly executing his dutyc: which offences, when they proceeded farther than bare threats, were punished in the Gothic constitutions with exile and forfeiture of goodsd.

Lastly, to endeavour to dissuade a witness from giving evidence; to disclose an

examination before the privy council; or, to advise a prisoner to stand mute; (all of

w LL. Inae. c. 6. LL. Canut. c. 56. LL. Alured. c. 7.

x Staundf. P. C. 38. 3 Inst. 140, 141.

y 1 Hawk. P. C. 57.

z [Sir William Waller’s case] Cro. Car. 373.

a [Harrison’s case] Cro. Car. 503.

b 1 Hawk. P. C. 58.

84 of public wrongs

which are impediments of justice) are high misprisions, and contempts of the king’s courts, and punishable by fine and imprisonment. And antiently it was held, that if one of the grand jury disclosed to any person indicted the evidence that appeared against him, he was thereby made accessory to the offence, if felony; and in treason a principal. And at this day it is agreed, that he is guilty of a high misprisione, and liable to be fined and imprisonedf.

e See Barr. 212. [YB] 27 Ass. pl. 44. §. 4 [recte 2]. fol. 138.

f 1 Hawk. P. C. 59.





chapter the tenth. 127




of offences against

public justice.

The order of our distribution will next lead us to take into consideration such crimes and misdemesnors as more especially affect the common-wealth, or public polity of the kingdom: which however, as well as those which are peculiarly pointed against the lives and security of private subjects, are also offences against the king, as the pater-familias [father of the family] of the nation; to whom it appertains by his regal office to protect the community, and each individual therein, from every degree of injurious violence, by executing those laws, which the people themselves in conjunction with him have enacted; or at least have consented to, by an agreement either expressly made in the persons of their representatives, or by a tacit and implied consent pre­ sumed and proved by immemorial usage.

The species of crimes, which we have now before us, is subdivided into such a

number of inferior and subordinate classes, that it would much exceed the bounds of an elementary treatise, and be insupportably tedious to the reader, were I to examine them all minutely, or with any degree of critical accuracy. I shall therefore confine myself principally to general definitions or descriptions of this great variety of offences, and to the punishments inflicted by law for each particular offence; with now and then a few incidental observations: referring the student for more particulars 128

to other voluminous authors; who have treated of these subjects with greater precision and more in detail, than is consistent with the plan of these commentaries.

The crimes and misdemesnors, that more especially affect the common­wealth,

may be divided into five species; viz. offences against public justice, against the public peace, against public trade, against the public health, and against the public police or oeconomy: of each of which we will take a cursory view in their order.

First then, of offences against public justice: some of which are felonious, whose

punishment may extend to death; others only misdemesnors. I shall begin with those that are most penal, and descend gradually to such as are of less malignity.

1. Imbezzling or vacating records, or falsifying certain other proceedings in a

court of judicature, is a felonious offence against public justice. It is enacted by statute 8 Hen. VI. c. 12. that if any clerk, or other person, shall wilfully take away, withdraw, or avoid any record, or process in the superior courts of justice in Westminster­hall, by reason whereof the judgment shall be reversed or not take effect; 〈1〉 it is felony not only in the principal actors, but also in their procurers, 〈2〉 and abettors. Likewise by statute 21 Jac. I. c. 26. to acknowlege any fine, recovery, deed enrolled, statute, recognizance, bail, or judgment, in the name of another person not privy to the same, is felony without benefit of clergy. Which law extends only to proceedings in the courts themselves: but by statute 4 W. & M. c. 4. to personate 〈3〉 any other person 86 of public wrongs

before any commissioner authorized to take bail in the country is also felony. For no man’s property would be safe, if records might be suppressed or falsified, or persons’ names be falsely usurped in courts, or before their public officers.

129 2. To prevent abuses by the extensive power, which the law is obliged to repose in

gaolers, it is enacted by statute 14 Edw. III. c. 10. that if any gaoler by too great duress of imprisonment makes any prisoner that he hath in ward, become an approver or an appellor against his will; that is, as we shall see hereafter, to accuse and turn evidence against some other person; it is felony in the gaoler. For, as sir Edward Cokea observes, it is not lawful to induce or excite any man even to a just accusation of another; much less to do it by duress of imprisonment; and least of all by a gaoler, to whom the prisoner is committed for safe custody.

3. A third offence against public justice is obstructing the execution of lawful process.

This is at all times an offence of a very high and presumptuous nature; but more particularly so, when it is an obstruction of an arrest upon criminal process. And it hath been holden, that the party opposing such arrest becomes thereby particeps criminis; that is, an accessory in felony, and a principal in high treasonb. Formerly one of the greatest obstructions to public justice, both of the civil and criminal kind, was the multitude of pretended privileged places, where indigent persons assembled together to shelter themselves from justice, (especially in London and Southwark) under the pretext of their having been antient palaces of the crown, or the likec: all of which sanctuaries for iniquity are now demolished, and the opposing of any process therein is made highly penal, by the statutes 8 & 9 W. III. c. 27. 9 Geo. I. c. 28. and 11 Geo. I. c. 22. which enact, that persons opposing the execution of any process in such pretended privileged places within the bills of mortality,1 or abusing any officer in his endeavours to execute his duty therein, so that he receives bodily hurt, shall be guilty of felony, and 〈4〉 transported for seven years.

130 4. An escape of a person arrested upon criminal process, by eluding the vigilance

of his keepers before he is put in hold, is also an offence against public justice, and the party himself is punishable by fine or imprisonment d. But the officer permitting such escape, either by negligence or connivance, is much more culpable than the prisoner; the natural desire of liberty pleading strongly in his behalf, though he ought in strictness of law to submit himself quietly to custody, till cleared by the due course of justice. Officers therefore who, after arrest, negligently permit a felon to escape, are also punishable by finee; but voluntary escapes, by consent and connivance of the officer, are a much more serious offence: for it is generally agreed that such escapes amount to the same kind of offence, and are punishable in the same degree, as the offence of which the prisoner is guilty, and for which he is in custody, whether

a 3 Inst. 91.

b 1 Hawk. P. C. 121.

c Such as White-Friers, and its environs; the Savoy; and the Mint in Southwark.

d 2 Hawk. P. C. 122.

e 1 Hal. P. C. 600.

1 The area of metropolitan London covered by the regularly published statistics of baptisms and burials recorded





chapter 10 87


treason, felony, or trespass. And this, whether he were actually committed to gaol, or only under a bare arrestf. But the officer cannot be thus punished, till the original delinquent 〈5〉 is actually found guilty or convicted, by verdict, confession, or outlawry, of the crime for which he was so committed or arrested: otherwise it might happen, that the officer might be punished for treason or felony, and the person arrested and escaping might turn out to be an innocent man. But, before the conviction of the principal party, the officer thus neglecting his duty may be fined and imprisoned for a misdemesnor g.

5. Breach of prison by the offender himself, when committed for any cause, was

felony at the common lawh: or even conspiring to break iti. But this severity is miti­ gated by the statute de frangentibus prisonam [on those breaking out of prison], 1 Edw. II. which enacts, that no person shall have judgment of life or member, for breaking prison, unless committed for some capital offence. 〈6〉 So that to break 131 prison, when lawfully committed for any treason or felony, remains still felony as at the common law; and to break prison, when lawfully confined upon any other inferior charge, is still punishable as a high misdemesnor by fine and imprisonment. For the statute, which ordains that such offence shall be no longer capital, never meant to exempt it entirely from every degree of punishmentk.

6. Rescue is the 〈7〉 forcibly freeing another from an arrest or imprisonment; 〈8〉

and is always the same offence in the stranger so rescuing, 〈9〉 as it would have been in the party himself to have broken prisonl. A rescue therefore of one apprehended for felony, is felony; for treason, treason; and for a misdemesnor, a misdemesnor also. 〈10〉 But here, as upon voluntary escapes, the principal must first 〈11〉 be attainted before the rescuer can be punished: and for the same reason; because perhaps in fact it may turn out that there has been no offence 〈13〉 committedm. By the statute, 16 Geo. II. c. 31. 〈14〉 to assist a prisoner in custody for treason or felony with any arms, instruments of escape, or disguise, without the knowlege of the gaoler; or any way to assist such prisoner to attempt an escape, though no escape be actually made, is felony, and subjects the offender to transportation for 〈15〉 seven years. And by the statutes 25 Geo. II. c. 37. and 27 Geo. II. c. 15. to rescue, or attempt to rescue, any person committed for murder, or for any of the offences 〈16〉 enumerated in that act, or in the black act 9 Geo. I. c. 22. is felony without benefit of clergy.

7. Another capital offence against public justice is the returning from

transportation, or being seen at large in Great Britain before the expiration of the term for which the offender was 〈17〉 sentenced to be transported. This is made felony without benefit of clergy by statutes 4 Geo. I. c. 11. 6 Geo. I. c. 23. and 8 132

Geo. III. c. 15.

f 1 Hal. P. C. 590. 2 Hawk. P. C. 134.

g 1 Hal. P. C. 588, 9. 2 Hawk. P. C. 134, 5.

h 1 Hal. P. C. 607.

i Bract. l. 3. c. 9.

k 2 Hawk. P. C. 128.

l Ibid. 139.

88 of public wrongs

8. An eighth is that of taking a reward, under pretence of helping the owner to his

stolen goods. This was a contrivance carried to a great length of villainy in the begin­ ning of the reign of George the first: the confederates of the felons thus disposing of stolen goods, at a cheap rate, to the owners themselves, and thereby stifling all farther enquiry. The famous Jonathan Wild had under him a well disciplined corps of thieves, who brought in all their spoils to him; and he kept a sort of public office for restoring them to the owners at half price. To prevent which audacious practice, to the ruin and in defiance of public justice, it was enacted by statute 4 Geo. I. c. 11. that whoever shall take a reward under the pretence of helping any one to stolen goods, shall suffer as the felon who stole them; unless he cause such principal felon to be apprehended and brought to trial, 〈18〉 and shall also give evidence against him. Wild, upon this statute, (still continuing in his old practice) was at last convicted and executed.

9. Receiving of stolen goods, knowing them to be stolen, is also a high misdemesnor

and affront to public justice. We have seen in a former chaptern, that this offence, which is only a misdemesnor at common law, by the statutes 3 & 4 W. & M. c. 9. and 5 Ann. c. 31. makes the offender accessory to the theft and felony. But because the accessory cannot in general be tried, unless with the principal, or after the principal is convicted, the receivers by that means frequently eluded justice. To remedy which, it is enacted by statute 1 Ann. c. 9. and 5 Ann. c. 31. that such receivers may still be prosecuted for a misdemesnor, and punished by fine and imprisonment, though the principal felon be not before taken, so as to be prosecuted and convicted. And, in case of receiving stolen lead, iron, and certain other metals, such offence is by statute

133 29 Geo. II. c. 30. punishable by transportation for fourteen yearso. So that now the

prosecutor has two methods in his choice: either to punish the receivers for the misdemesnor immediately, before the thief is takenp; or to wait till the felon is convicted, and then punish them as accessories to the felony. But it is provided by the same statutes, that he shall only make use of one, and not both of these methods of punishment. By the same statute also 29 Geo. II. c. 30. persons having lead, iron, and other metals in their custody, and not giving a satisfactory account how they came by the same, are guilty of a misdemesnor and punishable 〈19〉 by fine or imprisonment.

10. Of a nature somewhat similar to the two last is the offence of theft-bote, which

is where the party robbed not only knows the felon, but also takes his goods again, or other amends, upon agreement not to prosecute. This is frequently called com­ pounding of felony, and formerly was held to make a man an accessory; but is now punished only with fine and imprisonment q. This perversion of justice, in the old Gothic constitutions, was liable to the most severe and infamous punishment. And the Salic law 2 “latroni eum similem habuit, qui furtum celare vellet, et occulte sine

n See pag. 38 [IV. 24].

o See also statute 2 Geo. III. c. 28. §. 12. for the punishment of receivers of goods stolen by bum­boats, &c. in the

Thames. [A bumboat was a small boat used to ferry or trade supplies to larger ships.]

p Foster. 373.

q 1 Hawk. P. C. 125.





chapter 10 89


judice compositionem ejus admitterer.”3 By statute 25 Geo. II. c. 36. even to advertise a reward for the return of things stolen, with no questions asked, or words to the same purport, subjects the advertiser and the printer to a forfeiture of 50l. each.

11. Common barretry is the offence of frequently exciting and stirring up suits

and quarrels between his majesty’s subjects, either at law or otherwises. The punishment for this offence, in a common person, is by fine and imprisonment: but if the offender (as is too frequently the case) belongs to the profession of the law, a barretor, who is 134 thus able as well as willing to do mischief, ought also to be 〈20〉 disabled from practising for the futuret. Hereunto may be referred an offence of equal malignity and audaciousness; that of suing another in the name of a fictitious plaintiff; either one not in being at all, or one who is ignorant of the suit. This offence, if committed in any of the king’s superior courts, is left, as a high contempt, to be punished at their discretion. But in courts of a lower degree, where the crime is equally pernicious, but the authority of the judges not equally extensive, it is directed by statute 8 Eliz. c. 2. to be punished by six months imprisonment, and treble damages to the party injured.

12. Maintenance is an offence, that bears a near relation to the former; being an

officious intermeddling in a suit that no way belongs to one, by maintaining or assisting either party with money or otherwise, to prosecute or defend itu: a practice, that was greatly encouraged by the first introduction of usesw. This is an offence against public justice, as it keeps alive strife and contention, and perverts the remedial process of the law into an engine of oppression. And therefore, by the Roman law, it was a species of the crimen falsi [fraud or deceit] to enter into any confederacy, or do any act to support another’s lawsuit, by money, witnesses, or patronagex. A man may however maintain the suit of his near kinsman, servant, or poor neighbour, out of charity and compassion, with impunity. Otherwise the punishment by common law is fine and imprisonmenty; and, by the statute 32 Hen. VIII. c. 9. a forfeiture of ten pounds.

13. Champerty, campi-partitio, is a species of maintenance, and punished in the

same mannerz; being a bargain with a plaintiff or defendant campum partire, to divide the land or other matter sued for between them, if they prevail at law; whereupon the champertor is to carry on the party’s suit at his own expensea. Thus 135 champart, in the French law, signifies a similar division of profits, being a part of the crop annually due to the landlord by bargain or custom. In our sense of the word, it signifies the purchasing of a suit, or right of suing: a practice so much abhorred by



r Stiernh. de jure Goth. l. 3. c. 5.

s 1 Hawk. P. C. 243.

t 1 Hawk. P. C. 244.

u Ibid. 249.

w Dr & St. 203.

x Ff. 48. 10. 20.

y 1 Hawk. P. C. 255.

z Ibid. 257.

a Stat. of conspirat. 33 Edw. I.

3 ‘He who would conceal a theft, and secretly receive a composition for it without the knowledge of the judge, 90 of public wrongs

our law, that it is one main reason why a chose in action, or thing of which one hath the right but not the possession, is not assignable at common law; because no man should purchase any pretence to sue in another’s right. These pests of civil society, that are perpetually endeavouring to disturb the repose of their neighbours, and officiously interfering in other men’s quarrels, even at the hazard of their own fortunes, were severely animadverted on by the Roman law: “qui improbe coeunt in alienam litem, ut quicquid 〈21〉 ex communicatione in rem ipsius redactum fuerit, inter eos communicaretur, lege Julia de vi privata tenentur b;”4 and they were punished by the forfeiture of a third part of their goods, and perpetual infamy. Hitherto also must be referred the provision of the statute 32 Hen. VIII. c. 9. that no one shall sell or purchase any pretended right or title to land, unless the vendor hath received the profits thereof for one whole year before such grant, or hath been in actual possession of the land, or of the reversion or remainder; on pain that both purchasor and vendor shall each forfeit the value of such land to the king and the prosecutor. These offences relate chiefly to the commencement of civil suits: but

14. The compounding of informations upon penal statutes are an offence of an

equivalent nature in criminal causes; and are, besides, an additional misdemesnor against public justice, by contributing to make the laws odious to the people. At once therefore to discourage malicious informers, and to provide that offences, when once discovered, shall be duly prosecuted, it is enacted by statute 18 Eliz. c. 5. that if any person, informing under pretence of any penal law, makes any composition without

136 leave of the court, or takes any money or promise from the defendant to excuse him

(which demonstrates his intent in commencing the prosecution to be merely to serve his own ends, and not for the public good) he shall forfeit 10l., shall stand two hours on the pillory, and shall be for ever disabled to sue on any popular or penal statute.

15. A conspiracy also to indict an innocent man of felony falsely and maliciously,

who is accordingly indicted and acquitted, is a farther abuse and perversion of public justice; for which the party injured may either have a civil action by writ of conspiracy, (of which we spoke in the preceding book)c or the conspirators, for there must be at least two to form a conspiracy, may be indicted at the suit of the king, and were by the antient common lawd to receive what is called the villenous judgment; viz. to lose their liberam legem [legal rights], whereby they are discredited and 〈22〉 disabled to be jurors or witnesses; to forfeit their goods and chattels, and lands for life; to have those lands wasted, their houses rased, their trees rooted up, and their own bodies committed to prisone. But it now is the better opinion, that the villenous judgment is by long disuse become obsolete; it not having been pronounced for some ages: but instead thereof the delinquents are usually sentenced to imprisonment, fine, and

b Ff. 48. 7. 6.

c See Vol. III. pag. 126 [III. 264].

d Bro. Abr. t. conspiracy. 28.

e 1 Hawk. P. C. 193.

4 ‘Those who improperly interfere in other men’s suits, for the purpose of sharing whatever may be awarded by





chapter 10 91


pillory. To this head may be referred the offence of sending letters, threatening to accuse any person of a crime punishable with death, transportation, pillory, or other infamous punishment, with a view to extort from him any money or other valuable chattels. This is punishable by statute 30 Geo. II. c. 24. at the discretion of the court, with fine, imprisonment, pillory, whipping, or transportation for seven years.

16. The next offence against public justice is when the suit is past its commence­

ment, and come to trial. And that is the crime of wilful and corrupt perjury; which is defined by sir Edward Cokef, to be a crime committed when a lawful oath is administred, in some judicial proceeding, to a person who swears wilfully, absolutely 137

and falsely, in a matter material to the issue or point in question. The law takes no notice of any perjury but such as is committed in some court of justice, having power to administer an oath; or before some magistrate or proper officer, invested with a similar authority, in some proceedings relative to a civil suit or a criminal prosecution: for it esteems all other oaths unnecessary at least, and therefore will not punish the breach of them. For which reason it is much to be questioned how far any magistrate is justifiable in taking a voluntary affidavit in any extrajudicial matter, as is now too frequent upon every petty occasion: since it is more than possible, that by such idle oaths a man may frequently in foro conscientiae [in the court of his conscience] incur the guilt, and at the same time evade the temporal penalties, of perjury. The perjury 〈23〉 must also be wilful, positive, and absolute; not upon surprize, or the like: it also must be in some point material to the question in dispute; for if it only be in some trifling collateral circumstance, to which no regard is paid, it is no more penal than in the voluntary extrajudicial oaths before­mentioned. Subornation of perjury is the offence of procuring another to take such a false oath, as constitutes perjury in the principal. The punishment of perjury and subornation, at common law, has been various. It was antiently death; afterwards banishment, or cutting out the tongue; then forfeiture of goods; and now it is fine and imprisonment, and never more to be capable of bearing testimonyg. But the statute 5 Eliz. c. 9. (if the offender be prosecuted thereon) inflicts the penalty of perpetual infamy, and a fine of 40l. on the suborner; and, in default of payment, imprisonment for six months, and to stand with both ears nailed to the pillory. Perjury itself is thereby punished with six months imprisonment, perpetual infamy, and a fine of 20l. or to have both ears nailed to the pillory. But the prosecution is usually carried on for the offence at common law; especially as, to the penalties before inflicted, the statute 2 Geo. II. c. 25. superadds a power, for the court to order the offender to be sent to the 〈24〉 house of correction for seven years, or to 138

be transported for the same period; and makes it felony without benefit of clergy to return or escape within the time. It has sometimes been wished, that perjury, at least upon capital accusations, whereby another’s life has been or might have been destroyed, was also rendered capital, upon a principle of retaliation; as it is 〈25〉 universally by the laws of Franceh. And certainly the odiousness of the crime pleads

f 3 Inst. 164.

g 3 Inst. 163.

92 of public wrongs

strongly in behalf of the French law. But it is to be considered, that there they admit witnesses to be heard only on the side of the prosecution, and use the rack to extort a confession from the accused. In such a constitution therefore it is necessary to throw the dread of capital punishment into the other scale, in order to keep in awe the witnesses for the crown; on whom alone the prisoner’s fate depends: so naturally does one cruel law beget another. But corporal and pecuniary punishments, exile and perpetual infamy, are more suited to the genius of the English law, where the fact is openly discussed between witnesses on both sides, and the evidence for the crown may be contradicted and disproved by those of the prisoner. Where indeed the death of an innocent person has actually been the consequence of such wilful perjury, it falls within the guilt of deliberate murder, and deserves an equal punishment: which our antient law in fact inflictedi. But the mere attempt to destroy life by other means not being capital, there is no reason that an attempt by perjury should: much less that this crime should in all judicial cases be punished with death. For to multiply capital punishments lessens their effect, when applied to crimes of the deepest dye; and, detestable as perjury is, it is not by any means to be compared with some other offences, for which only death can be inflicted: and therefore it seems already (except perhaps in the instance of deliberate murder by perjury) very properly punished by our present law; which has adopted the opinion of Cicerok, derived from the law of the twelve tables, “perjurii poena divina, exitium; humana, dedecus [The divine punishment of perjury is death; the human punishment, disgrace].”

139 17. Bribery is the next species of offence against public justice; which is when a

judge, or other person concerned in the administration of justice, takes any undue reward to influence his behaviour in his officel. In the east it is the custom never to petition any superior for justice, not excepting their kings, without a present. This is calculated for the genius of despotic countries; where the true principles of govern­ ment are never understood, and it is imagined that there is no obligation from the superior to the inferior, no relative duty owing from the governor to the governed. The Roman law, though it contained many severe injunctions against bribery, as well for selling a man’s vote in the senate or other public assembly, as for the bartering of common justice, yet, by a strange indulgence in one instance, it tacitly encouraged this practice; allowing the magistrate to receive small presents, provided they did not in the whole exceed a hundred crowns in the yearm: not considering the insinuating nature and gigantic progress of this vice, when once admitted. Plato therefore more wisely, in his ideal republicn, orders those who take presents for doing their duty to be punished in the severest manner: and by the laws of Athens he that offered was also prosecuted, as well as he that received a bribeo. In England this offence of taking bribes is punished, in inferior officers, with fine and imprisonment; and in those who

i Britton. c. 5.

k de Leg. 2. 9.

l 1 Hawk. P. C. 168.

m Ff. 48. 11. 6.

n de Leg. l. 12.

o Pott. Antiqu. b. 1. c. 23.





chapter 10 93


offer a bribe, though not taken, the samep. But in judges, especially the superior ones, it hath been always looked upon as so heinous an offence, that the chief justice Thorpe was hanged for it in the reign of Edward III.5 By a statuteq 11 Hen. IV, all judges and officers of the king, convicted of bribery, shall forfeit treble the bribe, be punished at the king’s will, and be discharged from the king’s service for ever.6 And some notable examples have been made in parliament, of persons in the highest stations, and 140 otherwise very eminent and able, but contaminated with this sordid vice.

18. Embracery is an attempt to influence a jury corruptly to one side by promises,

persuasions, entreaties, money, entertainments, and the liker. The punishment for the person embracing is by fine and imprisonment; and, for the juror so embraced, if it be by taking money, the punishment is (by divers statutes of the reign of Edward III) perpetual infamy, imprisonment for a year, and forfeiture of the tenfold value.

19. The false verdict of jurors, whether occasioned by embracery or not, was

antiently considered as criminal, and therefore exemplarily punished by attaint in the manner formerly mentioneds.

20. Another offence of the same species is the negligence of public officers, entrusted

with the administration of justice, as sheriffs, coroners, constables, and the like: which makes the offender liable to be fined; and in very notorious cases will amount to a forfeiture of his office, if it be a beneficial onet. Also the omitting to apprehend persons, offering stolen iron, lead, and other metals to sale, is a misdemesnor and punishable by a stated fine, or imprisonment, in pursuance of the statute 29 Geo. II. c. 30.

21. There is yet another offence against public justice, which is a crime of deep

malignity; and so much the deeper, as there are many opportunities of putting it in practice, and the power and wealth of the offenders may often deter the injured from a legal prosecution. This is the oppression and tyrannical partiality of judges, justices, and other magistrates, in the administration and under the colour of their office. However, when prosecuted, either by impeachment in parliament, or by information in the 141 court of king’s bench, (according to the rank of the offenders) it is sure to be severely punished with forfeiture of 〈27〉 their offices, fines, imprisonment, or other discretionary 〈28〉 censures, regulated by the nature and aggravations of the offence committed.

22. Lastly, extortion is an abuse of public justice, which consists in any officer’s

unlawfully taking, by colour of his office, from any man, any money or thing of value, that is not due to him, or more than is due, or before it is dueu. The punishment is fine and imprisonment, and sometimes a forfeiture of the office.



p 3 Inst. 147.

q Ibid. 146.

r 1 Hawk. P. C. 259.

s 〈26〉 See Vol. III. pag. 402 [III. 264].

t 1 Hawk. P. C. 168.

u 1 Hawk. P. C. 170.

5 Chief Justice Sir William Thorp (d. 1361) was convicted and sentenced to hang for taking bribes in 1350, but received an immediate royal pardon.

142 chapter the eleventh.



of offences against the

public peace.

We are next to consider offences against the public peace; the conservation of which is intrusted to the king and his officers, in the manner and for the reasons which were formerly mentioned at largea. These offences are either such as are an actual breach of the peace; or constructively so, by tending to make others break it. Both of these species are also either felonious, or not felonious. The felonious breaches of the peace are strained up to that degree of malignity by virtue of several modern statutes: and, particularly,

1. The riotous assembling of twelve persons, or more, and not dispersing upon

proclamation. This was first made high treason by statute 3 & 4 Edw. VI. c. 5. when the king was a minor, and a change in religion to be effected: but that statute was repealed by statute 1 Mar. c. 1. among the other treasons created since the 25 Edw. III c. 2.; though the prohibition was in substance re-enacted, with an inferior degree of punishment, by statute 1 Mar. st. 2. c. 12. which made the same offence a single felony. These statutes specified and particularized the nature of the riots they were meant to suppress; as, for example, such as were set on foot with intention to offer violence to the privy council, or to change the laws of the kingdom, or for certain other specific

143 purposes: in which cases, if the persons were commanded by proclamation to

disperse, and they did not, it was by the statute of Mary made felony, but within the benefit of clergy; and also the act indemnified the peace officers and their assistants, if they killed any of the mob in endeavouring to suppress such riot. This was thought a necessary security in that sanguinary reign, when popery was intended to be re-established, which was like to produce great discontents: but at first it was made only for a year, and was afterwards continued for that queen’s life. And, by statute 1 Eliz. c. 16. when a reformation in religion was to be once more attempted, it was revived and continued du[r]ing her life also; and then expired. From the accession of James the first to the death of queen Anne, it was never once thought expedient to revive it: but, in the first year of George the first, it was judged necessary, in order to support the execution of the act of settlement, to renew it, and at one stroke to make it perpetual, with large additions. For, whereas the former acts expressly defined and specified what should be accounted a riot, the statute 1 Geo. I. c. 5. enacts, generally, that if any twelve persons are unlawfully assembled to the disturbance of the peace, and any one justice of the peace, sheriff, under-sheriff, or mayor of a town, shall think proper to command them by proclamation to disperse, if they contemn his orders and continue together for one hour afterwards, such contempt shall be felony

a Vol. I. pag. 117. 268. 350 [I. 81, 171–3, 224].





chapter 11 95


without benefit of clergy. And farther, if the reading of the proclamation be by force opposed, or the reader be in any manner wilfully hindered from the reading of it, such opposers and hinderers are felons, without benefit of clergy: and all persons to whom such proclamation ought to have been made, and knowing of such hindrance, and not dispersing, are felons, without benefit of clergy. There is the like indemnifying clause, in case any of the mob be unfortunately killed in the endeavour to disperse them; being copied from the act of queen Mary. And, by a subsequent clause of the new act, if 〈1〉 any persons, so riotously assembled, begin even before proclamation to pull down any church, chapel, meeting-house, dwelling-house, or out-houses, they shall be felons without benefit of clergy.

2. By statute 1 Hen. VII. c. 7. unlawful hunting in any legal forest, park, or warren, 144

not being the king’s property, by night, or with painted faces, was declared to be single felony. But now by the statute 9 Geo. I. c. 22. 〈2〉 to appear armed in any open place by day, or night, with faces blacked or otherwise disguised, or (being so disguised) to hunt, wound, kill, or steal any deer, to rob a warren, or to steal fish, is felony without benefit of clergy. I mention this offence in this place, not on account of the damage thereby done to private property, but of the manner in which that damage is committed; namely, with the face blacked or with other disguise, to the breach of the public peace and the terror of his majesty’s subjects.

3. Also by the same statute 9 Geo. I. c. 22. amended by statute 27 Geo. II. c. 15.

knowingly to send any letter without a name, or with a fictitious name, demanding money, venison, or any other valuable thing, or threatening (without any demand) 〈3〉 to kill, or fire the house of, any person, is made felony, without benefit of clergy. This offence was formerly high treason, by the statute 8 Hen. V. [recte VI] c. 6.

4. 〈4〉 To pull down or destroy any turnpike-gate, or fence thereunto belonging, by

the statute 1 Geo. II. c. 19. is punished with public whipping, and three months imprisonment; and to destroy the toll-houses, or any sluice or lock on a navigable river, is made felony to be punished with transportation for seven years. By the statute 5 Geo. II. c. 33. the offence of destroying turn-pike-gates or fences, is made felony also, with transportation for seven years. And, lastly, by statute 8 Geo. II. c. 20. the offences of destroying both turnpikes upon roads, and sluices upon rivers, are made felony, without benefit of clergy; and may be tried as well in an adjacent county, as that wherein the fact is committed. The remaining offences against the public peace are merely misdemesnors, and no felonies: as,

5. Affrays (from affraier, to terrify) are the fighting of two or more persons in 145

some public place, to the terror of his majesty’s subjects: for, if the fighting be in private, it is no affray but an assault b. Affrays may be suppressed by any private person present, who is justifiable in endeavouring to part the combatants, whatever consequence may ensuec. But more especially the constable, or other similar officer, however denominated, is bound to keep the peace; and to that purpose may break open doors to suppress an affray, or apprehend the affrayers; and may either carry

b 1 Hawk. P. C. 134.

c Ibid. 136.

96 of public wrongs

them before a justice, or imprison them by his own authority for a convenient space till the heat is over; and may then perhaps also make them find sureties for the peaced. The punishment of common affrays is by fine and imprisonment; the measure of which must be regulated by the circumstances of the case: for, where there is any material aggravation, the punishment proportionably increases. As where two persons coolly and deliberately engage in a duel: this being attended with an apparent intention and danger of murder, and being a high contempt of the justice of the nation, is a strong aggravation of the affray, though no mischief has actually ensuede. Another aggravation is, when thereby the officers of justice are disturbed in the due execution of their office: or where a respect to the particular place ought to restrain and regulate men’s behaviour, more than in common ones; as in the king’s court, and the like. And upon the same account 〈5〉 also all affrays in a church or church-yard are esteemed very heinous offences, as being indignities to him to whose service those places are consecrated. Therefore mere quarrelsome words, which are neither an affray nor an offence in any other place, are penal here. For it is enacted by statute 5 & 6 Edw. VI. c. 4. that if any person shall, by words only, quarrel, chide, or brawl, in a church or church-yard, the ordinary shall suspend him, if a layman, ab ingressu

146 ecclesiae [from entering church]; and, if a clerk in orders, from the ministration of his

office during pleasure. And, if any person in such church or church-yard proceeds to smite or lay violent hands upon another, he shall be excommunicated ipso facto [by the fact itself]; or if he strikes him with a weapon, or draws any weapon with intent to strike, he shall besides excommunication (being convicted by a jury) have one of his ears cut off; or, having no ears, be branded with the letter F in his cheek. Two persons may be guilty of an affray: but,

6. Riots, routs, and unlawful assemblies must have three persons at least to

constitute them. An unlawful assembly is when three, or more, do assemble themselves together to do an unlawful act, as to pull down inclosures, to destroy a warren or the game therein; and part without doing it, or making any motion towards itf. A rout is where three or more meet to do an unlawful act upon a common quarrel, as forcibly breaking down fences upon a right claimed of common, or of way; and make some advances towards itg. A riot is where three or more actually do an unlawful act of violence, either with or without a common cause or quarrelh: as if they beat a man; or hunt and kill game in another’s park, chase, warren, or liberty; or do any other unlawful act with force and violence; or even do a lawful act, as removing a nusance, in a violent and tumultuous manner. The punishment of unlawful assemblies, if to the number of twelve, we have just now seen may be capital, according to the circum stances that attend it; but, from the number of three to eleven, is by fine and imprisonment only. The same is the case in riots and routs by the common law; to



d Ibid. 137.

e Ibid. 138.

f 3 Inst. 176.

g Bro. Abr. t. Riot. 4. 5.

h 3 Inst. 176.





chapter 11 97


which the pillory in very enormous cases has been sometimes super-addedi. And by the statute 13 Hen. IV. c. 7. any two justices, together with the sheriff or under-sheriff of the county, may come with the posse comitatus, if need be, and suppress any such riot, assembly, or rout, arrest the rioters, and record upon the spot the nature and circumstances of the whole transaction; which record alone shall be a sufficient 147 conviction of the offenders. In the interpretation of which statute it hath been holden, that all persons, noblemen and others, except women, clergymen, persons decrepit, and infants under fifteen, are bound to attend the justices in suppressing a riot, upon pain of fine and imprisonment; and that any battery, wounding, or killing the rioters, that may happen in suppressing the riot, is justifiable j . So that our antient law, previous to the modern riot act, seems pretty well to have guarded against any violent breach of the public peace; especially as any riotous assembly on a public or general account, as to redress grievances or pull down all inclosures, and also resisting the king’s forces if sent to keep the peace, may amount to overt acts of high treason, by levying war against the king.

7. Nearly related to this head of riots is the offence of tumultuous petitioning;

which was carried to an enormous height in the times preceding the grand rebellion.1 Wherefore by statute 13 Car. II. St. 1. c. 5. it is enacted, that not more than twenty names shall be signed to any petition to the king or either house of parliament, for any alteration of matters established by law in church or state; unless the contents thereof be previously approved, in the country, by three justices, or the majority of the grand jury at the assises or quarter sessions; and, in London, by the lord mayor, aldermen, and common councilk: and that no petition shall be delivered by a company of more than ten persons: on pain in either case of incurring a penalty not exceeding 100l., and three months imprisonment.

8. An eighth offence against the public peace is that of a forcible entry or detainer;

which is committed by violently taking or keeping 〈6〉 possession, with menaces, force, and arms, of lands and tenements, without the authority of law. This was formerly allowable to every person disseised, or turned out of possession, unless his 148 entry was taken away or barred by his own neglect, or other circumstances; which were explained more at large in a former volumel. But this being found very prejudicial to the public peace, it was thought necessary by several statutes to restrain all persons from the use of such violent methods, even of doing themselves justice; and much more if they have no justice in their claimm. So that the entry now allowed by law is a peaceable one; that forbidden is such as is carried on and maintained with force, with violence, and unusual weapons. By the statute 5 Ric. II. St. 1. c. 8. all forcible

i 1 Hawk. P. C. 159.

j 1 Hal. P. C. 495. 1 Hawk. P. C. 161.

k This may be one reason (among others) why the corporation of London has, since the restoration, usually taken the lead in petitions to parliament for the alteration of any established law.

l See Vol. III. pag. 174 [III. 117–18], &c.

m 1 Hawk. P. C. 141.

1 Large crowds, some orchestrated by John Pym and his allies, accompanied the presentation of petitions to the 98 of public wrongs

entries are punished with imprisonment and ransom at the king’s will. And by the several statutes of 15 Ric. II. c. 2. 8 Hen. VI. c. 9. 31 Eliz. c. 11. and 21 Jac. I. c. 15. upon any forcible entry, or forcible detainer after peaceable entry, into any lands, or benefices of the church, one or more justices of the peace, taking sufficient power of the county, may go to the place, and there record the force upon his own view, as in case of riots; and upon such conviction may commit the offender to gaol, till he makes fine and ransom to the king. And moreover the justice or justices have power to summon a jury, to try the forcible entry or detainer complained of: and, if the same be found by that jury, then besides the fine on the offender, the justices shall make restitution by the sheriff of the possession, without inquiring into the merits of the title; for the force is the only thing to be tried, punished, and remedied by them: and the same may be done by indictment at the general sessions. But this provision does not extend to such as endeavour to maintain possession by force, where they themselves, or their ancestors, have been in the peaceable enjoyment of the lands and tenements, 〈7〉 for three years immediately preceding.

9. The offence of riding or going armed, with dangerous or unusual weapons, is a

crime against the public peace, by terrifying the good people of the land; and is

149 particularly prohibited by the statute of Northampton, 2 Edw. III. c. 3. upon pain of

forfeiture of the arms, and imprisonment during the king’s pleasure: in like manner as, by the laws of Solon, every Athenian was finable who walked about the city in armourn.

10. Spreading false news, to make discord between the king and nobility, or

concerning any great man of the realm, is 〈8〉 punished by common law o with fine and imprisonment; which is confirmed by statutes Westm. 1. 3 Edw. I. c. 34. 2 Ric. II. st. 1. c. 5. and 12 Ric. II. c. 11.

11. False and pretended prophecies, with intent to disturb the peace, are equally

unlawful, and more penal; as they raise enthusiastic jealousies in the people, and terrify them with imaginary fears. They are therefore punished by our law, upon the same principle that spreading of public news of any kind, without communicating it first to the magistrate, was prohibited by the antient Gaulsp. Such false and pretended prophecies were punished capitally by statute 1 Edw. VI. c. 12. which was repealed in the reign of queen Mary. And now by the statute 5 Eliz. c. 15. the penalty for the first offence is a fine of 〈9〉 100l., and one year’s imprisonment; for the second, forfeiture of all goods and chattels, and imprisonment during life.

12. Besides actual breaches of the peace, any thing that tends to provoke or excite

others to break it, is an offence of the same denomination. Therefore challenges to fight, either by word or letter, or to be the bearer of such challenge, are punishable by fine and imprisonment, according to the circumstances of the offenceq. If this

n Pott. Antiqu. b. 1. c. 26.

o 2 Inst. 226. 3 Inst. 198.

p “Habent legibus sanctum, si quis quid de republica a finitimis rumore aut fama acceperit, uti ad magistratum deferat,

neve cum alio communicet: quod saepe homines temerarios atque imperitos falsis rumoribus terreri, et ad facinus impelli, et de summis rebus consilium capere, cognitum est.” Caes. de bell. Gall. lib. 6. cap. 19. [‘They make it an inviolable rule, that if any one shall have received any intelligence in the neighbourhood concerning the republic by rumour or report, he shall make it known to a magistrate, and not communicate it to anyone else: for rash and ignorant men, it is well





chapter 11 99


challenge arises on account of any money won at gaming, or if any assault or affray 150

happen upon such account, the offender, by statute 9 Ann. c. 14. shall forfeit all his goods to the crown, and suffer two years imprisonment.

13. Of a nature very similar to challenges are libels, libelli famosi, which, taken in

their largest and most extensive sense, signify any writings, pictures, or the like, of an immoral or illegal tendency; but, in the sense under which we are now to consider them, are malicious defamations of any person, and especially a magistrate, made public by either printing, writing, signs, or pictures, in order to provoke him to wrath, or expose him to public hatred, contempt, and ridiculer. The direct tendency of these libels is the breach of the public peace, by stirring up the objects of them to revenge, and perhaps to bloodshed. The communication of a libel to any one person is a publication in the eye of the law.s: and therefore the sending an abusive private letter to a man is as much a libel as if it were openly printed, for it equally tends to a breach of the peacet. For the same reason it is immaterial with respect to the essence of a libel, whether the matter of it be true or falseu; since the provocation, and not the falsity, is the thing to be punished criminally: though, doubtless, the falshood of it may aggravate its guilt, and enhance its punishment. In a civil action, we may remember, a libel must appear to be false, as well as scandalousw; for, if the charge be true, the plaintiff has received no private injury, and has no ground to demand a compensation for himself, whatever offence it may be against the public peace: and therefore, upon a civil action, the truth of the accusation may be pleaded in bar of the suit. But, in a criminal prosecution, the tendency which all libels have to create animosities, and to disturb the public peace, is 〈10〉 the sole consideration of the law. And therefore, in such prosecutions, the only facts to be considered are, first, the 151 making or publishing of the book or writing; and secondly, whether the matter be criminal: and, if both these points are against the defendant, the offence against the public is complete. The punishment of such libellers, for either making, repeating, printing, or publishing the libel, is fine, and such corporal punishment as the court in 〈11〉 their discretion shall inflict; regarding the quantity of the offence, and the quality of the offenderx. By the law of the twelve tables at Rome, libels, which affected the reputation of another, were made a capital offence: but, before the reign of Augustus, the punishment became corporal only y. Under the emperor Valentinianz it was again made capital, not only to write, but to publish, or even to omit destroying them. Our law, in this and many other respects, corresponds rather with the middle age of Roman

r 1 Hawk. P. C. 193.

s [Lambe’s case] Moor. 813.

t [William Peacock v Sir George Reynal] 2 Brownl. 151. [Dr Edwards v Dr Wooton] 12 Rep. 35. [Hicks’s case] Hob. 215. [Hickes’s case) Poph. 139. 1 Hawk. P. C. 195.

u [Want’s case] Moor. 627. [de libellis famosis or of scandalous libels] 5 Rep. 125. [Anonymous, 1705] 11 Mod. 99.

w See Vol. III. pag. 125 [III. 85].

x 1 Hawk. P. C. 196.

y _____ Quinetiam lex

Poenaque lata, malo quae nollet carmine quenquam

Describi: _____ vertere modum formidine fustis … Hor. ad Aug. 152.

[Moreover the law and punishment are decreed whereby anyone is forbidden to write scurrilous verses, … they 100 of public wrongs

jurisprudence, when liberty, learning, and humanity, were in their full vigour, than with the cruel edicts that were established in the dark and tyrannical ages of the antient decemviri [commission of ten men], or the later emperors.

In this, and the other instances which we have lately considered, where blasphemous,

immoral, treasonable, schismatical, seditious, or scandalous libels are punished by the English law, some with a greater, others with a less degree of severity; the liberty of the press, properly understood, is by no means infringed or violated. The liberty of the press is indeed essential to the nature of a free state: but this consists in laying no previous restraints upon publications, and not in freedom from censure for criminal matter when published. Every freeman has an undoubted right to lay what sentiments

152 he pleases before the public: to forbid this, is to destroy the freedom of the press: but

if he publishes what is improper, mischievous, or illegal, he must take the consequence of his own temerity. To subject the press to the restrictive power of a licenser, as was formerly done, both before and since the revolutiona, is to subject all freedom of sentiment to the prejudices of one man, and make him the arbitrary and infallible judge of all controverted points in learning, religion, and government. But to punish (as the law does at present) any dangerous or offensive writings, which, when published, shall on a fair and impartial trial be adjudged of a pernicious tendency, is necessary for the preservation of peace and good order, of government and religion, the only solid foundations of civil liberty. Thus the will of individuals is still left free; the abuse only of that free will is the object of legal punishment. Neither is any restraint hereby laid upon freedom of thought or enquiry: liberty of private sentiment is still left; the disseminating, or making public, of bad sentiments, destructive of the ends of society, is the crime which society corrects. A man (says a fine writer on this subject) may be allowed to keep poisons in his closet, but not publicly to vend them as cordials.2 And to

153 this we may add, that the only plausible argument heretofore used for restraining the just

freedom of the press, “that it was necessary to prevent the daily abuse of it,” will entirely lose its force, when it is shewn (by a seasonable exertion of the laws) that the press cannot be abused to any bad purpose, without incurring a suitable punishment: whereas it never can be used to any good one, when under the control of an inspector. So true will it be found, that to censure the licentiousness, is to maintain the liberty, of the press.

a The art of printing, soon after its introduction, was looked upon (as well in England as in other countries) as

merely a matter of state, and subject to the coercion of the crown. It was therefore regulated with us by the king’s proclamations, prohibitions, charters of privilege and of licence, and finally by the decrees of the court of starchamber; which limited the number of printers, and of presses which each should employ, and prohibited new publications unless previously approved by proper licensers. On the demolition of this odious jurisdiction in 1641, the long parliament of Charles I, after their rupture with that prince, assumed the same powers as the starchamber exercised with respect to the licensing of books; and in 1643, 1647, 1649, and 1652, (Scobell. i. 44, 134. ii. 88, 230.) issued their ordinances for that purpose, founded principally on the starchamber decree of 1637. In 1662 was passed the statute 13 & 14 Car. II. c. 33. which (with some few alterations) was copied from the parliamentary ordinances. This act expired in 1679, but was revived by statute 1 Jac. II. c. 17. and continued till 1692. It was then continued for two years longer by statute 4 W. & M. c. 24. but, though frequent attempts were made by the government to revive it, in the subsequent part of that reign, (Com. Journ. 11 Feb. 1694. 26 Nov. 1695. 22 Oct. 1696. 9 Feb. 1697. 31 Jan. 1698.) yet the parliament resisted it so strongly, that it finally expired, and the press became properly free, in 1694; and has ever since so continued.





chapter the twelfth. 154




of offences against

public trade.

Offences against public trade, like those of the preceding classes, are either felonious, or not felonious. Of the first sort are,

1. Owling, so called from its being usually carried on in the night, which is the

offence of transporting wool or sheep out of this kingdom, to the detriment of its staple manufacture. This was forbidden at common lawa, and more particularly by statute 11 Edw. III. c. 1. when the importance of our woollen manufacture was first attended to; and there are now many later statutes relating to this offence, the most useful and principal of which are those enacted in the reign of queen Elizabeth, and since. The statute 8 Eliz. c. 3. makes the transportation of live sheep, or embarking them on board any ship, for the first offence forfeiture of goods, and imprisonment for a year, and that at the end of the year the left hand shall be cut off in some public market, and shall be there nailed up in the openest place; and the second offence is felony. The statutes 12 Car. II. c. 32. and 7 & 8 W. III. c. 28. make the exportation of wool, sheep, or fuller’s earth, liable to pecuniary penalties, and the forfeiture of the interest of the ship and cargo by the owners, if privy;1 and confiscation of goods, and 155 three years imprisonment to the master and all the mariners. And the statute 4 Geo. I. c. 11. (amended and farther enforced by 12 Geo. II. c. 21. and 19 Geo. II. c. 34. makes it transportation for seven years, if the penalties be not paid.

2. Smuggling, or the offence of importing goods without paying the duties

imposed thereon by the laws of the customs and excise, is an offence generally connected and carried on hand in hand with the former. This is restrained by a great variety of statutes, which inflict pecuniary penalties and seisure of the goods for clandestine smuggling; and affix the guilt of felony, with transportation for seven years, upon more open, daring, and avowed practices: but the last of them, 19 Geo. II. c. 34. is for this purpose instar omnium [a compendium of them all]; for it makes all forcible acts of smuggling, carried on in defiance of the laws, or even in disguise to evade them, felony without benefit of clergy: enacting, that if three or more persons shall assemble, with fire arms or other offensive weapons, to assist in the illegal exportation or importation of goods, or in rescuing the same after seisure, or in rescuing offenders in custody for such offences; or shall pass with such goods in disguise; or shall wound, shoot at, or assault any officers of the revenue when in the execution of their duty; such persons shall be felons, without the benefit of clergy. As to that branch of the statute, which required any person, charged upon oath as a

a Mirr. c. 1. §. 3.

1 i.e. if participating in the offence.

102 of public wrongs

smuggler, under pain of death, to surrender himself upon proclamation, it seems to be expired; as the subsequent statutesb, which continue the original act to the present time, do in terms continue only so much of the said act, as relates to the punishment of the offenders, and not to the extraordinary method of apprehending or causing them to surrender: and for offences of this positive species, where punishment (though necessary) is rendered so by the laws themselves, which by imposing high

156 duties on commodities increase the temptation to evade them, we cannot surely be

too cautious in inflicting 〈1〉 the penalty of deathc.

3. Another offence against public trade is fraudulent bankruptcy, which was

sufficiently spoken of 〈2〉 in a former volumed; when we thoroughly examined the nature of these unfortunate traders. I shall therefore here barely mention over again some abuses incident to bankruptcy, viz. the bankrupt’s neglect of surrendering himself to his creditors; his non-conformity to the directions of the several statutes; his concealing or imbezzling his effects to the value of 20l.; and his withholding any books or writings with intent to defraud his creditors: all which the policy of our commercial country has made capital in the 〈3〉 offender; or, felony without benefit of clergy. And indeed 〈4〉 it is allowed in general, by such as are the most averse to the infliction of capital punishment, that the offence of fraudulent bankruptcy, being an atrocious species of the crimen falsi [fraud or deceit], ought to be put upon a level with those of forgery and 〈5〉 falsifying the coine. To this head we may also subjoin, that by statute 32 Geo. II. c. 28. it is felony punishable by transportation for seven years, if a prisoner, charged in execution for any debt under 100l., neglects or refuses on demand to discover and deliver up his effects for the benefit of his creditors. And these are the only felonious offences against public trade; the residue being mere misdemesnors: as,

4. Usury, which is an unlawful contract upon the loan of money, to receive the

same again with exorbitant increase. Of this also we had occasion to discourse at large in a former volumef. We there observed that by statute 37 Hen. VIII. c. 9. the rate of interest was fixed at 10l. per cent. per annum: which the statute 13 Eliz. c. 8. confirms; and ordains, that all brokers shall be guilty of a praemunire that transact

157 any contracts for more, and the securities themselves shall be void. The statute 21 Jac.

I. c. 17. reduced interest to eight per cent; and, it having been lowered in 1650, during the usurpation,2 to six per cent, the same reduction was re-enacted after the restoration by statute 12 Car. II. c. 13. and, lastly, the statute 12 Ann. st. 2. c. 16. has reduced it to five per cent. Wherefore not only all contracts for taking more are in themselves totally void, but also the lender shall forfeit treble the money borrowed. Also if any scrivener or broker takes more than five shillings per cent. procuration-money,3 or more than twelve-pence for making a bond, he shall forfeit 20l. with costs, and shall suffer imprisonment for 〈6〉 half a year.

b Stat. 26 Geo. II. c. 32. 32 Geo. II. c. 18. 4 Geo. III. c. 12.

c See Vol. I. pag. 317 [I. 204]. Beccar. ch. 33.

d See Vol. II. pag. 481, 482 [II. 324–5].

e Beccar. ch. 34.

f See Vol. II. pag. 455 [II. 307–8], &c.





chapter 12 103


5. Cheating is another offence, more immediately against public trade; as that

cannot be carried on without a punctilious regard to common honesty, and faith between man and man. Hither therefore may be referred that prodigious multitude of statutes, which are made 〈7〉 to prevent deceits in particular trades, and which are chiefly of use among the traders themselves. For so cautious has the legislature been, and so thoroughly abhors all indirect practices, that there is hardly a considerable fraud incident to any branch of trade, but what is restrained and punished by some particular statute. The offence also of breaking the assise of bread, or the rules laid down by law, and particularly by 〈8〉 statute 〈9〉 31 Geo. II. c. 29. and 3 Geo. III. c. 11. for ascertaining its price in every given quantity, is reducible to this head of cheating: as is likewise in a peculiar manner the offence of selling by false weights and measures; the standard of which fell under our consideration in a former volumeg. The punishment of bakers breaking the assise, was antiently to stand in the pillory, by statute 51 Hen. III. st. 6. and for brewers (by the same act) to stand in the tumbrel or dungcarth: which, as we learn from domesday book, was the punishment for knavish brewers in the city of Chester so early as the reign of Edward the confessor. “Malam cervisiam faciens, in cathedra ponebatur stercoris4 [the makers of bad beer are put in the cucking stool]i.” But now the general punishment for all frauds of this kind, if 158 indicted (as they may be) at common law, is by fine and imprisonment: though the easier and more usual way is by levying on a summary conviction, by distress and sale, the forfeitures imposed by the several acts of parliament. Lastly, any deceitful practice, in cozening another by artful means, whether in matters of trade or otherwise, as by playing with false dice, or the like, is punishable with fine, imprisonment, and pillory k. And by the statutes 33 Hen. VIII. c. 1. and 30 Geo. II. c. 24. if any man defrauds another of any valuable chattels by colour of any false token, counterfeit letter, or false pretence, or pawns or disposes of another’s goods without the consent of the owner, he shall suffer such punishment by imprisonment, fine, pillory, transportation, whipping, or other corporal pain, as the court shall direct.

6. The offence of forestalling the market is also an offence against public trade.

This, which (as well as the two following) is also an offence 〈10〉 at common lawl, is described by statute 5 & 6 Edw. VI. c. 14. to be the buying or contracting for any merchandize or victual coming in the way to market; or dissuading persons from bringing their goods or provisions there; or persuading them to enhance the price, when there: any of which practices make the market dearer to the fair trader.

7. Regrating 〈11〉 is described by the same statute to be the buying of corn, or

other dead victual, in any market, and selling 〈12〉 them again in the same market, or within four miles of the place. For this also enhances the price of the provisions, as every successive seller must have a successive profit.

g See Vol. I. pag. 274 [I. 176–8].

h 3 Inst. 219.

i Seld. tit. of hon. b. 2. c. 5. §. 3.

k 1 Hawk. P. C. 188.

l 2 Hawk. P. C. 235.

104 of public wrongs

8. 〈13〉 Engrossing, by the same statute, is the getting into one’s possession, or

buying up, of corn or other dead victuals, with intent to sell them again. This must of course be injurious to the public, by putting it in the power of one or two rich men

159 to raise the price of provisions at their own discretion. 〈14〉 And the penalty for these

three offences by this statute (which is the last that hath been made concerning them) is the forfeiture of the goods or their value, and two months imprisonment for the first offence; double value and six months imprisonment for the second; and, for the third, the offender shall forfeit all his goods, be set in the pillory, and imprisoned at the king’s pleasure. Among the Romans these offences, and other male-practices to raise the price of provisions, were punished by a pecuniary mulct. “Poena viginti aureorum statuitur adversus eum, qui contra annonam fecerit, societatemve coierit quo annona carior fiat m .”5

9. Monopolies are much the same offence in other branches of trade, that engrossing

is in provisions: being a licence or privilege allowed by the king for the sole buying and selling, making, working, or using, of any thing whatsoever; whereby the subject in general is restrained from that liberty of manufacturing or trading which he had beforen. These had been carried to an enormous height during the reign of queen Elizabeth; and were heavily complained of by sir Edward Cokeo, in the beginning of the reign of king James the first: but were in great measure remedied by statute 21 Jac. I. c. 3. which declares such monopolies to be contrary to law and void; (except as to patents, not exceeding the grant of fourteen years, to the authors of new 〈15〉 inventions;) and monopolists are punished with the forfeiture of treble damages and double costs, to those whom they attempt to disturb; and if they procure any action, brought against them for these damages, to be stayed by any extrajudicial order, other than of the court wherein it is brought, they incur the penalties of praemunire. Combinations also among victuallers or artificers, to raise the price of provisions, or any commodities, or the rate of labour, are in many cases severely punished by particular statutes; and, in general, by statute 2 & 3 Edw. VI. c. 15. with the forfeiture

160 of 10l., or twenty days imprisonment, with an allowance of only bread and water, for

the first offence; 20l. or the pillory, for the second; and 40l. for the third, or else the pillory, loss of one ear, and perpetual infamy. In the same manner, by a constitution of the emperor Zenop, all monopolies and combinations to keep up the price of merchandize, provisions, or workmanship, were prohibited upon pain of forfeiture of goods and perpetual banishment.

10. To exercise a trade in any town, without having previously served as an

apprentice for seven yearsq, is looked upon to be detrimental to public trade, upon

m Ff. 48. 12. 2.

n 1 Hawk. P. C. 231.

o 3 Inst. 181.

p Cod. 4. 59. 1.

q See Vol. I. pag. 427 [I. 275].

5 ‘A penalty of twenty pieces of gold is inflicted on him who shall do any thing injurious to the market (for





chapter 12 105


the supposed want of sufficient skill in the trader; and therefore is punished by statute 5 Eliz. c. 4. with the forfeiture of forty shillings by the month.

11. Lastly, to prevent the destruction of our home manufactures, by transporting

and seducing our artists to settle abroad, it is provided by statute 5 Geo. I. c. 27. that such as so entice or seduce them shall be fined 100l., and be imprisoned three months; and for the second offence shall be fined at discretion, and be imprisoned a year: and the artificers, so going into foreign countries, and not returning within six months after warning given them by the British embassador where they reside, shall be deemed aliens, and forfeit all their lands and goods, and shall be incapable of any legacy or gift. By statute 23 Geo. II. c. 13. the seducers incur, for the first offence, a forfeiture of 500l. for each artificer contracted with to be sent abroad, and imprisonment for twelve months; and for the second, 1000l., and are liable to two years imprisonment: 〈16〉 and if any person exports any tools or utensils used in the silk or woollen manufactures, he forfeits the same and 200l., and the captain of the ship (having knowlege thereof) 100l.: and if any captain of a king’s ship, or officer of the customs, knowingly suffers such exportation, he forfeits 100l. and his employment; and is for ever made incapable of bearing 〈17〉 any public office.



161 chapter the thirteenth.



of offences against the

public health, and the

public police or oeconomy.

The fourth species of offences, more especially affecting the commonwealth, are such as are against the public health of the nation; a concern of the highest importance, and for the preservation of which there are in many countries special magistrates or curators appointed.

1. The first of these offences is a felony; but, by the blessing of providence for more

than a century past, incapable of being committed in this nation. For by statute 1 Jac. I. c. 31. it is enacted, that if any person infected with the plague, or dwelling in any infected house, be commanded by the mayor or constable, or other head officer of his town or vill, to keep his house, and shall venture to disobey it; he may be inforced, by the watchmen appointed on such melancholy occasions, to obey such necessary command: and, if any hurt ensue by such inforcement, the watchmen are thereby indemnified. And farther, if such person so commanded to confine himself goes abroad, and converses in company, if he has no plague sore upon him, he shall be punished as a vagabond by whipping, and be bound to his good behaviour: but, if he has any infectious sore upon him uncured, he then shall be guilty of felony. By the

162 statute 26 Geo. II. c. 6. (explained and amended by 29 Geo. II. c. 8) the method of

performing quarentine, or forty days probation, by ships coming from infected countries, is put in a much more regular and effectual order than formerly; and masters of ships, coming from infected places and disobeying the directions there given, or having the plague on board and concealing it, are guilty of felony without benefit of clergy. The same penalty also attends persons escaping from the lazarets, or places wherein quarentine is to be performed; and officers and watchmen neglecting their duty; and persons conveying goods or letters from ships performing quarentine.

2. A second, but much inferior, species of offence against public health is the

selling of unwholsome provisions. To prevent which the statute 51 Hen. III. st. 6. and the ordinance for bakers, c. 7. prohibit the sale of corrupted wine, contagious or unwholsome flesh, or flesh that is bought of a Jew; under pain of amercement for the first offence, pillory for the second, fine and imprisonment for the third, and abjuration of the town for the fourth. And by the statute 12 Car. II. c. 25. §. 11. any brewing or adulteration of wine is punished with the forfeiture of 100l., if done by the wholesale merchant; and 40l., if done by the vintner or retale trader. These are all the offences which may properly be said to respect the public health.

V. The last species of offences which especially affect the commonwealth are

those against the public police and oeconomy. By the public police and oeconomy I





chapter 13 107


mean the due regulation and domestic order of the kingdom: whereby the individuals of the state, like members of a well-governed family, are bound to conform their general behaviour to the rules of propriety, good neighbourhood, and good manners; and to be decent, industrious, and inoffensive in their respective stations. This head of offences must therefore be very miscellaneous, as it comprizes all such crimes as especially affect public society, and are not comprehended under any of the four preceding species. These amount, some of them to felony, and others to misdemesnors 163

only. Among the former are,

1. The offence of clandestine marriages: for by the statute 26 Geo. II. c. 33. 1. To

solemnize marriage in any other place besides a church, or public chapel wherein banns have been usually published, except by licence from 〈1〉 the archbishop;—and, 2. To solemnize marriage in such church or chapel without due publication of banns, or licence obtained from a proper authority;—do both of them not only render the marriage void, but subject the person solemnizing it to felony, punished by transportation for fourteen years: as, by three former statutesa, he and his assistants were subject to a pecuniary forfeiture of 100l. 3. To make a false entry in a marriage register; to alter it when made; to forge, or counterfeit, such entry, or a marriage 〈2〉 licence, or aid and abet such forgery; to utter the same as true, knowing it to be counterfeit; or to destroy or procure the destruction of any register, in order to vacate any marriage, or subject any person to the penalties of this act; all these offences, knowingly and wilfully committed, subject the party to the guilt of felony, without benefit of clergy.

2. Another felonious offence, with regard to this holy estate of matrimony, is 〈3〉

what our law corruptly calls bigamy; which properly signifies being twice married, but with us is used as synonymous to polygamy, or having a plurality of wives at onceb. Such second marriage, living the former husband or wife, is simply void, and a mere nullity, by the ecclesiastical law of England: and yet the legislature has thought it just to make it felony, by reason of its being so great a violation of the public oeconomy and decency of a well ordered state. For polygamy can never be endured under any rational civil establishment, whatever specious reasons may be urged for it by the eastern nations, the fallaciousness of which has been fully proved by many sensible writers: but in northern countries the very nature of the climate seems to 164 reclaim against it; it never having obtained in this part of the world, even from the time of our German ancestors; who, as Tacitus informs usc, “prope soli barbarorum singulis uxoribus contenti sunt [almost the only barbarians who are contented with one wife].” It is therefore punished by the laws both of antient and modern Sweden with deathd. And with us in England it is enacted by statute 1 Jac. I. c. 11. that if any person, being married, do afterwards marry again, the former husband or wife being alive, it is felony; but within the benefit of clergy. The first wife in this case shall not be admitted as 〈5〉 an evidence against her husband, because she is the true wife; but

a 6 & 7 W. III. c. 6. 7 & 8 W. III. c. 35. 10 Ann. c. 19. §. 176.

b 〈4〉 3 Inst. 88.

c de mor. Germ. 18.

108 of public wrongs

the second may, for she is indeed no wife at alle, and so, vice versa, of a second husband. This act makes an exception to five cases, in which such second marriage, though in the three first it is void, is yet no felony. 1. Where either party hath been continually abroad for seven years, whether the party in England hath notice of the other’s being living or no. 2. Where either of the parties hath been absent from the other seven years, within this kingdom, and the remaining party hath had no 〈6〉 notice of the other’s being alive within that time. 3. Where there is a divorce or separation 〈7〉 a mensa et thoro [from bed and board] by sentence in the ecclesiastical court. 4. Where the first marriage is declared absolutely void by any such sentence, and the parties loosed a vinculo [from the chains (of matrimony)]. Or, 5. Where either of the parties was under the age of consent at the time of the first marriage: for in such case the first marriage was voidable by the disagreement of either party, which 〈8〉 this second marriage very clearly amounts to. But, if at the age of consent the parties had agreed to the marriage, which completes the contract, and is indeed the real marriage; and afterwards one of them should marry again; I should apprehend that such second marriage would be within the reason and penalties of the act.

165 3. A third species of felony against the good order and oeconomy of the kingdom,

is by idle soldiers and mariners wandering about the realm, or persons pretending so to be, and abusing the name of that honourable professionf. Such a one, not having a testimonial or pass from a justice of the peace, limiting the time of his passage; or exceeding the time limited for fourteen days, unless he falls sick; or forging such testimonial; is by statute 39 Eliz. c. 17. made guilty of felony, without benefit of clergy. This sanguinary law, though in practice deservedly antiquated, still remains a disgrace to our statute-book: yet attended with this mitigation, that the offender may be delivered, if any honest freeholder or other person of substance will take him into his service, and he abides in the same for one year; unless licenced to depart by his employer, who in such case shall forfeit ten pounds.

4. Outlandish persons calling themselves Egyptians, or gypsies, are another

object of the severity of some of our unrepealed statutes. These are a strange kind of commonwealth among themselves of wandering impostors and jugglers, who made their first appearance in Germany about the beginning of the sixteenth century, and have since spread themselves all over Europe. 〈9〉 Munster, it is trueg, who is followed and relied upon by Spelmanh, fixes the time of their first appearance to the year 1417; but, as he owns, that the first whom he ever saw were in 1524, it is probably an error of the press for 1517: especially as other historiansj inform us, that when sultan Selim conquered Egypt, in the year 1517, several of the natives refused to submit to the Turkish yoke; but, being at length subdued and banished, they agreed to disperse in small parties all over the world, where their supposed skill in the black art gave them



e 1 Hal. P. C. 693.

f 3 Inst. 85.

g Cosmogr. l. 3.

h Gloss. 193.





chapter 13 109


an universal reception, in that age of superstition and credulity.1 In the compass of a very few years they gained such a number of idle proselytes, (who imitated their 166 language and complexion, and betook themselves to the same arts of chiromancy, begging, and pilfering) that they became troublesome and even formidable to most of the states of Europe. Hence they were expelled from France in the year 1560, and from Spain in 1591i. And the government in England took the alarm much earlier: for in 1530, they are described by statute 22 Hen. VIII. c. 10. as “outlandish people, calling themselves Egyptians, using no craft nor feat of merchandize, who have come into this realm and gone from shire to shire and place to place in great company, and used great, subtil, and crafty means to deceive the people; bearing them in hand, that they by palmestry could tell men’s and women’s fortunes; and so many times by craft and subtilty have deceived the people of their money, and also have committed many heinous felonies and robberies.” Wherefore they are directed to avoid the realm, and not to return under pain of imprisonment, and forfeiture of their goods and chattels; and, upon their trials for any felony which they may have committed, they shall not be intitled to a jury de medietate linguae [half foreigners]. And afterwards, it is enacted by statutes 1 & 2 Ph. & M. c. 4. and 5 Eliz. c. 20. that if any such persons shall be imported into this kingdom, the importer shall forfeit 40l. And if the Egyptians themselves remain one month in this kingdom; or if any person, being fourteen years old, (whether natural born subject or stranger) which hath been seen or found in the fellowship of such Egyptians, or which hath disguised him or herself like them, shall remain in the same one month, at one or several times; it is felony without benefit of clergy: and sir Matthew Hale informs usk, that at one Suffolk assises no less than thirteen gypsies were executed upon these statutes, a few years before the restoration. But, to the honour of our national humanity, there are no instances more modern than this, of carrying these laws into practice.2

5. To descend next to offences, whose punishment is short of death. Common 167

nusances are a species of offences against the public order and oeconomical regimen of the state; being either the doing of a thing to the annoyance of all the king’s subjects, or the neglecting to do a thing which the common good requiresl. The nature of common nusances, and their distinction from private nusances, were explained in the preceding volumem, when we considered more particularly the nature of the private sort, as a civil injury to individuals. I shall here only remind the student, that common nusances are such inconvenient or troublesome offences, as annoy the whole community in general, and not merely some particular person; and therefore are indictable only, and not actionable; as it would be unreasonable to multiply suits, by

i Dufresne. Gloss. I. 200.

k 1 Hal. P. C. 671.

l 1 Hawk. P. C. 197.

m Vol. III. pag. 216 [III. 144].

1 Egypt was the largest and most significant conquest of Selim I, who ruled the Ottoman Empire from 1512. Modern accounts of the origins of the Romani, often dubbed gypsies, trace their origins to the Indian sub-continent.

110 of public wrongs

giving every man a separate right of action, for what damnifies him in common only with the rest of his fellow subjects. Of this nature are, 1. Annoyances in highways, bridges, and public rivers, by rendering the same inconvenient or dangerous to pass: either positively, by actual obstructions; or negatively, by want of reparations. For both of these, the 〈10〉 persons so obstructing, or such individuals as are bound to repair and cleanse them, or (in default of these last) the parish at large, may be indicted, distreined to repair and amend them, and 〈11〉 in some cases fined. Where there is an house erected, or an inclosure made, upon any part of the king’s demesnes, or of an highway, or common street, or public water, or such like public things, it is properly called a purpresture n. 2. All those kinds of nusances, (such as offensive trades and manufactures) which when injurious to a private man are actionable, are, when detrimental to the public, punishable by public prosecution, and subject to fine according to the quantity of the misdemesnor: and particularly the keeping of hogs

168 in any city or market town is indictable as a public nusanceo. 3. All disorderly inns or

ale-houses, bawdy-houses, gaming-houses, stage-plays unlicenced, booths and stages for rope-dancers, mountebanks, and the like, are public nusances, and may upon indictment be suppressed and finedp. Inns, in particular, being intended for the lodging and receipt of travellers, may be indicted, suppressed, and the inn-keepers fined, if they refuse to entertain a traveller without a very sufficient cause: for thus to frustrate the end of their institution is held to be disorderly behaviour q. Thus too the hospitable laws of Norway punish, in the severest degree, such inn-keepers as refuse to furnish accommodations at a just and reasonable pricer. 4. By statute 10 & 11 W. III. c. 17. all lotteries are declared to be public nusances, and all grants, patents, or licences for the same to be 〈12〉 contrary to law.3 5. Cottages are held to be common nusances, if erected singly on the waste, being harbours for thieves and other idle and dissolute persons. Therefore it is enacted by statute 31 Eliz. c. 7. that no person shall erect a cottage, unless he lays to it four acres of freehold land of inheritance to be occupied therewith, on pain to forfeit to the king 10l. for its erection, and 40s. per month for its continuance: and no owner or occupier of a cottage shall suffer any inmates therein, or more families than one to inhabit there, on pain to forfeit 10s. per month to the lord of the leet. This seems, upon our present more enlarged notions, a hard and impolitic law; depriving the people of houses to dwell in, and consequently preventing the populousness of towns and parishes: which, though it is generally endeavoured to be guarded against, through a fatal rural policy, (being sometimes, when the poor are ill-managed, an intolerable hardship) yet, taken in a national view, and on a supposition of proper industry and good parochial government, is a very great advantage to any kingdom. But indeed this, like most other rigid or inconvenient

n Co. Litt. 277. from the French pourpris, an inclosure.

o [R. v Wigg ] [2] Salk. 460.

p 1 Hawk. P. C. 198. 225.

q 1 Hawk. P. C. 225.

r Stiernh. de jure Sueon. l. 2. c. 9.

3 While private lotteries were illegal, from the Million Lottery of 1694 onwards the government’s own lottery





chapter 13 111


laws, is rarely put in execution. 6. The making and selling of fireworks and squibs, or throwing them about in any street, is, on account of the danger that may ensue to any 169

thatched or timber buildings, declared to be a common nusance, by statute 9 & 10 W. III. c. 7. and therefore is 〈13〉 punishable by fine. 7. Eaves-droppers, or such as listen under walls or windows, or the eaves of a house, to hearken after discourse, and thereupon to frame slanderous and mischievous tales, are a common nusance and presentable at the court-leet s: or are indictable at the sessions, and punishable by fine and finding sureties for 〈14〉 the good behaviourt. 8. Lastly, a common scold, communis rixatrix, (for our law-latin confines it to the feminine gender) is a public nusance to her neighbourhood. For which offence she may be indictedu, and, if convicted, shallw be sentenced to be placed in a certain engine of correction called the trebucket, castigatory, or cucking stool, which in the Saxon language 〈15〉 signifies the scolding stool; though now it is frequently corrupted into ducking stool, because the residue of the judgment is, that, when she is so placed therein, she shall be plunged in the water for her punishment x.

6. Idleness in any person whatsoever is also a high offence against the public

oeconomy. In China it is a maxim, that if there be a man who does not work, or a woman that is idle, in the empire, somebody must suffer cold or hunger: the produce of the lands not being more than sufficient, with culture, to maintain the inhabitants; and therefore, though the idle person may shift off the want from himself, yet it must in the end fall somewhere. The court also of Areopagus4 at Athens punished idleness, and exerted a right of examining every citizen in what manner he spent his time; the intention of which wasy, that the Athenians, knowing they were to give an account of their occupations, should follow only such as were laudable, and that there might be no room left for such as lived by unlawful arts. The civil law expelled all sturdy vagrants from the city z: and, in our own law, all idle persons or vagabonds, whom 170 our antient statutes describe to be “such as wake on the night, and sleep on the day, and haunt customable taverns, and ale-houses, and routs about; and no man wot from whence they come, ne whither they go;” or such as are 〈16〉 most particularly described by statute 17 Geo. II. c. 5. and divided into three classes, idle and dis-orderly persons, rogues and vagabonds, and incorrigible rogues;—all these are offenders against the good order, and blemishes in the government, of any kingdom. They are therefore all punished, by the statute last-mentioned; that is to say, idle and disorderly persons with one month’s imprisonment in the house of correction; rogues and vagabonds with whipping and imprisonment not exceeding six months; and incorrigible

s Kitch. of courts. 20.

t Ibid. 1 Hawk. P. C. 132.

u [R. v Foxby] 6 Mod. 213.

w 1 Hawk. P. C. 198. 200.

x 3 Inst. 219.

y Valer. Maxim. l. 2. c. 6.

z Nov. 80. c. 5.

4 A rocky hill north-west of the Acropolis, the site of the high court of appeal for criminal and civil cases in 112 of public wrongs

rogues with the like discipline and confinement, not exceeding two years: the breach and escape from which confinement in one of an inferior class, ranks him among incorrigible rogues; and in a rogue (before incorrigible) makes him a felon, and liable to be transported for seven years. Persons harbouring vagrants are liable to a fine of forty shillings, and to pay all expenses brought upon the parish thereby; in the same manner as, by our antient laws, whoever harboured any stranger for more than two nights, was answerable to the public for any offence that such his inmate might commita.

7. Under the head of public oeconomy may also be properly ranked all sumptuary

laws against luxury, and extravagant expenses in dress, diet, and the like; concerning the general utility of which to a state, there is much controversy among the political writers. Baron Montesquieu lays it downb, that luxury is necessary in monarchies, as in France; but ruinous to democracies, as in Holland. With regard therefore to England, whose government is compounded of both species, it may still be a dubious question, how far private luxury is a public evil; and, as such, cognizable by public

171 laws. And indeed our legislators have several times changed their sentiments as to

this point: for formerly there were a multitude of penal laws existing, to restrain excess in apparelc, chiefly made in the reigns of Edward the third, Edward the fourth, and Henry the eighth, against piked shoes, short doublets, and long coats; all of which were repealed by statute 1 Jac. I. c. 25. But, as to excess in diet, there still remains one antient statute unrepealed, 10 Edw. III. st. 3. which ordains that no man shall be served, at dinner or supper, with more than two courses; except upon some great holydays there specified, in which he may be served with three.

8. Next to that of luxury, naturally follows the offence of gaming, which is

generally introduced to supply or retrieve the expenses occasioned by the former: it being a kind of tacit confession, that the company engaged therein do, in general, exceed the bounds of their respective fortunes; and therefore they cast lots to determine upon whom the ruin shall at present fall, that the rest may be saved a little longer. But, taken in any light, it is an offence of the most alarming nature; tending by necessary consequence to promote public idleness, theft, and debauchery among those of a lower class: and, among persons of a superior rank, it hath frequently been attended with the sudden ruin and desolation of antient and opulent families, an abandoned prostitution of every principle of honour and virtue, and too often hath ended in self-murder. To restrain this pernicious vice, among the inferior sort of people, the statute 33 Hen. VIII. c. 9. was made; which prohibits to all but gentlemen the games of tennis, tables, cards, dice, bowls, and other unlawful diversions there specifiedd, unless in the time of christmas, under pecuniary pains and imprisonment.5

a LL. Edw. c. 27. Bracton. l. 3. tr. 2. c. 10. §. 2.

b Sp. L. b. 7. c. 2 & 4.

c 3 Inst. 199.

d Logetting in the fields, slide-thrift or shove-groat, cloysh-cayls, half-bowl, and coyting.

5 Logetting or loggats was a kind of skittles; slide-thrift or shove-groat appears to have been an early form of

shove ha’penny; cloysh-cayls and half bowl were bowling games, whilst coyting was the game now known as





chapter 13 113


And the same law, and also the statute 30 Geo. II. c. 24. inflict pecuniary penalties, as well upon the master of any public house wherein servants are permitted to game, as upon the servants themselves who are found to be gaming there. But this is not the principal ground of modern complaint: it is the gaming in high life, that demands 172 the attention of the magistrate; a passion to which every valuable consideration is made a sacrifice, and which we seem to have inherited from our ancestors the antient Germans; whom Tacituse describes to have been bewitched with the spirit of play to a most exorbitant degree. “They addict themselves, says he, to dice, (which is wonderful) when sober, and as a serious employment; with such a mad desire of winning or losing, that, when stript of every thing else, they will stake at last their liberty, and their very selves. The loser goes into a voluntary slavery, and, though younger and stronger than his antagonist, suffers himself to be bound and sold. And this perseverance in so bad a cause they call the point of honour: ea est in re prava pervicacia, ipsi fidem vocant [That which is obstinacy in a depraved matter, they call honour].” One would almost be tempted to think Tacitus was describing a modern Englishman. When men are thus intoxicated with so frantic a spirit, laws will be of little avail: because the same false sense of honour, that prompts a man to sacrifice himself, will deter him from appealing to the magistrate. Yet it is proper that laws should be, and be known publicly, that gentlemen may 〈17〉 learn what penalties they wilfully incur, and what a confidence they repose in sharpers; who, if successful in play, are certain to be paid with honour, or, if unsuccessful, have it in their power to be still greater gainers by informing. For by statute 16 Car. II. c. 7. if any person by playing or betting shall lose more than 100l. at one time, he shall not be compellable to pay the same; and the winner shall forfeit treble the value, one moiety to the king, the other to the informer. The statute 9 Ann. c. 14. enacts, that all bonds and other securities, given for money won at play, or money lent at the time to play withal, shall be utterly void: that all mortgages and incumbrances of lands, made upon the same consideration, shall be and enure to the use of the heir of the 〈18〉 mortgagor: that, if any person at one time loses 10l. at play, he may sue the winner, and recover it back by action of debt at law; and, in case the loser does not, any other person may sue the winner for treble the sum so lost; and the 〈19〉 plaintiff in either case may examine the 173

defendant himself upon oath: and that in any of these suits no privilege of parliament shall be allowed. The statute farther enacts, that if any 〈20〉 person cheats at play, and at one time wins more than 10l. or any valuable thing, he may be indicted thereupon, and shall forfeit five times the value, shall be deemed infamous, and suffer such corporal punishment as in case of wilful perjury. By several statutes of the reign of king George IIf, all private lotteries by tickets, cards, or dice, (and particularly the games of faro, basset, ace of hearts, hazard, passage, rolly polly,6 and all other games with dice, except 〈21〉 bag-gammon) are prohibited under a penalty of 200l. for him

e de mor. Germ. c. 24.

f 12 Geo. II. c. 28. 13 Geo. II. c. 19. 18 Geo. II. c. 34.

6 Faro, basset, ace of hearts, and hazard were card games; passage and rolly polly (or roulette) were played with 114 of public wrongs

that shall erect such lotteries, and 50l. a time for the players. Public lotteries, unless by authority of parliament, and all manner of ingenious devices, under the denomi-nation of sales or otherwise, which in the end are equivalent to lotteries, were before prohibited by a great variety of statutesg under heavy pecuniary penalties. But particular descriptions will ever be lame and deficient, unless all games of mere chance are at once prohibited; the inventions of sharpers being swifter than the punishment of the law, which only hunts them from one device to another. The statute 13 Geo. II. c. 19. to prevent the multiplicity of horse races, another fund of gaming, directs that no plates or matches under 50l. value shall be run, upon penalty of 200l. to be paid by the owner of each horse running, and 100l. by such as advertise the plate. By statute 18 Geo. II. c. 34. the statute 9 Ann. is farther enforced, and some deficiences supplied: the forfeitures of that act may now be recovered in a court of equity; and, moreover, if any man be convicted upon information or indictment of winning or 〈22〉 losing at any sitting 10l., or 20l. within twenty four hours, he shall forfeit five times the sum. Thus careful has the legislature been to prevent this

174 destructive vice: which may shew that our laws against gaming are not so deficient,

as ourselves and our magistrates in putting those laws in execution.

9. Lastly, there is 〈23〉 another offence, so constituted by a variety of acts of

parliament, which are so numerous and so confused, and the crime itself of so questionable a nature, that I shall not detain the reader with many observations thereupon. And yet it is an offence which the sportsmen of England seem to think of the highest importance; and a matter, perhaps the only one, of general and national concern: associations having been formed all over the kingdom to prevent its destructive progress. I mean the offence of destroying such beasts and fowls, as are ranked under the denomination of game: which, we may remember, was formerly observedh, (upon the old principles of the forest law) to be a trespass and offence in all persons alike, who have not authority from the crown to kill game (which is royal property) by the grant of either a free warren, or at least a manor of their own. But the laws, called the game laws, have also inflicted additional punishments (chiefly pecuniary) on persons guilty of this general offence, unless they be people of such rank or fortune as is therein particularly specified. All persons therefore, of what property or distinction soever, that kill game out of their own territories, or even upon their own estates, without the king’s licence expressed by the grant of a franchise, are guilty of the first original offence, of encroaching on the royal prerogative. And those indigent persons who do so, without having such rank or fortune as is generally called a qualification, are guilty not only of the original offence, but of the aggravations also, created by the statutes for preserving the game: which aggravations are so severely punished, and those punishments so implacably inflicted, that the offence against the king is seldom thought of, provided the miserable delinquent can make his peace with the lord of the manor. This offence, thus aggravated, I have ranked

g 10 & 11 W. III. c. 17. 9 Ann. c. 6. §56. 10 Ann. c. 26. §109. 8 Geo. I. c. 2. §36, 37. 9 Geo. I. c. 19. §. 4, 5. 6 Geo. II.

c. 35. § 29, 30.

h See Vol. II. pag. 417 [II. 283], &c.





chapter 13 115


under the present head, because the only rational footing, upon which we can consider it as a crime, is that in low and indigent persons it promotes idleness, and takes them 175

away from their proper employments and callings; which is an offence against the public police and oeconomy of the commonwealth.

The statutes for preserving the game are many and various, and not a little obscure

and intricate; it being remarkedi, that in one statute only, 5 Ann. c. 14. there is false grammar in no fewer than six places, besides other mistakes: the occasion of which, or what denomination of persons were probably the penners of these statutes, I shall not at present enquire. It is in general sufficient to observe, that the qualifications for killing game, as they are usually called, or more properly the exemptions from the penalties inflicted by the statute law, are, 1. The having a freehold estate of 100l. per annum; there being fifty times the property required to enable a man to kill a partridge, as to vote for a knight of the shire: 2. A leasehold for ninety nine years of 150l. per annum: 3. Being the son and heir apparent of an esquire (a very loose and vague description) or person of superior degree: 4. Being the owner, or keeper, of a forest, park, chase, or warren. For unqualified persons transgressing these laws, by killing game, keeping engines for that purpose, or even having game in their custody, or for persons (however qualified) that kill game, or have it in possession, 〈24〉 at unseasonable times of the year, there are various penalties assigned, corporal and pecuniary, by different statutesk; on any of which, but only on one at a time, the justices may convict in a summary way, or prosecutions may be carried on at the assises. And, lastly, by statute 28 Geo. II. c. 12. no person, however qualified to kill, may make merchandize of this valuable privilege, by selling or exposing to sale any game, on pain of like forfeiture as if he had no qualification.

i Burn’s Justice, tit. Game. §. 3.

k Burn’s Justice, tit. Game.



176 chapter the fourteenth.



of homicide.

In the ten preceding chapters we have considered, first, such crimes and misdemes­ nors as are more immediately injurious to God and his holy religion; secondly, such as violate or transgress the law of nations; thirdly, such as more especially affect the king, the father and representative of his people; fourthly, such as more directly infringe the rights of the public or commonwealth, taken in its collective capacity; and are now, lastly, to take into consideration those which in a more peculiar manner affect and injure individuals or private subjects.

Were these injuries indeed confined to individuals only, and did they affect none

but their immediate objects, they would fall absolutely under the notion of private wrongs; for which a satisfaction would be due only to the party injured: the manner of obtaining which was the subject of our enquiries in the preceding volume. But the wrongs, which we are now to treat of, are of a much more extensive consequence; 1. Because it is impossible they can be committed without a violation of the laws of nature; of the moral as well as political rules of right: 2. Because they include in them almost always a breach of the public peace: 3. Because by their example and evil

177 tendency they threaten and endanger the subversion of all civil society. Upon these

accounts it is, that, besides the private satisfaction due and given in many cases to the individual, by action for the private wrong, the government also calls upon the offender to submit to public punishment for the public crime. And the prosecution of these offences is always at the suit and in the name of the king, in whom by the texture of our constitution the jus gladii [the right of the sword], or executory power of the law, entirely resides. Thus too, in the old Gothic constitution, there was a threefold punishment inflicted on all delinquents: first, for the private wrong to the party injured; secondly, for the offence against the king by disobedience to the laws; and thirdly, for the crime against the public by their evil examplea. Of which we may trace the groundwork, in what Tacitus tells us of his Germansb, that, whenever offenders were fined, “pars mulctae regi, vel civitati, pars ipsi qui vindicatur vel propinquis ejus, exsolvitur [one part of the fine is paid to the king or the city, the other part to the prosecutor or his relations].”

These crimes and misdemesnors against private subjects are principally of three

kinds; against their persons, their habitations, and their property.

Of crimes injurious to the persons of private subjects, the most principal and

important is the offence of taking away that life, which is the immediate gift of the great creator; 〈1〉 and which therefore no man can be entitled to deprive himself or another of, but in some manner either expressly commanded in, or evidently

a Stiernhook. l. 1. c. 5.

b de mor. Germ. c. 12.





chapter 14 117


deducible from, those laws which the creator has given us; the divine laws, I mean, of either nature or revelation. The subject therefore of the present chapter will be, the offence of homicide or destroying the life of man, in its several stages of guilt, arising from the particular circumstances of mitigation or aggravation which attend it.

Now homicide, or the killing of any human creature, is of three kinds; justifiable,

excusable, and felonious. The first has no share of guilt at all; the second very little; but the third is the highest crime against the law of nature, that man is capable of 178 committing.

I. Justifiable homicide is of divers kinds.

1. Such as is owing to some unavoidable necessity, without any will, intention, or

desire, and without any inadvertence or negligence, in the party killing, and therefore without any shadow of blame. As, for instance, by virtue of such an office as 〈2〉 obliges one, in the execution of public justice, to put a malefactor to death, who hath forfeited his life by the laws and verdict of his country. This is an act of necessity, and even of civil duty; and therefore not only justifiable, but commendable, where the law requires it. But the law must require it, otherwise it is not justifiable: therefore wantonly to kill the greatest of malefactors, a felon or a traitor, attainted or outlawed, deliberately, uncompelled, and extrajudicially, is murderc. For as Bractond very justly observes, “istud homicidium si fit ex livore, vel delectatione effundendi humanum sanguinem, licet juste occidatur iste, tamen occisor peccat mortaliter, propter inten­ tionem corruptam.”1And farther, if judgment of death be given by a judge not authorized by lawful commission, and execution is done accordingly, the judge is guilty of murder e. And upon this account sir Matthew Hale himself, though he accepted the place of a judge of the common pleas under Cromwell’s government (since it is necessary to decide the disputes of civil property in the worst of times) yet declined to sit on the crown side at the assises, and try prisoners; having very strong objections to the legality of the usurper’s commissionf: a distinction perhaps rather too refined; since the punishment of crimes is at least as necessary to society, as maintaining the boundaries of property. Also such judgment, when legal, must be executed by the proper officer, or his appointed deputy; for no one else is required by law to do it, which requisition it is, that justifies the homicide. If another person doth 179

it of his own head, it is held to be murder g: even though it be the judge himself h. It must farther be executed, servato juris ordine [according to legal procedure]; it must pursue the sentence of the court. If an officer beheads one who is adjudged to be hanged, or vice versa, it is murderi: for he is merely ministerial, and therefore only

c 1 Hal. P. C. 497.

d fol. 120.

e 1 Hawk. P. C. 70. 1 Hal. P. C. 497.

f Burnet in his life.

g 1 Hal. P. C. 501. 1 Hawk. P. C. 70.

h Dalt. Just. c. 150.

i Finch. L. 31. 3 Inst. 52. 1 Hal. P. C. 501.

1 ‘Although the victim deserved to be killed, if the homicide be committed through malice or a thirst for human 118 of public wrongs

justified when he acts under the authority and compulsion of the law; but, if a sheriff changes one kind of death for another, he then acts by his own authority, which extends not to the commission of homicide: and, besides, this licence might occasion a very gross abuse of his power. The king indeed may remit part of a sentence; as, in the case of treason, all but the beheading: but this is no change, no introduction of a new punishment; and in the case of felony, where the judgment is to be hanged, the king (it hath been said)2 cannot legally order even a peer to be beheadedk. But this doctrine will be more fully considered in a subsequent chapter.

Again: in some cases homicide is justifiable, rather by the permission, than by the

absolute command of the law: either for the advancement of public justice, which without such indemnification would never be carried on with proper vigour; or, in such instances where it is committed for the prevention of some atrocious crime, which cannot otherwise be avoided.

2. Homicides, committed for the advancement of public justice, are; 1. Where an

officer, in the execution of his office, either in a civil or criminal case, kills a person that assaults and resists himl. 2. If an officer, or any private person, attempts to take a man charged with felony, and is resisted; and, in the endeavour to take him, kills himm. 〈3〉 This is of a piece with the old Gothic constitutions, which (Stiernhook informs us)n “furem, si aliter capi non posset, occidere permittunt [it is allowable to kill

180 a thief if he cannot otherwise be taken].” 3. In case of a riot, or rebellious assembly,

the officers endeavouring to disperse the mob are justifiable in killing them, both at common law o, and by the riot act, 1 Geo. I. c. 5. 4. Where the prisoners in a gaol, or going to gaol, assault the gaoler or officer, and he in his defence kills any of them, it is justifiable, for the sake of preventing an escapep. 5. If trespassers in forests, parks, chases, or warrens, will not surrender themselves to the keepers, they may be slain; by virtue of the statute 21 Edw. I. st. 2. de malefactoribus in parcis [of wrongdoers in parks], and 3 & 4 W. & M. c. 10. But, in all these cases, there must be an apparent necessity on the officer’s side; viz. that the party could not be arrested or apprehended, the riot could not be suppressed, the prisoners could not be kept in hold, the deer­ stealers could not but escape, unless such homicide were committed: otherwise, without such absolute necessity, it is not justifiable. 6. If the champions in a trial by battel killed either of them the other, such homicide was justifiable, and was imputed to the just judgment of God, who was thereby presumed to have decided in favour of the truthq.



k 3 Inst. 52. 212.

l 1 Hal. P. C. 494. 1 Hawk. P. C. 71.

m 1 Hal. P. C. 494.

n de jure Goth. l. 3. c. 5.

o 1 Hal. P. C. 495. 1 Hawk. P. C. 161.

p 1 Hal. P. C. 496.

q 1 Hawk. P. C. 71.

2 Blackstone here refers to the execution of Laurence Shirley, 4th earl Ferrers. Although noblemen were





chapter 14 119


3. In the next place, such homicide, as is committed for the prevention of any

forcible and atrocious crime, is justifiable by the law of naturer; and also by the law of England, as it stood so early as the time of Bractons, and as it is since declared by statute 24 Hen. VIII. c. 5. If any person attempts a robbery or murder of another, or attempts to break open a house in the night time, (which extends also to an attempt to burn it,)t and shall be killed in such attempt, the slayer shall be acquitted and discharged. This reaches not to any crime unaccompanied with force, as picking of pockets; or to the breaking open of any house in the day time, unless it carries with it an attempt of robbery also. So the Jewish law, which punished no theft with death, makes homicide only justifiable, in case of nocturnal house­breaking: “if a thief be found breaking up, and he be smitten that he die, no blood shall be shed for him: but if the sun be risen 181 upon him, there shall blood be shed for him; for he should have made full restitutionu.” At Athens, if any theft was committed by night, it was lawful to kill the criminal, if taken in the factw: and, by the Roman law of the twelve tables, a thief might be slain by night with impunity; or even by day, if he armed himself with any dangerous weaponx: which amounts very nearly to the same as is permitted by our own constitutions.

The Roman law also justifies homicide, when committed in defence of the chastity

either of oneself or relationsy: and so also, according to Seldenz, stood the law in the Jewish republic. The English law likewise justifies a woman, killing one who attempts to ravish her a: and so too the husband or father may justify killing a man, who attempts a rape upon his wife or daughter; but not if he takes them in adultery by consent, for the one is forcible and felonious, but not the otherb. And I make no doubt but the forcibly attempting a crime, of a still more detestable nature, may be equally resisted by the death of the unnatural aggressor.3 For the one uniform principle that runs through our own, and all other laws, seems to be this: that where a crime, in itself capital, is endeavoured to be committed by force, it is lawful to repel that force by the death of the party attempting. But we must not carry this doctrine to the same visionary length that Mr Locke does; who holdsc, “that all manner of force without right upon a man’s person, puts him in a state of war with the aggressor; and, of consequence, that, being in such a state of war, he may lawfully kill him that puts him under this unnatural restraint.”4 However just this conclusion may be in a state of

r Puff. L. of N. l. 2. c. 5.

s fol. 155.

t 1 Hal. P. C. 488.

u Exod. xxii. 2.

w Potter. Antiqu. b. 1. c. 24.

x Cic. pro Milone. 3. Ff. 9. 2. 4.

y “Divus Hadrianus rescripsit, eum qui stuprum sibi vel suis inferentem occidit, dimittendum.” [The divine Hadrian wrote that one who killed a person attempting to violate the chastity of himself or any of his family is to be released.] (Ff. 48. 8. 1.)

z de legib. Hebræor. l. 4. c. 3.

a Bac. Elem. 34. 1 Hawk. P. C. 71.

b 1 Hal. P. C. 485, 486.

c Ess. on gov. p. 2. c. 3.

3 An oblique reference to a homosexual assault.

4 Although Blackstone flags this as a quotation, it is actually a paraphrase of statements by Locke in ch. 3 of his Essay on Civil Government. The citation appears to have been altered to ch. 5 in the seventh edition, but the typeface 120 of public wrongs

182 uncivilized nature, yet the law of England, like that of every other well­regulated

community, is too tender of the public peace, too careful of the lives of the subjects, to adopt so contentious a system; nor will suffer with impunity any crime to be prevented by death, unless the same, if committed, would also be punished by death.

In these instances of justifiable homicide, 〈4〉 you will observe that the slayer is in

no kind of fault whatsoever, not even in the minutest degree; and is therefore to be totally acquitted and discharged, with commendation rather than blame. But that is not quite the case in excusable homicide, the very name whereof imports some fault, some error, or omission; so trivial however, that the law excuses it from the guilt of felony, though in strictness it judges it deserving of some little degree of punishment.

II. Excusable homicide is of two sorts; either per infortunium, by misadventure;

or se defendendo, upon a principle of self­preservation. We will first see wherein these two species of homicide are distinct, and then wherein they agree.

1. Homicide per infortunium, or misadventure, is where a man, doing a lawful act,

without any intention of hurt, unfortunately kills another: as where a man is at work with a hatchet, and the head thereof flies off and kills a stander by; or, where a person, qualified to keep a gun, is shooting at a mark, and undesignedly kills a mand: for the act is lawful, and the effect is merely accidental. So where a parent is moderately correcting his child, a master his 〈5〉 servant or scholar, or an officer punishing a criminal, and happens to occasion his death, it is only misadventure; for the act of correction was lawful: but if he exceeds the bounds of moderation, either in the manner, the instrument, or the quantity of punishment, and death ensues, it is manslaughter at least, and in some cases (according to the circumstances) murdere;

183 for the act of immoderate correction is unlawful. Thus by an edict of the emperor

Constantinef, when the rigor of the Roman law with regard to slaves began to relax and soften, a master was allowed to chastise his slave with rods and imprisonment, and, if death accidentally ensued, he was guilty of no crime: but if he struck him with a club or a stone, and thereby occasioned his death; or if in any other yet grosser manner “immoderate suo jure utatur, tunc reus homicidii sit [if he use his right beyond the bounds of moderation, then he is guilty of homicide].”

But, to proceed. A tilt or tournament, the martial diversion of our ancestors, was

however an unlawful act; and so are boxing and swordplaying, the succeeding amusement of their posterity: and therefore if a knight in the former case, or a gladiator in the latter, be killed, such killing is felony of manslaughter. But, if the king command or permit such diversion, it is said to be only misadventure; for then the act is lawfulg. In like manner as, by the laws both of Athens and Rome, he who killed another in the pancratium, or public games, authorized or permitted by the state, was not held to be guilty of homicideh. Likewise to whip another’s horse, whereby he runs



d 1 Hawk. P. C. 73, 74.

e 1 Hal. P. C. 473, 474.

f Cod. l. 9. t. 14

g 1 Hal. P. C. 473. 1 Hawk. P. C. 74.





chapter 14 121


over a child and kills him, is held to be accidental in the rider, for he has done nothing unlawful; but manslaughter in the person who whipped him, for the act was a trespass, and at best a piece of idleness, of inevitably dangerous consequencei. And in general, if death ensues in consequence 〈6〉 of any idle, dangerous, and unlawful sport, as shooting or casting stones in a town, or the barbarous diversion of cock­ throwing,5 in these and similar cases, the slayer is guilty of manslaughter, and not misadventure only, for these are unlawful actsk.

2. Homicide in self­defence, or se defendendo, upon a sudden affray, is also

excusable rather than justifiable, by the English law. This species of self­defence must be distinguished from that just now mentioned, as calculated to hinder the perpetration of a capital crime; which is not only a matter of excuse, but of justification. 184

But the self­defence, which we are now speaking of, is that whereby a man may protect himself from an assault, or the like, in the course of a sudden brawl or quarrel, by killing him who assaults him. And this is what the law expresses by the word chance­medley, or (as some rather chuse to write it) chaud­medley: the former of which in its etymology signifies a casual affray, the latter an affray in the heat of blood or passion: both of them of pretty much the same import; but the former is in common speech too often erroneously applied to any manner of homicide by misadventure; whereas it appears by the statute 24 Hen. VIII. c. 5. and our antient booksl, that it is properly applied to such killing, as happens in self­defence upon a sudden rencounterm. This right of natural defence does not imply a right of attacking: for, instead of attacking one another for injuries past or impending, men need only have recourse to the proper tribunals of justice. They cannot therefore legally exercise this right of preventive defence, but in sudden and violent cases; when certain and immediate suffering would be the consequence of waiting for the assistance of the law. Wherefore, to excuse homicide by the plea of self­defence, it must appear that the slayer had 〈7〉 no other possible means of escaping from his assailant.

〈 8〉 In some cases this species of homicide (upon chance­medley in self­defence)

differs but little from manslaughter, which also happens frequently upon chance­ medley in the proper legal sense of the wordn. But the true criterion between them seems to be this: when both parties are actually combating at the time when the mortal stroke is given, the slayer is then guilty of manslaughter; but if the slayer hath not begun to fight, or (having begun) endeavours to decline any farther struggle, and afterwards, being closely pressed by his antagonist, kills him to avoid his own destruction, this is homicide excusable by self­defenceo. For which reason the law

i Hawk. P. C. 73.

k Ibid. 74. 1 Hal. P. C. 472. Fost. 261.

l Staundf. P. C. 16.

m 3 Inst. 55. 57. Fost. 275, 276.

n 3 Inst. 55.

o Fost. 277.

5 The popular pre­Lenten recreation of cock­throwing, or killing a tethered rooster with sticks and stones, was banned under the Cromwellian Protectorate; once again legal from 1660, it became in the eighteenth century a 122 of public wrongs

185 requires, that the person, who kills another in his own defence, should have retreated

as far as he conveniently or safely can, to avoid the violence of the assault, before he turns upon his assailant; and that, not fictitiously, or in order to watch his opportunity, but from a real tenderness of shedding his brother’s blood. And though it may be cowardice, in time of war between two independent nations, to flee from an enemy; yet between two fellow subjects the law countenances no such point of honour: because the king and his courts are the vindices injuriarum [avengers of injustice], and will give to the party wronged all the satisfaction he deservesp. In this the civil law also agrees with ours, or perhaps goes rather farther; “qui cum aliter tueri se non possunt, damni culpam dederint, innoxii sunt [those who kill their adversaries when they cannot otherwise defend themselves are held innocent]q.” The party assaulted must therefore flee as far as he conveniently can, either by reason of some wall, ditch, or other impediment; or as far as the fierceness of the assault will permit himr: for it may be so fierce as not to allow him to yield a step, without manifest danger of his life, or enormous bodily harm; and then in his defence he may kill his assailant instantly. And this is the doctrine of universal justices, as well as of the municipal law.

And, as the manner of the defence, so is also the time to be considered: for if the

person assaulted does not fall upon the aggressor till the affray is over, or when he is running away, this is revenge and not defence. Neither, under the colour of self defence, will the law permit a man to screen himself from the guilt of deliberate murder: for if two persons, A and B, agree to fight a duel, and A gives the first onset, and B retreats as far as he safely can, and then kills A, this is murder; because of the previous malice and concerted designt. But if A upon a sudden quarrel assaults B first, and upon B’s returning the assault, A really and bona fide [in good faith] flees; and, being driven to the wall, turns again upon B and kills him; this may be se

186 defendendo [self­defence] according to some of our writersu: though othersw have

thought this opinion too favourable; inasmuch as the necessity, to which he is at last reduced, originally arose from his own fault. Under this excuse of self­defence, the principal civil and natural relations are comprehended; therefore master and servant, parent and child, husband and wife, killing an assailant in the necessary defence of each other respectively, are excused; the act of the relation assisting being construed the same as the act of the party himself x.

There is one species of homicide se defendendo, where the party slain is equally

innocent as he who occasions his death: and yet this homicide is also excusable from the great universal principle of self­preservation, which prompts every man to save his own life 〈9〉 preferably to that of another, where one of them must inevitably

p 1 Hal. P. C. 481. 483.

q Ff. 9. 2. 45.

r 1 Hal. P. C. 483.

s Puff. b. 2. c. 5. §. 13.

t 1 Hal. P. C. 479.

u 1 Hal. P. C. 482.

w 1 Hawk. P. C. 75.





chapter 14 123


perish. As, among others, in that case mentioned by lord Bacony, where two persons, being shipwrecked, and getting on the same plank, but finding it not able to save them both, one of them thrusts the other from it, whereby he is drowned. He who thus preserves his own life at the expence of another man’s, is excusable through unavoidable necessity, and the principle of self­defence; since their both remaining on the same weak plank is a mutual, though innocent, attempt upon, and an endangering of, each other’s life.

Let us next take a view of those circumstances wherein these two species of

homicide, by misadventure and self­defence, agree; and those are in their blame and punishment. For the law sets so high a value upon the life of a man, that it always intends some misbehaviour in the person who takes it away, unless by the command or express permission of the law. In the case of misadventure, it presumes negligence, or at least a want of sufficient caution in him who was so unfortunate as to commit it; who therefore is not altogether faultlessz. And as to the necessity which excuses a man who kills another se defendendo, lord Bacona entitles it necessitas culpabilis 187

[culpable necessity], and thereby distinguishes it from the former necessity of killing a thief or a malefactor. For the law intends that the quarrel or assault arose from some unknown wrong, or some provocation, either in word or deed: and since in quarrels both parties may be, and usually are, in some fault; and it scarce can be tried who was originally in the wrong; the law will not hold the survivor intirely guiltless. But it is clear, in the other case, that where I kill a thief that breaks into my house, the original default can never be upon my side. The law besides may have a farther view, to make the crime of homicide more odious, and to caution men how they venture to kill another upon their own private judgment; by ordaining, that he who slays his neighbour, without an express warrant from the law so to do, shall in no case be absolutely free from guilt.

Nor is the law of England singular in this respect. Even the slaughter of enemies

required a solemn purgation among the Jews; which implies that the death of a man, however it happens, will leave some stain behind it. And the mosaical lawb appointed certain cities of refuge for him “who killed his neighbour unawares; as if a man goeth into the wood with his neighbour to hew wood, and his hand fetcheth a stroke with the ax to cut down a tree, and the head slippeth from the helve, and lighteth upon his neighbour that he die, he shall flee unto one of these cities and live.” But it seems he was not held wholly blameless, any more than in the English law; since the avenger of blood might slay him before he reached his asylum, or if he afterwards stirred out of it till the death of the high priest. In the imperial law likewisec casual homicide was excused, by the indulgence of the emperor signed with his own sign manual, “adnotatione principis [with the prince’s signature]:” otherwise the death of a man,



y Elem. c. 5. See also 1 Hawk. P. C. 73.

z 1 Hawk. P. C. 72.

a Elem. c. 5.

b Numb. c. 35. and Deut. c. 19.

124 of public wrongs

however committed, was in some degree punishable. Among the Greeks d homicide

188 by misfortune was expiated by voluntary banishment for a year e. In Saxony a fine is

paid to the kindred of the slain; which also, among the western Goths, was little inferior to that of voluntary homicidef: and in Franceg no person is ever absolved in cases of this nature, without a largess to the poor, and the charge of certain masses for the soul of the party killed.

The penalty inflicted by our laws is said by sir Edward Coke to have been antiently

no less than deathh; which however is with reason denied by later and more accurate writersi. It seems rather to have consisted in a forfeiture, some say of all the goods and chattels, others of only part of them, by way of fine or weregild k, which was probably disposed of, as in France, in pios usus [for pious uses], according to the humane superstition of the times, for the benefit of his soul, who was thus suddenly sent to his account, with all his imperfections on his head.6 But that reason having long ceased, and the penalty (especially if a total forfeiture) growing more severe than was intended, in proportion as personal property has become more considerable, the delinquent has now, and has had as early as our records will reachl, a pardon and writ of restitution of his goods as a matter of course and right, only paying for suing out the samem. And indeed, to prevent this expense, in cases where the death has notoriously happened by misadventure or in self­defence, the judges will usually permit (if not direct) a general verdict of acquittaln.

III. Felonious homicide is an act of a very different nature from the former,

189 being the killing of a human creature, of any age or sex, without justification or

excuse. This may be done, either by killing one’s self, or another man.

Self­murder, the pretended heroism, but real cowardice, of the Stoic

philosophers,7 who destroyed themselves to avoid those ills which they had not the fortitude to endure, though the attempting it seems to be countenanced by the civil law o, yet was punished by the Athenian law with cutting off the hand, which committed the desperate deedp. And also the law of England wisely and religiously

d Plato de Leg. lib. 9.

e To this expiation by banishment the spirit of Patroclus in Homer may be thought to allude, when he reminds

Achilles, in the twenty third Iliad, that, when a child, he was obliged to flee his country for casually killing his playfellow; “νηπιος ουκ ἐθελων [childishly and without wanting to].”

f Stiernh. de jure Goth. l. 3. c. 4.

g De Mornay on the digest.

h 2 Inst. 148. 315.

i 1 Hal. P. C. 425. 1 Hawk. P. C. 75. Fost. 282, &c.

k Fost. 287.

l Fost. 283.

m 2 Hawk. P. C. 381.

n Fost. 288.

o “Si quis impatientia doloris, aut taedio vitae, aut morbo, aut furore, aut pudore, mori maluit, non animadvertatur

in eum.” [If any one, sinking under the pressure of grief, or weariness of life, disease, madness, or shame, shall prefer death, he is not to be punished (capitally).] Ff. 49. 16. 6.

p Pott. Antiqu. b. 1. c. 26.

6 The payment of weregild to the victim’s family in compensation for their loss was a mechanism to avoid blood

feuds.





chapter 14 125


considers, that no man hath a power to destroy life, but by commission from God, the author of it: and, as the suicide is guilty of a double offence; one spiritual, in invading the prerogative of the Almighty, and rushing into his immediate presence uncalled for; the other temporal, against the king, who hath an interest in the preservation of all his subjects; the law has therefore ranked this among the highest crimes, making it a peculiar species of felony, a felony committed 〈10〉 on oneself. A felo de se [self­murderer] therefore is he that deliberately puts an end to his own existence, or commits any unlawful malicious act, the consequence of which is his own death: as if, attempting to kill another, he runs upon his antagonist’s sword; or, shooting at another, the gun bursts and kills himself q. The party must be of years of discretion, and in his senses, else it is no crime. But this excuse ought not to be strained to that length, to which our coroners’ juries are apt to carry it, viz. that the very act of suicide is an evidence of insanity; as if every man who acts contrary to reason, had no reason at all: for the same argument would prove every other criminal non compos [not of sound mind], as well as the self­murderer. The law very rationally judges, that every melancholy or hypochondriac fit does not deprive a man of the capacity of discerning right from wrong; which is necessary, as was observed in a former chapterr, to form a legal excuse. And therefore, if a real lunatic kills himself in a lucid interval, he is a felo 190

de se as much as another mans.

But now the question follows, what punishment can human laws inflict on one

who has withdrawn himself from their reach? They can only act upon what he has left behind him, his reputation and fortune: on the former, by an ignominious burial in the highway, with a stake driven through his body; on the latter, by a forfeiture of all his goods and chattels to the king: hoping that his care for either his own reputation, or the welfare of his family, would be some motive to restrain him from so desperate and wicked an act. And it is observable, that this forfeiture has relation to the time of the act done in the felon’s lifetime, which was the cause of his death. As if husband and wife be possessed jointly of a term of years in land, and the husband drowns himself; the land shall be forfeited to the king, and the wife shall not have it by survivorship. For by the act of casting himself into the water he forfeits the term; which gives a title to the king, prior to the wife’s title by survivorship, which could not accrue till the instant of her husband’s deatht. And, though it must be owned that the letter of the law herein borders a little upon severity, yet it is some alleviation that the power of mitigation is left in the breast of the sovereign, who upon this (as on all other occasions) is reminded by the oath of his office to execute judgment in mercy.

The other species of criminal homicide is that of killing another man. But in this

there are also degrees of guilt, which divide the offence into manslaughter, and murder. The difference between which may be partly collected from what has been incidentally mentioned in the preceding articles, and principally consists in this, that

q 1 Hawk. P. C. 68. 1 Hal. P. C. 413.

r See pag. 24 [IV. 15].

126 of public wrongs

〈11〉 manslaughter arises from the sudden heat of the passions, murder from the wickedness of the heart.

191 1. Manslaughter is therefore thus definedu, the unlawful killing of another,

without malice either express or implied: which may be either voluntarily, upon a sudden heat; or involuntarily, but in the commission of some unlawful act. These were called in the Gothic constitutions “homicidia vulgaria; quae aut casu, aut etiam sponte committuntur, sed in subitaneo quodam iracundiae calore et impetu [common homicides, which are committed by accident, or even willingly, but in the sudden heat and violence of anger]w.” And hence it follows, that in manslaughter there can be no accessories before the fact; because it must be done without premeditation.

As to the first, or voluntary branch: if upon a sudden quarrel two persons fight,

and one of them kills the other, this is manslaughter: and so it is, if they upon such an occasion go out and fight in a field; for this is one continued act of passionx: and the law pays that regard to human frailty, as not to put a hasty and 〈12〉 a deliberate act upon the same footing with regard to guilt. So also if a man be greatly provoked, as by pulling his nose, or other great indignity, and immediately kills the aggressor, though this is not excusable se defendendo [in self­defence], since there is no absolute necessity for doing it to preserve himself; yet neither is it murder, for there is no previous malice; but it is manslaughtery. But in this, and in every other case of homicide upon provocation, if there be a sufficient cooling­time for passion to subside and reason to interpose, and the person so provoked afterwards kills the other, this is deliberate revenge and not heat of blood, and accordingly amounts to murderz. So, if a man takes another in the act of adultery with his wife, and kills him directly upon the spot; though this was allowed by the laws of Solona, as likewise by the Roman civil law, (if the adulterer was found in the husband’s own house)b and also among the antient Gothsc; yet in England it is not absolutely ranked in the class

192 of justifiable homicide, as in case of a forcible rape, but it is manslaughter d. It is

however the lowest degree of it: and therefore in such a case the court directed the burning in the hand to be gently inflicted, because there could not be a greater provocatione. Manslaughter therefore on a sudden provocation differs from excusable homicide se defendendo in this: that in one case there is an apparent necessity, for self­preservation, to kill the aggressor; in the other no necessity at all, being only a sudden act of revenge.

The second branch, or involuntary manslaughter, differs also from homicide excus­

able by misadventure, in this; that misadventure always happens in consequence of

u 1 Hal. P. C. 466.

w Stiernh. de jure Goth. l. 3. c. 4.

x 1 Hawk. P. C. 82.

y [R. v Mawgridge] Kelyng. 135.

z Fost. 296.

a Plutarch. in vit. Solon.

b Ff. 48. 5. 24.

c Stiernh. de jure Goth. l. 3. c. 2.

d 1 Hal. P. C. 486.





chapter 14 127


a lawful act, but this species of manslaughter in consequence of an unlawful one. As if two persons play at sword and buckler,8 unless by the king’s command, and one of them kills the other: this is manslaughter, because the original act was unlawful; but it is not murder, for the one had no intent to do the other any personal mischief f. So where a person does an act, lawful in itself, but in an unlawful manner, and without due caution and circumspection: as when a workman flings down a stone or piece of timber into the street, and kills a man; this may be either misadventure, manslaughter, or murder, according to the circumstances under which the original act was done: if it were in a country village, where few passengers are, and he calls out to all people to have a care, it is misadventure only: but if it were in London, or other populous town, where people are continually passing, it is manslaughter, though he gives loud warningg; and murder, if he knows of their passing and gives no warning at all, for then it is malice against all mankindh. And, in general, when an involuntary killing happens in consequence of an unlawful act, it will be 〈13〉 either murder or man­ slaughter according to the nature of the act which occasioned it. If it be in prosecution of a felonious intent, it will be murder; but if no more was intended than a mere 193 trespass, it will only amount to manslaughteri.

Next, as to the punishment of this degree of homicide: the crime of manslaughter

amounts to felony, but within the benefit of clergy; and the offender shall be burnt in the hand, and forfeit all his goods and chattels.

But there is one species of manslaughter, which is punished as murder, the benefit

of clergy being taken away from it by statute; namely, the offence of mortally stabbing another, though done upon sudden provocation. For by statute 1 Jac. I. c. 8. when one thrusts or stabs another, not then having a weapon drawn, or who hath not then first stricken [i.e. struck] the party stabbing, so that he dies thereof within six months after, the offender shall not have the benefit of clergy, though he did it not of malice aforethought. This statute was made on account of the frequent quarrels and stabbings with short daggers, between the Scotch and the English, at the accession of James the firstk; and, being therefore of a temporary nature, ought to have expired with the mischief, which it meant to remedy. For, in point of solid and substantial justice, it cannot be said that the mode of killing, whether by stabbing, strangling or shooting, can either extenuate or enhance the guilt: unless where, as in the case of poisoning, it carries with it an internal evidence of cool and deliberate malice. But the benignity of the law hath construed the statute so favourably in behalf of the subject, and so strictly when against him, that the offence of 〈15〉 stabbing stands almost upon the same footing, as it did at the common law l. Thus, (not to repeat the cases before­mentioned,



f 3 Inst. 56.

g [John Hull’s case] Kel. 40.

h 3 Inst. 57.

i 〈14〉 Foster. 258.

k [R. v Keite] 1 Lord Raym. 140.

l Fost. 299, 300.

128 of public wrongs

of stabbing an adulteress, &c. which are barely manslaughter, as at common law) in the construction of this statute it hath been doubted, whether, if the deceased had struck at all before the mortal blow given, 〈16〉 this takes it out of the statute, though

194 in the preceding quarrel the stabber had given the first blow; and it seems to be the

better opinion, that this is not within the statutem. Also it hath been resolved, that the killing a man by throwing a hammer or 〈17〉 other weapon is not within the statute; and whether a shot with a pistol be so or not, is doubtedn. But if the party slain had a cudgel in his hand, or had thrown a pot or a bottle, or discharged a pistol at the party stabbing, this is a sufficient having a weapon drawn on his side within the words of the statuteo.

2. We are next to consider the crime of deliberate and wilful murder; a crime at

which human nature starts, and which is I believe punished almost universally throughout the world with death. The words of the mosaical law (over and above the general precept to Noahp, that “whoso sheddeth man’s blood, by man shall his blood be shed”) are very emphatical in prohibiting the pardon of murderersq. “Moreover ye shall take no satisfaction for the life of a murderer, who is guilty of death, but he shall surely be put to death; for the land cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed it.” And therefore our law has provided one course of prosecution, (that by appeal, of which hereafter) wherein the king himself is excluded the power of pardoning murder: so that, were the king of England so inclined, he could not imitate that Polish monarch mentioned by Puffendorf r; who thought proper to remit the penalties of murder to all the nobility, in an edict with this arrogant preamble, “nos, divini juris rigorem moderantes, &c. [we, mitigating the rigour of the divine law, &c].” But let us now consider the definition of this great offence.

The name of 〈18〉 murder was antiently applied only to the secret killing of anothers;

(which the word, moërda, signifies in the Teutonic languaget) and it was defined

195 “homicidium quod nullo vidente, nullo sciente, clam perpetratur [homicide, which is

committed privately, no one witnessing, no one knowing it]u”: for which the vill wherein it was committed, or (if that were too poor) the whole hundred, was liable to a heavy amercement; which amercement itself was also denominated murdrumw. This was an antient usage among the Goths in Sweden and Denmark; who supposed the neighbourhood, unless they produced the murderer, to have perpetrated or at least connived at the murderx: and, according to Bractony, was introduced into this

m Fost. 301. 1 Hawk. P. C. 77.

n 1 Hal. P. C. 470.

o 1 Hawk. P. C. 77.

p Gen. ix. 6.

q Numb. xxxv. 31.

r L. of N. b. 8. c. 3.

s Dialog. de Scacch. l. 1. c. 10.

t 〈19〉 Stiernh. de jure Sueon. l. 3. c. 3.

u Glanv. l. 14. c. 3.

w Bract. l. 3. tr. 2. c. 15. §.7. Stat. Marlbr. c. 26. Fost. 281.

x Stiernh. l. 3. c. 4.





chapter 14 129


kingdom by king Canute,9 to prevent his countrymen the Danes from being privily murdered by the English; and was afterwards continued by William the conqueror, for the like security to his own Normansz. And therefore if, upon inquisition had, it appeared that the person found slain was an Englishman, (the presentment whereof was denominated englescherie)a the country seems to have been excused from this burthen. But, this difference being totally abolished by statute 14 Edw. III. c. 4. we must now (as is observed by Staundforde)b define murder in quite another manner, without regarding whether the party slain was killed openly or secretly, or whether he was of English or foreign extraction.

Murder is therefore now thus defined, or rather described, by sir Edward Cokec;

“when a person, of sound memory and discretion, unlawfully killeth any reasonable creature in being and under the king’s peace, with malice aforethought, either express or implied.” The best way of examining the nature of this crime will be by considering the several branches of this definition.

First, it must be committed by a person of sound memory and discretion: for 〈20〉

a lunatic or infant, as was formerly observed, are incapable of committing any crime; unless in such cases where they shew a consciousness of doing wrong, and of course 196 a discretion, or discernment, between good and evil.

Next, it happens when a person of such sound discretion unlawfully killeth. The

unlawfulness arises from the killing without warrant or excuse: and there must also be an actual killing to constitute murder; for a bare assault, with intent to kill, is only a great misdemesnor, though formerly it was held to be murderd. The killing may be by poisoning, striking, starving, drowning, and a thousand other forms of death, by which human nature 〈21〉 may be overcome. Of these the most detestable of all is poison; because it can of all others be the least prevented either by manhood or forethoughte. And therefore by the statute 22 Hen. VIII. c. 9. it was made treason, and a more grievous and lingering kind of death was inflicted on it than the common law allowed; namely, boiling to death: but this act did not live long, being repealed by 1 Edw. VI. c. 12. There was also, by the antient common law, one species of killing held to be murder, 〈22〉 which is hardly so at this day, nor has there been an instance wherein it has been held to be murder for many ages pastf: I mean by bearing false witness against another, with an express premeditated design to take away his life, so as the innocent person be condemned and executedg. The Gothic laws punished in

z 1 Hal. P. C. 447.

a Bract. ubi supr. [note w]

b P. C. l. 1. c. 10.

c 3 Inst. 47.

d 1 Hal. P. C. 425.

e 3 Inst. 48.

f Fost. 132. In the case of Macdaniel and Berry, reported by sir Michael Foster, though 〈23〉 the attorney general declined to argue this point of law, 〈24〉 I have grounds to believe it was not from any apprehension that the point was not maintainable, but from other prudential reasons. Nothing therefore should be concluded from the waiving of that prosecution.

g Mirror. c. 1. §. 9. 〈25〉 Britt. c. 5. Bracton. l. 3. c. 4.

130 of public wrongs

this case, both the judge, the witnesses, and the prosecutor; “peculiari poena judicem puniunt; peculiari testes, quorum fides judicem seduxit; peculiari denique et maxima auctorem, ut homicidamh.”10And, among the Romans, the lex Cornelia, de sicariis [the Cornelian law concerning assassins], punished the false witness with death, as being

197 guilty of a species of assassinationi. And there is no doubt but this is equally murder

in foro conscientiae [in the court of conscience] as killing with a sword; though the modern law (to avoid the danger of deterring witnesses from giving evidence upon capital prosecutions, if it must be at the peril of their own lives) has not yet punished it as such.11 If a man however does such an act, of which the probable consequence may be, and eventually is, death; such killing may be murder, although no stroke be 〈26〉 struck by himself: as was the case of the unnatural son, who exposed his sick father to the air, against his will, by reason whereof he diedk; and, of the harlot, who laid her 〈27〉 child in an orchard, where a kite struck it and killed it l. So too, if a man hath a beast that is used to do mischief; and he, knowing it, suffers it to go abroad, and it kills a man; even this is manslaughter in the owner: but if he had purposely turned it loose, though barely to frighten people and make what is called sport, it is with us (as in the Jewish law) as much murder, as if he had incited 〈28〉 a bear or a dog to worry themm. If a physician or surgeon gives his patient a potion or plaister to cure him, which contrary to expectation kills him, this is neither murder, nor manslaughter, but misadventure; and he shall not be punished criminally, however liable he might formerly have been to a civil action for neglect or ignorancen: but it hath been holden, that if it be not a regular physician or surgeon, who administers the medicine or performs the operation, it is manslaughter at the least o. Yet sir Matthew Hale very justly questions the law of this 〈29〉 determination; since physic and salves were in use before licensed physicians and surgeons: wherefore he treats this doctrine as apocryphal, and fitted only to gratify and flatter licentiates and doctors in physic; though it may be of use to make people cautious and wary, how they meddle too much in so dangerous an employment p. In order also to make the killing murder, it is requisite that the party die within a year and a day after the stroke received, or

198 cause of death administred; in the computation of which, the whole day upon which

the hurt was done shall be reckoned the first q.

h Stiernh. de jure Goth. l. 3. c. 3.

i Ff. 48. 8. 1.

k 1 Hawk. P. C. 78.

l 1 Hal. P. C. 432.

m Ibid. 431.

n Mirr. c. 4. §. 16. See Vol. III. pag. 122 [III. 82].

o Britt. c. 5. 4 Inst. 251.

p 1 Hal. P. C. 430.

q 1 Hawk. P. C. 79.

10 ‘One particular punishment is inflicted on the judge, another on the witnesses whose testimony misled the

judge; and lastly, one, of the greatest severity, on the instigator, who is treated as a murderer.’

11 Stephen McDaniel and his cronies were ‘thieftakers’ who manipulated the private prosecution system by

organizing crimes, then arresting the perpetrators to obtain rewards payable on their conviction and execution. When arrested in the mid­1750s and tried for the murder of some of their victims, judgment was respited, probably





chapter 14 131


Farther; the person killed must be “a reasonable creature in being, and under the

king’s peace,” at the time of the killing. Therefore to kill an alien, a Jew, or an outlaw, who are all under the king’s 〈30〉 peace or protection, is as much murder as to kill the most regular born Englishman; except he be an alien­enemy, in time of warr. To kill a child in its mother’s womb, is now no murder, but a great misprision: but if the child be born alive, and dieth by reason of the potion or bruises it received in the womb, 〈31〉 it is murder in such as administred or gave thems. But, as there is one case where it is difficult to prove the child’s being born alive, namely, in the case of the murder of bastard children by the unnatural mother, it is enacted by statute 21 Jac. I. c. 27. that if any woman be delivered of a child, which if born alive should by law be a bastard; and endeavours privately to conceal its death, by burying the child or the like; the mother so offending shall suffer death as in the case of murder, unless she can prove by one witness at least that the child was actually born dead. This law, which savours pretty strongly of severity, in making the concealment of the death almost conclusive evidence of the child’s being murdered by the mother, is nevertheless to be also met with in the criminal codes of many other nations of Europe; as the Danes, the Swedes, and the Frencht: but I apprehend it has of late years been usual with us in England, upon trials for this offence, to require some sort of presumptive evidence that the child was born alive, before the other constrained presumption (that the child, whose death is concealed, was therefore killed by its parent) is admitted to convict the prisoner.

Lastly, the killing must be committed with malice aforethought, to make it the

crime of murder. This is the grand criterion, which now distinguishes murder from 199 other killing: and this malice prepense, malitia praecogitata, is not so properly spite or malevolence to the deceased in particular, as any evil design in general; the dictate of a wicked, depraved, and malignant heartu; un disposition a faire un male chosew [a disposition to commit a bad action]: and it may be either express, or implied in law. Express malice is when one, with a sedate deliberate mind and formed design, doth kill another: which formed design is evidenced by external circumstances discovering that inward intention; as lying in wait, antecedent menaces, former grudges, and concerted schemes to do him some bodily harmx. This takes in the case of deliberate duelling, where both parties meet avowedly with an intent to murder: thinking it their duty, as gentlemen, and claiming it as their right, to wanton with their own lives and those of their fellow creatures; without any warrant or authority from any power either divine or human, but in direct contradiction to the laws both of God and man: and therefore the law has justly fixed the crime and punishment of murder, on them, and on their seconds also y. Yet it requires such a degree of passive valour, to combat

r 3 Inst. 50. 1 Hal. P. C. 433.

s 3 Inst. 50. 1 Hawk. P. C. 80.

t See Barrington on the statutes. 425.

u Foster. 256.

w [Clement v. Blunt] 2 Roll. Rep. 461.

x 1 Hal. P. C. 451.

132 of public wrongs

the dread of even undeserved contempt, arising from the false notions of honour too generally received in Europe, that the strongest prohibitions and penalties of the law will never be intirely effectual to eradicate this unhappy custom; till a method be found out of compelling the original aggressor to make some other satisfaction to the affronted party, which the world shall esteem equally reputable, as that which is now given at the hazard of the life and fortune, as well of the person insulted, as of him who hath given the insult. Also, if even upon a sudden provocation one beats another in a cruel and unusual manner, so that he dies, though he did not intend his death, yet he is guilty of murder by express malice; that is, by an express evil design, the genuine sense of malitia [malice]. As when a park­keeper tied a boy, that was stealing wood, to a horse’s tail, and dragged him along the park; when a master corrected his

200 servant with an iron bar, and a schoolmaster stamped on his scholar’s belly; so that

each of the sufferers died; these were justly held to be murders, because the correction being excessive, and such as could not proceed but from a bad heart, it was equivalent to a deliberate act of slaughterz. Neither shall he be guilty of a less crime, who kills another in consequence of such a wilful act, as shews him to be an enemy to all mankind in general; as going 〈32〉 deliberately with a horse used to strike, or discharging a gun, among a multitude of peoplea. So if a man resolves to kill the next man he meets, and does kill him, it is murder, although he knew him not; for this is universal malice. And, if two or more come together to do an unlawful act against the king’s peace, of which the probable consequence might be bloodshed; as to beat a man, to commit a riot, or to rob a park; and one of them kills a man; it is murder in them all, because of the unlawful act, the malitia praecogitata [malice aforethought], or evil intended beforehandb.

Also in many cases where no malice is expressed, the law will imply it: as, where

a man wilfully poisons another, in such a deliberate act the law presumes malice, though no particular emnity can be provedc. And if a man kills another suddenly, without any, or without a considerable, provocation, the law implies malice; for no person, unless of an abandoned heart, would be guilty of such an act, upon a slight or no apparent cause. No affront, by words, or gestures only, is a sufficient provocation, so as to excuse or extenuate such acts of violence as manifestly endanger the life of anotherd. But if the person so provoked had unfortunately killed the other, by beating him in such a manner as shewed only an intent to chastise and not to kill him, the law so far considers the provocation of contumelious behaviour, as to adjudge it only manslaughter, and not murder e. In like manner if one kills an officer of justice, either

201 civil or criminal, in the execution of his duty, or any of his assistants endeavouring to

conserve the peace, or any private person endeavouring to suppress an affray or apprehend a felon, knowing his authority or the intention with which he interposes,

z 1 Hal. P. C. 454. 473, 474.

a 1 Hawk. P. C. 74.

b Ibid. 84.

c 1 Hal. P. C. 455.

d 1 Hawk. P. C. 82. 1 Hal. P. C. 455, 456.





chapter 14 133


the law will imply malice, and the killer shall be guilty of murderf. And if one intends to do another felony, and undesignedly kills a man, this is also murderg. Thus if one shoots at A and misses him, but kills B, this is murder; because of the previous felonious intent, which the law transfers from one to the other. The same is the case, where one lays poison for A; and B, against whom the prisoner had no malicious intent, takes it, and it kills him; 〈33〉 this is likewise murderh. It were endless to go through all the cases of homicide, which have been adjudged either expressly, or impliedly, malicious: these therefore may suffice as a specimen; and we may take it for a general rule, that all homicide is malicious, and of course amounts to murder, unless where justified by the command or permission of the law; excused 〈34〉 on a principle of accident or self­preservation; or alleviated into manslaughter, by being either the involuntary consequence of some act, not strictly lawful, or (if voluntary) occasioned by some sudden and sufficiently violent provocation. And all these circumstances of justification, excuse, or alleviation, it is incumbent upon the prisoner to make out, to the satisfaction of the court and jury: the latter of whom are to decide whether the circumstances alleged 〈35〉 be proved to have actually existed; the former, how far they extend to take away or mitigate the guilt. For all homicide is presumed to be malicious, until the contrary appeareth upon evidencei.

The punishment of murder, and that of manslaughter, were formerly one and the 202

same; both having the benefit of clergy: so that none but unlearned persons, who least knew the guilt of it, were put to death for this enormous crimek. 〈36〉 But now, by statute 23 Hen. VIII. c. 1. and 1 Edw. VI. c. 12. the benefit of clergy is taken away from murder though malice prepense. In atrocious cases it was frequently usual for the court to direct the murderer, after execution, to be hung upon a gibbet in chains, near the place where the fact was committed: but this was no part of the legal judgment; and the like is still sometimes practiced in the case of notorious thieves. This, being quite contrary to the express command of the mosaical lawl, seems to have been borrowed from the civil law; which, besides the terror of the example, gives also another reason for this practice, viz. that it is a comfortable sight to the relations and friends of the deceasedm. But now in England, it is enacted by statute 25 Geo. II. c. 37. that 〈37〉 the judge, before whom a murderer is convicted, shall in passing sentence direct him to be executed on the next day but one, (unless the same



f 1 Hal. P. C. 457. Foster. 308, & c.

g 1 Hal. P. C. 465.

h 1 Hal. P. C. 466.

i Fost. 255.

k 1 Hal. P. C. 450.

l “The body of a malefactor shall not remain all night upon the tree; but thou shalt in any wise bury him in that day, that the land be not defiled.” Deut. xxi. 23.

m “Famosos latrones, in his locis, ubi grassati sunt, furca figendos placuit; ut, et conspectu deterreantur alii, et

solatio sit cognatis interemptorum, eodem loco poena reddita, in quo latrones homicidia fecissent [It pleased him that infamous robbers should be fixed upon a gibbet in the same place where they committed their crimes, that others might be deterred by the sight, inasmuch as the punishment being inflicted in the same place where the robbers committed the murders, it might be some consolation to the relations of those who were killed] .” Ff. 48. 134 of public wrongs

shall be sunday, and then on the monday following) and that his body be delivered to the surgeons to be dissected and anatomizedn, and that the judge may direct his body to be afterwards hung in chains, but in no wise to be buried without dissection.12 And, during the short but awful interval between sentence and execution, the prisoner shall be kept alone, and sustained with only bread and water. But a power is allowed to the judge, upon good and sufficient cause, to respite the execution, and relax the other restraints of this act.

By the Roman law, parricide, or the murder of one’s parents or children, was

punished in a much severer manner than any other kind of homicide. After being scourged, the delinquents were sewed up in a leathern sack, with a live dog, a cock, a

203 viper, and an ape, and so cast into the seao. Solon, it is true, in his laws, made none

against parricide; apprehending it impossible that any one should be guilty of so unnatural a barbarity p. And the Persians, according to Herodotus, entertained the same notion, when they adjudged all persons who killed their reputed parents to be bastards. And, upon some such reason as this, must we account for the omission of an exemplary punishment for this crime in our English laws; which treat it no otherwise than as simple murder, unless the child was also the servant of his parent q.

For, though the breach of natural relation is unobserved, yet the breach of civil or

ecclesiastical connexions, when coupled with murder, denominates it a new offence; no less than a species of treason, called parva proditio, or petit treason: which however is nothing else but an aggravated degree of murderr; although, on account of the violation of private allegiance, it is stigmatized as an inferior species of treasons. And thus, in the antient Gothic constitution, we find the breach both of natural and civil relations ranked in the same class with crimes against the state and the sovereignt.

Petit treason, according to the statute 25 Edw. III. c. 2. may happen three ways: by

a servant killing his master, a wife her husband, or an ecclesiastical person (either secular, or regular) his superior, to whom he owes faith and obedience. A servant who kills his master whom he has left, upon a grudge conceived against him during his service, is guilty of petit treason: for the traiterous intention was hatched while the relation subsisted between them; and this is only an execution of that intentionu. So if a wife be divorced a mensa et thoro [from bed and board], still the vinculum

204 matrimonii [matrimonial chain] subsists; and if she kills such divorced husband, she

n [Case of Swann and Jefferies] Fost. 107.

o Ff. 48. 9. 9.

p Cic. pro S. Roscio. §. 25.

q 1 Hal. P. C. 380.

r [Case of Swann and Jefferies] Foster 107. 324. 336.

s See pag. 75 [IV. 49].

t “Omnium gravissima censetur vis facta ab incolis in patriam, subditis in regem, liberis in parentes, maritis in

uxores, (et vice versa) servis in dominos, aut etiam ab homine in semet ipsum [Of all others, that is considered the most grievous violence, that is committed by inhabitants against their own country; subjects against their king; children against their parents; and husbands against their wives (and vice versa) and so, by slaves against their lords; and even by a man against himself].” Stiernh. de jure Goth. l. 3. c. 3.

u 1 Hawk. P. C. 89. 1 Hal. P. C. 380.





chapter 14 135


is a traitressw. And a clergyman is understood to owe canonical obedience, to the bishop who ordained him, to him in whose diocese he is beneficed, and also to the metropolitan of such suffragan or diocesan bishop: and therefore to kill any of these is petit treasonx. As to the rest, whatever has been said, or remains to be observed hereafter, with respect to wilful murder, is also applicable to the crime of petit treason, which is no other than murder in its most odious degree: except that the trial shall be as in cases of high treason, before the improvements therein made by the statutes of 〈38〉 William III y, and also except in its punishment.

The punishment of petit treason, in a man, is to be drawn and hanged, and, in a

woman, to be drawn and burnedz: the idea of which latter punishment seems to have been handed down to us 〈39〉 from the laws of the antient Druids, which condemned a woman to be burned for murdering her husbanda; and it is now the usual punishment for all sorts of treasons committed by those of the female sexb. Persons guilty of petit treason were first debarred the benefit of clergy 〈40〉 by statute 12 Hen. VII. c. 7.

w 1 Hal. P. C. 381.

x Ibid.

y Fost. 337.

z 1 Hal. P. C. 382. 3 Inst. 311.

a Caesar de bell. Gall. l. 6. c. 18.

b See pag. 93 [IV. 61].



205 chapter the fifteenth.



of offences against the

persons of individuals.

Having in the preceding chapter considered the principal crime, or public wrong, that can be committed against a private subject, namely, by destroying his life; I proceed now to enquire into such other crimes and misdemesnors, as more peculiarly affect the security of his person, while living.

Of these some are felonious, and in their nature capital; others are simple misde­

mesnors, and punishable with a lighter animadversion. Of the felonies the first is that of mayhem.

1. Mayhem, mahemium, was in part considered in the preceding volumea, as a

civil injury: but it is also looked upon in a criminal light by the law; being an atrocious breach of the king’s peace, and an offence tending to deprive him of the aid and assistance of his subjects. For mayhem is properly defined to be, as we may remember, the violently depriving another of the use of such of his members, as may render him the less able in fighting, either to defend himself, or to annoy his adversary b. And

206 therefore the cutting off, or disabling, or weakening a man’s hand or finger, or striking

out his eye or foretooth, or depriving him of those parts, the loss of which in all animals abates their courage, are held to be mayhems. But the cutting off his ear, or nose, or the like, are not held to be mayhems at common law; because they do not weaken but only disfigure him.

By the antient law of England he that maimed any man, whereby he lost any part

of his body, was sentenced to lose the like part; membrum pro membro [limb for limb]c: which is still the law in Swedend. But this went afterwards out of use: partly because the law of retaliation, as was formerly shewne, is at best an inadequate rule of punishment; and partly because upon a repetition of the offence the punishment could not be repeated. So that, by the common law, as it for a long time stood, mayhem was only punishable with 〈1〉 fine and imprisonmentf; unless perhaps the offence of mayhem by castration, which all our old writers held to be felony; “et sequitur aliquando poena capitalis, aliquando perpetuum exilium, cum omnium bonorum ademptione [and sometimes capital punishment follows, sometimes perpetual exile

a See Vol. III. pag. 121 [III. 82].

b Brit. l. 1. c. 25. 1 Hawk. P. C. 111.

c 3 Inst. 118.—Mes, si la pleynte soit faite de femme qu’ avera tolle a home ses membres, en tiel case perdra le feme

la une meyn par jugement, come le membre dount ele avera trepasse [But if the complaint be preferred against a woman that she had mutilated a man, she shall be adjudged to lose her hand, with which she committed the wrong].

d Stiernhook de jure Sueon. l. 3. c. 3.

e See pag. 12 [IV. 8].

f 1 Hawk. P. C. 112.





chapter 15 137


with loss of all his goods]g.” And this, although the mayhem was committed upon the highest provocationh.

But subsequent statutes have put the crime and punishment of mayhem more out

of doubt. For, first, by statute 5 Hen. IV. c. 5. to remedy a mischief that then prevailed, of beating, wounding, or robbing a man, and then cutting out his tongue or putting out his eyes, to prevent him from being an evidence against them, this offence is declared to be felony, if done of malice prepense; that is, as sir Edward Cokei explains it, voluntarily and of set purpose, though done upon a sudden occasion. Next, in 207 order of time, is the statute 37 Hen. VIII. c. 6. which directs, that if a man shall maliciously and unlawfully cut off the ear of any of the king’s subjects, he shall not only forfeit treble damages to the party grieved, to be recovered by action of trespass at common law, as a civil satisfaction; but also 10l. by way of fine to the king, which was his criminal amercement. The last statute, but by far the most severe and effectual of all, is that of 22 & 23 Car. II. c. 1. called the Coventry act; being occasioned by an assault on sir John Coventry in the street, and slitting his nose, in revenge (as was supposed) for some obnoxious words uttered by him in parliament.1 By this statute it is enacted, that if any person shall of malice aforethought, and by lying in wait, unlawfully cut out or disable the tongue, put out an eye, slit the nose, cut off a nose or lip, or cut off or disable any limb or member of any other person, with intent to maim or to disfigure him; such person, his counsellors, aiders, and abettors, shall be guilty of felony without benefit of clergyk.2

Thus much for the felony of mayhem: to which may be added the offence of wilfully 208

and maliciously shooting at 〈2〉 any person, which may endanger either killing or maiming him. This, though no such evil consequence ensues, is made felony without benefit of clergy by statute 9 Geo. I. c. 22. and thereupon one [Edward] Arnold was

g Bract. fol. 141.

h Sir Edward Coke (3 Inst. 62.) has transcribed a record of Henry the third’s time, (Claus. 13 Hen. III. m. 9.) by which a gentleman of Somersetshire and his wife appear to have been apprehended and committed to prison, being indicted for dealing thus with John the monk, who was caught in adultery with the wife [Case of Hulle and Ascelina his wife].

i 3 Inst. 62.

k On this statute Mr Coke, a gentleman of Suffolk, and one Woodburn, a labourer, were indicted in 1722; Coke for hiring and abetting Woodburn, and Woodburn for the actual fact, of slitting the nose of Mr Crispe, Coke’s brother in law. The case was somewhat singular. The murder of Crispe was intended, and he was left for dead, being terribly hacked and disfigured with a hedge bill; but he recovered. Now the bare intent to murder is no felony: but to disfigure, with an intent to disfigure, is made so by this statute; on which they were therefore indicted. And Coke, who was a disgrace to the profession of the law, had the effrontery to rest his defence upon this point, that the assault was not committed with an intent to disfigure, but with an intent to murder; and therefore not within the statute. But the court held, that if a man attacks another to murder him with such an instrument as a hedge bill, which cannot but endanger the disfiguring him; and in such attack happens not to kill, but only to disfigure him; he may be indicted on this statute: and it shall be left to the jury whether it were not a design to murder by disfiguring, and consequently a malicious intent to disfigure as well as to murder. Accordingly the jury found them guilty of such previous intent to disfigure, in order to effect their principal intent to murder, and they were both condemned and executed. (State Trials. VI. 212.)

1 In parliamentary debate a witticism about the king’s mistresses by Sir John Coventry offended Charles II’s illegitimate son, James Scott, duke of Monmouth. Subsequently soldiers from Monmouth’s troop of guardsmen seized Coventry as he was returning home in the early hours of the morning and cut his nose to the bone.

138 of public wrongs

convicted in 1723, for shooting at lord Onslow; but, being half a madman, was never executed, but confined in prison, where he died about thirty years after.3

II. The second offence, more immediately affecting the personal security of

individuals, relates to the female part of his majesty’s subjects; being that of their forcible abduction and marriage; which is vulgarly called stealing an heiress. For by statute 3 Hen. VII. c. 2. it is enacted, that if any person shall for lucre take 〈3〉 any woman, maid, widow, or wife, having substance either in goods or lands, or being heir apparent to her ancestors, contrary to her will; and afterwards she be married to such misdoer, or by his 〈4〉 consent to others, or defiled; such person, and all his accessories, shall be deemed principal felons: and by statute 39 Eliz. c. 9. the benefit of clergy is taken away from all such felons, except accessories after the offence.

In the construction of this statute it hath been determined, 1. That the indictment

must allege that the taking was for lucre, for such are the words of the statutel. 2. In order to shew this, it must appear that the woman has substance either real or personal, or is an heir apparentm. 3. It must appear that she was taken away against her will. 4. It must also appear, that she was afterwards married, or defiled. And though possibly the marriage or defilement might be by her subsequent consent, being won thereunto by flatteries after the taking, yet this is felony, if the first taking were against her willn,

209 and so vice versa, if the woman be originally taken away with her own consent, yet if

she afterwards refuse to continue with the offender, and be forced against her will, she may, from that time, as properly be said to be taken against her will, as if she never had given any consent at all; for, till the force was put upon her, she was in her own power o. 5. It is held that a woman, thus taken away and married, may be sworn and give evidence against the offender, though he is her husband de facto; contrary to the general rule of law: because he is no husband de jure, in case the actual marriage was also against her willp. In cases indeed where the actual marriage is good, by the consent of the inveigled woman obtained after her forcible abduction, sir Matthew Hale seems to question how far her evidence should be allowed: but other authoritiesq seem to agree, that it should even then be admitted; esteeming it absurd, that the offender should thus take advantage of his own wrong, and that the very act of marriage, which is a principal ingredient of his crime, should (by a forced construction of law) be made use of to stop the mouth of the most material witness against him.

An inferior degree of the same kind of offence, but not attended with force, is

punished by the statute 4 & 5 Ph. & Mar. c. 8. which enacts, that if any person, above the age of fourteen, unlawfully shall convey or take away any woman child unmarried, (which is heldr to extend to bastards as well as to legitimate children) within the age of sixteen years, from the possession and against the will of the father, mother,

l 1 Hawk. P. C. 110.

m 1 Hal. P. C. 660. 1 Hawk. P. C. 109.

n 1 Hal. P. C. 660.

o 1 Hawk. P. C. 110.

p 1 Hal. P. C. 661.

q [Fulwood’s case] Cro. Car. 488. [R. v Brown.] 3 Keb. 193. [Haagen Swendsen] State Trials. V. 455.

r [R. v Cornforth et al.] Stra. 1162.





chapter 15 139


guardians, or governors, he shall be imprisoned two years, or fined at the discretion of the justices: and if he deflowers such maid or woman child, or, without the consent of parents, contracts matrimony with her, he shall be imprisoned five years, or fined at the discretion of the justices, and she shall forfeit all her lands to her next of kin, during the life of her said husband. So that as these stolen marriages, under the age of 210

sixteen, were usually upon mercenary views, this act, besides punishing the seducer, wisely removed the temptation. But this latter part of the act is now rendered almost useless, by provisions of a very different kind, which make the marriage totally voids, in the statute 26 Geo. II. c. 33.

III. A third offence, against the female part also of his majesty’s subjects, but

attended with greater aggravations than that of forcible marriage, is the crime of rape, raptus mulierum, or the carnal knowlege of a woman forcibly and against her will. This, by the Jewish law t, was punished with death, in case the damsel was betrothed to another man; and, in case she was not betrothed, then a heavy fine of fifty shekels was to be paid to the damsel’s father, and she was to be the wife of the ravisher all the days of his life; without that power of divorce, which was in general permitted by the mosaic law.

The civil law u punishes the crime of ravishment with death and confiscation of

goods: under which it includes both the offence of forcible abduction, or taking away a woman from her friends, of which we last spoke; and also the present offence of forcibly dishonouring them; either of which, without the other, is in that law, sufficient to constitute a capital crime. Also the stealing away a woman from her parents or guardians, and debauching her, is equally penal by the emperor’s edict, whether she consent or is forced: “sive volentibus, sive nolentibus mulieribus, tale facinus fuerit perpetratum [the crime will be the same whether the woman consents or not].” And this, in order to take away from women every opportunity of offending in this way; whom 〈5〉 the Roman laws suppose never to go astray, without the seduction and arts of the other sex: and therefore, by restraining and making so highly penal the solicitations of the men, they meant to secure effectually the honour of the women. “Si enim ipsi raptores metu, vel atrocitate poenae, ab hujusmodi facinore se temperaverint, 211

nulli mulieri, sive volenti, sive nolenti, peccandi locus relinquetur; quia hoc ipsum velle mulierum, ab insidiis nequissimi hominis, qui meditatur rapinam, inducitur. Nisi etenim eam solicitaverit, nisi odiosis artibus circumvenerit, non faciet eam velle in tantum dedecus sese prodere.”4 But our English law does not entertain quite such sublime ideas of the honour of either sex, as to lay the blame of a mutual fault upon one of the transgressors only: and therefore makes it a necessary ingredient in the crime of rape, that it must be against the woman’s will.

s See Vol. I. pag. 437 [I. 282], &c.

t Deut. xxii. 25.

u Cod. 9. tit. 13.

4 ‘For if the ravisher be restrained from a crime of this nature, either through fear, or the severity of the punishment, no opportunity is left for a woman to offend either willingly or unwillingly, because she is always led on to desire by the wicked seductions of the man who meditates the violence. For unless he solicit her, unless he 140 of public wrongs

Rape was punished by the Saxon laws, particularly those of king Athelstanw, with

death: which was also agreeable to the old Gothic or Scandinavian constitutionx. But this was afterwards thought too hard: and in its stead another severe, but not capital, punishment was inflicted by William the conqueror; viz, castration and loss of eyes y, which continued till after Bracton wrote, in the reign of Henry the third. But in order to prevent malicious accusations, it was then the law, (and, it seems, still continues to be so in appeals of rape)z that the woman should immediately after, “dum recens fuerit maleficium [while the injury be recent],” go to the next town, and there make discovery to some credible persons of the injury she has suffered; and afterwards should acquaint the high constable of the hundred, the coroners, and the sheriff with the outragea. This seems to correspond in some degree with the laws of Scotland and Arragonb, which require that complaint must be made within twenty four hours: though afterwards by statute Westm. 1. c. 13. the time of limitation in England was extended to forty days. At present there is no time of limitation fixed: for, as it is usually now punished by indictment at the suit of the king, the maxim of law takes place, that nullum tempus occurrit regi [no time runs against the king]: but the jury

212 will rarely give credit to a stale complaint. During the former period also it was held

for lawc, that the woman (by consent of the judge and her parents) might redeem the offender from the execution of his sentence, by accepting him for her husband; if he also was willing to agree to the exchange, but not otherwise.

In the 3 Edw. I. by the statute Westm. 1. c. 13. the punishment of rape was much

mitigated: 〈7〉 the offence itself being reduced to a trespass, if not prosecuted by the woman within forty days, and subjecting the offender only to two years imprisonment, and a fine at the king’s will. But, this lenity being productive of the most terrible consequences, it was in ten years afterwards, 13 Edw. I. found necessary to make the 〈8〉 offence of rape felony, by statute Westm. 2. c. 34. And by statute 18 Eliz. c. 7. it is made felony without benefit of clergy: as is also the abominable wickedness of carnally 〈9〉 knowing or abusing any woman child under the age of ten years; in which case the consent or non­consent is immaterial, as by reason of her tender years she is incapable of judgment and discretion. Sir Matthew Hale is indeed of opinion, that such profligate actions committed on an infant under the age of twelve years, the age of female discretion by the common law, either with or without consent, amount to rape and felony; as well since as before the statute of queen Elizabethd: but 〈10〉 the law has in general been held only to extend to infants under ten.

A male infant, under the age of fourteen years, is presumed by law incapable to

commit a rape, and therefore it seems cannot be found guilty of it. For though in

w Bracton. l. 3. c. 28.

x Stiernh. de jure Sueon. l. 3. c. 2.

y LL. Guil. Conqu. c. 19.

z 1 Hal. P. C. 632.

a Glanv. l. 14. c. 6. Bract. l. 3. c. 28.

b 〈6〉 Barrington. 107.

c Glanv. l. 14. c. 6. Bract. l. 3. c. 28.





chapter 15 141


other felonies malitia supplet aetatem [malice makes up for (any deficiency in) age], as has in some cases been shewn; yet, as to this particular species of felony, the law supposes an imbecillity of body as well as minde.

The civil law seems to suppose a prostitute or common harlot incapable of any 213

injuries of this kindf; not allowing any punishment for violating the chastity of her, who hath indeed no chastity at all, or at least hath no regard to it. But the law of England does not judge so hardly of offenders, as to cut off all opportunity of retreat even from common strumpets, and to treat them as never capable of amendment. It therefore holds it to be felony to force even a concubine or harlot; because the woman may have forsaken that unlawful course of lifeg: for, as Bracton well observesh, “licet meretrix fuerit antea, certe tunc temporis non fuit, cum reclamando nequitiae ejus consentire noluit”.5

As to the material facts requisite to be given in evidence and proved upon an

indictment of rape, they are of such a nature, that though necessary to be known and settled, for the conviction of the guilty and preservation of the innocent, and therefore are to be found in such criminal treatises as discourse of these matters in detail, yet they are highly improper to be publicly discussed, except only in a court of justice. I shall therefore merely add upon this head a few remarks from sir Matthew Hale, with regard to the competency and credibility of witnesses; which may, salvo pudore [decency being observed], be considered.

And, first, the party ravished may give evidence upon oath, and is in law a competent

witness; but the credibility of her testimony, and how far forth she is to be believed, must be left to the jury upon the circumstances of fact that concur in that testimony. For instance: if the witness be of good fame; if she presently discovered the offence, and made search for the offender; if the party accused fled for it; these and the like are concurring circumstances, which give greater probability to her evidence. But, on the other side, if she be of evil fame, and 〈11〉 stands unsupported by others; if she concealed the injury for any considerable time after she had opportunity to complain; if the place, where the fact was alleged to be committed, was where it was possible she 214

might have been heard, and she made no outcry; these and the like circumstances carry a strong, but not conclusive, presumption that her testimony is false or feigned.

Moreover, if the rape be charged to be committed on an infant under twelve

years of age, she may still be a competent witness, if she hath sense and understanding to know the nature and obligations of an 〈12〉 oath; and, even if she hath not, it is thought by sir Matthew Halei that she ought to be heard without oath, to give the court information; though that alone will not be sufficient to convict the offender. And he is of this opinion, first, because the nature of the offence being secret, there

e Ibid.

f Cod. 9. 9. 22. Ff. 47. 2. 39.

g 1 Hal. P. C. 629. 1 Hawk. P. C. 108.

h fol. 147.

i 1 Hal. P. C. 634.

5 ‘Although she had been a harlot formerly, she surely was not at that time, when by protesting against it she 142 of public wrongs

may be no other possible proof of the actual fact; though afterwards there may be concurrent circumstances to corroborate it, proved by other witnesses: and, secondly, because the law allows what the child told her mother, or other relations, to be given in evidence, since the nature of the case admits frequently of no better proof; and there is much more reason for the court to hear the narration of the child herself, than to receive it at second hand from those who swear they heard her say so. And indeed it is now settled, that infants of any age are to be heard; and, if they have any idea of an oath, to be also sworn: it being found by experience that infants of very tender years often give the clearest and truest testimony. But in any of these cases, whether the child be sworn or not, it is to be wished, in order to render her evidence credible, that there should be some concurrent testimony, of time, place and circum­ stances, in order to make out the fact; and that the conviction should not be grounded singly on the unsupported accusation of an infant under years of discretion. There may be therefore, in many cases of this nature, witnesses who are competent, that is, who may be admitted to be heard; and yet, after being heard, may prove not to be

215 credible, or such as the jury is bound to believe. For one excellence of the trial by

jury is, that the jury are triors of the credit of the witnesses, as well as of the truth of the fact.

“It is true, says this learned judge k, that rape is a most detestable crime, and therefore

ought severely and impartially to be punished with death; but it must be remembered, that it is an accusation easy to be made, hard to be proved, but harder to be defended by the party accused, though innocent.” He then relates two very extraordinary cases of malicious 〈13〉 prosecutions for this crime, that had happened within his own observation;6 and concludes thus: “I mention these instances, that we may be the more cautious upon trials of offences of this nature, wherein the court and jury may with so much ease be imposed upon, without great care and vigilance; the heinousness of the offence many times transporting the judge and jury with so much indignation, that they are overhastily carried to the conviction of the person accused thereof, by the confident testimony of sometimes false and malicious witnesses.”

IV. What has been here observed, especially with regard to the manner of proof,

which ought to be the more clear in proportion as the crime is the more detestable, may be applied to another offence, of a still deeper malignity; the infamous crime against nature, committed either with man or beast.7 A crime, which ought to be strictly and impartially proved, and then as strictly and impartially punished. But it is an offence of so dark a nature, so easily charged, and the negative so difficult to be proved, that the accusation should be clearly made out: for, if false, it deserves a punishment inferior only to that of the crime itself.

k 1 Hal. P. C. 635.

6 Hale cited cases at the Sussex and Northampton assizes. One defendant was 63 years of age and held by the

jury, after a private physical examination, to be incapable of sexual intercourse, despite a seemingly conclusive prosecution case. The other was convicted of a double rape and sentenced to death; Hale gives no further details but states that the prosecution case was subsequently discovered to be ‘a malicious contrivance’.

7 i.e. sodomy (or buggery) and bestiality.





chapter 15 143


I will not act 〈14〉 so disagreeable part, to my readers as well as myself, as to dwell

any longer upon a subject, the very mention of which is a disgrace to human nature. It will be more eligible to imitate in this respect the delicacy of our English law, which treats it, in its very indictments, as a crime not fit to be named; “peccatum illud horribile, 216

inter christianos 〈15〉 non nominandum [that horrible crime, not to be named amongst Christians].” A taciturnity observed likewise by the edict of Constantius and Constansl: “ubi scelus est id, quod non proficit scire, jubemus insurgere leges, armari jura gladio ultore, ut exquisitis poenis subdantur infames, qui sunt, vel qui futuri sunt, rei.”8 Which leads me to add a word concerning its punishment.

This the voice of nature and of reason, and the express law of Godm, determine to

be capital. Of which we have a signal instance, long before the Jewish dispensation, by the destruction of two cities by fire from heaven: so that this is an universal, not merely a provincial, precept. And our antient law in some degree imitated this punishment, by commanding such miscreants to be burnt to deathn, though Fletao says they should be buried alive: either of which punishments was indifferently used for this crime among the antient Gothsp. But now the general punishment of all felonies is the same, namely, by hanging: and this offence (being in the times of popery only subject to ecclesiastical censures) was 〈16〉 made single felony by the statute 25 Hen. VIII. c. 6. and felony without benefit of clergy by statute 5 Eliz. c. 17. And the rule of law herein is, that, if both are arrived at years of discretion, agentes et consentientes pari poena plectantur q [the perpetrator and consenting party are both liable to the same punishment].

These are all the felonious offences, more immediately against the personal security

of the subject. The inferior offences, or misdemesnors, that fall under this head, are assaults, batteries, wounding, false imprisonment, and kidnapping.

V, VI, VII. With regard to the nature of the three first of these offences in general,

I have nothing farther to add to what has already been observed in the preceding book of these commentariesr, when we considered them as private wrongs, or civil 217 injuries, for which a satisfaction or remedy is given to the party aggrieved. But, taken in a public light, as a breach of the king’s peace, an affront to his government, and a damage done to his subjects, they are also indictable and punishable 〈17〉 with fine and imprisonment; or with other ignominious corporal penalties, where they are committed with any very atrocious designs. As in case of an assault with an intent to murder, or with an intent to commit either of the crimes last spoken of; for which

l Cod. 9. 9. 31.

m Levit. xx. 13. 15.

n Brit. c. 9.

o l. 1. c. 37.

p Stiernh. de jure Goth. l. 3. c. 2.

q 3 Inst. 59.

r See Vol. III. pag. 120 [III. 81].

s 1 Hawk. P. C. 65.

8 ‘Where that crime is found, which is unfit even to know, we command the law to arise armed with an avenging 144 of public wrongs

intentional assaults, in the two last cases, indictments are much more usual, than for the absolute perpetration of the facts themselves, on account of the difficulty of 〈18〉 proof: and herein, besides heavy fine and imprisonment, it is usual to award judgment of the pillory.

There is also one species of battery, more atrocious and penal than the rest, which

is the beating of a clerk in orders, or clergyman; on account of the respect and reverence due to his sacred character, as the minister and embassador of peace. Accordingly it is enacted by the statute called articuli cleri [articles of the clergy], 9 Edw. II. c. 3, that if any person lay violent hands upon a clerk, the amends for the peace broken shall be before the king; that is by indictment in the king’s courts: and the assailant may also be sued before the bishop, that excommunication or bodily penance may be imposed: which if the offender will redeem by money, to be given to the bishop, or the party grieved, it may be sued for before the bishop; whereas otherwise to sue in any spiritual court, for civil damages for the battery, falls within the danger of praemunire t. But suits are, and always were, allowable in the spiritual court, for money agreed to be given as a commutation for penanceu. So that upon the whole it appears, that a person guilty of such brutal behaviour to a clergyman, is subject to three kinds of prosecution, all of which may be pursued for one and the

218 same offence: an indictment, for the breach of the king’s peace by such assault and

battery; a civil action, for the special damage sustained by the party injured; and a suit in the ecclesiastical court, first, pro correctione et salute animae [for the amendment and health of the soul] by enjoining penance, and then again for such sum of money as shall be agreed on for taking off the penance enjoined: it being usual in those courts to exchange their spiritual censures for a round compensation in money v, perhaps because poverty is generally esteemed by the moralists the best medicine pro salute animae [for the health of the soul].

VIII. The two remaining crimes and offences, against the persons of his majesty’s

subjects, are infringements of their natural liberty: concerning the first of which, false imprisonment, its nature and incidents, I must content myself with referring the student to what was observed in the preceding volumew, when we considered it as a mere civil injury. But, besides the private satisfaction given to the individual by action, the law also demands public vengeance for the breach of the king’s peace, for the loss which the state sustains by the confinement of one of its members, and for the infringement of the good order of society. We have before seenx, that the most atrocious degree of this offence, that of sending any subject of this realm a prisoner into parts beyond the seas, whereby he is deprived of the friendly assistance of the laws to redeem him from such his captivity, is punished with the pains of praemunire, and incapacity to hold any office, 〈19〉 without any possibility of pardony. Inferior

t 2 Inst. 492. 620.

u Artic. Cler. 9 Edw. II. c. 4. F. N. B. 53.

v [Dr Barker’s case] 2 Roll. Rep. 384.

w See Vol. III. pag. 127 [III. 86].

x See pag. 116 [IV. 77].





chapter 15 145


degrees of the same offence of false imprisonment are also punishable by indictment (like assaults and batteries) and the delinquent may be fined and imprisonedz. And indeeda there can be no doubt, but that all kinds of crimes of a public nature, all disturbances of the peace, all oppressions, and other misdemesnors whatsoever, of a notoriously evil example, may be indicted at the suit of the king.

IX. The other remaining offence, that of kidnapping, being the forcible abduction 219

or stealing away 〈20〉 of man, woman, or child from their own country, and selling them into another, was capital by the Jewish law. “He that stealeth a man, and selleth him, or if he be found in his hand, he shall surely be put to deathb.” So likewise in the civil law, the offence of spiriting away and stealing men and children, which was called plagium [manstealing], and the offenders plagiarii [manstealers], was punished with deathc. This is unquestionably a very heinous crime, as it robs the king of his subjects, banishes a man from his country, and may in its consequences be productive of the most cruel and disagreeable hardships; and therefore the common law of England has punished it with fine, imprisonment, and pillory d. And also the statute 11 & 12 W. III. c. 7. though principally intended against pirates, has a clause that extends to prevent the leaving of such persons abroad, as are thus kidnapped or spirited away; by enacting, that if any captain of a merchant vessel shall (during his being abroad) force any person on shore, or wilfully leave him behind, or refuse to bring home all such men as he carried out, if able and desirous to return, he shall suffer three months imprisonment. And thus much for offences that more immediately affect the persons of individuals.

z West. Symbol. part 2. pag. 92.

a 1 Hawk. P. C. 210.

b Exod. xxi. 16.

c Ff. 48. 15. 1.

d [Designy’s case] Raym. 474. [Turbet v Dassigney] 2 Show. 221. [R. v Wilmore, 1682] Skinn. 47. [R. v Baily] Comb. 10.



220 chapter the sixteenth.



of offences against the

habitations of individuals.

The only two offences, that more immediately affect the habitations of individuals or private subjects, are those of arson and burglary.

I. Arson, ab ardendo [from ‘burning’ (Latin)], is the malicious and wilful burning

of the house or 〈1〉 outhouses of another man. This is an offence of very great malignity, and much more pernicious to the public than simple theft: because, first, it is an offence against that right, of habitation, which is acquired by the law of nature as well as by the laws of society; next, because of the terror and confusion that necessarily attends it; and, lastly, because in simple theft the thing stolen only changes its master, but still remains in esse [in being] for the benefit of the public, whereas by burning the very substance is absolutely destroyed. It is also frequently more destructive than murder itself, of which too it is often the cause: since murder, atrocious as it is, seldom extends beyond the felonious act designed; whereas fire too frequently involves in the common calamity persons unknown to the incendiary, and not intended to be

221 hurt by him, and friends as well as enemies. For which reason the civil law a punishes

with death such as maliciously set fire to houses in towns, and contiguous to others; but is more merciful to such as only fire a cottage, or house, standing by itself.

Our English law also distinguishes with much accuracy upon this crime. And

therefore we will enquire, first, what is such a house as may be the subject of this offence; next, wherein the offence itself consists, or what amounts to a burning of such house; and, lastly, how the offence is punished.

1. Not only the bare dwelling house, but all outhouses that are parcel thereof,

though not contiguous thereto, nor under the same roof, as barns and stables, may be the subject of arsonb. And this by the common law: which also accounted it felony to burn a single barn in the field, if filled with hay or corn, though not parcel of the dwelling housec. The burning of a stack of corn was antiently likewise accounted arsond. And indeed all the niceties and distinctions which we meet with in our books, concerning what shall, or shall not, amount to arson, seem now to be taken away by a variety of statutes; which will be mentioned in the next chapter, and have made the punishment of wilful burning equally extensive as the mischief. The offence of arson (strictly so called) may be committed by wilfully setting fire to one’s own house, provided one’s neighbour’s house is thereby also burnt; but if no mischief is done but



a Ff. 48. 19. 28. §. 12.

b 1 Hal. P. C. 567.

c 3 Inst. 69.

d 1 Hawk. P. C. 105.





chapter 16 147


to one’s own, it does not amount to felony, though the fire was kindled with intent to burn another’se. For by the common law no intention to commit a felony amounts to the same crime; though it does, in some cases, by particular statutes. However such wilful firing one’s own house, in a town, is a high misdemesnor, and punishable by fine, imprisonment, pillory, and perpetual sureties for the good behaviourf. And if a landlord or reversioner1 sets fire to his own house, of which another is in possession 222

under a lease from himself or from those whose estate he hath, it shall be accounted arson; for, during the lease, the house is the property of the tenantg.

2. As to what shall be said a burning, so as to amount to arson: a bare intent, or attempt

to do it, by actually setting fire to an house, unless it absolutely burns, does not fall within the description of incendit et combussit [set fire to and burned down]; which were words necessary, in the days of law-latin, to all indictments of this sort. But the burning and consuming of any part is sufficient; though the fire be afterwards extinguishedh. Also it must be a malicious burning; otherwise it is only a trespass: and therefore no negligence or mischance amounts to it. For which reason, though an unqualified person, by shooting with a gun, happens to set fire to the thatch of a house, this sir Matthew Hale determines not to be felony, contrary to the opinion of former writersi. But by statute 6 Ann. c. 31. any servant, negligently setting fire to a house or outhouses, shall forfeit 100l., or be sent to the house of correction for eighteen months: in the same manner as the Roman law directed “eos, qui negligenter ignes apud se habuerint, fustibus vel flagellis caedi k [those who have fire carelessly about them shall be beaten with whips or sticks.].”

3. The punishment of arson was death by our antient Saxon lawsl. And, in the reign

of Edward the first, this sentence was executed by a kind of lex talionis [law of retaliation]; for the incendiaries were burnt to deathm: as they were also by the Gothic constitutionsn. The statute 8 Hen. VI. c. 6. made the wilful burning of houses, under some special circumstances therein mentioned, amount to the crime of high treason. But it was again reduced to felony by the general acts of Edward VI and queen Mary: and now the punishment of all capital felonies is uniform, namely, by 〈3〉 suspension. The offence of arson was denied the benefit of clergy by statute 21 Hen.VIII. c. 1. but 223 that statute was repealed by 1 Edw.VI. c. 12. and arson was afterwards held to be ousted of clergy, with respect to the principal offender, only by inference and deduction from the statute 4 & 5 P. & M. c. 4. which 〈4〉 expressly denied it to the accessoryo; though now it is expressly denied to the principal also, by statute 9 Geo. I. c. 22.



e 〈2〉 [Holmes’s case] Cro. Car. 377.

f 1 Hal. P. C. 568. 1 Hawk. P. C. 106.

g [Case of Anne Lewis] Fost. 115.

h 1 Hawk. P. C. 106.

i 1 Hal. P. C. 569.

k Ff. 1. 15. 4.

l LL. Inae. c. 7.

m Britt. c. 9.

n Stiernh. de jure Goth. l. 3. c. 6.

o [Powlter’s case, 1609] 11 Rep. 35. 2 Hal. P. C. 346, 347. Foster. 336.

148 of public wrongs

II. Burglary, or nocturnal housebreaking, burgi latrocinium [robbery of the

castle], which by our antient law was called hamesecken, as it is in Scotland to this day, has always been looked upon as a very heinous offence: not only because of the abundant terror that it naturally carries with it, but also as it is a forcible invasion and disturbance of that right of habitation, which every individual might acquire even in a state of nature; an invasion, which in such a state, would be sure to be punished with death, unless the assailant were the stronger. But in civil society, the laws also come in to the assistance of the weaker party: and, besides that they leave him this natural right of killing the aggressor, if he can, (as was shewn in a former chapter)p they also protect and avenge him, in case the might of the assailant is too powerful. And the law of England has so particular and tender a regard to the immunity of a man’s house, that it stiles it his castle, and will never suffer it to be violated with impunity: agreeing herein with the sentiments of antient Rome, as expressed in the words of Tully q; “quid enim sanctius, quid omni religione munitius, quam domus uniuscujusque civium? [For what is more sacred, what more inviolable, than the house of every citizen?]”2 For this reason 〈5〉 no doors can in general be broken open to execute any civil process; though, in criminal causes, the public safety supersedes the private. Hence also in part arises the animadversion of the law upon eaves-droppers, nusancers, and incendiaries: and to this principle it must be assigned, that a man may assemble people together lawfully (at least if they do not exceed eleven)3

224 without danger of raising a riot, rout, or unlawful assembly, in order to protect and

defend his house; which he is not permitted to do in any other caser.

The definition of a burglar, as given us by sir Edward Cokes, is, “ he that by night

breaketh and entreth into a mansion-house, with intent to commit a felony.” In this definition there are four things to be considered; the time, the place, the manner, and the intent.

1. The time must be by night, and not by day; for in the day time there is no

burglary. We have seent, in the case of justifiable homicide, how much more heinous all laws made an attack by night, rather than by day; allowing the party attacked by night to kill the assailant with impunity. As to what is reckoned night, and what day, for this purpose: antiently the day was accounted to begin only at sunrising, and to end immediately upon sunset; but the better opinion seems to be, that if there be daylight or crepusculum [twilight] enough, begun or left, to discern a man’s face withal, it is no burglaryu.4 But this does not extend to moonlight; for then many

p See pag. 180 [IV. 119].

q pro domo, 41.

r 1 Hal. P. C. 547.

s 3 Inst. 63.

t See pag. 180, 181 [IV. 119].

u 3 Inst. 63. 1 Hal. P. C. 550. 1 Hawk. P. C. 101.

2 Cicero’s speech was delivered in 57 bc.

3 The Riot Act, 1 Geo. 1 st. 2. c. 5 (1714), enabled gatherings of twelve or more persons to be declared unlawful

and hence subject to an order to disperse within an hour: see IV. 94–5.





chapter 16 149


midnight burglaries would go unpunished: and besides, the malignity of the offence does not so properly arise from its being done in the dark, as at the dead of night; when all the creation, except beasts of prey, are at rest; when sleep has disarmed the owner, and rendered his castle defenceless.

2. As to the place. It must be, according to sir Edward Coke’s definition, in a

mansion house; and therefore to account for the reason why breaking open a church is burglary, as it undoubtedly is, he quaintly observes that it is domus mansionalis Dei w [God’s mansion house]. But it does not seem absolutely necessary, that it should in all cases be a mansion-house; for it may also be committed by breaking the gates 225 or walls of a town in the nightx, though that perhaps sir Edward Coke would have called the mansion-house of the garrison or corporation. Spelman defines burglary to be, “nocturna diruptio alicujus habitaculi, vel ecclesiae, etiam murorum portarumve burgi, ad feloniam perpetrandam [the nocturnal breaking open of any habitation or church, or even the walls or gates of a town, for the purpose of committing a felony].” And therefore we may safely conclude, that the requisite of its being domus mansionalis [mansion house] is only in the burglary of a private house; which is the most frequent, and in which it is indispensably necessary to form its guilt, that it must be in a mansion or dwelling house. For no distant barn, warehouse, or the like, are under the same privileges, nor looked upon as a man’s castle of defence: nor is a breaking open of houses wherein no man resides, and which therefore for the time being are not mansion-houses, attended with the same circumstances of midnight terror. A house however, wherein a man sometimes resides, and which the owner hath only left for a short season, animo revertendi [with the intention of returning], is the object of burglary; though no one be in it, at the time of the fact committedy. And if the barn, stable, or warehouse be parcel 〈6〉 of the mansion-house, though not under the same roof or contiguous, a burglary may be committed therein; for the capital house protects and privileges all its branches and appurtenants, if within the curtilage or homestall z.5 A chamber in a college or an inn of court, where each inhabitant hath a distinct property, is, to all other purposes as well as this, the mansion-house of the ownera. So also is a room or lodging, in any private house, the mansion for the time being 〈7〉 of the lodger. The house of a corporation, inhabited in separate apartments by the officers of the body corporate, is the mansion-house of the corporation, and not of the respective officersb. But if I hire a shop, parcel of another man’s house, and work or trade in it, but never lie there; it is no dwellinghouse, nor can burglary be committed therein: for by the lease it is severed from the rest of the house, and therefore is not the dwellinghouse of him who occupies the other



w 3 Inst. 64.

x Spelm. Gloss. t. Burglary. 1 Hawk. P. C. 103.

y 1 Hal. P. C. 566. Fost. 77.

z 1 Hal. P. C. 558. 1 Hawk. P. C. 104.

a 1 Hal. P. C. 556.

b [Sir John Wedderburn’s case] Foster. 38, 39.

150 of public wrongs

226 part; neither can I be said to dwell therein, when I neve[r] lie therec. Neither can

burglary be committed in a tent or booth erected in a market or fair; though the owner may lodge thereind: for the law regards thus highly nothing but permanent edifices; a house, or church, the wall, or gate of a town; 〈8〉 and it is the folly of the owner to lodge in so fragile a tenement: but his lodging there no more makes it burglary to break it open, than it would be to uncover a tilted waggon in the same circumstances.

3. As to the manner of committing burglary: there must be both a breaking and

an entry to complete it. But they need not be both done at once: for, if a hole be broken one night, and the same breakers enter the next night through the same, they are burglarse. There 〈9〉 must be an actual breaking; not a mere legal clausum fregit [breach of the enclosure], (by leaping over invisible ideal boundaries, which may constitute a civil trespass) but a substantial and forcible irruption. As at least by breaking, or taking out the glass of, or otherwise opening, a window; picking a lock, or opening it with a key; nay, by lifting up the latch of a door, or unloosing any other fastening which the owner has provided. But if a person leaves his doors or windows open, it is his own folly and negligence; and if a man enters therein, it is no burglary: yet, if he afterwards unlocks an inner or chamber door, it is sof. But to come down a chimney is held a burglarious entry; for that is as much closed, as the nature of things will permitg. So also to knock at a door, and upon opening it to rush in, with a felonious intent; or, under pretence of taking lodgings, to fall upon the landlord and rob him; or to procure a constable to gain admittance, in order to search for traitors, and then to bind the constable and rob the house; all these entries have been adjudged burglarious, though there was no actual breaking: for the law will not suffer itself to be trifled with by such evasions, especially under the cloke of legal processh. And so,

227 if a servant opens and enters his master’s chamber door with a felonious design; or if

any other person lodging in the same house, or in a public inn, opens and enters another’s door, with such evil intent; it is burglary. Nay, if the servant conspires with a robber, and lets him into the house by night, this is burglary in bothi, for the servant is doing an unlawful act, and the opportunity afforded him, of doing it with greater ease, rather aggravates than extenuates the guilt. As for the entry, any the least degree of it, with any part of the body, or with an instrument held in the hand, is sufficient: as, to step over the threshold, to put a hand or a hook in at a window to draw out goods, or a pistol to demand one’s money, are all of them burglarious entriesk. The entry may be before the breaking, as well as after: for by statute 12 Ann. c. 7. if a person 〈11〉 enters into, or is within, the dwelling house of another, without breaking

c 1 Hal. P. C. 558.

d 1 Hawk. P. C. 104.

e 1 Hal. P. C. 551.

f Ibid. 553.

g 1 Hawk. P. C. 102. 1 Hal. P. C. 552.

h Hawk. P. C. 102.

i 〈10〉 1 Hal. P. C. 553. 1 Hawk. P. C. 103.





chapter 16 151


in, either by day or by night, with intent to commit felony, and shall in the night break out of the same, this is declared to be burglary; there having before been different opinions concerning it: lord Baconl holding the affirmative, and sir Matthew Halem the negative. But it is universally agreed, that there must be both a breaking, either in fact or by implication, and also an entry, in order to complete the burglary.

4. As to the intent; it is clear, that such breaking and entry must be with a felonious

intent, otherwise it is only a trespass. And it is the same, whether such intention be actually carried into execution, or only demonstrated by some attempt or overt act, of which the jury is to judge. And therefore such a breach and entry of a house as has been before described, by night, with intent to commit a robbery, a murder, a rape, or any other felony, is burglary; whether the thing be actually perpetrated or not. Nor does it make any difference, whether the offence were felony at common law, or only created so by statute; since that statute, which makes an offence felony, gives it 228 incidentally all the properties of a felony at common lawn.

Thus much for the nature of burglary; 〈12〉 which is, as has been said, a felony at

common law, but within the benefit of clergy. 〈13〉 The statute however of 18 Eliz. c. 7. takes away clergy from the principals, and that of 3 & 4 W. & M. c. 9. from all accessories before the fact. And, in like manner, the laws of Athens, which punished no simple theft with death, made burglary a capital crimeo.

l Elem. 65.

m 1 Hal. P. C. 554.

n 1 Hawk. P. C. 105.

o Pott. Antiq. b. 1. c. 26.



229 chapter the seventeenth.



of offences against

private property.

The next, and last, species of offences against private subjects, are such as more immediately affect their property. Of which there are two, which are attended with a breach of the peace; larciny, and malicious mischief : and one, that is equally injurious to the rights of property, but attended with no act of violence; which is the crime of forgery. Of these three in their order.

I. Larciny, or theft, by contraction for latrociny, latrocinium, is distinguished by

the law into two sorts; the one called simple larciny, or plain theft unaccompanied with any other atrocious circumstance; and mixt or compound larciny, which also includes in it the aggravation of a taking from one’s house or person.

And, first, of simple larciny: which, when it is the stealing of goods above the value

of twelvepence, is called grand larciny; when of goods to that value, or under, is petit larciny: offences, which are considerably distinguished in their punishment, but not otherwise. I shall therefore first consider the nature of simple larciny in general; and then shall observe the different degrees of punishment, inflicted on its two several branches.

230 Simple larciny then is “the felonious taking, and carrying away, of the personal

goods of another.” This offence certainly commenced then, whenever it was, that the bounds of property, or laws of meum [mine] and tuum [yours], were established. How far such an offence can exist in a state of nature, where all things are held to be common, is a question that may be solved with very little difficulty. The disturbance of any individual, in the occupation of what he has seised to his present use, seems to be the only offence of this kind incident to such a state. But, unquestionably, in social communities, when property is established, the necessity whereof we have formerly seena, any violation of that property is subject to be punished by the laws of society: though how far that punishment should extend, is matter of considerable doubt. At present we will examine the nature of theft, or larciny, as laid down in the foregoing definition.

1. It must be a taking. This implies the consent of the owner to be wanting.

Therefore no delivery of the goods from the owner to the offender, upon trust, can ground a larciny. As if A lends B a horse, and he rides away with him; or, if I send goods by a carrier, and he carries them away; these are no larciniesb. But if the carrier opens a bale or pack of goods, or pierces a vessel of wine, and takes away part thereof, or if he carries it to the place appointed, and afterwards takes away the whole, these

a See Vol. II. pag. 8 [II. 5], &c.

b 1 Hal. P. C. 504.





chapter 17 153


are larciniesc: for here the animus furandi [intention to steal] is manifest; since in the first case he had otherwise no inducement to open the goods, and in the second the trust was determined, the delivery having taken its effect. But bare non-delivery shall not of course be intended to arise from a felonious design; since that may happen from a variety of other accidents. Neither by the common law was it larciny in any servant to run away with the goods committed to him to keep, but only a breach of civil trust. But by statute 33 Hen. VI. c. 1. the servants of persons deceased, accused 231

of embezzling their master’s goods, may by writ out of chancery (issued by the advice of the chief justices and chief baron, or any two of them) and proclamation made thereupon, be summoned to appear personally in the court of king’s bench, to answer their master’s executors in any civil suit for such goods; and shall, on default of appearance, be attainted of felony. And by statute 21 Hen. VIII. c. 7. if any servant embezzles his master’s goods to the value of forty shillings, it is made felony; except in apprentices, and servants under eighteen years old. But if he had not the possession, but only the care and oversight of the goods, as the butler of plate, the shepherd of sheep, and the like, the embezzling of them is felony at common law d. So if a guest robs his inn or tavern of a piece of plate, it is larciny; for he hath not the possession delivered to him, but merely the usee: and so it is declared to be by statute 3 & 4 W. & M. c. 9. if a lodger runs away with the goods from his ready furnished lodgings. Under some circumstances also a man may be guilty of felony in taking his own goods: as if he steals them from a pawnbroker, or any one to whom he hath delivered and entrusted them, with intent to charge such bailee with the value; or if he robs his own messenger on the road, with intent to charge the hundred with the loss according to the statute of Winchesterf.1

2. There must not only be a taking, but a carrying away: cepit et asportavit [he

took and removed] was the old law-latin. A bare removal from the place in which he found the goods, though the thief does not quite make off with them, is a sufficient asportation, or carrying away. As if a man be leading another’s horse out of a close, and be apprehended in the fact; or if a guest, stealing goods out of an inn, has removed them from his chamber down stairs; these have been adjudged sufficient carryings away, to constitute a larciny g. Or if a thief, intending to steal plate, takes it out of a chest in which it was, and lays it down upon the floor, but is surprized before he can 232

make his escape with it; this is larciny h.

3. This taking, and carrying away, must also be felonious; that is, done animo

furandi [with intent to steal] or as the civil law expresses it, lucri causa i [for the sake of gain]. This requisite, besides excusing those who labour under incapacities of

c 3 Inst. 107.

d 1 Hal. P. C. 506.

e 1 Hawk. P. C. 90.

f [Case of Macdaniel et al.] Foster. 123, 124.

g 3 Inst. 108, 109.

h 1 Hawk. P. C. 93.

i Inst. 4. 1. 1.

154 of public wrongs

mind or will, (of whom we spoke sufficiently at the entrance of this bookk) indemnifies also mere trespassers, and other petty offenders. As if a servant takes his master’s horse, without his knowlege, and brings him home again: if a neighbour takes another’s plough, that is left in the field, and uses it upon his own land, and then returns it: if, under colour of arrear of rent, where none is due, I distrein another’s cattel, or seise them: all these are misdemesnors and trespasses, but no feloniesl. The ordinary discovery of a felonious intent is where the party doth it clandestinely; or being charged with the fact, denies it. But this is by no means the only criterion of criminality: for in cases that may amount to larciny the variety of circumstances is so great, and the complications thereof so mingled, that it is impossible to recount all those, which may evidence a felonious intent, or animum furandi: wherefore they must be left to the due and attentive consideration of the court and jury.

4. This felonious taking and carrying away must be of the personal goods of

another: for if they are things real, or savour of the realty, larciny at the common law cannot be committed of them. Lands, tenements, and hereditaments (either corporeal or incorporeal) cannot in their nature be taken and carried away. And of things likewise that adhere to the freehold, as corn, grass, trees, and the like, or lead upon a house, no larciny could be committed by the rules of the common law; but the severance of them was, and in many things is still, merely a trespass: which depended

233 on a subtilty in the legal notions of our ancestors. These things were parcel of the real

estate; and therefore, while they continued so, could not by any possibility be the subject of theft, being absolutely fixed and immoveablem. And if they were severed by violence, so as to be changed into moveables; and at the same time, by one and the same continued act, carried off by the person who severed them; they could never be said to be taken from the proprietor, in this their newly acquired state of mobility (which is essential to the nature of larciny) being never, as such, in the actual or constructive possession of any one, but of him who committed the trespass. He could not in strictness be said to have taken what at that time were the personal goods of another, since the very act of taking was what turned them into personal goods. But if the thief severs them at one time, whereby the trespass is completed, and they are converted into personal chattels, in the constructive possession of him on whose soil they are left or laid; and comes again at another time, when they are so turned into personalty, and takes them away; it is larciny: and so it is, if the owner, or any one else, has severed themn. And now, by the statute 4 Geo. II. c. 32. 〈1〉 to steal, or sever with intent to steal, any lead or iron fixed to a house, or in any court or garden thereunto belonging, is made felony, liable to transportation for seven years: and to steal underwood or hedges, and the like, to rob orchards or gardens of fruit growing therein, to steal or otherwise destroy any turnips or the roots of madder when growing, are by the statutes 43 Eliz. c. 7. 15 Car. II. c. 2. 23 Geo. II. c. 26. and 31 Geo. II.

k See pag. 20 [IV. 13].

l 1 Hal. P. C. 509.

m See Vol. II. pag. 16 [II. 10].





chapter 17 155


c. 35. punishable criminally, by whipping, small fines, imprisonment, and satisfaction to the party wronged, according to the nature of the offence. Moreover, the stealing by night of any trees, or of any roots, shrubs, or plants to the value of 5s., is by statute 6 Geo. III. c. 36. made felony in the principals, aiders, and abettors, and in the purchasers thereof knowing the same to be stolen: and by statute 6 Geo. III. c. 48. the stealing of any timber trees therein specifiedo, and of any root, shrub, or plant, by day 234

or night, is liable to pecuniary penalties for the two first offences, and for the third is constituted a felony liable to transportation for seven years. Stealing ore out of mines is also no larciny, upon the same principle of adherence to the freehold; with an exception only to mines of black lead, the stealing of ore 〈3〉 out of which is felony without benefit of clergy by statute 25 Geo. II. c. 10.2 Upon nearly the same principle the stealing of writings relating to a real estate is no felony, but a trespassp: because they concern the land, or (according to our technical language) savour of the realty, and are considered as part of it by the law; so that they descend to the heir together with the land which they concernq.

Bonds, bills, and notes, which concern mere choses in action, were also at the

common law held not to be such goods whereof larciny might be committed; being of no intrinsic valuer, and not importing any 〈4〉 property in the possession of the person from whom they are taken. But by the statute 2 Geo. II. c. 25. they are now put upon the same footing, with respect to larcinies, as the money they were meant 〈5〉 to secure. And, by statute 7 Geo. III. c. 50. if any officer or servant of the post-office shall secrete, embezzle, or destroy any letter or pacquet, containing any bank note or other valuable paper particularly specified in the act, or shall steal the same out of any letter or pacquet, he shall be guilty of felony without benefit of clergy. Or, if he shall destroy any letter or pacquet with which he has received money for the postage, or shall advance the rate of postage on any letter or pacquet sent by the post, and shall secrete the money received by such advancement, he shall be guilty of single felony. Larciny also could not at common law be committed of treasuretrove, or wreck, till seised by the king or him who hath the franchise; for till such seisure no one hath a determinate property therein. But by statute 26 Geo. II. c. 19. plundering, or stealing from, any ship in distress (whether wreck or no wreck) is felony without benefit of 235

clergy: in like manner as, by the civil law s, 〈6〉 this inhumanity is also punished in the same degree as the most atrocious theft.

Larciny also cannot be committed of such animals, in which there is no property

either absolute or qualified; as of beasts that are ferae naturae [wild by nature], and unreclaimed, such as deer, hares, and conies [rabbits], in a forest, chase, or warren;

o 〈2〉 Oak, beech, chesnut, walnut, ash, elm, cedar, fir, asp, lime, sycamore, and birch.

p 1 Hal. P. C. 510. [R. v Westbeer] [2] Stra. 1137.

q See Vol. II. pag. 438 [II. 297].

r [Calye’s case] 8 Rep. 33.

s Cod. 6. 2. 18.

2 The act’s preamble states that ‘Wad, or Black Cawke, commonly called Black Lead, is … necessary for divers useful Purposes, and more particularly in the casting of Bomb Shells, Round Shot and Cannon Balls’: Statutes at 156 of public wrongs

fish in an open river or pond; or wild fowls at their natural liberty t. But if they are reclaimed or confined, and may serve for food, it is otherwise, even at common law: for of deer so inclosed in a park that they may be taken at pleasure, fish in a trunk, and pheasants or partridges in a mew,3 larciny may be committedu. And now, by statute 9 Geo. I. c. 22. 〈7〉 to kill or steal any deer in a forest, or other place, enclosed; to rob a warren; or to steal fish from a river or pond, being in this last case armed and disguised; these are felonies without benefit of clergy. And by statute 13 Car. II. c. 10. to steal deer in any forest, though uninclosed, is a forfeiture of 20l. for the first offence, and by statute 10 Geo. II. c. 32. seven years transportation for the second offence: which punishment is also inflicted for the first offence upon such as come to hunt there armed with offensive weapons. Also by statute 5 Geo. III. c. 14. the penalty of transportation for seven years is inflicted on persons stealing or taking fish in any water within a 〈8〉 park, paddock, orchard, or yard; and on the receivers, aiders, and abettors: and the like punishment, or whipping, fine, or imprisonment, is provided for the taking or 〈9〉 killing of coniesw in open warrens. And a forfeiture of five pounds to the owner of the fishery is made payable by persons taking or destroying (or attempting so to do) any fish in any river or other water within any inclosed ground being private property. Stealing hawks, in disobedience to the rules prescribed by the

236 statute 37 Edw. III. c. 19. is also felony x. It is also saidy, that, if swans be lawfully

marked, it is felony to steal them, though at large in a public river; and that it is likewise felony to steal them, though unmarked, if in any private river or pond: otherwise it is only a trespass. But, of all valuable domestic animals, 〈10〉 as horses, and of all animals domitae naturae [domesticated], which serve for food, as swine, sheep, poultry, and the like, larciny may be committed; and also of the flesh of such as are ferae naturae, when killedz. As to those animals, which do not serve for food, and which therefore the law holds to have no intrinsic value, as dogs of all sorts, and other creatures kept for whim and pleasure, though a man may have a base property therein, and maintain a civil action for the loss of thema, yet they are not of such estimation, as that the crime of stealing them amounts to 〈11〉 larcinyb.

Notwithstanding however that no larciny can be committed, unless there be

some property in the thing taken, and an owner; yet, if the owner be unknown, provided there be a property, it is larciny to steal it; and an indictment will lie, for the goods of a person unknownc. In like manner as, among the Romans, the lex Hostilia de furtis [the Hostilian law concerning theft]4 provided, that a prosecution for theft

t 1 Hal. P. C. 511. Fost. 366.

u 1 Hawk. P. C. 94. 1 Hal. P. C. 511.

w See stat. 22 & 23 Car. II. c. 25.

x 3 Inst. 98.

y Dalt. Just. c. 156.

z 1 Hal. P. C. 511.

a See Vol. II. pag. 393 [II. 265–6].

b 1 Hal. P. C. 512.

c Ibid.

3 A fish trunk was a perforated floating box; a mew was a cage.





chapter 17 157


might be carried on without the intervention of the owner d. This is the case of stealing a shrowd out of a grave; which is the property of those, whoever they were, that buried the deceased: but stealing the corpse itself, which has no owner, (though a matter of great indecency) is no felony, unless some of the gravecloths be stolen with it e. Very different from the law of the Franks, which seems to have respected both as equal offences; when it directed that a person, who had dug a corpse out of the ground in order to strip it, should be banished from society, and no one suffered to relieve his wants, till the relations of the deceased consented to his readmissionf.

Having thus considered the general nature of simple larciny, I come next to treat 237

of its punishment. Theft, by the Jewish law, was only punished with a pecuniary fine, and satisfaction to the party injuredg. And in the civil law, till some very late constitutions, we never find the punishment capital. The laws of Draco at Athens punished it with death:5 but his laws were said to be written in blood; and Solon afterwards changed the penalty to a pecuniary mulct. And so the Attic laws in general continuedh; except that once, in a time of dearth, it was made capital to break into a garden, and steal figs: but this law, and the informers against the offence, grew so odious, that from them all malicious informers were stiled sycophants; a name, which we have much perverted from its original meaning. From these examples, as well as the reason of the thing, many learned and scrupulous men have questioned the propriety, if not lawfulness, of inflicting capital punishment for simple thefti. And certainly the natural punishment for injuries to property seems to be the loss of the offender’s own property: which ought to be universally the case, were all men’s fortunes equal. But as those, who have no property themselves, are generally the most ready to attack the property of others, it has been found necessary instead of a pecuniary to substitute a corporal punishment: yet how far this corporal punishment ought to extend, is what has occasioned the doubt. Sir Thomas More j, and the marquis

d Gravin. l. 3. §. 106.

e See Vol. II. pag. 429 [II. 291].

f Montesq. Sp. L. b. 30. ch. 19.

g Exod. c. xxii.

h Petit. LL. Attic. l. 7. tit. 5.

i Est enim ad vindicanda furta nimis atrox, nec tamen ad refraenanda sufficiens: quippe neque furtum simplex tam ingens facinus est, ut capite debeat plecti; neque ulla poena est tanta, ut ab latrociniis cohibeat eos, qui nullam aliam artem quaerendi victus habent. (Mori Utopia. edit. Glasg. 1750. pag. 21.)—Denique, cum lex Mosaica, quanquam inclemens et aspera, tamen pecunia furtum, haud morte, mulctavit; ne putemus Deum, in nova lege clementiae qua pater imperat filiis, majorem indulsisse nobis invicem saeviendi licentiam. Haec sunt cur non licere putem: quam vero sit absurdum, atque etiam perniciosum reipublicae, furem atque homicidam ex aequo puniri, nemo est (opinor) qui nesciat. (Ibid. 39.) [Death is too severe a punishment for theft nor yet sufficient to restrain it; for neither is simple theft such a heinous offence that it should be made capital, nor can there be any punishment so severe as to restrain those from robbing who have no other means of obtaining a livelihood.—In short since the Mosaic law although rigorous and severe only punished theft by a fine not by death we cannot think that God in that new law of mercy by which as a father he governs his children has granted us a greater liberty of harshness or severity towards each other. These are the reasons why I deem it unlawful. And there is no one, I think, who does not know how absurd it is and even pernicious to the commonwealth that a thief and a murderer should receive the same punishment.]

j Utop. pag. 42.

5 Draco (c. seventh century bc), the first legislator of Athens, credited with replacing oral law and the blood 158 of public wrongs

Beccariak, at the distance of 〈12〉 more than two centuries, have very sensibly pro-

238 posed that kind of corporal punishment, which approaches the nearest to a pecuniary

satisfaction; viz. a temporary imprisonment, with an obligation to labour, first for the party robbed, and afterwards for the public, in works of the most slavish kind: in order to oblige the offender to repair, by his industry and diligence, the depredations he has committed upon private property and public order. But, notwithstanding all the remonstrances of speculative politicians and moralists, the punishment of theft still continues, throughout the greatest part of Europe, to be capital: and Puffendorf l, together with sir Matthew Halem, are of opinion that this must always be referred to the prudence of the legislature; who are to judge, say they, when crimes are become so enormous as to require such sanguinary restrictionsn. Yet both these writers agree, that such punishment should be cautiously inflicted, and never without the utmost necessity.

Our antient Saxon laws nominally punished theft with death, if above the value of

twelvepence: but the criminal was permitted to redeem his life by a pecuniary ransom; as, among their ancestors the Germans, by a stated number of cattleo. But in the ninth year of Henry the first [1109], this power of redemption was taken away, and all persons guilty of larciny above the value of twelvepence were directed to be hanged; which law continues in force to this day p. For though the inferior species of theft, or petit larciny, is only punished 〈13〉 by whipping at common law q, or by statute 4 Geo. I. c. 11. 〈14〉 may be extended to transportation 〈15〉 for seven years, yet the punishment of grand larciny, or the stealing above the value of twelvepence, (which sum was the standard in the time of king Athelstan, eight hundred years ago) is at common law regularly death. Which, considering the great 〈16〉 intermediate alteration in the price or denomination of money, is undoubtedly a very rigorous constitution; and made sir Henry Spelman (above a century since, when money was

239 at twice its present rate) complain,6 that while every thing else was risen in its nominal

value, and become dearer, the life of man had continually grown cheaperr. It is true, that the mercy of juries will often make them strain a point, and bring in larciny to be under the value of twelvepence, when it is really of much greater value: 〈17〉 but this is a kind of pious perjury, and does not at all excuse our common law in this respect from the imputation of severity, but rather strongly confesses the charge. It is likewise true, that, by the merciful extensions of the benefit of clergy by our modern statute law, a person who commits a simple larciny to the value of thirteen pence or



k ch. 22.

l L. of N. b. 8. c. 3.

m 1 Hal. P. C. 13.

n See pag. 9 [IV. 5–6].

o Tac. de mor. Germ. c. 12.

p 1 Hal. P. C. 12. 3 Inst. 53.

q 3 Inst. 218.

r Gloss. 350.





chapter 17 159


thirteen hundred pounds, though guilty of a capital offence, shall be excused the pains of death: but this is only for the first offence. And in many cases of simple larciny the benefit of clergy is taken away by statute: as from 〈18〉 horsestealings; taking woollen cloth from off the tenterst,7 or linen from the place of manufacturev; stealing sheep or other cattle specified in the actsu; thefts on navigable rivers above the value of forty shillingsw; plundering vessels in distress, or that have suffered shipwreckx; stealing letters sent by the posty; and 〈19〉 also stealing deer, hares, and conies under the peculiar circumstances mentioned in the Waltham black actz. Which additional severity is owing to the great malice and mischief of the theft in some of these instances; and, in others, to the difficulties men would otherwise lie under to preserve those goods, which are so easily carried off. Upon which last principle the Roman law punished more severely than other thieves the abigei, or stealers of cattlea; and the balnearii, or such as stole the cloaths of persons who were washing in the public bathsb: both which constitutions seem to be borrowed from the laws of Athensc. And so too the antient Goths punished with unrelenting severity 240 thefts of cattle, 〈20〉 or of corn that was reaped and left in the field: such kind of property (which no human industry can sufficiently guard) being esteemed under the peculiar custody of heavend. And thus much for the offence of simple larciny.

Mixed, or compound larciny is such as has all the properties of the former, but is

accompanied 〈21〉 with one of, or both, the aggravations of a taking from one’s house or person. First therefore of larciny from the house, and then of larciny from the person.

1. Larciny from the house, though it seems (from the considerations mentioned

in the preceding chapter e) to have a higher degree of guilt than simple larciny, yet is not at all distinguished from the other at common law f: unless where it is accompanied with the circumstance of breaking the house by night; and then we have seen that it falls under another description, viz. that of burglary. But now by several acts of parliament (the history of which is very ingeniously deduced by a learned modern writerg, who hath shewn them to have gradually arisen from our improvements in



s Stat. 1 Edw. VI. c. 12. 2 & 3 Edw. VI. c. 33. 31 Eliz. c. 12.

t Stat. 22 Car. II. c. 5.

v Stat. 18 Geo. II. c. 27.

u Stat. 14 Geo. II. c. 6. 15 Geo. II. c. 34.

w Stat. 24 Geo. II. c. 45.

x Stat. 12 Ann. st. 2. c. 18. 26 Geo. II. c. 19.

y Stat. 7 Geo. III. c. 50.

z Stat. 9 Geo. I. c. 22.

a Ff. 47. t. 14.

b Ibid. t. 17.

c Pott. Antiqu. b. 1. c. 26.

d Stiernh. de jure Goth. l. 3. c. 5.

e See pag. 223 [IV. 148].

f 1 Hawk. P. C. 98.

g Barr. 375, &c.

160 of public wrongs

trade and opulence)8 the benefit of clergy is taken from larcinies committed in an house 〈22〉 in almost every instanceh. The multiplicity of which acts are apt to create some confusion; but upon comparing them diligently we may collect, that the benefit of clergy is denied upon the following domestic aggravations of larciny; 〈23〉 viz. 1. In all larcinies above the value of twelvepence, from a church, or from a dwelling-house, or booth, any person being therein. 2. In all larcinies to the value of 5s. committed by breaking the dwelling-house, though no person be therein. 3. In all larcinies to the value of 40s. from a dwelling-house, or its outhouses, without breaking in, and

241 whether any person be therein or no. 4. In all larcinies to the value of 5s. from any

shop, warehousei, coachhouse, or stable; whether the same be broken open or not, and whether any person be therein or no. In all these cases, whether happening by day or by night, the benefit of clergy is taken away from the offenders.

2. Larciny from the person is either by privately stealing; or by open and violent

assault, which is usually called robbery.

The offence of privately stealing from a man’s person, as by picking his pocket 〈24〉

or the like, without his knowlege, was debarred of the benefit of clergy, so early as by the statute 8 Eliz. c. 14. But then it must be such a larciny, as stands in need of the benefit of clergy, viz. of above the value of twelvepence; else the offender shall not have judgment of death. For the statute creates no new offence; 〈25〉 but only takes away the benefit of clergy, which was a matter of grace, and leaves the thief to the regular judgment of the antient law k. This severity (for a most severe law it certainly is) seems to be owing to the ease with which such offences are 〈26〉 committed, and the difficulty of guarding against them: besides that this is an infringement of property, in the manual occupation or corporal possession of the owner, which was an offence even in a state of nature. And therefore the saccularii, or cutpurses, were more severely punished than common thieves by the Roman and Athenian lawsl.

Open and violent larciny from the person, or robbery, the rapina of the civilians, is

the felonious and forcible taking, from the person of another, of goods or money to any value, 〈27〉 by putting him in fearm. 1. There must be a taking, otherwise it is no robbery. A mere attempt to rob was indeed held to be felony, so late as Henry the fourth’s timen: but afterwards it was taken to be only a misdemesnor, and punishable

242 with fine and imprisonment; till the statute 7 Geo. II. c. 21. which makes it 〈28〉 a

felony transportable for seven years. If the thief, having once taken a purse, returns it, still it is a robbery: and so it is whether the taking be strictly from the person of

h Stat. 23 Hen. VIII. c. 1. 25 Hen. VIII. c. 3. 1 Edw. VI. c. 12. 5 & 6 Edw. VI. c. 9. 39 Eliz. c. 15. 3 & 4 W. & M. c. 9.

10 & 11 W. III. c. 23. 12 Ann. c. 7.

i See [John Howard’s case] Foster. 78, 79. Barr. 379.

k 1 Hawk. P. C. 98.

l Ff. 47. 11. 7. Pott. Antiqu. I. 1. c. 26.

m 1 Hawk. P. C. 95.

n 1 Hal. P. C. 532.

8 Daines Barrington (1727–1800), judge, antiquary, and naturalist, whose Observations on the Statutes (1766 and

later editions) supported Blackstone’s emphasis on the overall superiority of common law to parliamentary





chapter 17 161


another, or in his presence only; as where a robber by menaces and violence puts a man in fear, and drives away his sheep or his cattle 〈29〉 before his faceo. 2. It is immaterial of what value the thing taken is: a penny as well as a pound, thus forcibly extorted, makes a robbery p. 3. Lastly, the taking must be by force, or a previous putting in fear; which makes the violation of the person more atrocious than privately stealing. For, according to the maxim of the civil law q, “qui vi rapuit, fur improbior esse videtur [He who hath taken by force seems to be the more iniquitous thief].” 〈 30〉 This previous putting in fear is the criterion that distinguishes robbery from other larcinies. For if one privately steals sixpence from the person of another, and after wards keeps it by putting him in fear, this is no robbery, for the fear is subsequentr: neither is it capital, as privately stealing, being 〈31〉 under the value of twelvepence. Yet this putting in fear does not imply, that any great degree of terror or affright in the party robbed is necessary to constitute a robbery: it is sufficient that so much force, or threatening by word or gesture, be used, as might create an apprehension of danger, or oblige a man to part with his property without or against his consent s. Thus, if a man be knocked down without previous warning, and stripped of his property while senseless, though strictly he cannot be said to be put in fear, yet this is undoubtedly a robbery. Or, if a person with a sword drawn begs an alms, and I give it him through mistrust and apprehension of violence, this is a felonious robbery t. So if, under a pretence of sale, a man forcibly extorts money from another, neither shall this subterfuge avail him. But it is doubtedu, whether the forcing a higler, or other chapman, to sell his wares, and giving him the full value of them, amounts to so heinous a crime as robbery.

This species of larciny is debarred of the benefit of clergy by statute 23 Hen. VIII. 243

c. 1. and other subsequent statutes; not indeed in general, but only when 〈32〉 committed in or near the king’s highway. A robbery therefore in a distant field, or footpath, was not punished with deathw; but was open to the benefit of clergy, till the statute 3 & 4 W. & M. c. 9. which takes away clergy 〈33〉 from robbery wheresoever committed.

II. Malicious mischief, or damage, is the next species of injury to private property,

which the law considers as a public crime. This is such as is done, not animo furandi, or with an intent of gaining by another’s loss; which is some, though a weak, excuse: but either out of a spirit of wanton cruelty, or black and diabolical revenge. In which it bears a near relation to the crime of arson; for as that affects the habitation, so this does the other property, of individuals. And therefore any damage arising from this mischievous disposition, though only a trespass at common law, is now by a multitude

o 1 Hal. P. C. 533.

p 1 Hawk. P. C. 97.

q Ff. 4. 2. 14. §. 12.

r 1 Hal. P. C. 534.

s Fost. 128.

t 1 Hawk. P. C. 96.

u Ibid. 97.

162 of public wrongs

of statutes made penal in the highest degree. Of these I shall extract the contents in order of time.

And, first, by statute 22 Hen. VIII. c. 11. perversely and maliciously to cut down or

destroy the powdike, in the fens of Norfolk and Ely,9 〈34〉 is felony. By statute 43 Eliz. c. 13. (for preventing rapine on the northern borders) to burn any barn or stack of corn 〈35〉 or grain; or to prey, or make spoil, of the persons or goods of the subject upon deadly feud, in the four northern counties of Northumberland, Westmorland, Cumberland, and Durham; or to give or take any money or contribution, there called blackmail, to secure such goods from rapine; is felony without benefit of clergy. 〈36〉 By statute 22 & 23 Car. II. c. 7. to burn any ricks or stacks of corn, hay, or grain, barns, houses, buildings, or kilns; or maliciously, unlawfully, and willingly to kill any horses,

244 sheep, or other cattle, in the night time, is felony; but the offender may make his

election to be transported for seven years: and to maim or hurt such cattle is a trespass, for which treble damages shall be recovered. By statute 1 Ann. st. 2. c. 9. captains and mariners belonging to ships, and destroying the same, to the prejudice of the owners, (and by 4 Geo. I. c. 12. to the prejudice of insurers also) are guilty of felony without benefit of clergy. And by statute 12 Ann. c. 18. making any hole in a ship in distress, or 〈37〉 stealing her pumps, or wilfully doing any thing tending to the immediate loss of such ship, is felony without benefit of clergy. By statute 1 Geo. I, c. 48. maliciously to set on fire any underwood, wood, or coppice, is made single felony. By statute 6 Geo. I. c. 23. the wilful and malicious tearing, cutting, spoiling, burning, or defacing of the garments or cloaths of any person passing 〈38〉 in the streets or highways, is felony. This was occasioned by the insolence of certain weavers and others; who, upon the introduction of some Indian fashions prejudicial to their own manufactures, made it 〈39〉 their practice to cast aqua fortis10 in the streets upon such as wore them. By statute 9 Geo. I. c. 22. commonly called the Waltham black act, occasioned by the devastations committed in Epping forest, near Waltham in Essex, by persons in disguise or with their faces blacked; (who seem to have resembled the Roberdsmen, or followers of Robert Hood, that in the reign of Richard the first committed great outrages on the borders of England and Scotlandx;) by this black act, I say, which has in part been mentioned under the several heads of 〈40〉 riots, mayhem, and larciny, it is farther enacted, that unlawfully and maliciously to set fire to any house, barn, or outhouse, or to any hovel, cock, mow, or stack of corn, straw, hay, or wood; or to break down the head of any fishpond, whereby the fish shall be lost; or to kill, maim, or wound any cattle; or to cut down, or destroy, any trees planted in an avenue, or growing in a garden, orchard, or plantation, for ornament, shelter, or profit; all these malicious acts are felonies without benefit of clergy: and

245 the hundred shall be chargeable for the damages, unless the offender be convicted. In

x 3 Inst. 197.

9 One of three embankments raised to keep water off low-lying fenland in Norfolk.

10 A solution of nitric acid in water. The ‘Indian fashions’ complained of related to the use of cloth rather than

metal buttons and the binding of buttonholes with strips of cloth rather than twine. Both were held to damage





chapter 17 163


like manner by the Roman law to cut down trees, and especially vines, was punished in the same degree as robberyy. By statutes 6 Geo. II. c. 37. and 10 Geo. II. c. 32. it is also made felony without the benefit of clergy, maliciously to cut down any river or sea bank, whereby lands may be 〈41〉 overflowed; or to cut any hop-binds11 growing in a plantation of hops, or wilfully and maliciously to set fire to any mine or delph of coal. By statute 28 Geo. II. c. 19. to set fire to any goss [gorse], furze, or fern, growing in any forest or chase, is subject to a fine of five pounds. And by statute 6 Geo. III. c. 36 & 48. wilfully to spoil or destroy any timber or other trees, roots, shrubs, or plants, is for the two first offences liable to pecuniary penalties; and for the third if in the day time, and even for the first if at night, the offender shall be guilty of felony, and liable to transportation for seven years. And these are the punishments of malicious mischief.

III. Forgery, or the crimen falsi, is an offence, which was punished by the civil

law with deportation or banishment, and sometimes with deathz. It may with us be defined (at common law) to be, “the fraudulent making or alteration of a writing to the prejudice of another man’s right:” for which the offender may suffer fine, imprisonment, and pillory. And also by a variety of statutes, a more severe punishment is inflicted on the offender in many particular cases, which are so multiplied of late as almost to become general. I shall mention the principal instances.

By statute 5 Eliz. c. 14. to forge or make, or knowingly to publish or give in evidence,

any forged deed, court roll, or will, with intent to affect the right of real property, either freehold or copyhold, is punished by a forfeiture to the party grieved of double costs and damages; by standing in the pillory, and having both his ears cut off, and his nostrils slit, and seared; by forfeiture to the crown of the profits of his lands, and by perpetual imprisonment. For any forgery relating to a term of years, or annuity, 246

bond, obligation, acquittance, release, or discharge of any debt or demand of any personal chattels, the same forfeiture is given to the party grieved; and on the offender is inflicted the pillory, loss of one of 〈42〉 his ears, and half a year’s imprisonment: the second offence in both cases being felony without benefit of clergy.

Besides this general act, a multitude of others, since the revolution, (when paper

credit was first established) have inflicted capital punishment on 〈43〉 the forging or altering of bank bills or notes, or other securitiesa; of bills of credit issued from the exchequerb; of south sea bonds, &c c; of lottery ordersd; of army or navy debenturese; of East India bondsf; of writings under seal of the London, or royal exchange,



y Ff. 47. 7. 2.

z Inst. 4. 18. 7.

a Stat. 7 & 8 W. III. c. 31. 8 & 9 W. III. c. 20. 11 Geo. I. c. 9. 12 Geo. I. c. 32. 15 Geo. II. c. 13.

b See the several acts for issuing them.

c Stat. 9 Ann. c. 21. 6 Geo. I. c. 4 & 11. 12 Geo. I. c. 32.

d See the several acts for the lotteries.

e Stat. 5 Geo. I. c. 14. 9 Geo. I. c. 5.

f Stat. 12 Geo. I. c. 32.

164 of public wrongs

assuranceg; of a letter of attorney or other power to receive or transfer stock or annuities, or for the personating a proprietor thereof, to receive or transfer such annuities, stock, or dividendsh: to which may be added, though not strictly reducible to this head, the counterfeiting of mediterranean passes,12 under the hands of the lords of the admiralty, to protect one from the piratical states of Barbaryi; the forging or imitating any stamps to defraud the stamp officek; and the forging any marriage register or licencel: all which are by distinct acts of parliament made felonies without benefit of clergy. And by statute 31 Geo. II. c. 32. forging or counterfeiting any stamp or mark to denote the standard of gold and silver plate, and certain other offences of the like tendency, are made felony, but not without benefit of clergy.

247 〈44〉 There are also two other general laws, with regard to forgery; the one 2 Geo.

II. c. 35. whereby the first offence in forging or publishing any forged deed, will, writing obligatory, bill of exchange, promissory note, indorsement or assignment thereof, or any acquittance or receipt for money or goods, with intention to defraud any person, is made felony without benefit of clergy. And by statute 7 Geo. II. c. 22. it is equally penal to forge or utter a counterfeit acceptance of a bill of exchange, or the number of any accountable receipt for any note, bill, or any other security for money; or any warrant or order for the payment of money, or delivery of goods. So that, I believe, through the number of these general and special provisions, there is now hardly a case possible to be conceived, wherein forgery, that tends to defraud, whether in the name of a real or fictitious personm, is not made a capital crime.

These are the principal infringements of the rights of property; which were the

last species of offences against individuals or private subjects, which the method of our distribution has led us to consider. We have before examined the nature of all offences against the public, or commonwealth; against the king or supreme magistrate, the father and protector of that community; against the universal law of all civilized nations; together with some of the more atrocious offences, of publicly pernicious consequence, against God and his holy religion. And these several heads comprehend the whole circle of crimes and misdemesnors, with the punishment annexed to each, that are cognizable by the laws of England.

g Stat. 6 Geo. I. c. 18.

h Stat. 8 Geo. I. c. 22. 9 Geo. I. c. 12.

i Stat. 4 Geo. II. c. 18.

k See the several stamp acts.

l Stat. 26 Geo. II. c. 33.

m [Anne Lewis’s case] Fost. 116, &c.

12 ‘Mediterranean passes’ issued by the Admiralty under the terms of a 1682 treaty with the Barbary states of

North Africa guaranteed safe passage to English merchant shipping; forgeries threatened both state revenue and continued relations with the Barbary rulers.





chapter the eighteenth. 248




of the means of preventing

offences.

We are now arrived at the fifth general branch or head, under which I proposed to consider the subject of this book of our commentaries; viz. the means of preventing the commission of crimes and misdemesnors. And really it is an honour, and almost a singular one, to our English laws, that they furnish a title of this sort: since preventive justice is upon every principle, of reason, of humanity, and of sound policy, preferable in all respects to punishing justicea; the execution of which, though necessary, and in its consequences a species of mercy to the commonwealth, is always attended with many harsh and disagreeable circumstances.

This preventive justice consists in obliging those persons, whom 〈1〉 there is

probable ground to suspect of future misbehaviour, to stipulate with and to give full assurance to the public, that such offence as is apprehended shall not happen; by finding pledges or securities for keeping the peace, or for their good behaviour. This requisition of sureties has been several times mentioned before, as part of the penalty inflicted upon such as have been guilty of certain gross misdemesnors: but there also it must be understood rather as a caution against the repetition of the offence, than any immediate pain or punishment. And indeed, if we consider all human punish­ 249

ments in a large and extended view, we shall find them all rather calculated to prevent future crimes, than to expiate the past: since, as was observed in a former chapterb, all punishments inflicted by temporal laws may be classed under three heads; such as tend to the amendment of the offender himself, or to deprive him of any power to do future mischief, or to deter others by his example: all of which conduce to one and the same end, of preventing future crimes, whether that be effected by amendment, disability, or example. But the caution, which we speak of at present, is such as is intended merely for prevention, without any crime actually committed by the party, but arising only from a probable suspicion, that some crime is intended or likely to happen; and consequently it is not meant as any degree of punishment, unless perhaps for a man’s imprudence in giving just ground of apprehension.

By the Saxon constitution these sureties were always at hand, by means of king

Alfred’s wise institution of decennaries or frankpledges; wherein, as has more than once been observedc, the whole neighbourhood or tithing of freemen were mutually pledges for each others good behaviour. But, this great and general security being now fallen into disuse and neglected, there hath succeeded to it the method of making suspected persons find particular and special securities for their future

a Beccar. ch. 41.

b See pag. 11 [IV. 7].

c See Vol. I. pag. 113 [I. 79].

166 of public wrongs

conduct: of which we find mention in the laws of king Edward the confessord; “tradat fidejussores de pace et legalitate tuenda [Let him deliver sureties for maintaining peace and good behaviour].” Let us therefore consider, first, what this security is; next, who may take or demand it; and, lastly, how it may be discharged.

1. This security consists in being bound, with one or more sureties, in a recogni­

zance or obligation to the king, entered on record, and taken in some court or by some judicial officer; whereby the parties acknowlege themselves to be indebted to

250 the crown in the sum required; (for instance 100l.) with condition to be void and of

none effect, if the party shall appear in court on such a day, and in the mean time shall keep the peace: either generally, towards the king, and all his liege people; or particularly also, with regard to the person who craves the security. Or, if it be for the good behaviour, then on condition that he shall demean and behave himself well, (or be of good behaviour) either generally or specially, for the time therein limited, as for one or more years, or for life. This recognizance, if taken by a justice of the peace, must be certified to the next sessions, in pursuance of the statute 3 Hen. VII. c. 1. and if the condition of such recognizance be broken, by any breach of the peace in the one case, or any misbehaviour in the other, the recognizance becomes forfeited or absolute; and, being estreated or extracted (taken out from among the other records) and sent up to the exchequer, the party and his sureties, having now become the king’s absolute debtors, are sued for the several sums in which they are respectively bound.

2. Any justices of the peace, by virtue of their commission, or those who are ex

officio [by reason of office] conservators of the peace, as was mentioned in a former volumee, may demand such security according to their own discretion: or it may be granted at the request of any subject, upon due cause shewn, provided such demandant be under the king’s protection; for which reason 〈2〉 it hath been formerly doubted, whether Jews, Pagans, or persons convicted of a praemunire, were intitled theretof. Or, if the justice is averse to act, it may be granted by a mandatory writ, called a supplicavit, issuing out of the court of king’s bench or chancery; which will compel the justice to act, as a ministerial and not as a judicial officer: and he must make a return to such writ, specifying his compliance, under his hand and sealg. But this writ is seldom used: for, when application is made to the superior courts, they usually take the recognizances there, under the directions of the statute 21 Jac. I. c. 8.

251 And indeed a peer or peeress cannot be bound over in any other place, than the

courts of king’s bench or chancery: though a justice of the peace has a power to require sureties of any other person, being compos mentis [of sound mind] and under the degree of nobility, whether he be a fellow justice or other magistrate, or whether he be merely a private manh. Wives may demand it against their husbands; or

d cap. 18.

e See Vol. I. pag. 350 [I. 225].

f 1 Hawk. P. C. 126.

g ms F. N. B. 80. [Clavering’s case] 2 P. W. 202. [Blackstone’s citation seems odd, as the case concerns a failed

motion to discharge a supplicavit; the reporter notes that the Master of the Rolls generally refused to grant the writ, directing the applicant to apply instead to the justices of the peace.]





chapter 18 167


husbands, if necessary, against their wives j. But feme­coverts,1 and infants under age, ought to find security by their friends only, and not to be bound themselves: for they are incapable of engaging themselves to answer any debt; which, as we observed, is the nature of these recognizances or acknowlegements.

3. A recognizance may be discharged, either by the demise of the king, to whom

the recognizance is made; or by the death of the principal party bound thereby, if not before forfeited; or by order of the court to which such recognizance is certified by the justices (as the quarter sessions, assises, or king’s bench) if they see sufficient cause: 〈3〉 or if he at whose request it was granted, if granted upon a private account, will release it, or does not make his appearance to pray that it may be continuedi.

Thus far what has been said is applicable to both species of recognizances, for the

peace, and for the good behaviour; de pace, et legalitate, tuenda, as expressed in the laws of king Edward. But as these two species of securities are in some respects different, especially as to the cause of granting, or the means of forfeiting them; I shall now consider them separately: and first, shall shew for what cause such a recognizance, with sureties for the peace, is grantable; and then, how it may be forfeited.

1. Any justice of the peace may, ex officio [by virtue of his office], bind all those to

keep the peace, who in his presence make any affray; or threaten to kill or beat another; or contend together with hot and angry words; or go about with unusual 252 weapons or attendance, to the terror of the people; and all such as he knows to be common barretors; and such as are brought before him by the constable for a breach of the peace in his presence; and all such persons, as, having been before bound to the peace, have broken it and forfeited their recognizancesk. Also, wherever any private man hath just cause to fear, that another will burn his house, or do him a corporal injury, by killing, imprisoning, or beating him; or that he will procure others so to do; he may demand surety of the peace against such person: and every justice of the peace is bound to grant it, if he who demands it will make oath, that he is actually under fear of death or bodily harm; and will shew that he has just cause to be so, by reason of the other’s menaces, attempts, or having lain in wait for him; and will also farther swear, that he does not require such surety out of malice or for mere vexationl. This is called swearing the peace against another: and, if the party does not find such sureties, as the justice in his discretion shall require, he may immediately be committed till he doesm.

2. Such recognizance for keeping the peace, when given, may be forfeited by any

actual violence, or even an assault, or menace, to the person of him who demanded it, if it be a special recognizance: or, if the recognizance be general, by any unlawful action whatsoever, that either is or tends to a breach of the peace; or, more particularly,

j [Sims’s case] 2 Stra. 1207.

i 1 Hawk. P. C. 129.

k 1 Hawk. P. C. 126.

l Ibid. 127.

m Ibid. 128.

1 Feme covert (literally ‘covered woman’) was the legal term for a married woman, deemed to have no legal 168 of public wrongs

by any one of the many species of offences which were mentioned as crimes against the public peace in the eleventh chapter of this book; or, by any private violence committed against any of his majesty’s subjects. But a bare trespass upon the lands or goods of another, which is a ground for a civil action, unless accompanied with a wilful breach of the peace, is no forfeiture of the recognizancen. Neither are mere reproachful words, as calling a man knave or liar, any breach of the peace, so as to

253 forfeit one’s recognizance (being looked upon to be merely the 〈4〉 effect of heat and

passion) unless they amount to a challenge to fight o.

The other species of recognizance, with sureties, is for the good abearance, or good

behaviour. This includes security for the peace, and somewhat more: we will therefore examine it in the same manner as the other.

1. First then, the justices are empowered by the statute 34 Edw. III. c. 1. to bind

over to the good behaviour towards the king and his people, all them that be not of good fame, wherever they be found; to the intent that the people be not troubled nor endamaged, nor the peace diminished, nor merchants and others, passing by the highways of the realm, be disturbed nor put in the peril which may happen by such offenders. Under the general words of this expression, that be not of good fame, it is holden that a man may be bound to his good behaviour for causes of scandal, contra bonos mores [against good morals], as well as contra pacem [against the peace]; as, for haunting bawdy houses with women of bad fame; or for keeping such women in his own house; or for words tending to scandalize the government, or in abuse of the officers of justice, especially in the execution of their office. Thus also a justice may bind over all night­walkers; eaves­droppers; such as keep suspicious company, or are reported to be pilferers or robbers; such as sleep in the day, and wake on the night; common drunkards; whoremasters; the putative fathers of bastards; cheats; idle vagabonds; and other persons, whose misbehaviour may reasonably bring them within the general words of the statute, as persons not of good fame: an expression, it must be owned, of so great a latitude, as leaves much to be determined by the discretion of the magistrate himself. But, if he commits a man for want of sureties, he must express the cause thereof with convenient certainty; and take care that such cause be a good one p.

254 2. A recognizance for the good behaviour may be forfeited by all the same means,

as one for the security of the peace may be; and also by some others. As, by going armed with unusual attendance, to the terror of the people; by speaking words tending to sedition; or, by committing any of those acts of misbehaviour, which the recognizance was intended to prevent. But not by barely giving fresh cause of suspicion of that which perhaps may never actually happenq: for, though it is just to compel suspected persons to give security to the public against misbehaviour that is apprehended; yet it would be hard, upon such suspicion, without the proof of any actual crime, to punish them by a forfeiture of their recognizance.

n Ibid. 131.

o 1 Hawk. P. C. 130.

p Ibid. 132.

q 1 Hawk. P. C. 133.





chapter the nineteenth. 255




of courts of a criminal

jurisdiction.

The sixth, and last, object of our enquiries will be the method of inflicting those punishments, which the law has annexed to particular offences; and which I have constantly subjoined to the description of the crime itself. In the discussion of which I shall pursue much the same general method, that I followed in the preceding book, with regard to the redress of civil injuries: by, first, pointing out the several courts of criminal jurisdiction, wherein offenders may be prosecuted to punishment; and by, secondly, deducing down in their natural order, and explaining, the several proceedings therein.

First then, in reckoning up the several courts of criminal jurisdiction, I shall, as

in the former case, begin with an account of such, as are of a public and general jurisdiction throughout the whole realm; and, afterwards, proceed to such, as are only of a private and special jurisdiction, and confined to some particular parts of the kingdom.

I. In our enquiries into the criminal courts of public and general jurisdiction,

I must in one respect pursue a different order from that in which I considered the civil tribunals. For there, as the several courts had a gradual subordination to each other, the superior correcting and reforming the errors of the inferior, I thought it 256 best to begin with the lowest, and so ascend gradually to the courts of appeal, or those of the most extensive powers. But as it is contrary to the genius and spirit of the law of England, to suffer any man to be tried twice for the same offence in a criminal way, especially if acquitted upon the first trial; therefore these criminal courts may be said to be all independent of each other: at least so far, as that the sentence of the lowest of them can never be controlled or reversed by the highest jurisdiction in the kingdom, unless for error in matter of law, apparent upon the face of the record; though sometimes causes may be removed from one to the other before trial. And therefore as, in these courts of criminal cognizance, there is not the same chain and dependence as in the others, I shall rank them according to their dignity, and begin with the highest of all; viz.

1. The high court of parliament; which is the supreme court in the kingdom, not

only for the making, but also for the execution, of laws; by the trial of great and enormous offenders, whether lords or commoners, in the method of parliamentary impeachment. As for acts of parliament to attaint particular persons of treason or felony, or to inflict pains and penalties, beyond or contrary to the common law, to serve a special purpose, I speak not of them; being to all intents and purposes new laws, made pro re nata [for the specific case], and by no means an execution of such as are already in being. But an impeachment before the lords by the commons of 170 of public wrongs

Great Britain, in parliament, is a prosecution of the already known and established law, and has been frequently put in practice; being a presentment to the most high and supreme court of criminal jurisdiction by the most solemn grand inquest of the whole kingdoma. A commoner cannot however be impeached before the lords for

257 any capital offence, but only for high misdemesnorsb: a peer may be impeached for

any crime. And they usually (in case of an impeachment of a peer for treason) address the crown to appoint a lord high steward, for the greater dignity and regularity of their proceedings; which high steward was formerly elected by the peers themselves, though he was generally commissioned by the kingc; but it hath of late years been strenuously maintainedd, that the appointment of an high steward in such cases is not indispensably necessary, but that the house may proceed without one. The articles of impeachment are a kind of bills of indictment, found by the house of commons, and afterwards tried by the lords; who are in cases of misdemesnors considered not only as their own peers, but as the peers of the whole nation. This is a custom derived to us from the constitution of the antient Germans; who in their great councils sometimes tried capital accusat[i]ons relating to the public: “licet apud concilium accusare quoque, et discrimen capitis intendere e [it is allowed to bring accusations before the council and to seek the death penalty].” And it has a peculiar propriety in the English constitution; which has much improved upon the antient model imported

258 hither from the continent. For, though in general the union of the legislative and

judicial powers ought to be most carefully avoidedf, yet it may happen that a subject, intrusted with the administration of public affairs, may infringe the rights of the people, and be guilty of such crimes, as the ordinary magistrate either dares not or cannot punish. Of these the representatives of the people, or house of commons, cannot properly judge; because their constituents are the parties injured: and can therefore only impeach. But before what court shall this impeachment be tried? Not before the ordinary tribunals, which would naturally be swayed by the authority of so powerful an accuser. Reason therefore will suggest, that this branch of the legislature, which represents the people, must bring its charge before the other branch, which

a * 1 Hal. P. C. 150.

b When, in 4 Edw. III. the king demanded the earls, barons, and peers, to give judgment against Simon de

Bereford, who had been a notorious accomplice in the treasons of Roger earl of Mortimer, they came before the king in parliament, and said all with one voice, that the said Simon was not their peer; and therefore they were not bound to judge him as a peer of the land. And when afterwards, in the same parliament, they were prevailed upon, in respect of the notoriety and heinousness of his crimes, to receive the charge and to give judgment against him, the following protest and proviso was entered on the parliament roll. “And it is assented and accorded by our lord the king, and all the great men, in full parliament, that albeit the peers, as judges of the parliament, have taken upon them in the presence of our lord the king to make and render the said judgment; yet the peers who now are, or shall be in time to come, be not bound or charged to render judgment upon others than peers; nor that the peers of the land have power to do this, but thereof ought ever to be discharged and acquitted: and that the aforesaid judgment now rendered be not drawn to example or consequence in time to come, whereby the said peers may be charged hereafter to judge others than their peers, contrary to the laws of the land, if the like case happen, which God forbid.” (Rot. Parl. 4 Edw. III. n. 2 & 6. 2 Brad. Hist. 190. Selden. judic. in parl. ch. 1.)

c 1 Hal. P. C. 350.

d Lords Journ. 12 May 1679. Com. Journ. 15 May 1679. Fost. 142, &c.

e Tacit. de mor. Germ. 12.

f See Vol. I. pag. 269 [I. 173].





chapter 19 171


consists of the nobility, who have neither the same interests, nor the same passions as popular assembliesg. This is a vast superiority, which the constitution of this island enjoys, over those of the Grecian or Roman republics; where the people were at the same time both judges and accusers. It is proper that the nobility should judge, to insure justice to the accused; as it is proper that the people should accuse, to insure justice to the commonwealth. And therefore, among other extraordinary circumstances attending the authority of this court, there is one of a very singular nature, which was insisted on by the house of commons in the case of the earl of Danby in the reign of Charles II h; and is now enacted by statute 12 & 13 W. III. c. 2. that no pardon under the great seal shall be pleadable to an impeachment by the commons of Great Britain in parliamenti.

2. The court of the lord high steward of Great Britaink is a court instituted for the

trial of peers, indicted for treason or felony, or for misprision of eitherl. The office of this great magistrate is very antient; and was formerly hereditary, or at least held for 259

life, or dum bene se gesserit [during good behaviour]: but now it is usually, and hath been for many centuries pastm, granted pro hac vice [for this occasion] only; and it hath been the constant practice (and therefore seems now to have become necessary) to grant it to a lord of parliament, else he is incapable to try such delinquent peern. When such an indictment is therefore found by a grand jury of freeholders in the king’s bench, or at the assises before the justices of oyer and terminer, it is to be removed by a writ of certiorari into the court of the lord high steward, which only has power to determine it. A peer may plead a pardon before the court of king’s bench, and the judges have power to allow it; in order to prevent the trouble of appointing an high steward, merely for the purpose of receiving such plea. But he may not plead, in that inferior court, any other plea; as guilty, or not guilty, of the indictment; but only in this court: because, in consequence of such plea, it is possible that judgment of death might be awarded against him. The king therefore, in case a peer be 〈2〉 indicted of treason, felony, or misprision, creates a lord high steward pro hac vice by commission under the great seal; which recites the indictment so found, and gives his grace power to receive and try it secundum legem et consuetudinem Angliae [by the law and custom of England]. Then, when the indictment is regularly removed, by writ of certiorari, commanding the inferior court to certify it up to him, the lord high steward directs a precept to a serjeant at arms, to summon the lords to attend and try the indicted peer. This precept was formerly issued to summon only eighteen

g Montesq. Sp. L. xi. 6.

h Com. Journ. 5 May 1679.

i See chap. 31 [IV. 257].

k 〈1〉 4 Inst. 58. 2 Hawk. P. C. 5. 421.

l [R. v Edward Lord Vaux] 1 Bulstr. 198.

m Pryn. on 4 Inst. 46.

n Quand un seigneur de parlement serra arrein de treason ou felony, le roy par ses lettres patents fera un grand et sage seigneur d’ estre le grand seneschal d’ Angleterre: qui—doit faire un precept—pur faire venir xx seigneurs, ou xviii, &c. [When a lord of parliament is arraigned on a charge of treason or felony, the king by his letters patent shall create some wise and noble lord the lord high steward of England who … shall issue out a precept … to summon 18 172 of public wrongs

or twenty, selected from the body of the peers: then the number came to be indefinite; and the custom was, for the lord high steward to summon as many as he thought proper, (but of late years not less than twenty threeo) and that those lords only should

260 sit upon the trial: which threw a monstrous weight of power into the hands of the

crown, and this its great officer, of selecting only such peers as the then predominant party should most approve of. And accordingly, when the earl of Clarendon fell into disgrace with Charles II, there was a design formed to prorogue the parliament, in order to try him by a select number of peers; it being doubted whether the whole house could be induced to fall in with the views of the court p. But now, by statute 7 W. III. c. 3. upon all trials of peers for treason or misprision, all the peers who have a right to sit and vote in parliament shall be summoned, at least twenty days before such trial, to appear and vote therein; and every lord appearing shall vote in the trial of such peer, first taking the oaths of allegiance and supremacy, and subscribing the declaration against popery.

During the session of parliament the trial of an indicted peer is not properly in the

court of the lord high steward, but before the court last-mentioned, of our lord the king in parliament q. It is true, a lord high steward is always appointed in that case, to regulate and add weight to the proceedings; but he is rather in the nature of a speaker pro tempore [for the time being], or chairman of the court, than the judge of it ; for the collective body of the peers are therein the judges both of law and fact, and the high steward has a vote with the rest, in right of his peerage. But in the court of the lord high steward, which is held in the recess of parliament, he is the 〈3〉 sole judge in matters of law, as the lords triors are in matters of fact; and as they may not interfere with him in regulating the proceedings of the court, so he has no right to intermix with them in giving any vote upon the trialr. Therefore, upon the conviction and attainder of a peer for murder in full parliament, it hath been holden by the judgess, that in case the day appointed in the judgment for execution should lapse before execution done, a new time of execution may be appointed by either the high court of

261 parliament, during its sitting, though no high steward be existing; or, in the recess of

parliament, by the court of king’s bench, the record being removed into that court.

It has been a point of some controversy, whether the bishops have now a right to

sit in the court of the lord high steward, to try indictments of treason and misprision. Some incline to imagine them included under the general words of the statute of king William, “all peers, who have a right to sit and vote in parliament:” but the expression had been much clearer, if it had been, “all lords,” and not, “all peers;” for though bishops, on account of the baronies annexed to their bishopricks, are clearly lords of parliament, yet, their blood not being ennobled, they are not universally allowed to be peers with the temporal nobility: and perhaps this word might be inserted purposely with a view to exclude them. However, there is no instance of

o [Lord Dacre’s case] Kelynge. 56.

p Carte’s life of Ormonde. Vol. 2.

q [Case of Lord Ferrers] Fost. 141.

r [Trial of Henry, Lord Delamere] State Trials, Vol. IV. 214. 232, 3.





chapter 19 173


their sitting on trials for capital offences, even upon impeachments or indictments in full parliament, much less in the court we are now treating of; for indeed they usually voluntarily withdraw, but enter a protest declaring their right to stay. 〈4〉 It is certain that, in the eleventh chapter of the constitutions of Clarendon, made in parliament 11 Hen. II. they are expressly excluded from sitting and voting in trials of life or limb: “episcopi, sicut caeteri barones, debent interesse judiciis cum baronibus, quousque perveniatur ad diminutionem membrorum, vel ad mortem [the bishops ought to be present at judgments with the barons like other barons, until it comes to [a judgment] involving the loss of life or limb]:” and Becket’s quarrel with the king hereupon was not on account of the exception, (which was agreeable to the canon law) but of the general rule, that compelled the bishops to attend at all. And the determination of the house of lords in the earl of Danby’s caset, which hath ever since been adhered to, is consonant to these constitutions; “that the lords spiritual have a right to stay and sit in court in capital cases, till the court proceeds to the vote of guilty, or not guilty.” It must be noted, that this resolution extends only to trials in full parliament: for to the court of the lord high steward (in which no vote can be given, but merely that of 262

guilty or not guilty) no bishop, as such, ever was or could be summoned; and though the statute of king William regulates the proceedings in that court, as well as in the court of parliament, yet it never intended to new-model or alter its constitution; and consequently does not give the lords spiritual any right in cases of blood which they had not beforeu. And what makes their exclusion more reasonable, is, that they have no right to be tried themselves in the court of the lord high stewardw, and therefore surely ought not to be judges there. For the privilege of being thus tried depends upon nobility of blood, rather than a seat in the house; as appears from the trials of popish lords, of lords under age, and (since the union) of the Scots nobility, though not in the number of the sixteen;1 and from the trials of females, such as the queen consort or dowager, and of all peeresses by birth; and peeresses by marriage also, unless they have, when dowagers, disparaged themselves by taking a commoner to their second husband.

3. The court of king’s bench x, concerning the nature of which we partly enquired

in the preceding book y, was (we may remember) divided into a crown side, and a plea side. And on the crown side, or crown office, it takes cognizance of all criminal causes, from high treason down to the most trivial misdemesnor or breach of the peace. Into this court also indictments from all inferior courts may be removed by writ of certiorari, and tried either at bar, or at nisi prius, by a jury of the county out of which the indictment is brought. The judges of this court are the supreme coroners of the kingdom. And the court itself is the principal court of criminal jurisdiction

t Lords Journ. 15 May 1679.

u Fost. 248.

w Bro. Abr. t. Trial. 142.

x 4 Inst. 70. 2 Hal. P. C. 2. 2 Hawk. P. C. 6.

y See Vol. III. pag. 41 [III. 27].

1 That is, the sixteen representative peers of Scotland who were elected at each general election by their fellow 174 of public wrongs

(though the two former are of greater dignity) known to the laws of England. For which reason by the coming of the court of king’s bench into any county, (as it was removed to Oxford on account of the sickness in 1665) all former commissions of

263 oyer and terminer, and general gaol delivery, are at once absorbed and determined

ipso facto: in the same manner as by the old Gothic and Saxon constitutions, “jure vetusto obtinuit, quievisse omnia inferiora judicia, dicente jus regez.”2

Into this court of king’s bench hath reverted all that was good and salutary of the

jurisdiction of the court of starchamber, camera stellataa: which was a court of very antient originalb, but new-modelled by statutes 3 Hen. VII. c. 1. and 21 Hen. VIII. c. 20. consisting of divers lords spiritual and temporal, being privy counsellors, together with two judges of the courts of common law, without the intervention of any jury.

264 Their jurisdiction extended legally over riots, perjury, misbehaviour of sheriffs, and

other notorious misdemesnors, contrary to the laws of the land. Yet this was afterwards (as lord Clarendon informs usc) stretched “to the asserting of all proclamations, and orders of state; to the vindicating of illegal commissions, and grants of monopolies; holding for honourable that which pleased, and for just that which profited, and becoming both a court of law to determine civil rights, and a court of revenue to enrich the treasury: the council table by proclamations enjoining to the people that which was not enjoined by the laws, and prohibiting that which was not prohibited; and the star-chamber, which consisted of the same persons in different rooms, censuring the breach and disobedience to those proclamations by very great fines, imprisonments, and corporal severities: so that any disrespect to any acts of state, or

z Stiernhook. l. 1. c. 2.

a This is said (Lamb. Arch. 154.) to have been so called, either from the Saxon word steoran, to steer or govern;

or from its punishing the crimen stellionatus [the crime of imposition, deceit or cheating], or cosenage; or because the room wherein it sate, the old council chamber of the palace of Westminster, 〈5〉 (Lamb. 148.) was full of windows; or (to which sir Edward Coke, 4 Inst. 66. accedes) because haply the roof thereof was at the first garnished with gilded stars. As all these are merely conjectures, (for 〈6〉 no stars are said to have remained in the roof so late as the reign of queen Elizabeth) I shall venture to propose another conjectural etymology, as plausible perhaps as any of them. It is well known that, before the banishment of the Jews under Edward I, their contracts and obligations were denominated in our antient records starra or starrs, from a corruption of the Hebrew word, shetàr, a covenant. (Tovey’s Angl. judaic. 32. Selden. tit. of hon. ii. 34. Uxor Ebraic. i. 14.) These starrs, by an ordinance of Richard the first, preserved by Hoveden, were commanded to be enrolled and deposited in chests under three keys in certain places; one, and the most considerable, of which was in the king’s exchequer at Westminster: and no starr was allowed to be valid, unless it were found in some of the said 〈7〉 repositaries. (Madox hist. exch. c. vii. §. 4, 5, 6.) The room at the exchequer, where the chests containing these starrs were kept, was probably called the starr-chamber; and, when the Jews were expelled the kingdom, was applied to the use of the king’s council, when sitting in their judicial capacity. To confirm this; the first time the star-chamber is 〈8〉 mentioned in any record, (Rot. claus. 41 Edw. III. m. 13.) it is said to have been situated near the receipt of the exchequer: that the king’s council, his chancellor, treasurer, justices, and other sages, were assembled en la chaumbre des esteilles pres la resceipt al Westminster [in the star chamber near the receipt at Westminster]. For in process of time, when the meaning of the Jewish starrs was forgotten, the word star-chamber was naturally rendered in law-french, la chaumbre des esteilles, and in law-latin, camera stellata; which continued to be the stile in latin till the dissolution of that court. [The Oxford English Dictionary dismisses Blackstone’s etymology as having ‘no claim to consideration’.]

b Lamb. Arch. 156.

c Hist. of Reb. book 1 & 3.

2 ‘It was the ancient practice that all inferior courts of justice should be discontinued in those places where the

king administered justice.’





chapter 19 175


to the persons of statesmen, was in no time more penal, and the foundations of right never more in danger to be destroyed.” For which reasons, it was finally abolished by statute 16 Car. I. c. 10. to the general joy of the whole nationd.

4. The court of chivalry e, of which we also formerly spokef as a military court, or

court of honour, when held before the earl marshal only, is also a criminal court, when held before the lord high constable of England jointly with the earl marshal. And then it has jurisdiction over pleas of life and member, arising in matters of arms and deeds of war, as well out of the realm as within it. But the criminal, as well as civil part of its authority, is fallen into entire disuse: there having been no permanent high 265

constable of England (but only pro hac vice at coronations and the like) since the attainder and execution of Stafford duke of Buckingham in the thirteenth year of Henry VIII; the authority and charge, both in war and peace, being deemed too ample for a subject: so ample, that when the chief justice Fineux was asked by king Henry the eighth, how far they extended, he declined answering; and said, the decision of that question belonged to the law of arms, and not to the law of Englandg.

5. The high court of admiraltyh, held before the lord high admiral of England, or

his deputy, stiled the judge of the admiralty, is not only a court of civil, but also of criminal, jurisdiction. This court hath cognizance of all crimes and offences committed either upon the sea, or on the coasts, out of the body or extent of any English county; and, by statute 15 Ric. II. c. 3. of death and mayhem happening in great ships being and hovering in the main stream of great rivers, below the bridges of the same rivers, which are then a sort of ports or havens; such as are the ports of London and Glocester, though they lie at a great distance from the sea. But, as this court proceeded without jury, in a method much conformed to the civil law, the exercise of a criminal 〈10〉 jurisdiction therein was contrary to the genius of the law of England; inasmuch as a man might be there deprived of his life by the opinion of a single judge, without the judgment of his peers. And besides, as innocent persons might thus fall a sacrifice to the caprice of a single man, so very gross offenders might, and did frequently, escape punishment: for the rule of the civil law is, how reasonably I shall not at present enquire, that no judgment of death can be given against offenders, without proof by two witnesses, or a confession of the fact by themselves. This was always a great offence to the English nation: and therefore in the eighth year of 〈11〉 Henry VI a remedy was endeavoured to be applied in parliament; 266 but it miscarried for want of the royal assent. However, by the statute 28 Hen. VIII. c. 15. it was enacted, that these offences should be tried by 〈12〉 commissioners,

d The just odium, into which this tribunal had fallen before its dissolution, has been the occasion that few memorials have reached us of its nature, jurisdiction, and practice; except such as, on account of their enormous oppression, are recorded in the histories of the times. There are however to be met with some reports of its 〈9〉 proceedings in manuscript; of which the author hath one, for the first three years of king Charles: and there is in the British Museum (Harl. MSS. Vol. I. no. 1226.) a very full, methodical, and accurate account of the constitution and course of this court, compiled by William Hudson of Gray’s Inn, an eminent practitioner therein.

e 4 Inst. 123. 2 Hawk. P. C. 9.

f See Vol. III. pag. 68 [III. 45–6].

g Duck de authorit. jur. civ.

176 of public wrongs

nominated by the lord chancellor; namely, the admiral, or his deputy, and three or four more; (among whom two common law judges are constantly appointed, who in effect try all the prisoners) the indictment being first found by a grand jury of twelve men, and afterwards tried by another jury, as at common law: and that the course of proceedings should be according to the law of the land. This is now the only method of trying marine felonies in the court of admiralty: the judge of the admiralty still presiding 〈13〉 therein, just as the lord mayor presides at the sessions in London.

These five courts may be held in any part of the kingdom, and their jurisdiction

extends over crimes that arise throughout the whole of it, from one end to the other. What follow are also of a general nature, and universally diffused over the nation, but yet are of a local jurisdiction, and confined to particular districts. Of which 〈14〉 species is,

6. The 〈15〉 court of oyer and terminer, and general gaol delivery i: which is held

before the king’s commissioners, among whom are usually two judges of the courts at Westminster, twice in every year in every county of the kingdom; except the four northern ones, where it is held only once, and London and Middlesex, wherein it is held eight times. This was slightly mentioned in the preceding bookk. We then observed, that, at what is usually called the assises, the judges sit by virtue of five several authorities: two of which, the commission of assise and its attendant jurisdiction of nisi prius, being principally of a civil nature, were then explained at large; to which I shall only add, that these justices have, by virtue of several statutes,

267 a criminal jurisdiction also, in certain special casesl. The third, which is the commission

of the peace, was also treated of in a former volumem, when we enquired into the nature and office of a justice of the peace. I shall only add, that all the justices of the peace of any county, wherein the assises are held, are bound by law to attend them, or else are liable to a fine; in order to return recognizances, &c, and to assist the judges in such matters as lie within their knowlege and jurisdiction, and in which some of them have probably been concerned, by way of previous examination. But the fourth authority is the commission of oyer and terminer n, to hear and determine all treasons, felonies, and misdemesnors. This is directed to the judges and 〈16〉 several others; but the judges only are of the quorum, so that the rest cannot act without them. The words of the commission are, “to enquire, hear, and determine:” so that by virtue of this commission they can only proceed upon an indictment found at the same assises; for they must first enquire, by means of the grand jury or inquest, before they are empowered to hear and determine by the help of the petit jury. Therefore they have besides, fifthly, a commission of general gaol delivery o; which empowers them to try and deliver every prisoner, who shall be in the gaol when the judges arrive at the circuit town, 〈17〉 whenever indicted, or for whatever

i 4 Inst. 162. 168. 2 Hal. P. C. 22. 32. 2 Hawk. P. C. 14. 23.

k See Vol. III. pag. 58 [III. 38–9].

l 2 Hal. P. C. 39. 2 Hawk. P. C. 28.

m See Vol. I. pag. 351 [I. 225–6].

n See appendix, §. 1 [IV. 287].

o Ibid.





chapter 19 177


crime committed. It was antiently the course to issue special writs of gaol delivery for each particular prisoner, which were called the writs de bono et malo [for good and ill]p: but, these being found inconvenient and oppressive, a general commission for all the prisoners has long been established in their stead. So that, one way or other, 〈18〉 the gaols are cleared, and all offenders tried, punished, or delivered, twice in every year: a constitution of singular use and excellence. Sometimes also, upon urgent occasions, the king issues a special or extraordinary commission of oyer and terminer, and gaol delivery, confined to those offences which stand in need of immediate inquiry and punishment: upon which the course of proceeding 〈19〉 is the same, as upon general and ordinary commissions. Formerly it was held, in pursuance of the statutes 8 Ric. II. 268

c. 2. and 33 Hen. VIII. c. 4. that no judge or other lawyer could act in the commission of oyer and terminer, or in that of gaol delivery, within his own county, where he was born or inhabited; in like manner as they are prohibited from being judges of assise and determining civil causes. But that local partiality, which the jealousy of our ancestors was careful to prevent, being judged less likely to operate in the trial of crimes and misdemesnors, than in matters of property and disputes between party and party, it was thought proper by the statute 12 Geo. II. c. 27. to allow any man to be a justice of oyer and terminer and general gaol delivery within any county of England.

7. The court of general quarter sessions of the peaceq is a court that must be held

in every county, once in every quarter of a year; which by statute 2 Hen. V. c. 4. is appointed to be in the first week after michaelmas-day; the first week after the epiphany; the first week after the close of easter; and in the week after the translation of saint 〈20〉 Thomas a Becket, or the seventh of July.3 It is held before two or more justices of the peace, one of which must be of the quorum. The jurisdiction of this court by statute 34 Edw. III. c. 1. extends to the trying and determining all felonies and trespasses whatsoever: though they seldom, if ever, try any greater offence than small felonies within the benefit of clergy; their commission providing, that, if any case of difficulty arises, they shall not proceed to judgment, but in the presence of one of the justices of the courts of king’s bench or common pleas, or one of the judges of assise. And therefore murders, and other capital felonies, are usually remitted for a more solemn trial to the assises. They cannot also try any new-created offence, with-out express power given them by the statute which creates it r. But there are many offences, and particular matters, which by particular statutes belong properly to this jurisdiction, and ought to be prosecuted in this court: as, the smaller misdemesnors 269

against the public or commonwealth, not amounting to felony; and especially offences relating to the game, highways, alehouses, bastard children, the settlement and provision for the poor, vagrants, servants wages, apprentices, and popish recusantss. Some of these are proceeded upon by indictment; and others in a summary way by motion and

p 2 Inst. 43.

q 4 Inst. 170. 2 Hal. P. C. 42. 2 Hawk. P. C. 32.

r [R. v Buggs] 4 Mod. 379. [R. v Yarrington], Salk. 406. [R. v Smith (1705)] [2] Lord Raym. 1144.

s See Lambard’s eirenarcha, and Burn’s justice.

178 of public wrongs

order thereupon: which order may for the most part, unless guarded against by particular statutes, be removed into the court of king’s bench, by writ of certiorari facias, and be there either quashed or confirmed. The records or rolls of the sessions are committed to the custody of a special officer denominated the custos rotulorum [keeper of the rolls], who is always a justice of the quorum; and among them of the quorum (saith Lambards) a man for the most part especially picked out, either for wisdom, countenance, or credit. The nomination of the custos rotulorum (who is the principal civil officer in the county, as the lord lieutenant is the chief in military command) is by the king’s sign manual: and to him the nomination of the clerk of the peace belongs; which office he is expressly forbidden to sell for money t.

In most corporation towns there are quarter sessions kept before justices of their

own, within their respective limits: which have exactly the same authority as the general quarter sessions of the county, except in a very few instances; one of the most considerable of which is the matter of appeals from orders of removal of the poor, which, though they be from the orders of corporation justices, must be to the sessions of the county, by statute 8 & 9 W. III. c. 30. In both corporations and counties at large, there is sometimes kept a special or petty session, by a few justices, for dispatching smaller business in the neighbourhood between the times of the general sessions; as, for licencing alehouses, passing the accounts 〈21〉 of parish officers, and the like.

270 8. The sherifs’s tourn u, or rotation, is a court of record, held twice every year

within a month after easter and michaelmas, before the sheriff, in different parts of the county; being indeed only the turn of the sheriff to keep a court-leet in each respective hundredw. This therefore is the great court-leet of the county, as the county court is the court-baron: for out of this, for the ease of the sheriff, was taken

9. The court-leet, or view of frankpledge x, which is a court of record, held once in

the year and not oftenery, within a particular hundred, lordship, or manor, before the steward of the leet; being the king’s court granted by charter to the lords of those hundreds or manors. Its original intent was to view the frank pledges, that is, the freemen within the liberty; who (we may rememberz) according to the institution of the great Alfred, were all mutually pledges for the good behaviour of each other. Besides this, the preservation of the peace, and the chastisement of divers minute offences against the public good, are the objects both of the court-leet and the sheriff’s tourn: which have exactly the same jurisdiction, one being only a larger species of the other; extending over more territory, but not over more causes. All freeholders within the precinct are obliged to attend them, and all persons commorant therein; which commorancy consists in usually lying there: a regulation, which owes its original to the laws of king Canutea. But persons under twelve and above sixty years

s b. 4. c. 3.

t Stat. 37 Hen. VIII. c. 1. 1 W. & M. st. 1. c. 21.

u 4 Inst. 259. 2 Hal. P. C. 69. 2 Hawk. P. C. 55.

w Mirr. c. 1. §. 13 & 16.

x 4 Inst. 261. 2 Hawk. P. C. 72.

y Mirror. c. 1. §. 10.

z See Vol. III. pag. 113 [III. 76].





chapter 19 179


old, peers, clergymen, women, and the king’s tenants in antient demesne, are excused from attendance there: all others being bound to appear upon the jury, if required, and make their due presentments. It was also antiently the custom to summon all the king’s subjects, as they respectively grew to years of discretion and strength, to come to the court-leet, and there take the oath of allegiance to the king. The other general 271 business of the leet and tourn, was to present by jury all crimes whatsoever that happened within their jurisdiction; and not only to present, but also to punish, all trivial misdemesnors, as all trivial debts were recoverable in the court-baron, and county court: justice, in these minuter matters of both kinds, being brought home to the doors of every man by our antient constitution. Thus in the Gothic constitution, the haereda [hundred court], which answered to our court-leet, “de omnibus quidem cognoscit, non tamen de omnibus judicat b [takes cognizance of all offences but does not give judgment in all].” The objects of their jurisdiction are therefore unavoidably very numerous: being such as in some degree, either less or more, affect the public weal, or good governance of the district in which they arise; from common nusances and other material offences against the king’s peace and public trade, down to eaves-dropping, waifs, and irregularities in public commons. But both the tourn and the leet have been for a long time in a declining way: a circumstance, owing in part to the discharge granted by the statute of Marlbridge, 52 Hen. III. c. 10. to all prelates, peers, and clergymen from their attendance upon these courts; which occasioned them to grow into disrepute. And hence it is that their business hath for the most part gradually devolved upon the quarter sessions: which it is particularly directed to do in some cases by statute 1 Edw. IV. c. 2.

10. The court of 〈22〉 the coroner c is also a court of record, to enquire, when any one

dies in prison, or comes to a violent or sudden death, by what manner he came to his end. And this he is only entitled to do super visum corporis [on a view of the body]. Of the coroner and his office we treated at large in a former volumed, among the public officers and ministers of the kingdom; and therefore shall not here repeat our enquiries: only mentioning his court, by way of regularity, among the criminal courts of the nation.

11. The court of the clerk of the market e is incident to every fair and market in the 272

kingdom, to punish misdemesnors therein; as a court of pie poudre [pie powder] is, to determine all disputes relating to private or civil property. The object of this jurisdictionf is, principally the cognizance of weights and measures, to try whether they be according to the true standard thereof, or no: which standard was antiently committed to the custody of the bishop, who appointed some clerk under him to inspect the abuse of them more narrowly; and hence this officer, though now usually a layman, is called the clerk of the market g. If they be not according to the standard, then, besides the punishment of the party by fine, the weights and measures themselves

b Stiernh. de jur. Goth. l. 1. c. 2.

c 4 Inst. 271. 2 Hal. P. C. 53. 2 Hawk. P. C. 42.

d See Vol. I. pag. 349 [I. 222–4].

e 4 Inst. 273.

f See stat. 17 Car. II. [recte 16 Car. I] c. 19. 22 Car. II. c. 8. 23 Car. II. c. 12.

180 of public wrongs

ought to be burnt. This is the most inferior court of criminal jurisdiction in the kingdom; though the objects of its coercion were esteemed among the Romans of such importance to the public, that they were committed to the care of some of their most dignified magistrates, the curule aediles.

II. There are a few other criminal courts of greater dignity than many of these, but

of a more confined and partial jurisdiction; extending only to some particular places, which the royal favour, confirmed by act of parliament, has distinguished by the privilege of having peculiar courts of their own, for the punishment of crimes and misdemesnors arising within the bounds of their cognizance. These, not being universally dispersed, or of general use, as the former, but confined to one spot, as well as to a determinate species of causes, may be denominated private or special courts of criminal jurisdiction.

I speak not here of ecclesiastical courts; which punish spiritual sins, rather than

temporal crimes, by penance, contrition, and excommunication, pro salute animae [for the soul’s good]: or, which is looked upon as equivalent to all the rest, by a sum

273 of money to the officers of the court by way of commutation of penance. Of these we

discoursed sufficiently in the preceding bookh. I am now speaking of such courts as proceed according to the course of the common law; which is a stranger to such unaccountable barterings of public justice.

1. And, first, the court of the lord steward, treasurer, or comptroller of the king’s

houshold i, was instituted by statute 3 Hen. VII. c. 14. to enquire of felony by any of the king’s sworn servants, in the checque roll of the houshold, under the degree of a lord, in confederating, compassing, conspiring, and imagining the death or destruction of the king, or any lord or other of his majesty’s privy council, or the lord steward, treasurer, or comptroller of the king’s house. The enquiry, and trial thereupon, must be by a jury according to the course of the common law, consisting of twelve sad men (that is, sober and discreet persons) of the king’s houshold.

2. The court of the lord steward of the king’s houshold, or (in his absence) of the

treasurer, comptroller, and steward of the marshalseak, was erected by statute 33 Hen. VIII. c. 12. with a jurisdiction to enquire of, hear, and determine, all treasons, misprisions of treason, murders, manslaughters, bloodshed, and other malicious strikings; whereby blood shall be 〈23〉 shed in any of the palaces and houses of the king, or in any other house where the royal person shall abide. The proceedings are also by jury, both a grand and a petit one, as at common law, taken out of the officers and sworn servants of the king’s houshold. The form and solemnity of the process, particularly with regard to the execution of the sentence for cutting off the hand, which is part of the punishment for shedding blood in the 〈24〉 king’s court, is very minutely set forth in the said statute 33 Hen. VIII. and the 〈25〉 several offices of the

274 servants of the houshold in and about such execution are described; from the serjeant

of the wood-yard, who furnishes the chopping-block, to the serjeant farrier, who brings hot irons to sear the stump.

h See Vol. III. pag. 61 [III. 41].

i 4 Inst. 133.





chapter 19 181


3. As in the preceding bookl we mentioned the courts of the two universities, or

their chancellor’s courts, for the redress of civil injuries; it will not be improper now to add a short word concerning the jurisdiction of their criminal courts, which is equally large and extensive. The chancellor’s court of Oxford (with which university the author hath been chiefly conversant, though probably that of Cambridge hath also a similar jurisdiction) hath authority to determine all causes of property, wherein a privileged person is one of the parties, except only causes of freehold; and also all criminal offences or misdemesnors, under the degree of treason, felony, or mayhem. The prohibition of meddling with freehold still continues: but the trial of treason, felony, and mayhem, by a particular charter is committed to the university jurisdiction in another court, namely, the court of the lord high steward of the university.

For by the charter of 7 Jun. 2 Hen. IV. (confirmed, among the rest, by the statute

13 Eliz. c. 29.) cognizance is granted to the university of Oxford of all indictments of treasons, insurrections, felony, and mayhem, which shall be found in any of the king’s courts against a scholar or privileged person; and they are to be tried before the high steward of the university, or his deputy, who is to be nominated by the chancellor of the university for the time being. But, when his office is called forth into action, such high steward must be approved by the lord high chancellor of England; and a special commission under the great seal is given to him, and others, to try the indictment then depending, according to the law of the land and the privileges of the said university. 275

When therefore an indictment is found at the assises, or elsewhere, against any scholar of the university, or other privileged person, the vice-chancellor may claim the cognizance of it; and (when claimed in due time and manner) it ought to be allowed him by the judges of assise: and then it comes to be tried in the high steward’s court. But the indictment must first be found by a grand jury, and then the cognizance claimed: for I take it that the high steward cannot proceed originally ad inquirendum [to enquire]; but only, after inquest in the common law courts, ad audiendum et determinandum [to hear and determine]. Much in the same manner, as, when a peer is to be tried in the court of the lord high steward of Great Britain, the indictment must first be found at the assises, or in the court of king’s bench, and then (in consequence of a writ of certiorari) transmitted to be finally heard and determined before his grace the lord high steward and the peers.

When the cognizance is so allowed, if the offence be inter minora crimina [among

the lesser crimes], or a misdemesnor only, it is tried in the chancellor’s court by the ordinary judge. But if it be for treason, felony, or mayhem, it is then, and then only, to be determined before the high steward, under the king’s special commission to try the same. The process of the trial is this. The high steward issues one precept to the sheriff of the county, who thereupon returns a panel of eighteen freeholders; and another precept to the bedells of the university, who thereupon return a panel of eighteen matriculated laymen, “laicos privilegio universitatis gaudentes [laymen enjoy-ing the privilege of the university]:” and by a jury formed de medietate [of half], half 182 of public wrongs

of freeholders, and half of matriculated persons, is the indictment to be tried; and that in the guildhall of the city of Oxford. And if execution be necessary to be awarded, in consequence of finding the party guilty, the sheriff of the county must execute the university process; to which he is annually bound by an oath.

276 I have been the more minute in describing these proceedings, as there has happily

been no occasion to reduce them into practice for more than 〈26〉 a century past; though it is not a right that merely rests in scriptis [in writing] or theory, but has formerly often been carried into execution. There are many instances, one in the reign of queen Elizabeth, two in that of James the first, and two in that of Charles the first, where indictments for murder have been challenged by the vice-chancellor at the assises, and afterwards tried before the high steward by jury. The commissions under the great seal, the sheriff’s and bedell’s panels, and all the other proceedings on the trial of the several indictments, are still extant in the archives of that university.





chapter the twentieth. 277




of summary convictions.

We are next, according to the plan I have laid down, to take into consideration the proceedings in the courts of criminal jurisdiction, in order to the punishment of offences. These are plain, easy, and regular; the law not admitting any fictions, as in civil causes, to take place where the life, the liberty, and the safety of the subject are more immediately brought into jeopardy. And these proceedings are divisible into two kinds; summary, and regular: of the former of which I shall briefly speak, before we enter upon the latter, which will require a more thorough and particular examination.

By a summary proceeding I mean principally such as is directed by several acts of

parliament (for the common law is a stranger to it, unless in the case of contempts) for the conviction of offenders, and the inflicting of certain penalties created by those acts of parliament. In these there is no intervention of a jury, but the party accused is acquitted or condemned by the suffrage of such person only, as the statute has appointed for his judge. An institution designed professedly for the greater ease of the subject, by doing him speedy justice, and by not harrassing the freeholders with frequent and troublesome attendances to try every minute offence. But it has of late 278

been so far extended, as, if a check be not timely given, to threaten the disuse of our admirable and truly English trial by jury, unless only in capital cases. For,

I. Of this summary nature are all trials of offences and frauds contrary to the laws

of the excise, and other branches of the revenue: which are to be enquired into and determined by the commissioners of the respective departments, or by justices of the peace in the country; officers, who are all of them appointed and removeable at the discretion of the crown. And though such convictions are absolutely necessary for the due collection of the public money, and are a species of mercy to the delinquents, who would be ruined by the expense and delay of 〈1〉 frequent prosecutions by indictment; and though such has usually been the conduct of the commissioners, as seldom (if ever) to afford just grounds to complain of oppression; yet when we againa consider the various and almost innumerable branches of this revenue, which may be in their turns the subjects of fraud, or at least complaints of fraud, and of course the objects of this summary and arbitrary jurisdiction; we shall find that the power of these officers of the crown over the property of the people is increased to a very formidable height.

II. Another branch of summary proceedings is that before justices of the peace,

in order to inflict divers petty pecuniary mulcts, and corporal penalties, denounced by act of parliament for many disorderly offences; such as common swearing, drunkenness, vagrancy, idleness, and a vast variety of others, for which I must refer

a See Vol. I. pag. 318 [I. 205], &c.

184 of public wrongs

the student to the justice-books formerly citedb, and which used to be formerly punished by the verdict of a jury in the court-leet. This change in the administration of justice hath however had some mischievous effects; as, 1. The almost entire disuse and contempt of the court-leet, and sheriff’s tourn, the king’s antient courts of

279 common law, formerly much revered and respected. 2. The burthensome increase of

the business of a justice of the peace, which discourages so many gentlemen of rank and character from acting in the commission; from an apprehension that the duty of their office would take up too much of that time, which they are unwilling to spare from the necessary concerns of their families, the improvement of their understandings, and their engagements in other services of the public. Though if all gentlemen of fortune had it both in their power, and inclinations, to act in this capacity, the business of a justice of the peace would be more divided, and fall the less heavy upon individuals: which would remove what in the present scarcity of magistrates is really an objection so formidable, that the country is greatly obliged to any gentleman of figure, who will undertake to perform that duty, which in consequence of his rank in life he owes more peculiarly to his country. However, this backwardness to act as magistrates, arising greatly from this increase of summary jurisdiction, is productive of, 3. A third mischief: which is, that this trust, when slighted by gentlemen, falls of course into the hands of those who are not so; but the mere tools of office. And then the extensive power of a justice of the peace, which even in the hands of men of honour is highly formidable, will be prostituted to mean and scandalous purposes, to the low ends of selfish ambition, avarice, or personal resentment. And from these ill consequences we may collect the prudent foresight of our antient lawgivers, who suffered neither the property nor the punishment of the subject to be determined by the opinion of any one or two men; and we may also observe the necessity of not deviating any farther from our antient constitution, by ordaining new penalties to be inflicted upon summary convictions.

The process of these summary convictions, it must be owned, is extremely speedy.

Though the courts of common law have thrown in one check upon them, by making

280 it necessary to summon the party accused before he is condemned. This is now held

to be an indispensable requisitec: though the justices long struggled the point; forget-ting that rule of natural reason expressed by Seneca,

“Qui statuit aliquid, parte inaudita altera,

Aequom licet statuerit, haud aequus fuit.”1

A rule, to which all municipal laws, that are founded on the principles of justice,

have strictly conformed: the Roman law requiring a citation at the least; and our own common law never suffering any fact (either civil or criminal) to be tried, till it has previously compelled an appearance by the party concerned. After this summons,

b Lambard and Burn.

c [R. v Dyer] Salk. 181. [R. v Venables] 2 Lord Raym. 1405.





chapter 20 185


the magistrate, in summary proceedings, may go on to examine one or more witnesses, as the statute may require, upon oath; and then make his conviction of the offender, in writing upon which he usually issues his warrant, either to apprehend the offender, in case corporal punishment is to be inflicted on him; or else to levy the penalty incurred, by distress and sale of his goods. This is, in general, the method of summary proceedings before a justice or justices of the peace: but for particulars we must have recourse to the several statutes, which create the offence, or inflict the punishment; and which usually chalk out the method by which offenders are to be convicted. Otherwise they fall of course under the general rule, and can only be convicted by indictment or information at the common law.

III. To this head, of summary proceedings, may also be properly referred the

method, immemorially used by the superior courts of justice, of punishing contempts by attachment, and the subsequent proceedings thereon.

The contempts, that are thus punished, are either direct, which openly insult or

resist the powers of the courts, or the persons of the judges who preside there; or else are consequential, which (without such gross insolence or direct opposition) plainly 281 tend to create an universal disregard of their authority. The principal instances, of either sort, that have been usually d 〈2〉 punished by attachment, are chiefly of the following kinds. 1. Those committed by inferior judges and magistrates: by acting unjustly, oppressively, or irregularly, in administring those portions of justice which are intrusted to their distribution; or by disobeying the king’s writs issuing out of the superior courts, by proceeding in a cause after it is put a stop to or removed by writ of prohibition, certiorari, error, supersedeas, and the like. For, as the king’s superior courts (and especially the court of king’s bench) have a general super-intendence over all inferior jurisdictions, any corrupt or iniquitous practices of subordinate judges are contempts of that super-intending authority, whose duty it is to keep them within the bounds of justice. 2. Those committed by sheriffs, bailiffs, gaolers, and other officers of the court: by abusing the process of the law, or deceiving the parties, by any acts of oppression, extortion, collusive behaviour, or culpable neglect of duty. 3. Those committed by attorneys and solicitors, who are also officers of the respective courts: by gross instances of fraud and corruption, injustice to their clients, or other dishonest practice. For the mal-practice of the officers reflects some dishonour on their employers: and, if frequent or unpunished, creates among the people a disgust against the courts themselves. 4. Those committed by jurymen, in collateral matters relating to the discharge of their office: such as making default, when summoned; refusing to be sworn, or to give any verdict; eating or drinking without the leave of the court, and especially at the cost of either party; and other misbehaviours or irregularities of a similar kind: but not in the mere exercise of their judicial capacities, as by giving a false or erroneous verdict. 5. Those committed by witnesses: by making default when summoned, refusing to be sworn or examined, or prevaricating in their evidence when sworn. 6. Those committed by parties to any suit or proceeding 282 before the court: as by disobedience to any rule or order, made in the progress of a

d 2 Hawk. P. C. 142, &c.

186 of public wrongs

cause; by non-payment of costs awarded by the court upon a motion; or by non-observance of awards duly made by arbitrators or umpires, after having entered into a rule for submitting to such 〈3〉 determinatione. 7. Those committed by any other persons, under the degree of a peer: and even by peers themselves, when enormous and accompanied with violence, such as forcible rescous2 and the likef; or when they import a disobedience to the king’s great prerogative writs, of prohibition, habeas corpus g, and the rest. Some of these contempts may arise in the face of the court; as by rude and contumelious behaviour; by obstinacy, perverseness, or prevarication; by breach of the peace, or any wilful disturbance whatever: others in the absence of the party; as by disobeying or treating with disrespect the king’s writ, or the rules or process of the court; by perverting such writ or process to the purposes of private malice, extortion, or injustice; by speaking or writing contemptuously of the court, or judges, acting in their judicial capacity; by printing false accounts (or even true ones without proper permission) of causes then depending in judgment; and by any thing in short that demonstrates a gross want of that regard and respect, which when once courts of justice are deprived of, their authority (so necessary for the good order of the kingdom) is intirely lost among the people.

The process of attachment, for these and the like contempts, must necessarily be

as antient as the laws themselves. For laws, without a competent authority to secure their administration from disobedience and contempt, would be vain and nugatory. A power therefore in the supreme courts of justice to suppress such contempts, by an immediate attachment of the offender, results from the first principles of judicial establishments, and must be an inseparable attendant upon every superior tribunal.

283 Accordingly we find it actually exercised, as early as the annals of our law extend. And,

though a very learned author h seems inclinable to derive this process from the statute of Westm. 2. 13 Edw. I. c. 39. (which ordains, that in case the process of the king’s courts be resisted by the power of any great man, the sheriff shall chastise the resisters by imprisonment, “a qua non deliberentur sine speciali praecepto domini regis [from which they may not be released without special command of the lord king]:” and if the sheriff himself be resisted, he shall certify to 〈5〉 the court the names of the principal offenders, their aiders, consenters, commanders, and favourers, and by a special writ judicial they shall be attached by their bodies to appear before the court, and if they be convicted thereof they shall be punished at the king’s pleasure, without any interfering by any other person whatsoever) yet he afterwards more justly concludes, that it is a part of the law of the land; and, as such, is confirmed by the statute of magna carta.

If the contempt be committed in the face of the court, the offender may be instantly

apprehended and imprisoned, at the discretion of the 〈6〉 judges, without any farther proof or examination. But in matters that arise at a distance, and of which the court

e See Vol. III. pag. 17 [III. 11].

f 〈4〉 [Smith v earl of Dorset] Styl. 277. 2 Hawk. P. C. 152.

g [R. v Earl Ferrers] 4 Burr. 632. Lords Journ. 7 Febr. 8 Jun. 1757.

h Gilb. Hist. C. P. ch 3.

2 For rescues, see further IV. 87.





chapter 20 187


cannot have so perfect a knowlege, unless by the confession of the party or the testimony of others, if the judges upon affidavit see sufficient ground to suspect that a contempt has been committed, they either make a rule on the suspected party to shew cause why an attachment should not issue against himi; or, in very flagrant instances of contempt, the attachment issues in the first instancek; as it also does, if no sufficient cause be shewn to discharge, and thereupon the court confirms and makes absolute, the original rule. This process of attachment is merely intended to bring the party into court: and, when there, he must either stand committed, or put in bail, in order to answer upon oath to such interrogatories as shall be administred to him, for the better information of the court with respect to the circumstances of 284

the contempt. These interrogatories are in the nature of a charge or accusation, and must by the course of the court be exhibited within the first four daysl: and, if any of the interrogatories is improper, the defendant may refuse to answer it,3 and move the court to have it struck outm. If the party can clear himself upon oath, he is discharged; but, if perjured, may be prosecuted for the perjury n. If he confesses the contempt, the court will proceed to correct him by fine, or imprisonment, or both, and sometimes by a corporal or infamous punishment o. If the contempt be of such a nature, that, when the fact is once acknowleged, the court can receive no farther information by interrogatories than it is already possessed of, (as in the case of a rescous p) the defendant may be admitted to make such simple acknowlegement, and receive his judgment, without answering to any interrogatories: but if he wilfully and obstinately refuses to answer, or answers in an evasive manner, he is then clearly guilty of a high and repeated contempt, to be punished at the discretion of the court.

It cannot have escaped the attention of the reader, that this method, of making the

defendant answer upon oath to a criminal charge, is not agreeable to the genius of the common law in any other instanceq; and seems indeed to have been derived to the courts of king’s bench and common pleas through the medium of the courts of equity. For the whole process of the courts of equity, in the several stages of a cause, and finally to enforce their decrees, was, till the introduction of sequestrations, in the nature of a process of contempt;4 acting only in personam [against the person] and not in rem [against the matter or thing]. And there, after the party in contempt has answered the interrogatories, such his answer may be contradicted and disproved by affidavits of the adverse party: whereas in the courts of law, the admission of the party to purge himself by oath is more favourable to his liberty, though perhaps not 285

i [Smith v earl of Dorset] Styl. 277.

k [Anon. 1711] Salk. 84. [R. v Jones] 〈7〉 Stra. 185.

l [Saunders v Melhuish] 6 Mod. 73.

m [R. v Barber] Stra. 444.

n [Saunders v Melhuish] 6 Mod. 73.

o [Royson’s case] Cro. Car. 146.

p The king v. Elkins. M. 8 Geo. III. B.R. [4 Burr. 2129].

q See Vol. III. pag. 100, 101 [III. 67–8].

3 The objection advanced to an interrogatory in R. v Barber (1721), cited in note m, was that the interrogatory in question invited the accused to incriminate himself on another charge.

4 For sequestrations, see III. 292.

188 of public wrongs

less dangerous to his conscience; for, if he clears himself by his answers, the complaint is totally dismissed. And, with regard to this singular mode of trial, thus admitted in this one particular instance, I shall only for the present observe; that as the process by attachment in general appears to be extremely 〈8〉 antientr, and has since the restoration been confirmed by an express act of parliament s, so the method of examining the delinquent himself upon oath, with regard to the contempt alleged, is at least of as high antiquity t, and by long and immemorial usage is now become the law of the land.

r Yearb. 22 Edw. IV. 29

s Stat. 13 Car. II. st. 2. c. 2. §. 4.

t M. 5 Edw. IV. rot. 75. cited in Rast. Ent. 268. pl. 5.





chapter the twenty first. 286




of arrests.

We are now to consider the regular and ordinary method of proceeding in the courts of criminal jurisdiction; which may be distributed under twelve general heads, following each other in a progressive order: viz. 1. Arrest; 2. Commitment, and bail; 3. Prosecution; 4. Process; 5. Arraignment, and its incidents; 6. Plea, and issue; 7. Trial, and conviction; 8. Clergy; 9. Judgment, and its consequences; 10. Reversal of judgment; 11. Reprieve, or pardon; 12. Execution: all which will be discussed in the subsequent part of this book.

First then, of an arrest: which is the apprehending or restraining of one’s person,

in order to be forthcoming to answer an alleged or suspected crime. To this arrest all persons whatsoever are, without distinction, equally 〈1〉 liable to all criminal cases: but no man is to be arrested, unless charged with such a crime, as will at least justify holding him to bail, when taken. And, in general, an arrest may be made four ways: 1. By warrant: 2. By an officer without warrant: 3. By a private person also without warrant: 4. By an hue and cry.

1. A warrant may be granted in extraordinary cases by the privy council, or 287

secretaries of statea; but ordinarily by justices of the peace. This they may do in any cases where they have a jurisdiction over the offence; in order to compel the person accused to appear before themb: for it would be absurd to give them power to examine an offender, unless they had also a power to compel him to attend, and submit to such examination. And this extends undoubtedly to all treasons, felonies, and breaches of the peace; and also to all such offences as they have power to punish by statute. Sir Edward Coke indeedc hath laid it down, that a justice of the peace cannot issue a warrant to apprehend a felon upon bare suspicion; no, not even till an indictment be actually found: and the contrary practice is by othersd held to be grounded rather upon connivance, than the express rule of law; though now by long custom established. A doctrine, which would in most cases give a loose to felons to escape without punishment; and therefore sir Matthew Hale hath combated it with invincible authority, and strength of reason: maintaining, 1. That a justice of peace hath power to issue a warrant to apprehend a person accused of felony, though not yet indicted e; and 2. That he may also issue a warrant to apprehend a person suspected of felony, though the original suspicion be not in himself, but in the party that prays his warrant; because he is a competent judge of the probability offered to him of such suspicion. But in both cases it is fitting to examine upon oath the party requiring a warrant, as well to

a [R. v Kendal and Row] 1 Lord Raym. 65.

b 2 Hawk. P. C. S4.

c 4 Inst. 176.

d 2 Hawk. P. C. 84.

e 2 Hal. P. C. 108.

190 of public wrongs

ascertain that there is a felony or other crime actually committed, without which no warrant should be granted; as also to prove the cause and probability of suspecting the party, against whom the warrant is prayedf. This warrant ought to be under the hand and seal of the justice, should set forth the time and place of making, and the cause for

288 which it is made, and should be directed to the constable, or other 〈2〉 peace officer,

requiring him to bring the party either generally before any justice of the peace for the county, or only before the justice who granted it; the warrant in the latter case being called a special warrant g. A general warrant to apprehend all persons suspected, without naming or particularly describing any person in special, is illegal and void for its uncertainty h; for it is the duty of the magistrate, and ought not to be left to the officer, to judge of the ground of suspicion. And a warrant to apprehend all persons guilty of a crime therein specified, is no legal warrant: for the point, upon which its authority rests, is a fact to be decided on a subsequent trial; namely, whether the person apprehended thereupon be really guilty or not. It is therefore in fact no warrant at all: for it will not justify the officer who acts under iti; whereas 〈3〉 a lawful warrant will at all events indemnify the officer, who executes the same ministerially. When a warrant is received by the officer, he is bound to execute it, so far as the jurisdiction of the magistrate and himself extends. A warrant from the chief, or other, justice of the court of king’s bench extends all over the kingdom: and is teste’d, or dated, England; not Oxfordshire, Berks, or other particular county. But the warrant of a justice of the peace in one county, as Yorkshire, must be backed, that is, signed by a justice of the peace in another, as Middlesex, before it can be executed there. Formerly, regularly

289 speaking, there ought to have been a fresh warrant in every fresh county; but the

practice of backing warrants had long prevailed without law, and was at last authorized by statutes 23 Geo. II. c. 26. 〈4〉 and 24 Geo. II. c. 55.

2. Arrests by officers, without warrant, may be executed, 1. By a justice of the

peace; who may himself apprehend, or cause to be apprehended, by word only, any person committing a felony or breach of the peace in his presencek. 2. The sheriff, and 3. The coroner, may apprehend any felon within the county without warrant. 4. The constable, of whose office we formerly spokel, hath great original and inherent author­ ity with regard to arrests. He may, without warrant, arrest any one for a breach of

f Ibid. 110.

g 2 Hawk. P. C. 85.

h 1 Hal. P. C. 580. 2 Hawk. P. C. 82.

i A practice had obtained in the secretaries office ever since the restoration, grounded on some clauses in the

acts for regulating the press, of issuing general warrants to take up (without naming any person in particular) the authors, printers and publishers of such obscene or seditious libels, as were particularly specified in the warrant. When those acts expired in 1694, the same practice was inadvertently continued, in every reign and under every administration, except the four last years of queen Anne, down to the year 1763: when such a warrant being issued to apprehend the authors, printers and publishers of a certain seditious libel, its validity was disputed; and the warrant was adjudged by the whole court of king’s bench to be void, in the case of Money v. Leach. Trin. 5 Geo. III. B. R. [3 Burr. 1742]. After which the issuing of such general warrants was declared illegal by a vote of the house of commons. (Com. Journ. 22 Apr. 1766.) [That ‘certain seditious libel’ was issue No. 45 of the North Briton, an anti­ government newspaper edited by the opposition politician John Wilkes, which commented unfavourably on George III’s speech at the opening of Parliament in April 1763.]

k 1 Hal. P. C. 86.





chapter 21 191


the 〈5〉 peace, and carry him before a justice of the peace. And, in case of felony actually committed, or a dangerous wounding whereby felony is like to ensue, he may upon probable suspicion arrest the felon; and for that purpose is authorized (as upon a justice’s warrant) to break open doors, and even to kill the felon if he cannot otherwise be taken; and, if he or his assistants be killed in attempting such arrest, it is murder in all concernedm. 5. Watchmen, either those appointed by the statute of Winchester, 13 Edw. I. c. 4. to keep watch and ward in all towns from sunsetting to sunrising, or such as are mere assistants to the constable, may virtute officii [by virtue of their office] arrest all offenders, and particularly nightwalkers, and commit them to custody till the morningn.

3. Any private person (and a fortiori a peace officer) that is present when any

felony is committed, is bound by the law to arrest the felon; on pain of fine and imprisonment, if he escapes through the negligence of the standers by o. And they may justify breaking open doors upon following such felon: and if they kill him, provided he cannot be otherwise taken, it is justifiable; though if they are killed in endeavouring to make such arrest, it is murder p. Upon probable suspicion also a private person may 290

arrest the felon, or other person 〈6〉 so suspectedq, but he cannot justify breaking open doors to do it; and if either party kill the other in the attempt, it is manslaughter, and no morer. It is no more, because there is no malicious design to kill: but it amounts to so much, because it would be of most pernicious consequence, if, under pretence of suspecting felony, any private person might break open a house, or kill another; and also because such arrest upon suspicion is barely permitted by the law, and not enjoined, as in the case of those who are present when a felony is committed.

4. There is yet another species of arrest, wherein both officers and private men are

concerned, and that is upon an hue and cry raised upon a felony committed. An hue (from huer, to shout) and cry, hutesium et clamor, is the old common law process of pursuing, with horn and with voice, all felons, and such as have dangerously wounded another s. It is also mentioned by statute Westm. 1. 3 Edw. I. c. 9. and 4 Edw. I. de officio coronatoris [of the office of coroner]. But the principal statute, relative to this matter, is that of Winchester, 13 Edw. I. c. 1 & 4. which directs, that from thenceforth every country shall be so well kept, that, immediately upon robberies and felonies committed, fresh suit shall be made from town to town, and from county to county; and that hue and cry shall be raised upon the felons, and they that keep the town shall follow with hue and cry, with all the town and the towns near; and so hue and cry shall be made from town to town, until they be taken and delivered to the sheriff. And, that such hue and cry may more effectually be made, the hundred is bound by the same statute, c. 3. to answer for all robberies therein committed, unless they take the felon; which is the

m 2 Hal. P. C. 88–96.

n Ibid. 98.

o 2 Hawk. P. C. 74.

p 2 Hal. P. C. 77.

q Stat. 30 Geo. II. c. 24.

r 2 Hal. P. C. 82, 83.

s Bracton. l. 3. tr. 2. c. 1. §. 1. Mirr. c. 2. §. 6.

192 of public wrongs

291 foundation of an action against the hundredt, in case of any loss by robbery. By statute

27 Eliz. c. 13. no hue and cry is sufficient, unless made with both horsemen and footmen. And by statute 8 Geo. II. c. 16. the constable or like officer refusing or neglecting to make hue and cry, forfeits 5l.: and the whole vill or district is still in strictness liable to be amerced, according to the law of Alfred, if any felony be committed therein and the felon escapes. An institution, which hath long prevailed in many of the eastern countries, and hath in part been introduced even into the Mogul empire, about the beginning of the last century; which is said to have effectually delivered that vast territory from the plague of robbers, by making in some places the villages, in others the officers of justice, responsible for all the robberies committed within their respective districtsu. Hue and cry w may be raised either by precept of a justice of the peace, or by a peace officer, or by any private man that knows of a felony. The party raising it must acquaint the constable of the vill with all the circumstances which he knows of the felony, and the person of the felon; and thereupon the constable is to search his own town, and raise all the neighbouring vills, and make pursuit with horse and foot: and in the prosecution of such hue and cry, the constable and his attendants have the same powers, protection, and indemnification, as if acting under the warrant of a justice of the peace. But if a man wantonly or maliciously raises a hue and cry, without cause, he shall be severely punished as a disturber of the public peacex.

In order to encourage farther the apprehending of certain felons, rewards and

immunities are bestowed on such as bring them to justice, by divers acts of parliament. The statute 4 & 5 W. & M. c. 8. enacts, that such as apprehend a highwayman, and prosecute him to conviction, shall receive a reward of 40l. from the public; to be paid

292 to them (or, if killed in the endeavour to take him, their executors) by the 〈7〉 sheriff

of the county: to which the statute 8 Geo. II. c. 16. super­adds 10l. to be paid by the hundred indemnified by 〈8〉 such taking. By statute 10 & 11 W. III. c. 23. any person apprehending and prosecuting to conviction a felon guilty of 〈9〉 burglary or private larciny to the value of 5s. from any shop, warehouse, coachhouse, or stable, shall be excused from all parish offices. And by statute 5 Ann. c. 31. any person so apprehending and prosecuting a burglar, or felonious housebreaker, (or, if killed in the attempt, his executors) shall be entitled to 〈10〉 a reward of 40l.

t See Vol. III. pag. 160 [III. 108].

u Mod. Un. Hist. vi. 383. vii. 156.

w 2 Hal. P. C. 100–104.

x 1 Hawk. P. C. 75.





chapter the twenty second. 293




of commitment and bail.

When a delinquent is arrested by any of the means mentioned in the preceding chapter, he ought regularly to be carried before a justice of the peace. And how he is there to be treated, I shall next shew, under the second head, of commitment and bail.

The justice, before whom such prisoner is brought, is bound immediately to

examine the circumstances of the crime alleged: and to this end by statute 2 & 3 Ph. & M. c. 10. he is to take in writing the examination of such prisoner, and the information of those who bring him: which, Mr Lambard observesa, was the first warrant given for the examination of a felon in the English law. For, at the common law, nemo tenebatur prodere seipsum [no one was obliged to betray himself]; and his fault was not to be wrung out of himself, but rather to be discovered by other means, and other men. If upon this enquiry it manifestly appears, either that no such crime was committed, or that the suspicion entertained of the prisoner was wholly groundless, in such cases only it is lawful totally to discharge him. Otherwise he must either be committed to prison, or give bail; that is, put in securities for his appearance, to answer the charge 294 against him. This commitment therefore being only for safe custody, wherever bail will answer the same intention, it ought to be taken; as in most of the inferior crimes: but in felonies, and other offences of a capital nature, no bail can be a security equivalent to the actual custody of the person. For what is there that a man may not be induced to forfeit, to save his own life? and what satisfaction or indemnity is it to the public, to seize the effects of them who have bailed a murderer, if the murderer himself be suffered to escape with impunity? Upon a principle similar to which, the Athenian magistrates, when they took a solemn oath, never to keep a citizen in bonds that could give three sureties of the same quality with himself, did it with an exception to such as had embezzled the public money, or been guilty of treasonable practisesb. What the nature of bail is, hath been shewn in the preceding bookc; viz. a delivery, or bailment, of a person to his sureties, upon their giving (together with himself) sufficient security for his appearance: he being supposed to continue in their friendly custody, instead of going to gaol. In civil cases we have seen that every defendant is bailable; but in criminal matters it is otherwise. Let us therefore enquire, in what cases the party accused ought, or ought not, to be admitted to bail.

And, first, to refuse or delay to bail any person bailable, is an offence against the

liberty of the subject, in any magistrate, by the common law d; as well as by the statute Westm. 1. 3 Edw. I. c. 15. and the habeas corpus act, 31 Car. II. c. 2. And lest the intention of the law should be frustrated by the justices requiring bail to a greater amount than

a Eirenarch. b. 2. c. 7.

b Pott. Antiq. b. 1. c. 18.

c See Vol. III. pag. 290 [III. 192].

d 2 Hawk. P. C. 90.

194 of public wrongs

the nature of the case demands, it is expressly declared by statute 1 W. & M. st. 2. c. 1. that excessive bail ought not to be required: though what bail shall be called excessive, must be left to the courts, on considering the circumstances of the case, to determine.

295 And on the other hand, if the magistrate takes insufficient bail, he is liable to be fined,

if the criminal doth not appear e. Bail may be taken either in court, or in some particular cases by the sheriff, coroner, or other magistrate; but most usually by the justices of the peace. Regularly, in all offences either against the common law or act of parliament, that are below felony, the offender ought to be admitted to bail, unless it be prohibited by some special act of parliamentf. In order therefore more precisely to ascertain what offences are bailable,

Let us next see, who may not be admitted to bail, or, what offences are not bailable.

And here I shall not consider any one of those cases in which bail is ousted by statute, from prisoners convicted of particular offences; for then such imprisonment without bail is part of their sentence and punishment. But, where the imprisonment is only for safe custody before the conviction, and not for punishment afterwards, in such cases bail is ousted or taken away, wherever the offence is of a very enormous nature: for then the public is entitled to demand nothing less than the highest security that can be given; viz. the body of the accused, in order to ensure that justice shall be done upon him, if guilty. Such persons therefore, as the author of the mirror observesg, have no other sureties but the four walls of the prison. By the antient common law, beforeh and sincei the conquest, all felonies were bailable, till murder was excepted by statute: so that persons might be admitted to bail before conviction almost in every case. But the statute Westm. 1. 3 Edw. I. c. 15. takes away the power of bailing in treason, and in divers instances of felony. 〈1〉 The statute 1 & 2 Ph. & Mar. c. 13. gives farther regulations in this matter: and upon the whole we may collect k, that no justices of the peace can

296 bail, 1. Upon an accusation of treason: nor, 2. Of murder: nor, 3. In case of manslaughter,

if the prisoner be clearly the slayer, and not barely suspected to be so; or if any indictment be found against him: nor, 4. Such as, being committed for felony, have broken prison; because it not only carries a presumption of guilt, but is also superadding one felony to another: 5. Persons outlawed: 6. Such as have abjured the realm: 7. Approvers, of whom we shall speak in a subsequent chapter, and persons by them accused:1 8. Persons taken with the mainour,2 or in the fact of felony: 9. Persons charged with arson: 10. Excommunicated persons, taken by writ de excommunicato capiendo [for taking an excommunicated person]: all which are clearly not admissible 〈 2〉 to bail. Others are of a dubious nature, as, 11. Thieves openly defamed and known:

e 2 Hawk. P. C. 89.

f 2 Hal. P. C. 127.

g c. 2. §. 24.

h 2 Inst. 189.

i In omnibus placitis de felonia solet accusatus per plegios dimitti, praeterquam in placito de homicidio, ubi ad

terrorem aliter statutum est [In all pleas of felony the accused is usually discharged upon bail, except in the plea of murder, where it is otherwise decreed to deter others]. (Glanv. l. 14. c. 1.)

k 2 Inst. 186. 2 Hal. P. C. 129.

1 See IV. 214.

2 See IV. 199.





chapter 22 195


12. Persons charged with other felonies, or manifest and enormous offences, not being of good fame: and 13. Accessories to felony, that labour under the same want of reputation. These seem to be in the discretion of the justices, whether bailable or not. The last class are such as must be bailed upon offering sufficient surety; as, 14. Persons of good fame, charged with a bare suspicion of manslaughter, or other inferior homicide: 15. Such persons, being charged with petit larciny or any felony, not before specified: or, 16. With being accessory to any felony. Lastly, it is agreed that the 〈3〉 court of king’s bench (or any judge thereof in time of vacation) may bail for any crime whatsoever, be it treasonl, murder, or any other offence, according to the circumstances of the case. And herein the wisdom of the law is very manifest. To allow bail to be taken commonly for such enormous crimes, would greatly tend to elude the public justice: and yet there are cases, though they rarely happen, in which it would be hard and unjust to confine a man in prison, though accused even of the greatest offence. The law has therefore provided one court, and only one, which has a discretionary power of bailing in any case: except only, even to this high jurisdiction, and of course to all inferior ones, such persons as are committed by either house of parliament, so 297 long as the session lasts; or such as are committed for contempts by any of the king’s superior courts of 〈4〉 justice.

Upon the whole, if the offence be not bailable, or the party cannot find bail, he is to

be committed to the county gaol by the mittimus of the justice, or warrant under his hand and seal, containing the cause of his commitment; there to abide till delivered by due course of law m. But this imprisonment, as has been said, is only for safe custody, and not for punishment: therefore, in this dubious interval between the commitment and trial, a prisoner ought to be used with the utmost humanity; and neither be loaded with needless fetters, or subjected to other hardships than such as are absolutely requisite for the purpose of confinement only: though what are so requisite, must too often be left to the discretion of the gaolers; who are frequently a merciless race of men, and, by being conversant in scenes of misery, steeled against any tender sensation. Yet 〈5〉 the law will not justify them in fettering a prisoner, unless where he is unruly, or has 〈6〉 attempted an escapen: this being the humane language of our antient lawgiverso, “custodes poenam sibi commissorum non augeant, nec eos torqueant; sed omni saevitia remota, pietateque adhibita, judicia debite exequantur.”3

l In the reign of queen Elizabeth it was the unanimous opinion of the judges, that no court could bail upon a commitment, for a charge of high treason, by any of the queen’s privy council. (1 Anders. 298.)

m 2 Hal. P. C. 122.

n 2 Inst. 381. 3 Inst. 34.

o Flet. l. 1. c. 26.

3 ‘Gaolers are not to torture or augment the punishment of those entrusted to their keeping; but let the sentence of the law be duly yet mercifully executed.’

298 chapter the twenty third.



of the several modes of

prosecution.

The next step towards the punishment of offenders is their prosecution, or the manner of their formal accusation. And this is either upon a previous finding of the fact by an inquest or grand jury; or without such previous finding. The former way is either by presentment, or indictment.

I. A presentment, generally taken, is a very comprehensive term; including not

only presentments properly so called, but also inquisitions of office, and indictments by a grand jury. A presentment, properly speaking, is the notice taken by a grand jury of any offence from their own knowlege or observationa, without any bill of indictment laid before them at the suit of the king. As, the presentment of a nusance, a libel, and the like; upon which the officer of the court must afterwards frame an 〈1〉 indictment, before the party presented as the author can be put to answer it. An inquisition of office is the act of a jury, summoned by the proper officer to enquire of matters relating to the crown, upon evidence laid before them. Some of these are in themselves convictions, and cannot afterwards be traversed or denied; and therefore the inquest,

299 or jury, ought to hear all that can be alleged on both sides. Of this nature are all

inquisitions of felo de se [self-murder, i.e. suicide]; of flight in persons accused of felony; of deodands, and the like; and presentments of petty offences in the sheriff’s tourn or court-leet, whereupon the presiding officer may set a fine. Other inquisitions may be afterwards traversed and examined; as particularly the coroner’s inquisition of the death of a man, when it finds any one guilty of homicide: for in such cases the offender so presented must be arraigned upon this inquisition, and may dispute the truth of it; which brings it to a kind of indictment, the most usual and effectual means of prosecution, and into which we will therefore enquire a little more minutely.

II. An indictment b is a written accusation of one or more persons of a crime or

misdemesnor, preferred to, and presented upon oath by, a grand jury. To this end the sheriff of every county is bound to return to every session of the peace, and every commission of oyer and terminer, and of general gaol delivery, twenty four good and lawful men of the county, some out of every hundred, to enquire, present, do, and execute all those things, which on the part of our lord the king shall then and there be commanded themc. They ought to be freeholders, but to what amount is uncertaind: which seems to be casus omissus [an omission], and as proper to be supplied by the legislature as the qualifications of the petit jury; which were formerly equally vague

a Lamb. Eirenarch. l. 4 c. 5.

b See appendix. §. 1 [IV. 287–8].

c 2 Hal. P. C. 154.

d Ibid. 155.





chapter 23 197


and uncertain, but are now settled by several acts of parliament. However, they are usually gentlemen of the best figure in the county. As many as appear upon this panel, are sworn upon the grand jury, to the amount of twelve at the least, and not more than twenty three; that twelve may be a majority. Which number, as well as the constitution itself, we find exactly described, so early as the laws of king Ethelrede. “Exeant seniores duodecim thani, et praefectus cum eis, et jurent super sanctuarium quod eis in manus datur, quod nolint ullum innocentem accusare, nec aliquem noxium 300

celare.”1 In the time of king Richard the first (according to Hoveden)2 the process of electing the grand jury, ordained by that prince, was as follows: four knights were to be taken from the county at large, who chose two more out of every hundred; which two associated to themselves ten other principal freemen, and those twelve were to answer concerning all particulars relating to their own district. This number was probably found too large and inconvenient; but the traces of this institution still remain, in that some of the jury must be summoned out of every hundred. This grand jury are previously instructed in the articles of their enquiry, by a charge from the judge who presides upon the bench. They then withdraw, to sit and receive indictments, which are preferred to them in the name of the king, but at the suit of any private prosecutor; and they are only to hear evidence on behalf of the prosecution: for the finding of an indictment is only in the nature of an enquiry or accusation, which is afterwards to be tried and determined; and the grand jury are only to enquire upon their oaths, whether there be sufficient cause to call upon the party to answer it. A grand jury however ought to be thoroughly persuaded of the truth of an indictment, so far as their evidence goes; and not to rest satisfied merely with remote probabilities: a doctrine, that might be applied to very oppressive purposesf.

The grand jury are sworn to enquire, only for the body of the county, pro corpore

comitatus; and therefore they cannot regularly enquire of a fact done out of that county for which they are sworn, unless particularly enabled by act of parliament. And to so high a nicety was this matter antiently carried, that where a man was wounded in one county, and died in another, the offender was at common law indictable in neither, because no complete act of felony was done in any one of them: but by statute 2 & 3 Edw. VI. c. 24. he is now indictable in the county where the party 〈2〉 died. And so in some other cases: as particularly, where treason is committed out 301

of the realm, it may be enquired of in any county within the realm, as the king shall direct, in pursuance of 〈3〉 statutes 26 Hen. VIII. c. 13. 35 Hen. VIII. c. 2. and 5 & 6 Edw. VI. c. 11. But, in general, all offences must be enquired into as well as tried in the county where the fact is committed.

e Wilk. LL. Angl. Sax. 117.

f State Trials. IV. 183. [This refers to the editorial comments of Sollom Emlyn on the nature and role of the grand jury, sparked by consideration of the crown’s unsuccessful attempt in 1681 to try for treason the opposition politician Anthony Ashley Cooper, earl of Shaftesbury.]

1 ‘Let twelve elder thegns and the reeve with them retire and swear upon the holy book that is given into their hands that they will not accuse any innocent person or screen anyone who is guilty.’

2 i.e. Roger of Hoveden (Howden) (d. c. 1201), chronicler and royal servant, whose ‘Annalium’ was printed in Sir Henry Savile’s Rerum Anglicarum Scriptores Post Bedam Praecipui Ex Vetustissimis Codicibus Manuscriptis (1596). 198 of public wrongs

When the grand jury have heard the evidence, if they think it a groundless

accusation, they used formerly to endorse on the back of the bill, “ignoramus;” or, we know nothing of it; intimating, that though the facts might possibly be true, that truth did not appear to them: but now, they assert in English, more absolutely, 〈4〉 “not a true bill;” and then the party is discharged without farther answer. But a fresh bill may afterwards be preferred to a subsequent grand jury. If they are satisfied of the truth of the accusation, they then endorse upon it, “a true bill;” antiently, “billa vera.” The indictment is then said to be sound, and the party stands indicted. But, to find a bill, there must at least twelve of the jury agree: for so tender is the law of England of the lives of the subjects, that no man can be convicted at the suit of the king of any capital offence, unless by the unanimous voice of twenty four of his equals and neighbours: that is, by twelve at least of the grand jury, in the first place, assenting to the accusation; and afterwards, by the whole petit jury, of twelve more, finding him guilty upon his trial. But, if twelve of the grand jury assent, it is a good presentment, though some of the rest disagreeg. And the indictment, when so found, is publicly delivered into court.

Indictments must have a precise and sufficient certainty. By statute 1 Hen. V. c. 5.

all indictments must set forth the christian name, sirname, and addition of the state and degree, mystery,3 town, or place, and the county of the offender: and all this to identify his person. The time, and place, are also to be ascertained, by naming the day, and township, in which the fact was committed: though a mistake in these points is in

302 general not held to be material, provided the time be laid previous to the finding of the

indictment, and the place to be within the jurisdiction of the 〈5〉 court. But sometimes the time may be very material, where there is any limitation in point of time assigned for the prosecution of offenders; as by the statute 7 Will. III. c. 3. which enacts, that no prosecution shall be had for any of the treasons or misprisions therein mentioned (except an assassination designed or attempted on the person of the king) unless the bill of indictment be found within three years after the offence committedh: and, in case of murder, the time of the death must be laid within a year and a day after the mortal stroke was given. The offence itself must also be set forth with clearness and certainty: and in some crimes particular words of art must be used, which are so appropriated by the law to express the precise idea which it entertains of the offence, that no other words, however synonymous they may seem, are capable of doing it. Thus, in treason, the facts must be laid to be done, “treasonably, and against his allegiance;” antiently “proditorie et contra ligeantiae suae debitum:” else the indictment is void. In indictments for murder, it is necessary to say that the party indicted “murdered,” not “killed” or “slew,” the other; which till the late statute was expressed in Latin by the word “murdravit i.” In all indictments for felonies, the adverb “feloniously, felonice,” must be used; and for burglaries also, “burglariter,” or in English, “burglariously:” and all these to ascertain

g 2 Hal. P. C. 161.

h Fost. 249.

i See Vol. III. pag. 321 [III. 212].

3 i.e. occupation, profession, or trade.





chapter 23 199


the intent. In rapes, the word “rapuit,” or “ravished,” is necessary, and must not be expressed by any periphrasis; in order to render the crime certain. So in larcinies also, the words “felonice cepit et asportavit, feloniously took and carried away,” are necessary to every indictment; for these only can express the very offence. Also in indictments for murder, the length and depth of the wound should in general be expressed, in order that it may appear to the court to have been of a mortal nature: but if it goes through the body, then its dimensions are immaterial, for that is apparently sufficient to have been the cause of the death. Also where a limb, or the like, is absolutely cut off, there 303

such description is impossiblek. Lastly, in indictments the value of the thing, which is the subject or instrument of the offence, must sometimes be expressed. In indictments for larcinies this is necessary, that it may appear whether it be grand or petit larciny; and whether entitled or not to the benefit of clergy: in homicide of all sorts it is necessary; as the weapon, with which it is committed, is forfeited to the king as a deodand.

The remaining methods of prosecution are without any previous finding by a jury,

to fix the authoritative stamp of verisimilitude upon the accusation. One of these, by the common law, was when a thief was taken with the mainour, that is, with the thing stolen upon him, in manu [in his hand]. For he might, when so detected flagrante delicto [in open crime], be brought into court, arraigned, and tried, without indictment: as by the Danish law he might be taken and hanged upon the spot, without accusation or trial l. But this proceeding was taken away by several statutes in the reign of Edward the thirdm: though in Scotland a similar process remains to this dayn. So that the only species of proceeding at the suit of the king, without a previous indictment or presentment by a grand jury, now seems to be that of information.

III. Informations are of two sorts; first, those which are partly at the suit of the

king, and partly at that of a subject; and secondly, such as are only in the name of the king. The former are usually brought upon penal statutes, which inflict a penalty upon conviction of the offender, one part to the use of the king, and another to the use of the informer; and are a sort of qui tam actions, (the nature of which was explained in a former volumeo) only carried on by a criminal instead of a civil process: upon which I shall therefore only observe, that by the statute 31 Eliz. c. 5. no prosecution 304

upon any penal statute, the suit and benefit whereof are limited in part to the king and in part to the prosecutor, can be brought by any common informer after one year is expired since the commission of the offence; nor on behalf of the crown after the lapse of two years longer; nor, where the forfeiture is originally given only to the king, can such prosecution be had after the expiration of two years from the commission of the offence.

The informations, that are exhibited in the name of the king alone, are also of two

kinds: first, those which are truly and properly his own suits, and filed ex officio by his

k [Long’s case] 5 Rep. 122.

l Stiernh. de jure Sueon. l. 3. c. 5.

m 2 Hal. P. C. 149.

n Lord Kayms. I. 331.

200 of public wrongs

own immediate officer, the attorney general: secondly, those in which, though the king is the nominal prosecutor, yet it is at the relation of some private person or common informer; and they are filed by the king’s coroner and attorney in the court of king’s bench, usually called the master of the crown-office, who is for this purpose the standing officer of the public. The objects of the king’s own prosecutions, filed ex officio by his own attorney general, are properly such enormous misdemesnors, as peculiarly tend to disturb or endanger his government, or to molest or affront him in the regular discharge of his royal functions. For offences so high and dangerous, in the punishment or prevention of which a moment’s delay would be fatal, the law has given to the crown the power of an immediate prosecution, without waiting for any previous application to any other 〈6〉 tribunal. A power, so necessary, not only to the ease and safety but even to the very existence of the executive magistrate, was originally reserved in the great plan of the English constitution, which has wisely provided for the due preservation of all its parts. The objects of the other species of informations, filed by the master of the crown-office upon the complaint or relation of a private subject, are any gross and notorious misdemesnors, riots, batteries, libels, and other

305 immoralities of an atrocious kind p, not peculiarly tending to disturb the government

(for those are left to the care of the attorney general) but which, on account of their magnitude or pernicious example, deserve the most public animadversion. And when an information is filed, either thus, or by the attorney general ex officio, it must be tried by a petit jury of the county where the offence arises: after which, if the defendant be 〈7〉 found guilty, he must resort to the court for his punishment.

There can be no doubt but that this mode of prosecution, by information (or

suggestion) filed on record by the king’s attorney general, or by his coroner or master of the crown-office in the court of king’s bench, is as antient as the common law itself q. For as the king was bound to prosecute, or at least to lend the sanction of his name to a prosecutor, whenever a grand jury informed him upon their oaths that there was a sufficient ground for instituting a criminal suit; so, when these his immediate officers were otherwise sufficiently assured that a man had committed a gross misdemesnor, either personally against the king or his government, or against the public peace and good order, they were at liberty, without waiting for any farther intelligence, to convey that information to the court of king’s bench by a suggestion on record, and to carry on the prosecution in his majesty’s name. But these informations (of every kind) are confined by the constitutional law to mere misdemesnors only: for, wherever any capital offence is charged, the same law requires that the accusation be warranted by the oath of twelve men, before the party shall be put to answer it. And, as to those offences, in which informations were allowed as well as indictments, so long as they were confined to this high and respectable jurisdiction, and were carried on in a legal and regular course in his majesty’s court of king’s bench, the subject had no reason to complain. The same notice was given, the same process was issued, the same pleas were allowed, the same trial by jury was had, the same judgment was given by the

p 2 Hawk. P. C. 260.





chapter 23 201


same judges, as if the prosecution had originally been by indictment. But when the 306 statute 3 Hen. VII. c. 1. had extended the jurisdiction of the court of star-chamber, the members of which were the sole judges of the law, the fact, and the penalty; and when the statute 11 Hen. VII. c. 3. had permitted informations to be brought by any informer upon any penal statute, not extending to life or member, at the assises or before the justices of the peace, who were to hear and determine the same according to their own discretion; then it was, that the legal and orderly jurisdiction of the court of king’s bench fell into disuse and oblivion, and Empson and Dudley (the wicked instruments of king Henry VII)4 by hunting out obsolete penalties, and this tyrannical mode of prosecution, with other oppressive devicesr, continually harassed the subject and shamefully inriched the crown. The latter of these acts was soon indeed repealed by statute 1 Hen. VIII. c. 6. but the court of star-chamber continued in high vigour, and daily increasing its authority, for more than a century longer; till finally abolished by statute 16 Car. I. c. 10.

Upon this dissolution the old common law s authority of the court of king’s bench,

as the custos morum [guardian of the morals] of the nation, being found necessary to reside somewhere for the peace and good government of the kingdom, was again revived in practicet. And it is observable, that, in the same act of parliament which abolished the court of star-chamber, a conviction by information is expressly reckoned up, as one of the legal modes of conviction of such persons, as should offend a third time against the provisions of that statuteu. It is true, sir Matthew Hale, who presided in this court soon after the time of such revival, is saidw to have been no friend to this method of prosecution: and, if so, the reason of such his dislike was probably the ill use, which the master of the crown-office then made of his authority, by permitting the subject to be harrassed with vexatious informations, whenever applied to by any 307

malicious or revengeful prosecutor; rather than his doubt of their legality, or propriety upon urgent occasionsx. For the power of filing informations, without any control, then resided in the breast of the master: and, being filed in the name of the king, they subjected the prosecutor to no costs, though on trial they proved to be groundless. This oppressive use of them, in the times preceding the revolution, occasioned a struggle, soon after the accession of king Williamy, to procure a declaration of their illegality by the judgment of the court of king’s bench. But sir John Holt, who then presided there, and all the judges, were clearly of opinion, that this proceeding was

r 1 And. 157.

s [Prynn’s case] 5 Mod. 464.

t [Viccarye v Barnes] Styl. Rep. 217. [Davis v Ockham] 245. Styl. pract Reg. tit. Information. pag. 187. (edit. 1657.) [Dudly’s case] 2 Sid. 71. [Seigneur de Rutland v Gie, Hurst’s case, and Fountain’s case] 1 Sid. 152.

u Stat. 16 Car. I. c. 10. §. 6.

w [Prynn’s case] 5 Mod. 460.

x [R. v Opie and Dodge] 1 Saund. 301. [R. v Starling] 1 Sid. 174.

y M. 1 W. & M. [Prynn’s case] 5 Mod. 459. [R. v Abraham et al.] Comb. 141. [R. v Abraham et al.] Farr. [recte Holt K.B.] 361. [R. v Abraham et al.] 1 Show. 106.

4 Edmund Dudley (c. 1462–1510) and Sir Richard Empson (c. 1450–1510), lawyers and privy councillors in the reign of Henry VII; their heavy-handed money-raising on behalf of their royal master aroused enough resentment 202 of public wrongs

grounded on the common law, and could not be then impeached. And, in a few years afterwards, a more temperate remedy was applied in parliament, by statute 4 & 5 W. & M. c. 18. which enacts, that the clerk of the crown shall not file any information without express direction from the court of king’s bench: and that every prosecutor, permitted to promote such information, shall give security by a recognizance of twenty pounds (which now seems to be too small a sum) to prosecute the same with effect; and to pay costs to the defendant, in case he be acquitted thereon, unless the judge, who tries the information, shall certify there was reasonable cause for filing it; and, at all events, to pay costs, unless the information shall be tried within a year after issue joined. But there is a proviso in this act, that it shall not extend to any other informations, than those which are exhibited by the master of the crown-office: and, consequently, informations at the king’s own suit, filed by his attorney general, are no way restrained thereby.

There is one species of informations, still farther regulated by statute 9 Ann. c. 20.

viz. those in the nature of a writ of quo warranto [by what authority]; which was shewn in the preceding volumez, to be a remedy given to the crown against such as had

308 usurped or intruded into any office or franchise. The modern information tends to the

same purpose as the antient writ, being generally made use of to try the civil rights of such franchises; though it is commenced in the same manner as other informations are, by leave of the court, or at the will of the attorney general: being properly a criminal prosecution, in order to fine the defendant for his usurpation, as well as to oust him from his office; yet usually considered at present as merely a civil proceeding.

These are all the methods of prosecution at the suit of the king. There yet remains

another, which is merely at the suit of the subject, and is called an appeal.

IV. An appeal, in the sense wherein it is here used, does not signify any complaint

to a superior court of an injustice done by an inferior one, which is the general use of the word; but it here means an original suit, at the time of its first commencement a. An appeal therefore, when spoken of as a criminal prosecution, denotes an accusation by a private subject against another, for some heinous crime; demanding punishment on account of the particular injury suffered, rather than for the offence against the public. As this method of prosecution is still in force, I cannot omit to mention it: but, as it is very little in use, on account of the great nicety required in conducting it, I shall treat of it very briefly; referring the student for more particulars to 〈8〉 other voluminous compilationsb.

This private process, for the punishment of public crimes, had probably its original

in those times, when a private pecuniary satisfaction, called a weregild, was constantly paid to the party injured, or his relations, to expiate enormous offences. This was a custom derived to us, in common with other northern nationsc, from our ancestors,

309 the antient Germans; among whom according to Tacitusd, “luitur homicidium certo

z See Vol. III. pag. 262 [III. 174].

a It is derived from the French, “appeller,” the verb active, which signifies to call upon, summon, or challenge

one; and not the verb neuter, which signifies the same as the ordinary sense of “appeal” in English.

b 2 Hawk. P. C. ch. 23.

c Stiernh. de jure Sueon. l. 3. c. 4.

d de M. G. c. 21.





chapter 23 203


armentorum ac pecorum numero; recipitque satisfactionem universa domuse [the homicide is expiated by a certain recompense in flocks and herds and the whole family receives satisfaction].” In the same manner by the Irish Brehon law, in case of murder, the Brehon or judge was used to compound between the murderer, and the friends of the deceased who prosecuted him, by causing the malefactor to give unto them, or to the child or wife of him that was slain, a recompense which they called an eriachf. And thus we find in our Saxon laws (particularly those of king Athelstang) the several weregilds for homicide established in progressive order, from the death of the ceorl or peasant, up to that of the king himself h. And in the laws of king Henry I i, we have an account of what other offences were then redeemable by weregild, and what were not sok. As therefore, during the continuance of this custom, a process was certainly given, for recovering the weregild by the party to whom it was due; it seems that, when these offences by degrees grew no longer redeemable, the private process was still continued, in order to insure the infliction of punishment upon the offender, though the party injured was allowed no pecuniary compensation for the offence.

But, though appeals were thus in the nature of prosecutions for some atrocious

injury committed more immediately against an individual, yet it also was antiently permitted, that any subject might appeal another subject of high-treason, either in 310 the courts of common law l, or in parliament, or (for treasons committed beyond the seas) in the court of the high constable and marshal. The cognizance of appeals in the latter still continues in force; and so late as 1631 there was a trial by battel awarded in the court of chivalry, on such an appeal of treasonm: 〈9〉 but the first was virtually abolishedn by the statutes 5 Edw. III. c. 9. and 25 Edw. III. c. 24. and the second expressly by statute 1 Hen. IV. c. 14. So that the only appeals now in force, for things done within the realm, are appeals of felony and mayhem.

An appeal of felony may be brought for crimes committed either against the parties

themselves, or their relations. The crimes against the parties themselves are larciny, rape, and arson. And for these, as well as for mayhem, the persons robbed, ravished, maimed, or whose houses are burnt, may institute this private process. The only crime against one’s relation, for which an appeal can be brought, is that of killing him,

e And in another place, (c. 12.) “Delictis, pro modo poenarum, equorum pecorumque numera convicti mulctantur. Pars mulctae regi vel civitati; pars ipsi qui vindicatur, vel propinquis ejus, exsolvitur [Those who are convicted of offences are punished by a fine of a certain number of horses and cattle. One part of the fine is paid to the king or state, the other half to the plaintiff or his relations].”

f Spenser’s state of Ireland, pag. 1513. edit. Hughes.

g Judic. Civit. Lund. Wilk. 71.

h The weregild of a ceorl was 266 thrymsas, that of the king 30000; each thrymsa being equal to about a shilling of our present money. The weregild of a subject was paid entirely to the relations of the party slain: but that of the king was divided; one half being paid to the public, the other to the royal family.

i c. 12.

k In Turkey this principle is still carried so far, that even murder is never prosecuted by the officers of the government, as with us. It is the business of the next relations, and them only, to revenge the slaughter of their kinsmen; and if they rather choose (as they generally do) to compound the matter for money, nothing more is said about it. (Lady M. W. Montague. lett. 42.)

l Britt. c. 22.

m By Donald lord Rea against David Ramsey. (Rushw. vol. 2. part. 2. pag. 112.)

204 of public wrongs

by either murder or manslaughter. But this cannot be brought by every relation: but only by the wife for the death of her husband, or by the heir male for the death of his ancestor; which heirship was also confined, by an ordinance of king Henry the first, to the four nearest degrees of bloodo. It is given to the wife, on account of the loss of her husband: therefore, if she marries again, before or pending her appeal, it is lost and gone; or, if she marries after judgment, she shall not demand execution. The heir, as was said, must also be heir male, and such a one as was the next heir by the course of the common law, at the time of the killing of the ancestor. But this rule has three exceptions: 1. If the person killed leaves an innocent wife, she only, and not the heir, shall have the appeal: 2. If there be no wife, and the heir be accused of the murder, the person, who next to him would have been heir male, shall bring the appeal: 3. If the

311 wife kills her husband, the heir may appeal her of the death. And, by the statute of

Gloucester, 6 Edw. I. c. 9. all appeals of death must be sued within a year and a day after the completion of the felony by the death of the party: which seems to be only declaratory of the old common law; for in the Gothic constitutions we find the same “praescriptio annalis, quae currit adversus actorem, si de homicida ei non constat intra annum a caede facta, nec quenquam interea arguat et accuset p.”5

These appeals may be brought, previous to any indictment; and, if the appellee be

acquitted thereon, he cannot be afterwards indicted for the same offence. In like manner as by the old Gothic constitution, if any offender gained a verdict in his favour, when prosecuted by the party injured, he was also understood to be acquitted of any crown prosecution for the same offenceq: but, on the contrary, if he made his peace with the king, still he might be prosecuted at the suit of the party. And so, with us, if a man be acquitted on an indictment of murder, or found guilty, and pardoned by the king, 〈10〉 still he may, by virtue of statute 3 Hen. VII. c. 1. be prosecuted by appeal for the same felony, not having as yet been punished for it: though, if he hath been found guilty of manslaughter on an indictment, and hath had the benefit of clergy, and suffered the judgment of the law, he cannot afterwards be appealed. For it is a maxim of law, that “nemo bis punitur pro eodem 〈11〉 delicto [no one is punished twice for the same offence].”

If the appellee be found guilty, he shall suffer the same judgment, as if he had been

convicted by indictment: but with this remarkable difference; that on an indictment, which is at the suit of the king, the king may pardon and remit the execution; on an appeal, which is at the suit of a private subject, to make an atonement for the private wrong, the king can no more pardon it, than he can remit the damages recovered on

312 an action of battery r. In like manner as, while the weregild continued to be paid as a

fine for homicide, it could not be remitted by the king’s authority s. And the antient

o Mirr. c. 2. §. 7.

p Stiernh. de jure Goth. l. 3. c. 4.

q Ibid. l. 1. c. 5.

r 2 Hawk. P. C. 392.

s LL. Edm. §. 3.

5 ‘The limitation of a year, which runs against the appellor if he does not prove the murder within a year from

the event or bring his accusation within that time.’





chapter 23 205


usage was, so late as Henry the fourth’s time, that all the relations of the slain should drag the appellee to the place of executiont: a custom, founded upon that savage spirit of family resentment, which prevailed universally through Europe, after the irruption of the northern nations, and is peculiarly attended to in their several codes of law; and which prevails even now among the wild and untutored inhabitants of America: as if the finger of nature had pointed it out to mankind, in their rude and uncultivated 〈12〉 state. However, the punishment of the offender may be remitted and discharged by the concurrence of all parties interested; and as the king by his pardon may frustrate an indictment, so the appellant by his release may discharge an appealu: “nam quilibet potest renunciare juri, pro se introducto [for anyone may relinquish a right introduced for his own benefit].”

These are the several methods of prosecution instituted by the laws of England

for the punishment of offences; of which that by indictment is the most general. I shall therefore confine my subsequent observations principally to this method of prosecution; remarking by the way the most material variations that may arise, from the method of proceeding by either information or appeal.

t [YB] M. 11 Hen. IV. 12. 3 Inst. 131.

u 1 Hal. P. C. 9.



313 chapter the twenty fourth.



of process upon an

indictment.

We are next, in the fourth place, to enquire into the manner of issuing process, after indictment found, to bring in the accused to answer it. We have hitherto supposed the offender to be in custody before the finding of the indictment; in which case he is 〈1〉 immediately to be arraigned thereon. But if he hath fled, or secretes himself, in capital cases; or hath not, in smaller misdemesnors, been bound over to appear at the assises or sessions, still an indictment may be preferred against him in his absence; since, were he present, he could not be heard before the grand jury against it. And, if it be found, then process must issue to bring him into court; for the indictment cannot be tried, unless he personally appears: according to the rules of equity 〈2〉 in all, and the express provision of statute 28 Edw. III. c. 3. in capital, cases; that no man shall be put to death, without being brought to answer by due process of law.

The proper process on an indictment for any petty misdemesnor, or on a penal

statute, is a writ of venire facias [cause to come], which is in the nature of a summons to cause the party to appear. And if by the return to such venire it appears, that the party hath lands in the county whereby he may be distreined, then a distress infinite

314 shall be issued from time to time till he appears. But if the sheriff returns that he hath

no lands in his bailiwick, then (upon his non-appearance) a writ of capias shall issue, which commands the sheriff to take his body, and have him at the next assises; and if he cannot be taken upon the first capias, a second, and a third shall issue, called an alias, and a pluries capias. But, on indictments for treason or felony, a capias is the first process: and, for treason or homicide, only one shall be allowed to issuea, or two in the case of other felonies, by statute 25 Edw. III. c. 14. though the usage is to issue only one in any felony; the provisions of this statute being in most cases found impracticableb. And so, in the case of misdemesnors, it is now the usual practice for any judge of the court of king’s bench, upon certificate of an indictment found, to award a writ of capias immediately, in order to bring in the defendant. But if he absconds, and it is thought proper to pursue him to an outlawry, then a greater exactness is necessary. For, in such case, after the several writs have issued in a regular number, according to the nature of the respective crimes, without any effect, the offender shall be put in the exigent in order to his outlawry: that is, he shall be exacted, proclaimed, or required to surrender, at five county courts; and if he be returned quinto exactus [required for the fifth time], and does not appear at the fifth exaction or requisition, then he is adjudged to be outlawed, or put out of the protection of the

a See appendix. §. 1 [IV. 288].

b 2 Hal. P. C. 195.





chapter 24 207


law; so that he is incapable of taking the benefit of it in any respect, either by bringing actions or otherwise.

The punishment for outlawries upon indictments for misdemesnors, is the same as

for outlawries upon civil actions; (of which, and the previous process by writs of capias, exigi facias, and proclamation, we spoke in the preceding bookc) viz. forfeiture of goods and chattels. But an outlawry in treason or felony amounts to a conviction and attainder of the offence charged in the indictment, as much 〈3〉 as if he had been found guilty by his country d. His life is however still under the protection of the law, 315 as hath formerly been 〈4〉 observede: and though antiently an outlawed felon was said to have caput lupinum [a wolf’s head], and might be knocked on the head like a wolf, by any one that should meet himf; because, having renounced all law, he was to be dealt with as in a state of nature, when every one that should find him might slay him: yet now, to avoid such inhumanity, it is holden that no man is intitled to kill him wantonly or wilfully; but in so doing is guilty of murderg, unless it happens in the endeavour to apprehend himh. For any person may arrest an outlaw on a criminal prosecution, either of his own head, or by writ or warrant of capias utlagatum [take the outlaw], in order to bring him to execution. But such outlawry may be frequently reversed by writ of error; the proceedings therein being (as it is fit they should be) exceedingly nice and circumstantial; and, if any single minute point be omitted or misconducted, the whole outlawry is illegal, and may be reversed: upon which reversal the party accused is admitted to plead to, and defend himself against, the indictment.

Thus much for process to bring in the offender after indictment found; during

which stage of the prosecution it is, that writs of certiorari facias are usually had, though they may be had at any time before trial, to certify and remove the indictment, with all the proceedings thereon, from any inferior court of criminal jurisdiction into the court of king’s bench; which is the sovereign ordinary court of justice in causes criminal. And this is frequently done for one of these four purposes; either, 1. To consider and determine the validity of appeals or indictments and the proceedings thereon; and to quash or confirm them as there is cause: or, 2. Where it is surmised that a partial or insufficient trial will probably be had in the court below, the indictment is removed, in order to have the prisoner or defendant tried at the bar of the court of king’s bench, or before the justices of nisi prius: or, 3. It is so removed, in order to plead the king’s pardon there: or, 4. To issue process of outlawry against the 316

offender, in those counties or places where the process of the inferior judges will not reach himi. Such writ of certiorari, when issued and delivered to the inferior court for removing any record or other proceeding, as well upon indictment as otherwise, supersedes the jurisdiction of such inferior court, and makes all subsequent proceedings

c See Vol. III. pag. 283, 4 [III. 187–8].

d 2 Hal. P. C. 205.

e See pag. 178 [IV. 117].

f Mirr. c. 4. §. 4. Co. Litt. 128.

g 1 Hal. P. C. 497.

h Bracton. fol. 125.

i 2 Hal. P. C. 210.

208 of public wrongs

therein entirely erroneous and illegal; unless the court of king’s bench remands the record to the court below, to be there tried and determined. A certiorari may be granted at the instance of either the prosecutor or the defendant: the former as a matter of right, the latter as a matter of discretion; and therefore it is seldom granted to remove indictments from the justices of gaol delivery, or after issue joined or confession of the fact in any of the courts below k.

At this stage of prosecution also it is, that indictments found by the grand jury

against a peer must in consequence of a writ of certiorari be certified and transmitted into the court of parliament, or into that of the lord high steward of Great Britain; and that, in places of exclusive jurisdiction, as the two universities, indictments must be delivered (upon challenge and claim of cognizance) to the courts therein established by charter, and confirmed by act of parliament, to be there respectively tried and determined.

k 2 Hawk. P. C. 287. [R. v Gwynne et al.] 4 Burr. 749.





chapter the twenty fifth. 317




of arraignment, and

its incidents.

When the offender either appears voluntarily to an indictment, or was before in custody, or is brought in upon criminal process to answer it in the proper court, he is immediately to be arraigned thereon; which is the fifth stage of criminal prosecution.

To arraign, is nothing else but to call the prisoner to the bar of the court, to answer

the matter charged upon him in the indictment a. The prisoner is to be called to the bar by his name; and it is laid down in our antient booksb, that, though under an indictment of the highest nature, he must be brought to the bar without irons, or any manner of shackles or bonds; unless there be evident danger of an escape, and then he may be secured with irons. But yet in Layer’s case, a.d. 1722. a difference was taken between the time of arraignment, and the time of trial;1 and accordingly the prisoner stood at the bar in chains during the time of his arraignment c.

When he is brought to the bar, he is called upon by name to hold up his hand: 318

which, though it may seem a trifling circumstance, yet is of this importance, that by the holding up of his hand constat de persona [he confirms his identity], and he owns himself to be of that name by which he is calledd. However it is not an indispensable ceremony; for, being calculated merely for the purpose of identifying the person, any other acknowlegement will answer the purpose as well: therefore, if the prisoner obstinately and contemptuously refuses to hold up his hand, but confesses he is the person named, it is fully sufficient e.

Then the indictment is to be read to him distinctly in the English tongue (which

was law, even while all other proceedings were in Latin) that he may fully understand his charge. After which it is to be demanded of him, whether he be guilty of the crime, whereof he stands indicted, or not guilty. By the old common law the accessory could not be arraigned till the principal was 〈1〉 attainted; and therefore, if the principal had never been indicted at all, had stood mute, had challenged above thirty five jurors peremptorily, had claimed the benefit of clergy, had obtained a pardon, or had died before attainder, the accessory in any of these cases could not be arraigned: for non constitit [it was not evident] whether any felony was committed or no, till the

a 2 Hal. P. C. 216.

b Bract. l. 3. de coron. c. 18. §. 3. Mirr. c. 5. sect. 1. §. 54. Flet. l. 1. c. 31. §. 1. Britt. c. 5. Staundf. P. C. 78. 3 Inst. 34. [Regicides] Kel. 10. 2 Hal. P. C. 219. 2 Hawk. P. C. 308.

c State Trials. VI. 230.

d 2 Hal. P. C. 219.

e [Lord Stafford’s case] Raym. 408.

1 The barrister Christopher Layer (1683–1723) was arrested in 1722, tried, and executed for his part in Atterbury’s plot, a Jacobite conspiracy jointly organized with one of his clients, William Baron North.

210 of public wrongs

principal was attainted; and it might so happen that the accessory should be convicted one day, and the principal acquitted the next, which would be absurd. However, this absurdity could only happen, where it was possible, that a trial of the principal might be had, subsequent to that of the accessory: and therefore the law still continues, that the accessory shall not be tried, so long as the principal remains liable to be tried hereafter. But by statute 1 Ann. c. 9. if the principal be once convicted, and before attainder, (that is, before he receives judgment of death or outlawry) he is delivered by pardon, the benefit of clergy, or otherwise; or if the principal stands mute, or

319 challenges peremptorily above the legal number of jurors,2 so as never to be convicted

at all; in any of these cases, in which no subsequent trial can be had of the principal, the accessory may be proceeded against, as if the principal felon had been attainted; for there is no danger of future contradiction. And upon the trial of the accessory, as well after as before the conviction of the principal, it seems to be the better opinion, and founded on the true spirit of justicef, that the accessory is at liberty (if he can) to controvert the guilt of his supposed principal, and to prove him innocent of the charge, as well in point of fact as in point of law.

When a criminal is arraigned, he either stands mute, or confesses the fact; which

circumstances we may call incidents to the arraignment: or else he pleads to the indictment, which is to be considered as the next stage of proceedings. But, first, let us observe these incidents to the arraignment, of standing mute, or confession.

I. Regularly a prisoner is said to stand mute, when, being arraigned for treason

or felony, he either, 1. Makes no answer at all: or, 2. Answers foreign to the purpose, or with such matter as is not allowable; and will not answer otherwise: or, 3. Upon having pleaded not guilty, refuses to put himself upon the country g. If he says nothing, the court ought ex officio [by virtue of its office] to impanel a jury, to enquire whether he stands obstinately mute, or whether he be dumb ex visitatione Dei [by visitation of God]. If the latter appears to be the case, the judges of the court (who are to be of counsel for the prisoner, and to see that he hath law and justice) shall proceed to the trial, and examine all points as if he had pleaded not guilty h. But whether judgment of death can be given against such a prisoner, who hath never pleaded, and can say nothing in arrest of judgment, is a point yet undeterminedi.

320 If he be found to be obstinately mute, (which a prisoner hath been held to be, that

hath cut out his own tonguek,) then, if it be on an indictment of high treason, 〈2〉 it is clearly settled that standing mute is equivalent to a conviction, and he shall receive the same judgment and executionl. And as in this the highest crime, so also in the lowest species of felony, viz. in petit larciny, and in all misdemesnors, 〈3〉 standing mute is equivalent to conviction. But upon appeals or indictments for other felonies,

f Foster 365, &c.

g 2 Hal. P. C. 316.

h 2 Hawk. P. C. 327.

i 2 Hal. P. C. 317.

k 3 Inst. 178.

l 2 Hawk. P. C. 329. 2 Hal. P. C. 317.

2 For peremptory challenges to jurors, see IV. 227–9.





chapter 25 211


or petit treason, he shall not be looked upon as convicted, so as to receive judgment for the felony; but shall, for his obstinacy, receive the terrible sentence of penance, 〈4〉 or peine forte et dure [the strong and hard punishment].

〈 5〉 Before this is pronounced the prisoner ought to have not only trina admonitio

[a three-fold warning], but also a convenient respite of a few hours, and the sentence should be distinctly read to him, that he may know his dangerm: and, after all, if he continues obstinate, and his offence is clergyable, he shall have the benefit of his clergy allowed him; even though he is too stubborn to pray itn. Thus tender has the modern law been of inflicting this dreadful punishment: but if no other means will prevail, and the prisoner (when charged with a capital felony) continues stubbornly mute, the judgment is then given against him, without any distinction of sex or degree. A judgment, which the law has purposely ordained to be exquisitely severe, that by that very means it might rarely be put in execution.

The rack, or question, to extort a confession from criminals, is a practice of a

different nature: 〈6〉 this being only used to compel a man to put himself upon his trial; that being a species of trial in itself. And the trial by rack is utterly unknown to the law of England; though once when the dukes of Exeter and Suffolk, and other ministers of Henry VI, had laid a design to introduce the civil law into this kingdom as the rule of government,3 for a beginning thereof they erected a rack for torture; which was called 321

in derision the duke of Exeter’s daughter,4 and still remains in the tower of Londono: where it was occasionally used as an engine of state, not of law, more than once in the reign of queen Elizabethp.5 But when, upon the assassination of Villiers duke of Buckingham by Felton, it was proposed in the privy council to put the assassin to the rack, in order to discover his accomplices; the judges, being consulted, declared unanimously, to their own honour and the honour of the English law,6 that no such proceeding was allowable by the laws of Englandq. It seems astonishing that this usage, of administring the torture, should be said to arise from a tenderness to the lives of men: and yet this is the reason given for its introduction in the civil law, and its subsequent adoption by the French and other foreign nationsr: viz. because the laws

m 2 Hal. P. C. 320.

n 2 Hal. P. C. 321. 2 Hawk. P. C. 332.

o 3 Inst. 35.

p 〈7〉 Barr. 69. 385.

q Rushw. Coll. i. 638.

r Cod. l. 9. t. 41. l. 8. & t. 47. l. 16. Fortesc. de LL. Angl. c. 22.

3 Civil law in this context refers to ‘the civil or municipal law of the Roman empire’ (I. 59–60), which Blackstone consistently associates with absolutist regimes and the loss of individual liberty.

4 The rack in the Tower of London may have gained its nickname in the sixteenth century; the duke of Exeter in question was John Holland (1395–1447), constable of the Tower from 1420. William de la Pole, duke of Suffolk (1396–1450) was the dominant magnate during Henry VI’s incapacity in the late 1440s.

5 Use of the rack and other instruments of torture by and on behalf of the king’s council (it was never standard judicial procedure), did not however begin or end in Elizabeth’s reign. This passage appears to draw on A. Ellys, The Spiritual and Temporal Liberty of the Subjects in England (1765), ii. 27, which in turn is indebted to Coke’s Third Institutes and Barrington’s Observations on the Statutes.

6 George Villiers, duke of Buckingham, Charles I’s highly unpopular favourite and chief minister, was assassinated by John Felton in 1628. Notwithstanding the judges’ opinion, Felton, who became something of a national hero, was tortured in an effort to extract information about his assumed co-conspirators.

212 of public wrongs

cannot endure that any man should die upon the evidence of a false, or even a single, witness; and therefore contrived this method that innocence should manifest itself by a stout denial, or guilt by a plain confession. Thus rating a man’s virtue by the hardiness of his constitution, and his guilt by the sensibility of his nerves! But there needs only to state accuratelys, in order most effectually to expose, this inhuman species of mercy: the uncertainty of which, as a test and criterion of truth, was long ago very elegantly pointed out by Tully; though he lived in a state wherein it was usual to torture slaves in order to furnish evidence: “tamen, says he, illa tormenta gubernat dolor, moderatur natura cujusque tum animi tum corporis, regit quaesitor, flectit libido, corrumpit spes, infirmat metus; ut in tot rerum angustiis nihil veritati loci relinquatur t.”7

322 The English judgment of penance for standing mutev 〈8〉 is as follows: that the

prisoner shall be remanded to the prison from whence he came; and put into a low, dark chamber; and there be laid on his back, on the bare floor, naked, unless where decency forbids; that there be placed upon his body as great a weight of iron as he can bear, and more; that he shall have no sustenance, save only, on the first day, three morsels of the worst bread; and, on the second day, three draughts of standing water, that shall be nearest to the prison door; and in this situation this shall be alternately his daily diet, till he dies, as the judgment now runs, though formerly it was, till he answered u.

It hath been doubted whether this punishment subsisted at the common law w, or

was introduced in consequence of the statute Westm. 1. 3 Edw. I. c. 12.x which seems to be the better opinion. For not a word of it is mentioned in Glanvil or Bracton, or in any antient author, case, or record, (that hath yet been produced) previous to the reign of Edward I: but there are instances on record in the reign of Henry III y, where persons accused of felony, and standing mute, were tried in a particular manner, by two successive juries, and convicted; and it is asserted by the judges in 8 Hen. IV. that, by the common law before the statute, standing mute on an appeal amounted to a conviction of the felony z. This statute of Edward I directs such persons, “as will not put themselves upon inquests of felonies before the judges at the suit of the king, to be put into hard and strong prison (soient mys en la prisone fort et dure) as those which refuse to be at the common law of the land.” And, immediately after this statute, the form of

s The marquis Beccaria, (ch. 16.) in an exquisite piece of raillery, has proposed this problem, with a gravity and

precision that are truly mathematical: “the force of the muscles and the sensibility of the nerves of an innocent person being given, it is required to find the degree of pain, necessary to make him confess himself guilty of a given crime.”

t Pro Sulla. 28.

v 2 Hal. P. C. 319. 2 Hawk. P. C. 329.

u Britton. c. 4. & 22. Flet. l. 1. c. 34. §. 33.

w 2 Inst. 179. 2 Hal. P. C. 322. 2 Hawk P. C. 330.

x Staundf. P. C. 149. 〈9〉 Barr. 65.

y Emlyn on 2 Hal. P. C. 322.

z Al common ley, avant le statute de West. 1. c. 12. si ascun ust estre appeal, et ust estre mute, il serra convict de

felony [At common law before the statute of Westminster, 1. c. 12, if any one was charged with an offence, and remained mute, he was convicted of felony]. ([YB] M. 8 Hen. IV. 2.)

7 ‘Nevertheless, these torments are regulated by pain; they are more or less great in each sufferer, according to

his strength of mind or body, the inquisitor directs them, the will bends, hope corrupts, fear enfeebles, so that in





chapter 25 213


the judgment appears in Fleta and Britton to have been only a very strait confinement 323

in prison, with hardly any degree of sustenance; but no weight is directed to be laid upon the body, so as to hasten the death of the miserable sufferer: and indeed any surcharge of punishment on persons adjudged to penance, so as to shorten their lives, is reckoned by Horne in the mirror a as a species of criminal 〈10〉 homicide: to which we may add, that the record of 35 Edw. I. (cited by a learned author b) most clearly proves, that the prisoner might then possibly subsist for forty days under this lingering punishment. I should therefore imagine that the practice of loading him with weights, or, as it is usually called, pressing him to death, was gradually introduced between the reign of Edward I and 8 Hen. IV, when it first appears upon our booksc; and 〈11〉 was intended as a species of mercy to the delinquent, by delivering him the sooner from his torment: and hence I presume it also was, that the duration of the penance was then firstd altered; and instead of continuing till he answered, it was directed to continue till he died, which must very soon happen under an enormous pressure.

The uncertainty of its original, the doubts 〈12〉 that may be conceived of its legality,

and the repugnance of its theory (for it rarely is carried into practice) to the humanity of the laws of England, all seem to require a legislative abolition of this cruel process, and a restitution of the antient common law; whereby the standing mute in felony, as well as in treason and in trespass, amounted to a confession of the charge. Or, if the corruption of the blood and the consequent escheat in felony 〈13〉 were removed, the peine forte et dure might still remain, as a monument of the savage rapacity, with which the lordly tyrants of feodal antiquity hunted after escheats and forfeitures; but no man would ever be tempted to undergo such a horrid alternative. For the law is, that by standing mute, and suffering this heavy penance, the judgment, and of course the corruption of the blood and escheat of the lands, are saved in felony and petit treason; though not the forfeiture of the goods: and therefore this lingering 324 punishment was probably introduced, in order to extort a plea; without which it was held that no judgment of death could be given, and so the lord lost his escheat. But notwithstanding these terrors, some hardy delinquents, conscious of their guilt, and yet touched with a tender regard for their children, have rather chosen to submit to this painful death, than the easier judgment upon conviction, which might expose their offspring not only to present want, but to future incapacities of inheritance. But in high treason, as standing mute is equivalent to a conviction, the same judgment, the same corruption of blood, and the same 〈14〉 forfeitures attend it, as in other cases of convictione. And thus much for the demesnor of a prisoner upon his arraignment, by standing mute.

II. The other incident to arraignments, exclusive of the plea, is 〈15〉 the prisoner’s

confession of the indictment. Upon a simple and plain confession, the court hath

a ch. 1. §. 9.

b Barr. 62.

c Yearb. 8 Hen. IV. 1.

d Et fuit dit, que le contrarie avoit estre fait devant ces heures [and it was said that the contrary had been done before this time]. (Ibid. 2)

e 2 Hawk. P. C. 331.

214 of public wrongs

nothing to do but to award judgment: but it is usually very backward in receiving and recording such confession, out of tenderness to the life of the subject; and will generally advise the prisoner to retract it, and plead to the indictment f.

But there is another species of confession, which we read much of in our antient

books, of a far more complicated kind, which is called approvement. And that is when a person, indicted of treason or felony, and arraigned for the same, doth confess the fact before plea pleaded; and appeals or accuses others, his accomplices, of the same crime, in order to obtain his pardon. In this case he is called an approver or prover, probator, and the party appealed or accused is called the appellee. Such approvement can only be in capital offences; and it is, as it were, equivalent to an indictment, since the appellee is equally called upon to answer it: and if he hath no reasonable and legal exceptions to

325 make to the person of the approver, which indeed are very numerous, he must put

himself upon his trial, either by battel, or by the country; and, if vanquished or found guilty, must suffer the judgment of the law, and the approver shall have his pardon, ex debito justitiae [as due to justice]. On the other hand, if the appellee be conqueror, or acquitted by the jury, the approver shall receive judgment to be hanged, upon his own confession of the indictment; for the condition of his pardon has failed, viz. the convicting of some other person, and therefore his conviction remains absolute.

But it is purely in the discretion of the court to permit the approver thus to appeal,

or not; and, in fact, this course of admitting approvements hath been long disused: for the truth was, as sir Matthew Hale observes, that more mischief hath arisen to good men by these kind of approvements, upon false and malicious accusations of desperate villains, than benefit to the public by the discovery and conviction of real offenders. And therefore, in the times when such appeals were more frequently admitted, great strictness and nicety were held thereing: though, since their discontinuance, the doctrine of approvements is become a matter of more curiosity than use. I shall only observe, that all the good, whatever it be, that can be expected from this method of approvement, is fully provided for 〈16〉 in the cases of robbery, burglary, housebreaking, and larciny to the value of five shillings from shops, warehouses, stables, and coachhouses, by statutes 4 & 5 W. & M. c. 8. 10 & 11 W. III. c. 23. and 5 Ann. c. 31. which enact, that, if any such felon, being out of prison, shall discover two or more persons, who have committed the like felonies, so as they may be convicted thereof; he shall in most cases receive a reward of 40l., and in general be entitled a pardon of all capital offences, excepting only murder and treason. And if any such person, having feloniously stolen any lead, iron, or other metals, shall discover and convict two offenders of having illegally bought or received the same, he shall by virtue of statute 29 Geo. II. c. 30 be pardoned for all such felonies committed 〈17〉 before such discovery.

f 2 Hal. P. C. 225.

g 2 Hal. P. C. ch. 29. 2 Hawk. P. C. ch. 24.





chapter the twenty sixth. 326




of plea, and issue.

We are now to consider the plea of the prisoner, or defensive matter alleged by him on his arraignment, if he does not confess, or stand mute. This is either, 1. A plea to the jurisdiction; 2. A demurrer; 3. A plea in abatement; 4. A special plea in bar; or, 5. The general issue.

Formerly there was another plea, now abrogated, that of sanctuary; which is

however necessary to be lightly touched upon, as it may give some light to many parts of our antient law: it being introduced and continued during the superstitious veneration, that was paid to consecrated ground in the times of popery. First then, it is to be observed, that if a person accused of any crime (except treason, wherein the crown, and sacrilege, wherein the church, was too nearly concerned) had fled to any church or church-yard, and within forty days after went in sackcloth and confessed himself guilty before the coroner, and declared all the particular circumstances of the offence; and thereupon took the oath in that case provided, viz. that he abjured the realm, and would depart from thence forthwith at the port that should be assigned him, and would never return without leave from the king; he by this means saved his life, if he observed the conditions of the oath, by going with a cross in his hand and with all convenient speed, to the port assigned, and embarking. For if, during this 327 forty days privilege of sanctuary, or in his road to the sea side, he was apprehended and arraigned in any court for this felony, he might plead the privilege of sanctuary, and had a right to be remanded, if taken out against his willa. But by this abjuration his blood was attainted, and he forfeited all his goods and chattelsb. The immunity of these privileged places was very much abridged by the statutes 27 Hen. VIII. c. 19. and 32 Hen. VIII. c. 12. And now, by the statute 21 Jac. I. c. 28. all privilege of sanctuary, and abjuration consequent thereupon, is utterly taken away and abolished.

Formerly also the benefit of clergy used to be pleaded before trial or conviction,

and was called a declinatory plea; which was the name also given to that of sanctuary c. But, as the prisoner upon a trial has a chance to be acquitted, and totally discharged and, if convicted of a clergyable felony, is entitled equally to his clergy after as before conviction; this course is extremely disadvantageous: and therefore the benefit of clergy is now very rarely pleaded; but, if found requisite, is prayed by the convict before judgment is passed upon him.

I proceed therefore to the five species of pleas, before-mentioned. I. A plea to the jurisdiction, is where an indictment is taken before a court, that

hath no cognizance of the offence; as if a man be indicted for a rape at the sheriff’s

a Mirr. c. 1. §. 13. 2 Hawk. P. C. 335.

b 2 Hawk. P. C. 52.

c 2 Hal. P. C. 236.

216 of public wrongs

tourn, or for treason at the quarter sessions: in these or similar cases, he may except to the jurisdiction of the court, without answering at all to the crime allegedd.

II. A demurrer to the indictment. This is incident to criminal cases, as well as

328 civil, when the fact as alleged is allowed to be true, but the prisoner joins issue upon

some point of law in the indictment, by which he insists that the fact, as stated, is no felony, treason, or whatever the crime is alleged to be. Thus, for instance, if a man be indicted for feloniously stealing a greyhound; which is an animal in which no valuable property can be had, and therefore it is not felony, but only a civil trespass, to steal it: in this case the party indicted may demur to the indictment; denying it to be felony, though he confesses the act of taking it. Some have helde, that if, on demurrer, the point of law be adjudged against the prisoner, he shall have judgment and execution, as if convicted by verdict. But this is denied by othersf, who hold, that in such case he shall be directed and received to plead the general issue, not guilty, after a demurrer determined against him. Which appears the more reasonable, because it is clear, that if the prisoner freely discovers the fact in court, and refers it to the opinion of the court, whether it be felony, or no; and upon the fact thus shewn it appears to be felony; the court will not record the confession, but admit him afterwards to plead not guilty g. And this seems to be a case of the same nature, being for the most part a mistake in point of law, and in the conduct of his pleading; and, though a man by mispleading may in some cases lose his property, yet the law will not suffer him by such niceties to lose his life. However, upon this doubt, demurrers to indictments are seldom used: since the same advantages may be taken upon a plea of not guilty; or afterwards, in arrest of judgment, when the verdict has established the fact.

III. A plea in abatement is principally for a misnosmer, a wrong name, or a false

addition to the prisoner. As, if James Allen, gentleman, is indicted by the name of John Allen, esquire, he may plead that he has the name of James, and not of John; and that he is a gentleman, and not an esquire. And, if either fact is found by a jury, then

329 the indictment shall be abated, as writs or declarations may be in civil actions; of

which we spoke at large, in the preceding volumeh. But, in the end, there is little advantage accruing to the prisoner by means of these dilatory pleas; because if the exception be allowed, a new bill of indictment may be framed, according to what the prisoner in his plea avers to be his true name and addition. For it is a rule, upon all pleas in abatement, that he, who takes advantage of a flaw, must at the same time shew how it may be amended. Let us therefore next consider a more substantial kind of plea, viz.

IV. Special pleas in bar; which go to the merits of the indictment, and give a

reason why the prisoner ought not to answer it at all, nor put himself upon his trial for the crime alleged. These are of four kinds: a former acquittal, a former conviction,



d Ibid. 256.

e 2 Hal. P. C. 257.

f 2 Hawk. P. C. 334.

g 2 Hal. P. C. 225.





chapter 26 217


a former attainder, or a pardon. There are many other pleas, which may be pleaded in bar of an appeali: but these are applicable to both appeals and indictments.

1. First, the plea of auterfoits acquit, or a former acquittal, is grounded on this

universal maxim of the common law of England, that no man is to be brought into jeopardy of his life, more than once, for the same offence. And hence it is allowed as a consequence, that when a man is once fairly found not guilty upon any indictment, or other 〈1〉 prosecution, he may plead such acquittal in bar of any subsequent accusation for the same crime. Therefore an acquittal on an appeal is a good bar to an indictment of the same offence. And so also was an acquittal on an indictment a good bar to an appeal, by the common law k: and therefore, in favour of appeals, a general practice was introduced, not to try any person on an indictment of homicide, till after the year and day, within which appeals may be brought, were past; by which time it often happened that the witnesses died, or the whole was forgotten. To remedy which inconvenience, the statute 3 Hen. VII. c. 1. enacts, that indictments shall be 330 proceeded on, immediately, at the king’s suit, for the death of a man, without waiting for bringing an appeal; and that the plea, of auterfoits acquit on an indictment, shall be no bar to the prosecuting of any appeal.

2. Secondly, the plea of auterfoits convict, or a former conviction for the same

identical crime, though no judgment was ever given, or perhaps will be, (being suspended by the benefit of clergy or other causes) is a good plea in bar to an indictment. And this depends upon the same principle as the former, that no man ought to be twice brought in danger of his life for one and the same crimel. Hereupon it has been held, that a conviction of manslaughter, 〈2〉 on an appeal, is a bar even in another appeal, and much more in an indictment, of murder; for the fact prosecuted is the same in both, though the offences differ in colouring and in degree. It is to be observed, that the pleas of auterfoits acquit, and auterfoits convict, or a former acquittal, and former conviction, must be upon a prosecution for the same identical act and crime. But the case is otherwise, in

3. Thirdly, the plea of auterfoits attaint, or a former attainder; which is a good

plea in bar, whether it be for the same or any other felony. For wherever a man is attainted of felony, by judgment of death either upon a verdict or confession, by outlawry, or heretofore by abjuration; and whether upon an appeal or an indictment; he may plead such attainder in bar to any subsequent indictment or appeal, for the same or for any other felony m. And this because, generally, such proceeding on a second prosecution cannot be to any purpose; for the prisoner is dead in law by the first attainder, his blood is already corrupted, and he hath forfeited all that he had: so that it is absurd and superfluous to endeavour to attaint him a second time. But to this general rule however, as to all others, there are some exceptions; wherein, cessante ratione, cessat et ipsa lex [the reason ceasing, the law itself ceases]. As, 1. Where the

i 2 Hawk. P. C. ch. 23.

k Ibid. 373.

l 2 Hawk. P. C. 377.

m Ibid. 375.

218 of public wrongs

331 former attainder is reversed for error, for then it is the same as if it had never been.

And the same reason holds, where the attainder is reversed by parliament, or the judgment vacated by the king’s pardon, with regard to felonies committed afterwards. 2. Where the attainder was upon indictment, such attainder is no bar to an appeal: for the prior sentence is pardonable by the king; and if that might be pleaded in bar of the appeal, the king might in the end defeat the suit of the subject, by suffering the prior sentence to stop the prosecution of a second, and then, when the time of appealing is elapsed, granting the delinquent a pardon. 3. An attainder in felony is no bar to an indictment of treason: because not only the judgment and manner of death are different, but the forfeiture is more extensive, and the land goes to different persons. 4. Where a person attainted 〈3〉 of one felony, as robbery, is afterwards indicted as principal in another, as murder, to which there are also accessories, prosecuted at the same time; in this case it is held, that the plea of auterfoits attaint is no bar, but he shall be compelled to take his trial, for the sake of public justice: because the accessories to such second felony cannot be convicted till after the conviction 〈4〉 of the principal. And from these instances we may collect that the plea of auterfoits attaint is never good, but when a second trial would be 〈5〉 quite superfluous.

4. Lastly, a pardon may be pleaded in bar; as at once destroying the end and

purpose of the indictment, by remitting that punishment, which the prosecution is calculated to inflict. There is one advantage that attends pleading a pardon in bar, or in arrest of judgment, before sentence is past; which gives it by much the preference to pleading it after sentence or attainder. This is, that by stopping the judgment it stops the attainder, and prevents the corruption of the blood: which, when once corrupted by attainder, cannot afterwards be restored, otherwise than by act of parliament. But, as the title of pardons is applicable to other stages of prosecution; and they have their respective force and efficacy, as well after as before conviction,

332 outlawry, or attainder; I shall therefore reserve the more minute consideration of

them, till I have gone through every other title, except only that of execution.

Before I conclude this head of special pleas in bar, it will be necessary once more

to observe; that, though in civil actions when a man has his election what plea in bar to make, he is concluded by that plea, and cannot resort to another if that be determined against him; (as, if on an action of debt the defendant pleads a general release, and no such release can be proved, he cannot afterwards plead the general issue, nil debet [he owes nothing], as he might at first: for he has made his election what plea to abide by, and it was his own folly to chuse a rotten defence) though, I say, this strictness is observed in civil actions, quia interest reipublicae ut sit finis litium [because it is for the public good that there be an end to litigation]: yet in criminal prosecutions, in favorem vitae [from a regard for life], as well upon appeal as indictment, when a prisoner’s plea in bar is found against him upon issue tried by a jury, or adjudged against him in point of law by the court; still he shall not be concluded or convicted thereon, but shall have judgment of respondeat ouster [he is to answer over], and may plead over to the felony the general issue, not guilty n. For





chapter 26 219


the law allows many pleas by which a prisoner may escape death; but only one plea, in consequence whereof it can be inflicted; viz. on the general issue, after an impartial examination and decision of the facts, by the unanimous verdict of a jury. It remains therefore that I consider,

V. The general issue, or plea of not guilty o, upon which plea alone the prisoner can

receive his final judgment of death. In case of an indictment of felony or treason, there can be no special justification put in by way of plea. As, on an indictment for murder, a man cannot plead that it was in his own defence against a robber on the highway, or a burglar; but he must plead the general issue, not guilty, and give this special matter in evidence. For (besides that these pleas do in effect amount to the general issue; since, if true, the prisoner is most clearly not guilty) as the facts in treason are laid to be done proditorie et contra ligeantiae suae debitum [treacherously 333

and against his duty of allegiance]; and, in felony, that the killing was done felonice; these charges, of a traiterous or felonious intent, are the points and very gist of the indictment, and must be answered directly, by the general negative, not guilty; and the jury upon the evidence will take notice of any defensive matter, and give their verdict accordingly, as effectually as if it were, or could be, specially pleaded. So that this is, upon all accounts, the most advantageous plea for the prisonerp.

When the prisoner hath thus pleaded not guilty, non culpabilis, or nient culpable;

which was formerly used to be abbreviated upon the minutes, thus, “non (or nient) cul.” the clerk of the assise, or clerk of the arraigns, on behalf of the crown replies, that the prisoner is guilty, and that he is ready to prove him so. This is done by two monosyllables in the same spirit of abbreviation, “cul. prît.” which signifies first that the prisoner is guilty, (cul. culpable, or culpabilis) and then that the king is ready to prove him so; prît, praesto sum [I am ready], or paratus verificare [ready to verify]. This is therefore a replication on behalf of the king viva voce [orally] at the bar; which was formerly the course in all pleadings, as well in civil as in criminal causes. And that was done in the concisest manner: for when the pleader intended to demur, he expressed his demurrer in a single word, “judgment;” signifying that he demanded judgment whether the writ, declaration, plea, &c, either in form or matter, were sufficiently good in law; and if he meant to rest on the truth of the facts pleaded, he expressed that also in a single syllable, “prît;” signifying that he was ready to prove his assertions; as may be observed from the yearbooks and other antient repositories of law q. By this replication the king and the prisoner are therefore at issue: for we may remember, in our strictures upon pleadings in the preceding bookr, it was observed, that when the parties come to a fact, which is affirmed on one side and denied on the other, then they are said to be at issue in point of fact: which is evidently the case 334 here, in the plea of non cul. by the prisoner; and the replication of cul. by the clerk. And we may also remember, that the usual conclusion of all affirmative pleadings, as this of cul. or guilty is, was by an averment in these words, “and this he is ready to

o See appendix, §. 1 [IV. 289].

p 2 Hal. P. C. 258.

q North’s life of lord Guilford. 98.

220 of public wrongs

verify; et hoc paratus est verificare:” which same thing is here expressed by the single word, “prît.”

How our courts came to express a matter of this importance in so odd and obscure

a manner, “rem tantam tam negligenter [a matter of such importance so carelessly],” can hardly be pronounced with certainty. It may perhaps, however, be accounted for by supposing, that these were at first short notes, to help the memory of the clerk, and remind him what he was to reply; or else it was the short method of taking down in court, upon the minutes, the replication and averment; “cul. prît:” which afterwards the ignorance of succeeding clerks adopted for the very words to be by them spokens.

But however it may have arisen, the joining of issue (which, though now usually

entered on the recordt, is no otherwise joinedu in any part of the proceedings) seems to be clearly the meaning of this obscure expressionw; which has puzzled our most ingenious etymologists, and is commonly understood as if the clerk of the arraigns, immediately on plea pleaded, had fixed an opprobrious name on the prisoner, by asking him, “culprit, how wilt thou be tried?” for immediately upon issue joined it is enquired of the prisoner, by what trial he will make his innocence appear. This form has at present reference to appeals and approvements only, wherein the appellee has

335 his choice, either to try the accusation by battel or by jury. But upon indictments,

since the abolition of ordeal, there can be no other trial but that by jury, per pais, or by the country: and therefore, if the prisoner refuses to put himself upon the inquest in the usual form, that is, to answer that he will be tried by God and the country x, if a commoner; and, if a peer, by God and his peersy; the indictment, if in treason, is taken pro confesso [as confessed]: and the prisoner, in cases of felony, is adjudged to stand mute, and, if he perseveres in his obstinacy, 〈6〉 shall be condemned to the peine fort et dure.

When the prisoner has thus put himself upon his trial, the clerk answers in the

humane language of the law, which always hopes that the party’s innocence rather than his guilt may appear, “God send thee a good deliverance.” And then they proceed, as soon as conveniently may be, to the trial; the manner of which will be considered at large in the next chapter.

s Of this ignorance we may see daily instances, in the abuse of two legal terms of antient French; one, the





prologue to all proclamations, “oyez, or hear ye,” which is generally pronounced most unmeaningly “O yes:” the other, a more pardonable mistake, viz. when a jury are all sworn, the officer bids the crier number them, for which the word in law-french is, “countez;” but we now hear it pronounced in very good English, “count these.”


t See appendix, §. 1 [IV. 289].

u 2 Hawk. P. C. 399.

w 2 Hal. P. C. 258.

x A learned author [Viner], who is very seldom mistaken in his conjectures, has observed that the proper

answer is “by God or the country,” that is, either by ordeal or by jury; because the question supposes an option in the prisoner. And certainly it gives some countenance to this observation, that the trial by ordeal used formerly to be called judicium Dei [judgment of God]. But it should seem, that when the question gives the prisoner an option, his answer must be positive; and not in the disjunctive, which returns the option back to the prosecutor.

y [Lord Dacres’s case] Kelynge. 57. State Trials, passim.





chapter the twenty seventh. 336





of trial, and conviction.

The several methods of trial and conviction of offenders, established by the laws of England, were formerly more numerous than at present, through the super stition of our Saxon ancestors: who, like other northern nations, were extremely addicted to divination; a character, which Tacitus observes of the antient Germansa. They there­ fore invented a considerable number of methods of purga tion or trial, to preserve innocence from the danger of false witnesses, and in consequence of a notion that God would always interpose miraculously, to vindi cate the guiltless.

I. The most 〈1〉 antient species of trial was that by ordeal; which was peculiarly

distinguished by the appellation of judicium Dei [judgment of god]; and sometimes vulgaris purgatio [common purgation], to distinguish it from the canonical purgation, which was by the oath of the party. This was of two sortsb, either fire­ordeal, or water­ ordeal; the former being confined to persons of higher rank, the latter to the common peoplec. Both these might be performed by deputy: but the principal was to answer 337 for the success of the trial; the deputy only venturing some corporal pain, for hire, or perhaps for friendshipd. Fire­ordeal was performed either by taking up in the hand, unhurt, a piece of red hot iron, of one, two, or three pounds weight; or else by walking, barefoot, and blindfold, over nine redhot plowshares, laid lengthwise at unequal distances: and if the party escaped being hurt, he was adjudged innocent; but if it happened otherwise, as without collusion it usually did, he was then condemned as guilty. However, by this latter method queen Emma, the mother of Edward the confessor,1 is mentioned to have cleared her character, when suspected of familiarity with Alwyn bishop of Winchester e.

Water­ordeal was performed, either by plunging the bare arm up to the elbow

in boiling water, and escaping unhurt thereby: or by casting the person suspected into a river or pond of cold water: and, if he floated therein without any action of swimming, it was deemed an evidence of his guilt; but, if he sunk, he was acquitted. It is easy to trace out the traditional relics of this water­ordeal, in the ignorant

a de mor. Germ. 10.

b Mirr. c. 3. §. 23.

c Tenetur se purgare is qui accusatur, per Dei judicium; scilicet, per calidum ferrum, vel per aquam, pro diversitate conditionis hominum: per ferrum calidum, si fuerit homo liber; per aquam, si fuerit rusticus. (Glanv. l. 14. c. 1.) [The accused is bound to clear himself by the judgment of God, that is, either by hot iron, or by water, according to his rank; by hot iron if he be a freeman, by water if a peasant.]

d This is still expressed in that common form of speech, of “going through fire and water to serve another.”

e Tho. Rudborne Hist. maj. Winton. l. 4. c. 1.

1 Emma, also known as Ǣlfgifu (d. 1052), queen of England as consort first of Ǣlthelred II and then of Cnut, lost influence after the accession of her son Edward the Confessor in 1043.

222 of public wrongs

barbarity still practised in many countries to discover witches, by casting them into a pool of water, and drowning them to prove their innocence. And in the Eastern empire the fire­ordeal was used to the same purpose by the emperor Theodore Lascaris; who, attributing his sickness to magic, caused all those whom he suspected to handle the hot iron: thus joining (as has been well remarkedf) to the most dubious crime in the world, the most dubious proof of innocence.2

And indeed this purgation by ordeal seems to have been very antient, and very

universal, in the times of superstitious barbarity. It was known to the antient Greek:

338 for in the Antigone of Sophoclesg, a person, suspected by Creon of a misdemesnor,

declares himself ready “to handle hot iron and to walk over fire,” in order to manifest his innocence; which, the scholiast tells us, was then a very usual purgation. And Grotiush gives us many instances of water­ordeal in Bithynia, Sardinia, and other places. There is also a very peculiar species of water­ordeal, said to prevail among the Indians on the coast of Malabar; where a person accused of any enormous crime is obliged to swim over a large river abounding with crocodiles, and, if he escapes unhurt, he is reputed innocent. As in Siam, besides the usual methods of fire and water ordeal, both parties are sometimes exposed to the fury of a tiger let loose for that purpose: and, if the beast spares either, that person is accounted innocent; if neither, both are held to be guilty; but if he spares both, the trial is incomplete, and they proceed to a more certain criterioni.

One cannot but be astonished at the folly and impiety of pronouncing a man

guilty, unless he was cleared by a miracle; and of expecting that all the powers of nature should be suspended, by an immediate interposition of providence to save the innocent, whenever it was presumptuously required. And yet in England, so late as king John’s time,3 we find grants to the bishops and clergy to use the judicium ferri, aquae, et ignis k [judgment of iron, water, and fire]. And, both in England and Sweden, the clergy presided at this trial, and it was only performed in the churches or in other consecrated ground: for which Stiernhookl gives the reason; “non defuit illis operae et laboris pretium; semper enim ab ejusmodi judicio aliquid lucri sacerdotibus obveniebat.”4 But, to give it its due praise, we find the canon law very early declaring against trial by ordeal, or vulgaris purgatio [common purgation], as being the fabric of the devil, “cum sit contra praeceptum Domini, non tentabis Dominum Deum tuumm [since it contradicts the Lord’s commandment: ‘thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God’].”

339 Upon this authority, though the canons themselves were of no validity in England, it



f Sp. L. b. 12. c. 5.

g v. 270.

h On Numb. v. 17.

i Mod. Univ. Hist. vii. 266.

k Spelm. Gloss. 435.

l de jure Sueonum, l. 1. c. 8.

m Decret. part. 2. caus. 2. qu. 5. dist. 7. Decretal. lib. 3. tit. 50. c. 9. & Gloss. ibid.

2 Theodore II Laskaris (1222–58), emperor of Nicaea from 1254.

3 John (1166–1216), king of England from 1199.





chapter 27 223


was thought proper (as had been done in Denmark above a century beforen) to disuse and abolish this trial entirely in our courts of justice, by an act of parliament in 3 Hen. III. according to sir Edward Cokeo, or rather by an order of the king in council p.

II. Another species of purgation, somewhat similar to the former, but probably

sprung from a presumptuous abuse of revelation in the ages of dark superstition, was the corsned, or morsel of execration: being a piece of cheese or bread, of about an ounce in weight, which was consecrated with a form of exorcism; desiring of the Almighty that it might cause convulsions and paleness, and find no passage, if the man was really guilty; but might turn to health and nourishment, if he was innocentq: as the water of jealousy among the Jewsr was, by God’s especial appointment, to cause the belly to swell and the thigh to rot, if the woman was guilty of adultery. This corsned was then given to the suspected person; who at the same time also received the holy sacraments: if indeed the corsned was not, as some have suspected, the sacramental bread itself; till the subsequent invention of transubstantiation preserved it from profane uses with a more profound respect than formerly. Our historians assure us, that Godwyn, earl of Kent in the reign of king Edward the confessor, abjuring the death of the king’s brother, at last appealed to his corsned, “per buccellam deglutiendam abjuravit t [he abjured it by swallowing the morsel of execration],” which stuck in his throat and killed him. This custom has been long since gradually abolished, though the remembrance of it still subsists in certain phrases of abjuration retained among the common peopleu.

However we cannot but remark, that though in European countries this custom 340

most probably arose from an abuse of revealed religion, yet credulity and superstition will, in all ages and in all climates, produce the same or similar effects. And therefore we shall not be surprized to find, that in the kingdom of Pegu5 there still subsists a trial by the corsned, very similar to that of our ancestors, only substituting raw rice instead of breadw. And, in the kingdom of Monomopata, they have a method of deciding lawsuits equally whimsical and uncertain.6 The witness for the plaintiff chews the bark of a tree, endued with an emetic quality; which, being sufficiently masticated, is then infused in water, which is given the defendant to drink. If his stomach rejects it, he is condemned: if it stays with him, he is absolved, unless the plaintiff will drink some of the same water; and, if it stays with him also, the suit is left undeterminedx.

These two antiquated methods of trial were principally in use among our Saxon

ancestors. The next, which still remains in force, though very rarely in use, owes its introduction among us to the princes of the Norman line. And that is

n Mod. Un. Hist. xxxii. 105.

o [Case of the Abbot of Strata Mercella] 9 Rep. 32.

p 1 Rym. Foed. 228. Spelm. Gloss. 326. 2 Pryn. Rec. Append. 20. Seld. Eadm. fol. 48.

q Spelm. Gl. 439.

r Numb. ch. v. [verses 11–31].

s LL. Canut. c. 6.

t Ingulph.

u As, “I will take the sacrament upon it; may this morsel be my last;” and the like.

w Mod. Univ. Hist. vii. 129.

x Ibid. xv. 464.

5 Pegu or Bago in southern Myanmar, Burma, once the capital of the Mon kingdom.

224 of public wrongs

III. The trial by battel, duel, or single combat: which was another species of

presumptuous appeals to providence, under an expectation that heaven would unquestionably give the victory to the innocent or injured party. The nature of this trial in cases of civil injury, upon issue joined in a writ of right, was fully discussed in the preceding booky: to which I have only to add, that the trial by battel may be demanded at the election of the appellee, in either an appeal or an approvement; and that it is carried on with equal solemnity as that on a writ of right: but with this difference, that there each party might hire a champion, but here they must fight in their proper persons. And therefore if the appellant or approver be a woman, a priest,

341 an infant, or of the age of sixty, or lame, or blind, he or she may counterplead and

refuse the wager of battel; and compel the appellee to put himself upon the country. Also peers of the realm, bringing an appeal, shall not be challenged to wage battel, on account of the dignity of their persons; nor the citizens of London, by special charter, because fighting seems foreign to their education and employment. So likewise if the crime be notorious; as if the thief be taken with the mainour, or the murderer in the room with a bloody knife, the appellant may refuse the tender of battel from the appelleez; for it is unreasonable that an innocent man should stake his life against one who is already half­convicted.

The form and manner of waging battel upon appeals are much the same as upon

a writ of right; only the oaths of the two combatants are vastly more striking and solemna. The appellee, when appealed of felony, pleads not guilty, and throws down his glove, and declares he will defend the same by his body: the appellant takes up the glove, and replies that he is ready to make good the appeal, body for body. And thereupon the appellee, taking the book in his right hand, and in his left the right hand of his antagonist, swears to this effect. “Hoc audi, homo, quem per manum teneo,” &c: “hear this, O man whom I hold by the hand, who callest thyself John by the name of baptism, that I, who call myself Thomas by the name of baptism, did not feloniously murder thy father, William by name, nor am any way guilty of the said felony. So help me God, and the saints; and this I will defend against thee by my body, as this court shall award.” To which the appellant replies, holding the bible and his antagonist’s hand in the same manner as the other: “hear this, O man whom I hold by the hand, who callest thyself Thomas by the name of baptism, that thou art perjured; and therefore perjured, because that thou feloniously didst murder my father, William by

342 name. So help me God and the saints; and this I will prove against thee by my body,

as this court shall awardb.” The battel is then to be fought with the same weapons, viz.



y See Vol. III. pag. 337 [III. 222].

z 2 Hawk. P. C. 427.

a Flet. l. 1. c. 34 [recte 32]. 2 Hawk. P. C. 426.

b There is a striking resemblance between this process, and that of the court of Areopagus at Athens, for murder;

wherein the prosecutor and prisoner were both sworn in the most solemn manner: the prosecutor, that he was related to the deceased (for none but near relations were permitted to prosecute in that court) and that the prisoner was the cause of his death; the prisoner, that he was innocent of the charge against him. (Pott. Antiqu. b. 1. c. 19.) [The Areopagus was the earliest aristocratic council of ancient Athens, named for the low hill where it met north­





chapter 27 225


batons, the same solemnity, and the same oath against amulets and sorcery, that are used in the civil combat: and if the appellee be so far vanquished, that he cannot or will not fight any longer, he shall be adjudged to be hanged immediately; and then, as well as if he be killed in battel, providence is deemed to have determined in favour of the truth, and his blood shall be attainted. But if he kills the appellant, or can maintain the fight from sunrising till the stars appear in the evening, he shall be acquitted. So also if the appellant becomes recreant, and pronounces the horrible word of craven, he shall lose his liberam legem [protection of the law], and become infamous; and the appellee shall recover his damages, and also be for ever quit, not only of the appeal, but of all indictments likewise for the same offence.

IV. The fourth method of trial used in criminal cases is that by the peers of Great

Britain, in the court of parliament, or the court of the lord high steward, when a peer is 〈2〉 capitally indicted. Of this enough has been said in a former chapter c; to which I shall now only add, that, in the method and regulations of its proceedings, it differs little from the trial per patriam [by the country, i.e. a jury], or by jury: 〈3〉 except that the peers need not all agree in their verdict; but the greater number, consisting of twelve at the least, will conclude, and bind the minority d.

V. The trial by jury, or the country, per patriam, is also that trial by the peers of

every Englishman, which, as the grand bulwark of his liberties, is secured to him by the great charter 343 e , “ nullus liber homo capiatur , vel imprisonetur , aut exulet , aut aliquo

alio modo destruatur, nisi per legale judicium parium suorum, vel per legem terrae.”7 The antiquity and excellence of this trial, for the settling of civil property, has before been explained at largef. And it will hold much stronger in criminal cases; since, in times of difficulty and danger, more is to be apprehended from the violence and partiality of judges appointed by the crown, in suits between the king and the subject, than in disputes between one individual and another, to settle the metes and bound­ aries of private property. Our law has therefore wisely placed this strong and twofold barrier, of a presentment and a trial by jury, between the liberties of the people, and the prerogative of the crown. It was necessary, for preserving the admirable ballance of our constitution, to vest the executive power of the laws in the prince: and yet this power might be dangerous and destructive to that very constitution, if exerted without check or control, by justices of oyer and terminer occasionally named by the crown; who might then, as in France or Turkey, imprison, dispatch, or exile any man that was obnoxious to the government, by an instant declaration, that such is their will and pleasure. But the founders of the English laws have with excellent forecast contrived, that no man should be called to answer to the king for any capital crime, unless upon the preparatory accusation of twelve or more of his fellow subjects, the grand jury: and that the truth of every accusation, whether preferred in the shape of

c See pag. 259 [IV. 171].

d [Lord Dacres’s case] Kelynge. 56. Stat. 7 W. III. c. 3. §. 11. Foster. 247.

e 9 Hen III. c. 29.

f See Vol. III. pag. 379 [III. 249–50].

7 ‘No free man (person) is to be arrested or imprisoned or exiled or destroyed in any other way except by the 226 of public wrongs

indictment, information, or appeal, should afterwards be confirmed by the unan­ imous suffrage of twelve of his equals and neighbours, indifferently chosen, and superior to all suspicion. So that the liberties of England cannot but subsist, so long as this palladium [safeguard] remains sacred and inviolate, not only from all open attacks, (which none will be so hardy as to make) but also from all secret machinations, which may sap and undermine it; by introducing new and arbitrary methods of trial,

344 by justices of the peace, commissioners of the revenue, and courts of conscience.8

And however convenient these may appear at first, (as doubtless all arbitrary powers, well executed, are the most convenient) yet let it be again remembered, that delays, and little inconveniences in the forms of justice, are the price that all free nations must pay for their liberty in more substantial matters; that these inroads upon this sacred bulwark of the nation are fundamentally opposite to the spirit of our constitution; and that, though begun in trifles, the precedent may gradually increase and spread, to the utter disuse of juries in questions of the most momentous concern.

What was said of juries in general, and the trial thereby, in civil cases, will greatly

shorten our present remarks, with regard to the trial of criminal suits; indictments, informations, and appeals: which trial I shall consider in the same method that I did the former; by following the order and course of the proceedings themselves, as the most clear and perspicuous way of treating it.

When therefore a prisoner on his arraignment has pleaded not guilty, and for his

trial hath put himself upon the country, which country the jury are, the sheriff of the county must return a panel of jurors, liberos et legales homines, de vicineto [free and legal men from the neighbourhood]; that is, freeholders, without just exception, and of the visne or neighbourhood; which is interpreted to be of the county where the fact is committedg. If the proceedings are before the court of king’s bench, there is time allowed, between the arraignment and the trial, for a jury to be impanelled by writ of venire facias to the sheriff, as in civil causes: and the trial in case of a misdemesnor is had at nisi prius, unless it be of such consequence as to merit a trial at bar; which is always invariably had when the prisoner is tried for any capital offence. But, before commissioners of oyer and terminer and gaol delivery, the sheriff

345 by virtue of a general precept directed to him beforehand, returns to the court a

panel of forty eight jurors, to try all felons that may be called upon their trial at that session: and therefore it is there usual to try all felons immediately, or soon, after their arraignment. But it is not customary, nor agreeable to the general course of 〈 4〉 proceedings, unless by consent of parties, to try persons indicted of smaller misde mesnors at the same court in which they have pleaded not guilty, or traversed the indictment. But they usually give security to the court, to appear at the next assises or session, and then and there to try the traverse, giving notice to the prosecutor of the same.

g 2 Hal. P. C. 264. 2 Hawk. P. C. 403.





chapter 27 227


In cases of high treason, whereby corruption of blood 〈5〉 may ensue, or misprision

of such treason, it is enacted by statute 7 W. III. c. 3. first, that no person shall be tried for any such treason, except an attempt to assassinate the king, unless the indictment be found within three years after the offence committed: next, that the prisoner shall have a copy of 〈6〉 the indictment, but not the names of the witnesses, five days at least before the trial; that is, upon the true construction of the act, before his arraignmenth; for then is his time to take any exceptions thereto, by way of plea or demurrer: thirdly, that he shall also have a copy of the panel of jurors two days before his trial: and, lastly, that he shall have the same compulsive process to bring in his witnesses for him, as was usual to compel their appearance against him. And, by statute 7 Ann. c. 21. (which did not take place till after the decease of the late pretender9)i all persons, indicted for high treason or misprision thereof, shall have not only a copy of the indictment, but a list of all the witnesses to be produced, and of the jurors impanelled, with their professions and places of abode, delivered to him ten days before the trial, and in the presence of two witnesses; the better to prepare him to make his challenges and defence. But this last act, so far as it affected indictments for the inferior species of high treason, respecting the coin and the royal seals, is repealed by the statute 6 Geo. III. c. 53. else it had been impossible to have tried those offences in the same 346 circuit in which they are indicted: for ten clear days, between the finding and the trial of the indictment, will exceed the time usually allotted for any session of oyer and terminer. And no person indicted for felony is, or (as the law stands) ever can be, entitled to such copies, before the time of his trialk.

When the trial is called on, the jurors are to be sworn, as they appear, to the

number of twelve, unless they are challenged by the party.

Challenges may here be made, either on the part of the king, or on that of the

prisoner; and either to the whole array, or to the separate polls, for the very same reasons that they may be made in civil causesl. For it is here at least as necessary, as there, that the sheriff or returning officer be totally indifferent; that where an alien is indicted, the jury should be de medietate, or 〈7〉 half foreigners; (which does not indeed hold in treasonsm, aliens being very improper judges of the breach of allegiance to the king) that on every panel there should be a competent number of hundredors;10 and that the particular jurors should be omni exceptione majores [above all exception]; not liable to objection either propter honoris respectum, propter defectum, propter affectum, or propter delictum [on account of dignity, on account of incompetency, on account of partiality, or on account of the commission of some offence].

Challenges upon any of the foregoing accounts are stiled challenges for cause;

which may be without stint in both criminal and civil trials. But in criminal cases, or

h Fost. 230.

i Fost. 250.

k 2 Hawk. P. C. 410.

l See Vol. III. pag. 359 [III. 237].

m 2 Hawk. P. C. 420. 2 Hal. P. C. 271.

228 of public wrongs

at least in capital ones, there is, in favorem vitae [from a regard to life], allowed to the prisoner an arbitrary and capricious species of challenge to a certain number of jurors, without shewing any cause at all; which is called a peremptory challenge: a provision full of that tenderness and humanity to prisoners, for which our English laws are justly

347 famous. This is grounded on two reasons. 1. As every one must be sensible, what

sudden impressions and unaccountable prejudices we are apt to conceive upon the bare looks and gestures of another; and how necessary it is, that a prisoner (when put to defend his life) should have a good opinion of his jury, the want of which might totally disconcert him; the law wills not that he should be tried by any one man against whom he has conceived a prejudice, even without being able to assign a reason for such his dislike. 2. Because, upon challenges for cause shewn, if the reason assigned prove insufficient to set aside the juror, perhaps the bare questioning his indifference may sometimes provoke a resentment; to prevent all ill consequences from which, the prisoner is still at liberty, if he pleases, peremptorily to set him aside.

This privilege, of peremptory challenges, though granted to the prisoner, is denied

to the king by the statute 33 Edw. I. st. 4. which enacts, that the king shall challenge no jurors without assigning a cause certain, to be tried and approved by the court. However it is held, that the king need not assign his cause of challenge, till all the panel is gone through, and unless there cannot be a full jury without the persons so challenged. And then, and not sooner, the king’s counsel must shew the cause: otherwise the juror shall be swornn.

The peremptory challenges of the prisoner must however have some reasonable

boundary; otherwise he might never be tried. This reasonable boundary is settled by the common law to be the number of thirty five; that is, one under the number of three full juries. For the law judges that five and thirty are fully sufficient to allow the most timorous man to challenge through mere caprice; and that he who peremptorily challenges a greater number, or three full juries, has no intention to be tried at all. And therefore it dealt with one, who peremptorily challenges above thirty five, and will not retract his challenge, as with one who stands mute or refuses his trial; by

348 sentencing him to the peine forte et dure in felony, and by attainting him in treasono.

And so the law stands at this day with regard to treason, of any kind.

But by statute 22 Hen. VIII. c. 14. (which, with regard to felonies, stands unrepealed

by statute 1 & 2 Ph. & Mar. c. 10.) by this statute, I say, no person, arraigned for felony, can be admitted to make any more than twenty peremptory challenges. But how if the prisoner will peremptorily challenge twenty one? what shall be done? The old opinion was, that judgment of peine forte et dure should be given, as where he challenged thirty six at the common lawp: but the better opinion seems to beq, that such challenge shall only be disregarded and overruled. Because, first, the common law doth not inflict the judgment of penance for challenging twenty one, neither

n 2 Hawk. P. C. 413. 2 Hal. P. C. 271.

o 2 Hal. P. C. 268.

p 2 Hawk. P. C. 414.





chapter 27 229


doth the statute inflict it; and so heavy 〈8〉 a judgment shall not be imposed by implication. Secondly, the words of the statute are, “that he be not admitted to challenge more than twenty;” the evident construction of which is, that any farther challenge shall be disallowed or prevented: and therefore, being null from the beginning, and never in fact a challenge, it can subject the prisoner to no punishment; but the juror shall be regularly sworn.

If, by reason of challenges or the default of the jurors, a sufficient number cannot

be had of the original panel, a tales [method of summoning additional jurors] may be awarded as in civil causesr, till the number of twelve is sworn, “well and truly to try, and true deliverance make, between our sovereign lord the king, and the prisoner whom they have in charge; and a true verdict to give, according to their evidence.”

When the jury is sworn, if it be a cause of any consequence, the indictment is

usually opened, and the evidence marshalled, examined, and enforced by the counsel for the crown, or prosecution. But it is a settled rule at common law, that no counsel 349

shall be allowed a prisoner upon his trial, upon the general issue, in any capital crime, unless some point of law shall arise proper to be debateds. A rule, which (however it may be palliated under cover of that noble declaration of the law, when rightly understood, that the judge shall be counsel for the prisoner; that is, shall see that the proceedings against him are legal and strictly regulart) seems to be not at all of a piece with the rest of the humane treatment of prisoners by the English law. For upon what face of reason can that assistance be denied to save the life of a man, which yet is allowed him in prosecutions for every petty trespass? Nor indeed is it strictly speaking a part of our antient law: for the mirrouru, having observed the necessity of counsel in civil suits, “who know how to forward and defend the cause, by the rules of law and customs of the realm,” immediately afterwards subjoins; “and more necessary are they for defence upon indictments and appeals of felony, than upon other venial causesw.” 〈11〉 And, to say the truth, the judges themselves are so sensible

r 〈9〉 See Vol. III. pag. 364 [III. 240].

s 2 Hawk. P. C. 400.

t Sir Edward Coke (3 Inst. 137.) gives another additional reason for this refusal, “because the evidence to convict a prisoner should be so manifest, as it could not be 〈10〉 contradicted.” It was therefore thought too dangerous an experiment, to let an advocate try, whether it could be contradicted or no.

u c. 3. §. 1.

w Father Parsons the jesuit [cf. R. Persons, Answere to the Fifth Part of Reportes lately Set Forth by Syr Edward Coke (St. Omer, 1606)], and after him bishop [Anthony] Ellys, (of English liberty ii. 26.) [i.e. The Spiritual and Temporal Liberty of Subjects in England in Two Parts (1765)] have imagined, that the benefit of counsel to plead for them was first denied to prisoners by a law of Henry I, meaning (I presume) chapters 47 and 48 of the code which is usually attributed to that prince. “De causis criminalibus vel capitalibus nemo quaerat consilium; quin implacitatus statim perneget, sine omni petitione consilii.— In aliis omnibus potest et debet uti consilio [in criminal or capital cases let no man ask for advice; but without that [advice], the one impleaded is at once to deny, without any request for counsel. In all other cases he can and ought to be allowed advice].” But this consilium [advice], I conceive, signifies only an imparlance, and the petitio consilii is craving leave to imparl; (See Vol. III. pag. 298. [III. 197]) which is not allowable in any criminal prosecution. This will be manifest by comparing this law with a co­temporary passage in the grand coustumier of Normandy, (ch. 85.) which speaks of imparlances in personal actions. “Apres ce, est tenu le querelle a respondre; et aura congie de soy conseiller, s’il le demande: et, quand il sera conseille, il peut nyer le faict dont il est accuse.” Or, as it stands in the Latin text, (edit. 1539.) “Querelatus autem postea tenetur respondere; et habebit licentiam consulendi, si requirat: habito autem consilio, debet factum negare quo accusatus est [But the defendant is afterwards bound to answer; and he shall have the liberty of imparling if he require it; but imparlance 230 of public wrongs

of this defect in our modern practice, that they seldom scruple to allow a prisoner

350 counsel to stand by him at the bar, and instruct him what questions to ask, or even to

ask questions for him, with respect to matters of fact: for as to matters of law, arising on the trial, they are intitled to the assistance of counsel. 〈12〉 But still this is a matter of too much importance to be left to the good pleasure of any judge, and is worthy the interposition of the legislature; which has shewn its inclination to indulge prisoners with this reasonable assistance, by enacting in statute 7 W. III. c. 3. that persons indicted for such high treason, as works a corruption of the blood, or 〈13〉 misprision thereof, may make their full defence by counsel, not exceeding two, to be named by the prisoner and assigned by the court or judge: 〈14〉 and this indulgence, by statute 20 Geo. II. c. 30. is extended to parliamentary impeachments for high treason, which were excepted in the former act.

The doctrine of evidence upon pleas of the crown is, in most respects, the same as

that upon civil actions. There are however a few leading points, wherein, by several statutes and resolutions, a difference is made between civil and criminal evidence.

First, in all cases of high treason, petit treason, and misprision of treason, 〈15〉 by

statutes 1 Edw. VI. c. 12. 5 & 6 Edw. VI. c. 11. and 1 & 2 Ph. & Mar. c. 10. two lawful witnesses are required to convict a prisoner; except in cases of coiningx, and counterfeiting the seals; or unless the party shall willingly and without violence confess the same. By statute 7 W. III. c. 3. in prosecutions for those treasons to which that act extends, the same rule is again enforced, with this addition, that the confession of the prisoner, which shall countervail the necessity of such proof, must be in open court; and it is declared that both witnesses must be to the same overt act of treason, or one to one overt act, and the other to another overt act of the same species of treasony, and not of distinct heads or kinds: and no evidence shall be admitted to

351 prove any overt act not expressly laid in the indictment. And therefore in sir John

Fenwick’s case, in king William’s time, where there was but one witness, an act of parliamentz was made on purpose to attaint him of treason, and he was executeda. But in almost every other accusation one positive witness is sufficient. Baron Mon­ tesquieu lays it down for a ruleb, that those laws which condemn a man to death in any case on the deposition of a single witness, are fatal to liberty: and he adds this reason, that the witness who affirms, and the accused who denies, 〈16〉 makes an equal ballancec; there is a necessity therefore to call in a third man to incline the scale. But this seems to be carrying matters too far: for there are some crimes, in which the very privacy of their nature excludes the possibility of having more than one witness: must these therefore escape unpunished? Neither indeed is the bare denial of the person accused equivalent to the positive oath of a disinterested witness. In cases of



x 1 Hal. P. C. 297.

y See [Christopher Love’s Case] St. Tr. II. 144. Foster. 235.

z Stat. 8 W. III. c. 4.

a [Proceedings against Sir John Fenwick] St. Tr. V. 40.

b Sp. L. b. 12. c. 3.





chapter 27 231


indictments for perjury, this doctrine is better founded; and there our law adopts it: for one witness is not allowed to convict a man indicted for perjury; because then there is only one oath against another d. In cases of treason also there is the accused’s oath of allegiance, to counterpoise the information of a single witness; and that may perhaps be one reason why the law requires a double testimony to convict him: though the principal reason, undoubtedly, is to secure the subject from being sacrificed to fictitious conspiracies, which have been the engines of profligate and crafty politicians in all ages.

Secondly, though from the reversal of colonel Sidney’s attainder11 by act of

parliament in 1689e it may be collectedf, that the mere similitude of hand­writing in two papers shewn to a jury, without other concurrent testimony, is no evidence that both were written by the same person; yet undoubtedly the testimony of witnesses, well acquainted with the party’s hand, that they believe the paper in question to have 352

been written by him, is evidence to be left to a jury g.

Thirdly, by the statute 21 Jac. I. c. 27. a mother of a bastard child, concealing its

death, must prove by one witness that the child was born dead; otherwise such concealment shall be evidence of her having murdered it h.

Fourthly, all presumptive evidence of felony should be admitted cautiously: for

the law holds, that it is better that ten guilty persons escape, than that one innocent suffer. And sir Matthew Hale in particularj lays down two rules, most prudent and necessary to be observed: 1. Never to convict a man for stealing the goods of a person unknown, merely because he will give no account how he came by them, unless an actual felony be proved of such goods: and, 2. Never to convict any person of murder or manslaughter, till at least the body be found dead; on account of two instances he mentions, where persons were executed for the murder of others, who were then alive, but missing.

Lastly, it was an antient and commonly received practicei, (derived from the civil

law, and which also to this day obtains in the kingdom of Francek) that, as counsel was not allowed to any prisoner accused of a capital crime, so neither should he be suffered to exculpate himself by the testimony of any witnesses. And therefore it deserves to be remembered, to the honour of Mary I, (whose early sentiments, till her marriage with Philip of Spain, seem to have been humane and generous l ) that when she appointed sir Richard Morgan chief justice of the common­pleas, she injoined him, “that notwithstanding the old error, which did not admit any witness to speak, 353

d [R. v Muscot] 10 Mod. 194.

e [Trial of Algernon Sidney] St. Tr. VIII. 472.

f 2 Hawk. P. C. 431.

g Lord Preston’s case. a.d. 1690. St. Tr. IV. 453. Francia’s case. a.d. 1716. St. Tr. VI. 69. Layer’s case. a.d. 1722. ibid. 279. Henzey’s case [R. v Florence Hensey]. A. D. 1758. 4 Burr. 644.

h See pag. 198 [IV. 131].

j 2 Hal. P. C. 290.

i St. Tr. I. passim.

k Domat. publ. law. b. 3. t. 1. Montesq. Sp. L. b. 29. c. 11.

l See pag. 17 [IV. 11].

232 of public wrongs

or any other matter to be heard, in favour of the adversary, her majesty being party; her highness’ pleasure was, that whatsoever could be brought in favour of the subject should be admitted to be heard: and moreover, that the justices should not persuade themselves to sit in judgment otherwise for her highness than for her subjectm. Afterwards, in one particular instance (when embezzling the queen’s military stores was made felony by statute 31 Eliz. c. 4.) it was provided that any person, impeached for such felony, “should be received and admitted to make any lawful proof that he could, by lawful witness or otherwise, for his discharge and defence:” and in general the courts grew so heartily ashamed of a doctrine so unreasonable and oppressive, that a practice was gradually introduced of examining witnesses for the prisoner, but not upon oathn: the consequence of which still was, that the jury gave less credit to the prisoner’s evidence, than to that produced by the crown. Sir Edward Cokeo protests very strongly against this tyrannical practice: declaring that he never read in any act of parliament, book­case, or record, that in criminal cases the party accused should not have witnesses sworn for him; and therefore there was not so much as scintilla juris [a spark of law] against it p. And the house of commons were so sensible of this absurdity, that, in the bill for abolishing hostilities between England and Scotlandq, when felonies committed by Englishmen in Scotland were ordered to be tried in one of the three northern counties, they insisted on a clause, and carried itr against the efforts of both the crown and the house of lords, against the practice of the courts in England, and the express law of Scotlands, “that in all such trials, for the better discovery of the truth, and the better information of the consciences of the

354 jury and justices, there shall be allowed to the party arraigned the benefit of such

credible witnesses, to be examined upon oath, as can be produced for his clearing and justification.” At length by the statute 7 W. III. c. 3. the same measure of justice was established throughout all the realm, in cases of treason within the act: and it was afterwards declared by statute 1 Ann. st. 2. c. 9. that in all cases of treason and felony, all witnesses for the prisoner should be examined upon oath, in like manner as the witnesses against him.

When the evidence on both sides is 〈17〉 closed, the jury cannot be discharged till

they have given in their verdict; but are to consider of it, and deliver it in, with the same forms, as upon civil causes: only they cannot, in a criminal case, give a privy verdictt. But an open verdict may be either general, guilty, or not guilty; or special, setting forth all the circumstances of the case, and praying the judgment of the court, whether, for instance, on the facts stated, it be murder, manslaughter, or no crime at all. This is where they doubt the matter of law, and therefore chuse to leave it to the

m Holingsh. 1112. [Trial of Sir Nicholas Throckmorton] St. Tr. I. 72.

n [R. v Walter Thomas] 2 Bulstr. 147. [Hopestill Tyndal’s case] Cro. Car. 292.

o 3 Inst. 79.

p See also 2 Hal. P. C . 283. and his summary. 264.

q Stat. 4. Jac. I. c. 1.

r Com. Journ. 4, 5, 12, 13, 15, 29, 30 Jun. 1607.

s Ibid. 4 Jun. 1607.





chapter 27 233


determination of the court; though they have an unquestionable right of determining upon all the circumstances, and finding a general verdict, if they think proper so to hazard a breach of their oaths: and, if their verdict be notoriously wrong, they may be punished and the verdict set aside by attaint at the suit of the king; but not at the suit of the prisoneru. But the practice, heretofore in use, of fining, inprisoning, or otherwise punishing jurors, merely at the discretion of the court, for finding their verdict contrary to the direction of the judge, was arbitrary, unconstitutional and illegal: and is treated as such by sir Thomas Smith, two hundred years ago; who accounted “such doings to be very violent, tyrannical, and contrary to the liberty and custom of the realm of Englandw.” For, as sir Matthew Hale well observesx, it would be a most unhappy case for the judge himself, if the prisoner’s fate depended upon his directions:—unhappy also for the prisoner; for, if the judge’s opinion must rule 355 the verdict, the trial by jury would be useless. Yet in many instancesy, where contrary to evidence the jury have found the prisoner guilty, their verdict hath been mercifully set aside, and a new trial granted by the court of king’s bench; for in such case, as hath been said, it cannot be set right by attaint. But there hath yet been no instance of granting a new trial, where the prisoner was acquitted upon the firstz.

If the jury therefore find the prisoner not guilty, he is then for ever quit and

discharged of the accusationa; except he be appealed of felony within the time limited 〈 18〉 by law. But if the jury find him guiltyb, he is then said to be convicted of the crime whereof he stands indicted. Which conviction may accrue two ways; either by his confessing the offence and pleading guilty; or by his being found so by the verdict of his country.

When the offender is thus convicted, there are two collateral circumstances that

immediately arise. 〈19〉 1. On a conviction, in general, for any felony, the reasonable expenses of prosecution are by statute 25 Geo. II. c. 36. to be allowed to the prosecutor out of the county stock, if he petitions the judge for that purpose; and by statute 27 Geo. II. c. 3. poor persons, bound over to give evidence, are likewise entitled to be paid their charges, as well without conviction as with it. 2. On a conviction of larciny in particular, the prosecutor shall have restitution of his goods, by virtue of the statute 21 Hen. VIII. c. 11. For by the common law there was no restitution of goods upon an indictment, because it is at the suit of the king only; and therefore the party was enforced to bring an appeal of robbery, in order to have his goods againc. But, it being 356 considered that the party, prosecuting the offender by indictment, deserves to the full

u 2 Hal. P. C. 310.

w Smith’s commonw. 1. 3. c. 1.

x 2 Hal. P. C. 313.

y [R. v Read] 1 Lev. 9. [R. v Smith (1681)] T. Jones. 163. [Trial of Ashley and Simons the Jew] St. Tr. X. 416.

z 2 Hawk. P. C. 442.

a The civil law in such case only discharges him from the same accuser, but not from the same accusation. (Ff. 48. 2. 7. §. 2.)

b In the Roman republic, when the prisoner was convicted of any capital offence by his judges, the form of pronouncing that conviction was something peculiarly delicate: not that he was guilty, but that he had not been enough upon his guard; “parum cavisse videtur [he seems to have taken insufficient caution],” (Festus. 325.) 234 of public wrongs

as much encouragement as he who prosecutes by appeal, this statute was made, which enacts, that if any person be convicted of larciny by the evidence of the party robbed, he shall have full restitution of his money, goods, and chattels; or the value of them out of the offender’s goods, if [he] has any, by a writ to be granted by the 〈20〉 justices. And this writ of restitution shall reach the goods so stolen, notwithstanding the property d of them is endeavoured to be altered by sale in market overt e. And, though this may seem somewhat hard upon the buyer, yet the rule of law is that “spoliatus debet, ante omnia, restitui [restitution should be made to the person robbed, before all others];” especially when he has used all the diligence in his power to convict the felon. And, since the case is reduced to this hard necessity, that either the owner or the buyer must suffer; the law prefers the right of the owner, who has done a meritorious act by pursuing a felon to condign punishment, to the right of the buyer, whose merit is only negative, that he has been guilty of 〈21〉 no unfair transaction. Or else, secondly, without such writ of restitution, the party may peaceably retake his goods, wherever he happens to find themf, unless a new property be fairly acquired therein. Or, lastly, if the felon be convicted and pardoned, or be allowed his clergy, the party robbed may bring his action of trover against him for his goods; and recover a satisfaction in damages. But such action lies not, before prosecution; for so felonies would be made up and healedg: and also recaption is unlawful, if it be done with intention to smother or compound the larciny; it then becoming the heinous offence of theft­bote, as was mentioned in a former chapterh.

It is not uncommon, when a person is convicted of a misdemesnor, which

principally and more immediately affects some individual, as a battery, imprisonment,

357 or the like, for the court to permit the defendant to speak with the prosecutor, before

any judgment is pronounced; and, if the prosecutor declares himself satisfied, to inflict but a trivial punishment. This is done, to reimburse the prosecutor his expenses, and make him some private amends, without the trouble and circuity of a civil action. But it surely is a dangerous practice: and, though it may be intrusted to the prudence and discretion of the judges in the superior courts of record, it ought never to be allowed in local or inferior jurisdictions, such as the quarter­sessions; where pros­ ecutions for assaults are by this means too frequently commenced, rather for private lucre than for the great ends of public justice. Above all, it should never be suffered, where the testimony of the prosecutor himself is necessary to convict the defendant: for by this means, the rules of evidence are intirely subverted; the prosecutor becomes in effect a plaintiff, and yet is suffered to bear witness for himself. Nay even a voluntary forgiveness, by the party injured, ought not in true policy to intercept the stroke of justice. “This,” says an elegant writeri, (who pleads with equal strength for the certainty



d See Vol. II. pag. 450 [II. 304].

e 1 Hal. P. C. 543.

f See Vol. III. pag. 4 [III. 2–3].

g 1 Hal. P. C. 546.

h See pag. 133 [IV. 88].





chapter 27 235


as for the lenity of punishment) “may be an act of good­nature and humanity, but it is contrary to the good of the public. For, although a private citizen may dispense with satisfaction for his private injury, he cannot remove the necessity of public example. The right of punishing belongs not to any one individual in particular, but to the society in general, or the sovereign who represents that society: and a man may renounce his own portion of this right, but he cannot give up that of others.”



358 chapter the twenty eighth.



of the benefit of clergy.

After trial and conviction, the judgment of the court regularly follows, unless suspended or arrested by some intervening circumstance; of which the principal is the benefit of clergy: a title of no small curiosity as well as use; and concerning which I shall therefore enquire, 1. Into its original, and the various mutations which this privilege of clergy has sustained. 2. To what persons it is to be allowed at this day. 3. In what cases. 4. The consequences of allowing it.

I. Clergy, the privilegium clericale, or in common speech the benefit of clergy, had

its original from the pious regard paid by christian princes to the church in its infant state; and the ill use which the popish ecclesiastics soon made of that pious regard. The exemptions, which they granted to the church, were principally of two kinds: 1. Exemption of places, consecrated to religious duties, from criminal arrests, which was the foundation of sanctuaries: 2. Exemption of the persons of clergymen from criminal process before the secular judge in a few particular cases, which was the true original and meaning of the privilegium clericale.

359 But the clergy, encreasing in wealth, power, honour, number, and interest, began

soon to set up for themselves: and that which they obtained by the favour of the civil government, they now claimed as their inherent right; and as a right of the highest nature, indefeasible, and jure divinoa [by divine right]. By their canons therefore and constitutions they endeavoured at, and where they met with easy princes obtained, a vast extension of these exemptions: as well in regard to the crimes themselves, of which the list became quite universalb; as in regard to the persons exempted, among whom were at length comprehended not only every little subordinate officer belong-ing to the church or clergy, but even many that were totally laymen.

In England however, although the usurpations of the pope were very many and

grievous, till Henry the eighth entirely exterminated his supremacy, yet a total exemption of the clergy from secular jurisdiction could never be thoroughly effected, though often endeavoured by the clergy c: and therefore, though the antient privile-gium clericale was in some capital cases, yet it was not universally, allowed. And in those particular cases, the use was for the bishop or ordinary to demand his clerks to be remitted out of the king’s courts, as soon as they were indicted: concerning the allowance of which demand there was for many years a great uncertainty d: till at length it was finally settled in the reign of Henry the sixth, that the prisoner should first be arraigned; and might either then claim his benefit of clergy, by way of

a The principal argument, upon which they sounded this exemption, was that text of scripture; “touch not mine

anointed, and do my prophets no harm.” [1 Chron. 16.22] (Keilw. 181).

b See Vol. III. pag. 62 [III. 41].

c Keilw. 180.

d 2 Hal. P. C. 377.





chapter 28 237


declinatory plea; or, after conviction, by way of arresting judgment. This latter way is most usually practiced, as it is more to the satisfaction of the court to have the crime previously ascertained by confession or the verdict of a jury; and 〈1〉 also as it is more advantageous to the prisoner himself, who may possibly be acquitted, and so need 360 not the benefit of his clergy at all.

Originally the law was held, that no man should be admitted to the privilege of

clergy, but such as had the habitum et tonsuram clericaleme [clerical habit and ton-sure]. But in process of time a much wider and more comprehensive criterion was established: every one that could read (a mark of great learning in those days of ignorance and her sister superstition) being accounted a clerk or clericus, and allowed the benefit of clerkship, though neither initiated in holy orders, nor trimmed with the clerical tonsure. But when learning, by means of the invention of printing, and other concurrent causes, began to be more generally disseminated than formerly; and reading was no longer a competent proof of clerkship, or being in holy orders; it was found that as many laymen as divines were admitted to the privilegium clericale: and therefore by statute 4 Hen. VII. c. 13. a distinction was once more drawn between mere lay scholars, and clerks that were really in orders. And though it was thought reasonable still to mitigate the severity of the law with regard to the former, yet they were not put upon the same footing with actual clergy; being subjected to a slight degree of punishment, and not allowed to claim the clerical privilege more than once. Accordingly the statute directs, that no person, once admitted to the benefit of clergy, shall be admitted thereto a second time, unless he produces his orders: and, in order to distinguish their persons, all laymen who are allowed this privilege shall be burnt with a hot iron in the brawn of the left thumb. This distinction between learned laymen, and real clerks in orders, was abolished for a time by the statutes 28 Hen. VIII. c. 1, and 32 Hen. VIII. c. 3. but is heldf to have been virtually restored by statute 1 Edw. VI. c. 12. which statute also enacts that lords of parliament, and 〈3〉 peers of the realm, may have the benefit of their peerage, equivalent to that of clergy, for the first offence, (although they cannot read, and without being burnt in the hand) for all 361 offences then clergyable to commoners, and also for the crimes of housebreaking, highway robbery, horse-stealing, and robbing of churches.

After this burning the laity, and before it the real clergy, were discharged from the

sentence of the law in the king’s courts, and delivered over to the ordinary, to be dealt with according to the ecclesiastical canons. Whereupon the ordinary, not satisfied with the proofs adduced in the profane secular court, set himself formally to work to make a purgation of the offender by a new canonical trial; although he had been previously convicted by his country, or perhaps by his own confession. This trial was held before the bishop in person, or his deputy; and by a jury of twelve clerks: and there, first, the party himself was required to make oath of his own innocence; next, there was to be the oath of twelve compurgators, who swore they believed he spoke the truth; then, witnesses were to be examined upon oath, but on behalf of the prisoner

e 2 Hal. P. C. 372. M. Paris. a.d. 1259. See Vol. I. pag. 24 [I. 22].

238 of public wrongs

only; and, lastly, the jury were to bring in their verdict upon oath, which usually acquitted the prisoner: otherwise, if a clerk, he was degraded, or put to penanceg. A learned judge, in the beginning of the last centuryh, remarks with much indigna-tion the vast complication of perjury and subornation of perjury, in this solemn farce of a mock trial; the witnesses, the compurgators, and the jury, being all of them par-takers in the guilt: the delinquent party also, though convicted before on the clearest evidence, and conscious of his own offence, yet was permitted and almost compelled to swear himself not guilty: nor was the good bishop himself, under whose counte-nance this scene of wickedness was daily transacted, by any means exempt from a share of it. And yet by this purgation the party was restored to his credit, his liberty, his lands, and his capacity of purchasing afresh, and was entirely made a new and an innocent man.

362 This scandalous prostitution of oaths, and the forms of justice, in the almost con-

stant acquittal of felonious clerks by purgation, was the occasion, that, upon very heinous and notorious circumstances of guilt, the temporal courts would not trust the ordinary with the trial of the offender, but delivered over to him the convicted clerk, absque purgatione facienda [without making purgation]: in which situation the clerk convict could not make purgation; but was to continue in prison during life, and was incapable of acquiring any personal property, or receiving the profits of his lands, unless the king should please to pardon him. Both these courses were in some degree exceptionable; the latter being perhaps too rigid, as the former was produc-tive of the most abandoned perjury. As therefore these mock trials took their rise from factious and popish tenets, tending to exempt one part of the nation from the general municipal law; it became high time, when the reformation was thoroughly established, to abolish so vain and impious a ceremony.

Accordingly the statute 18 Eliz. c. 7. enacts, that, for the avoiding of such perju-

ries and abuses, after the offender has been allowed his clergy, he shall not be deliv-ered to the ordinary, as formerly; but, upon such allowance and burning in the hand, he shall forthwith be enlarged and delivered out of prison; with proviso, that the judge may, if he thinks fit, continue the offender in gaol for any time not exceeding a year. And thus the law continued, for above a century, unaltered; except only that the statute 21 Jac. I. c. 6. allowed, that women convicted of simple larcinies under the value of ten shillings should, (not properly have the benefit of clergy, for they were not called upon to read; but) be burned in the hand, and whipped, stocked, or impris-oned for any time not exceeding a year. And a similar indulgence, by the statutes 3 & 4 W. & M. c. 9. and 4 & 5 W. & M. c. 24. was extended to women, guilty of any clergyable felony whatsoever; who were 〈4〉 allowed to claim the benefit of the statute, in like

363 manner as men might claim the benefit of clergy, and to be discharged upon being

burned in the hand, and imprisoned for any time not exceeding 〈5〉 a year. All women, all peers, and all commoners who could read, were therefore discharged in such fel-onies; absolutely, if clerks in orders; and for the first offence, upon burning in the

g ms [R. v Thomas Burridge] 3 P. W. 447. [Searle v Williams] Hob. 289.





chapter 28 239


hand, if lay: yet all liable (excepting peers) if the judge saw occasion, to imprison-ment not exceeding a year. And those men, who could not read, if under the degree of peerage, were hanged.

Afterwards indeed it was considered, that education and learning were no

extenuations of guilt, but quite the reverse: and that, if the punishment of death for simple felony was too severe for those who had been liberally instructed, it was, a fortiori [by a stronger reason], too severe for the ignorant also. And 〈6〉 thereupon by statute 5 Ann. c. 6. it was enacted, that the benefit of clergy should be granted to all those who were intitled to ask it, without requiring them to read by way of condi-tional merit.

〈 7〉 But a few years experience having shewn, that this universal lenity was fre-

quently inconvenient, and an encouragement to commit the lower degrees of felony; and that, though capital punishments were too rigorous for these inferior offences, yet no punishment at all (or next to none, as branding or whipping) was as much too gentle; it was enacted by statutes 4 Geo. I. c. 11. and 6 Geo. I. c. 23. that when any persons shall be convicted of any larciny, either grand or petit, and shall be entitled to the benefit of clergy, or i liable only to the penalties of burning in the hand or whip- 364

ping, the court in their discretion, instead of such burning in the hand or whipping, may direct such offenders to be transported to America for seven years: and, if they return within that time, it shall be felony without benefit of clergy.

In this state does the benefit of clergy at present stand; very considerably different

from its original institution: the wisdom of the English legislature having, in the course of a long and laborious process, extracted by a noble alchemy rich medicines out of poisonous ingredients; and converted, by gradual mutations, what was at first an unreasonable exemption of particular popish ecclesiastics, into a merciful mitiga-tion of the general law, with respect to capital punishment.

From the whole of this detail we may collect, that, however in times of ignorance

and superstition that monster in true policy may for a while subsist, of a body of men, residing in the bowels of a state, and yet independent of its laws; yet, when learning and rational religion have a little enlightened mens minds, society can no longer endure an absurdity so gross, as must destroy its very fundamentals. For, by the original contract of government, the price of protection by the united force of individuals is that of obe-dience to the united will of the community. This united will is declared in the laws of the land: and that united force is exerted in their due, and universal, execution.

II. I am next to enquire, to what persons the benefit of clergy is to be allowed at

this day: and this must be chiefly collected from what has been observed in the

i The printed statute book reads and instead of or : and, if that be the true reading, it may be doubted, and, as the consequence may in some cases be capital, it deserves to be explained by the legislature, whether women, and persons convicted of petit larciny, are strictly within these statutes of George the first; for the statutes, as printed, seem to extend only to such convicts as are entitled to the benefit of clergy, which no woman, or petit larcener [one who commits petty larceny], properly is. For, with regard to the female sex, the statutes of William and Mary (before referred to) very anxiously distinguish between the benefit of clergy, which extends only to men, and the benefit of the statute 3 & 4 W. & M. which is allowed to be claimed by women: and the statute of Anne (as is hereafter observed) doth not entitle any one to the benefit of clergy but such as were entitled before; as its whole 240 of public wrongs

preceding article. For, upon the whole, we may pronounce, that all clerks in orders are, without any branding, and of course without any 〈8〉 transportation, (for that is only substituted in lieu of the other) to be admitted to this privilege, and immediately

365 discharged, or at most only confined for one year: and this as often as they offendk.

Again, all lords of parliament and peers of the realm, by the statute 1 Edw. VI. c. 12. shall be discharged in all clergyable and other felonies, provided for by the act, with-out any burning in the hand, in the same manner, as real clerks convict: but this is only for the first offence. Lastly, all the commons of the realm, not in orders, whether male 〈9〉 or female l, shall for the first offence be discharged of the punishment of felonies, within the benefit of clergy; upon being burnt in the hand, imprisoned for a year, or less; or, in case of larciny, being transported for seven years, if the court shall think proper. It hath been said, that Jews, and other infidels and heretics, were not capable of the benefit of clergy, till after the statute 5 Ann. c. 6. as being under a legal incapacity for ordersm. 〈10〉 But, with deference to such respectable authorities, I much question whether this was ever ruled for law, since the re-introduction of the Jews into England, in the time of Oliver Cromwell. For, if that were the case, the Jews are still in the same predicament, which every day’s experience will contradict: the statute of queen Anne having certainly made no alteration in this respect; it only dispensing with the necessity of reading in those persons, who, in case they could read, were before the act entitled to the benefit of their clergy.

III. The third point to be considered is, for what crimes the privilegium clericale,

or benefit of clergy, is to be allowed. And, it is to be observed, that neither in high treason, nor in petit larciny, nor in any mere misdemesnors, it was indulged at the common law; and therefore we may lay it down for a rule, that it was allowable only in petit treason 〈11〉 and felonies: which for the most part became legally intitled to this indulgence by the statute de clero [of the clergy], 25 Edw. III. st. 3. c. 4. which provides, that clerks convict for treasons or felonies, touching other persons than the

366 king himself or his royal majesty, shall have the privilege of holy church. But yet it

was not allowable in all felonies whatsoever: for in some it was denied even by the common law, viz. insidiatio viarum, or lying in wait for one on the highway; depopu-latio agrorum, or destroying and ravaging a countryn; and combustio domorum, or arson, that is, the burning of houseso; all which are a kind of hostile acts, and in some degree border upon treason. And farther, all these identical crimes, together with petit treason, and very many other acts of felony, are ousted of clergy by particular acts of parliament; which have in general been mentioned under the particular offences to which they belong, and therefore need not be here 〈12〉 recapitulated. Of all which statutes for excluding clergy I shall only observe, that they are nothing else but the restoring of the law to the same rigor of capital punishment in the first offence, that it exerted before the privilegium clericale was at all indulged; and which it still

k 2 Hal. P. C. 375.

l See note i.

m 2 Hal. P. C. 373. 2 Hawk. P. C. 338. Fost. 306.

n 2 Hal. P. C. 333.





chapter 28 241


exerts upon a second offence in almost all kinds of felonies, unless committed by clerks actually in 〈13〉 orders. We may also remark, that by the marine law, as declared in statute 28 Hen. VIII. c. 15. the benefit of clergy is not allowed in any case whatso-ever. And therefore when offences are committed within the admiralty-jurisdiction, which would be clergyable if committed by land, the constant course is to acquit and discharge the prisonerp. 〈14〉 And lastly, under this head of enquiry, we may observe the following rules: 1. That in all felonies, whether new created or by common law, clergy is now allowable, unless taken away by express words of an act of parliament q. 2. That, where clergy is taken away from the principal, it is not of course taken away from the accessory, unless he be also particularly included in the words of the statuter. 3. That, when the benefit of clergy is taken away from the offence, (as in case of murder, buggery, robbery, rape, and burglary) a principal in the second 〈15〉 degree, aiding and abetting the crime, is as well excluded from his clergy as he that is princi-pal in the first degree: but, 4. That, where it is only taken away from the person com- 367

mitting the offence, (as in the case of stabbing, or committing larciny in a dwelling house, or privately from the person) his aiders and abetters are not excluded; through the tenderness of the law, which hath determined that such statutes shall be taken literallys.

IV. Lastly, we are to enquire what the consequences are to the party, of allowing

him this benefit of clergy. I speak not of the 〈17〉 branding, imprisonment, or trans-portation; which are rather concomitant conditions, than consequences of receiving this indulgence. The consequences are such as affect his present interest, and future credit and capacity: as having been once a felon, but now purged from that guilt by the privilege of clergy; which operates as a kind of statute pardon.

And, we may observe, 1. That by his conviction he forfeits all his goods to the king;

which, being once vested in the crown, shall not afterwards be restored to the offend-ert. 2. That, after conviction, and till he receives the judgment of the law, by 〈18〉 brand-ing or the like, or else is pardoned by the king, he is to all intents and purposes a felon, and subject to all the disabilities and other incidents of a felonu. 3. That, after burning or pardon, he is discharged for ever of that, and all other felonies before committed, within the benefit of clergy; but not of felonies from which such benefit is excluded: and this by statutes 8 Eliz. c. 4. and 18 Eliz. c. 7. 4. 〈19〉 That by the burning, or pardon of it, he is restored to all capacities and credits, and the possession of his lands, as if he had never been convictedw. 5. That what is said with regard to the advantages of com-moners and laymen, subsequent to the burning in the hand, is equally applicable 〈20〉 to all peers and clergymen, although never branded at all. For they have the same privileges, without any burning, which others are intitled to after itx.

p Moor. 756. Fost. 288.

q 2 Hal. P. C. 330.

r 2 Hawk. P. C. 342.

s 〈16〉 1 Hal. P. C. 529. Foster. 356.

t 2 Hal. P. C. 388.

u ms [R. v Thomas Burridge] 3 P. W. 487.

w 2 Hal. P. C. 389. [Foxley’s case] 5 Rep. 110.

368 chapter the twenty ninth.



of judgment, and its

consequences.

We are now to consider the next stage of criminal prosecution, after trial and convic-tion are past, in such crimes and misdemesnors, as are either too high or too low to be included within the benefit of clergy: which is that of judgment. For when, upon a capital charge, the jury have brought in their verdict, guilty, in the presence of the prisoner; he is either immediately, or at a convenient time soon after, asked by the court, if he has any thing to offer why judgment should not be awarded against him. And in case the defendant be found guilty of a misdemesnor, (the trial of which may, and does usually, happen in his absence, after he has once appeared) a capias is awarded and issued, to bring him in to receive his judgment; and, if he absconds, he may be prosecuted even to outlawry. But whenever he appears in person, upon either a capital or inferior conviction, he may at this period, as well as at his arraignment, offer any exceptions to the indictment, in arrest or stay of judgment: as for want of sufficient certainty in setting forth either the person, the time, the place, or the offence. And, if the objections be valid, the whole proceedings shall be set aside; but

369 the party may be indicted againa. And we may take notice, 1. That none of the statutes

of jeofailsb, for amendment of errors, extend to indictments or proceedings in crim-inal cases; and therefore a defective indictment is not aided by a verdict, as defective pleadings in civil cases are. 2. That, in favour of life, great strictness has at all times been observed, in every point of an indictment. Sir Matthew Hale indeed complains, “that this strictness is grown to be a blemish and inconvenience in the law, and the administration thereof: for that more offenders escape by the over-easy ear given to exceptions in indictments, than by their own innocence; and many times gross mur-ders, burglaries, robberies, and other heinous and crying offences, remain unpun-ished by these unseemly niceties; to the reproach of the law, to the shame of the government, to the encouragement of villany, and to the dishonour of Godc.” And yet, notwithstanding this laudable zeal, no man was more tender of life, than this truly excellent judge.

A pardon also, as has been before said, may be pleaded in arrest of judgment: and

it has the same advantage when pleaded here, as when pleaded upon arraignment; viz. the saving the attainder, and of course the corruption of blood: which nothing can restore but parliament, when a pardon is not pleaded till after sentence. And certainly, upon all accounts, when a man hath obtained a pardon, he is in the right to plead it as soon as possible.

a [Vaux’s case] 4 Rep. 45.

b See Vol. III. pag. 406 [III. 266–7].

c 2 Hal. P. C. 193.





chapter 29 243


Praying the benefit of clergy may also be ranked among the motions in arrest of

judgment; of which we spoke largely in the preceding chapter.

If all these resources fail, the court must pronounce that judgment, which the law

hath annexed to the crime, and which hath been constantly mentioned, together with the crime itself, in some or other of the former chapters. Of these some are capital, 370

which extend to the life of the offender, and consist generally in being hanged by the neck till dead; though in very atrocious crimes other circumstances of terror, pain, or disgrace are superadded: as, in treasons of all kinds, being drawn or dragged to the place of execution; in high treason affecting the king’s person or government, embowel-ling alive, beheading, and quartering; and in murder, a public dissection. And, in case of any treason committed by a female, the judgment is to be burned alive. But the humanity of the English nation has authorized, by a tacit consent, an almost gen-eral mitigation of such part of these judgments as savour of torture or cruelty: a sledge or hurdle being usually allowed to such traitors as are condemned to be drawn; and there being very few instances (and those accidental or by negligence) of any person’s being embowelled or burned, till previously deprived of sensation by stran-gling. Some punishments consist in exile or banishment, by abjuration of the realm, or 〈1〉 transportation to the American colonies: others in loss of liberty, by perpetual or temporary imprisonment. Some extend to confiscation, by forfeiture of lands, or moveables, or both, or of the profits of lands for life: others induce a disability, of hold-ing offices or employments, being heirs, executors, and the like. Some, though rarely, occasion a mutilation or dismembring, by cutting off the hand or ears: others fix a lasting stigma on the offender, by slitting the nostrils, or branding in the hand 〈2〉 or face. Some are merely pecuniary, by stated or discretionary fines: and lastly there are others, that consist principally in their ignominy, though most of them are mixed with some degree of corporal pain; and these are inflicted chiefly for crimes, which arise from indigence, or which render even opulence disgraceful. Such as whipping, hard labour in the house of 〈3〉 correction, the pillory, the stocks, and the ducking-stool.

Disgusting as this catalogue may seem, it will afford pleasure to an English

reader, and do honour to the English law, to compare it with that shocking apparatus 371

of death and torment, to be met with in the criminal codes of almost every other nation in Europe. And it is moreover one of the glories of our English law, that 〈4〉 the nature, though not always the quantity or degree, of punishment is ascertained for every offence; and that it is not left in the breast of any judge, nor even of a jury, to alter that judgment, which the law has beforehand ordained, for every subject alike, without respect of persons. For, if judgments were to be the private opinions of the judge, men would then be slaves to their magistrates; and would live in society, with-out knowing exactly the conditions and obligations which it lays them under. And besides, as this prevents oppression on the one hand, so on the other it stifles all hopes of impunity or mitigation; with which an offender might flatter himself, if his punishment depended on the humour or discretion of the court. Whereas, where an established penalty is annexed to crimes, the criminal may read their certain conse-quence in that law, which ought to be the unvaried rule, as it is the inflexible judge, of his actions.

244 of public wrongs

The discretionary fines and discretionary length of imprisonment, which our

courts are enabled to impose, may seem an exception to this rule. But the general nature of the punishment, viz. by fine or imprisonment, is in these cases fixed and determinate: though the duration and quantity of each must frequently vary, from the aggravations or otherwise of the offence, the quality and condition of the parties, and from innumerable other circumstances. The quantum [amount], in particular, of pecuniary fines neither can, nor ought to be, ascertained by any invariable law. The value of money itself changes from a thousand causes; and, at all events, what is ruin to one man’s fortune, may be matter of indifference to another’s. Thus the law of the twelve tables at Rome fined every person, that struck another, five and twenty denarii: this, in the more opulent days of the empire, grew to be a punishment of so little consideration, that Aulus Gellius tells a story of one Lucius Neratius, who made it his

372 diversion to give a blow to 〈5〉 whomever he pleased, and then tender them the legal

forfeiture. Our statute law has not therefore often ascertained the quantity of fines, nor the common law ever; it directing such an offence to be punished by fine, in general, without specifying the certain sum: which is fully sufficient, when we con-sider, that however unlimited the power of the court may seem, it is far from being wholly arbitrary; but its discretion is regulated by law. For the bill of rightsd has particularly declared, that excessive fines ought not to be imposed, nor cruel and unusual punishments inflicted: (which had a retrospect to some unprecedented pro-ceedings in the court of king’s bench, in the reign of king James the second)1 and the same statute farther declares, that all grants and promises of fines and forfeitures of particular persons, before conviction, are illegal and void. Now the bill of rights was only 〈6〉 declaratory, throughout, of the old constitutional law of the land: and accord-ingly we find it expressly holden, long beforee, that all such previous grants are void; since thereby many times undue means, and more violent prosecution, would be used for private lucre, than the quiet and just proceeding of law would permit.

The reasonableness of fines in criminal cases has also been usually regulated by

the determination of 〈7〉 magna cartaf, concerning amercements for misbehaviour in matters of civil right. “Liber homo non amercietur pro parvo delicto, nisi secundum modum ipsius delicti; et pro magno delicto, secundum magnitudinem delicti; salvo con-tenemento suo: et mercator eodem modo, salva mercandisa sua; et villanus eodem modo amercietur, salvo wainagio suo.”2 A rule, that obtained even in Henry the sec-ond’s timeg, and means only, that no man shall have a larger amercement imposed

d Stat. 1 W. & M. st. 2. c. 2.

e 2 Inst. 48.

f cap. 14.

g Glanv. l. 9 c. 8 & 11.

1 James II’s brief reign was marked by extensive use of the law for political purposes, including excessive fines

on political opponents. At the ‘bloody assizes’ following the unsuccessful rebellion led by Charles II’s illegitimate son James, duke of Monmouth, Chief Justice George Jeffreys sentenced hundreds to death, among them the 68-year-old Alice Lisle, widow of a regicide, convicted of treason for harbouring a fugitive.

2 ‘A freeman shall be fined for a small offence, only according to its measure; and for a great offence, only

according to its magnitude, saving his livelihood; and the merchant likewise, saving his merchandize; and a villein





chapter 29 245


upon him, than his circumstances or personal estate will bear: saving to the land-holder his contenement, or land; to the trader his merchandize; and to the country-man his wainage, or team and instruments of husbandry. In order to ascertain which, 373

the great charter also directs, that the amercement, which is always inflicted in gen-eral terms (“sit in misericordia” [he is to be amerced]) shall be set, ponatur [laid down], or reduced to a certainty, by 〈8〉 the oath of a jury. This method, of liquidating the amercement to a precise sum, is usually done in the court-leet and court-baron by affeerors, or jurors sworn to affeere, that is, tax and moderate, the general amerce-ment according to the particular circumstances of the offence and the offender. In imitation of which, in courts superior to these, the antient practice was to enquire by a jury, when a fine was imposed upon any man, “quantum inde regi dare valeat per annum, salva sustentatione sua, et uxoris, et liberorum suorumh”.3 And, since the dis-use of such inquest, it is never usual to assess a larger fine than a man is able to pay, without touching the implements of his livelyhood; but to inflict corporal punish-ment, 〈9〉 or a stated imprisonment, which is better than an excessive fine, for that amounts to imprisonment for life. And this is the reason why fines in the king’s court are frequently denominated ransoms, because the penalty must otherwise fall upon a man’s person, unless it be redeemed or ransomed by a pecuniary finej: according to an antient maxim, qui non habet in crumena luat in corpore [let he who has nothing in his purse, pay in his person]. Yet, where any statute speaks both of fine and ran-som, it is holden, that the ransom shall be treble to the fine at leasti.

When sentence of death, the most terrible and highest judgment in the laws of

England, is pronounced, the immediate inseparable consequence by the common law is attainder. For when it is now clear beyond all dispute, that the criminal is no longer fit to live upon the earth, but is to be exterminated as a monster and a bane to human society, the law sets a note of infamy upon him, puts him out of its protection, and takes no farther care of him than barely to see him executed. He is then called attaint, attinctus, stained, or blackened. He is no longer of any credit or reputation; he cannot be a witness in any court; neither is he capable of performing the functions 374

of another man: for, by an anticipation of his punishment, he is already dead in law k. This is after judgment: for there is great difference between a man convicted, and attainted; though they are frequently through inaccuracy confounded together. After conviction only, a man is liable to none of these disabilities: for there is still in con-templation of law a possibility of his innocence. Something may be offered in arrest of judgment: the indictment may be erroneous, which will render his guilt uncertain, and thereupon the present conviction may be quashed: he may obtain a pardon, or be allowed the benefit of clergy; both which suppose some latent sparks of merit, which plead in extenuation of his fault. But when judgment is once pronounced, both law and fact conspire to prove him completely guilty; and there is not the remotest

h Gilb. Exch. c. 5.

j Mirr. c. 5. §. 3. Lamb. Eirenarch. 575.

i [Sir Edward Norton’s case] Dyer. 232.

k 3 Inst. 213.

246 of public wrongs

possibility left of any thing to be said in his favour. Upon judgment therefore of death, and not before, the attainder of a criminal commences: or upon such circum-stances as are equivalent to judgment of death; as judgment of outlawry on a capital crime, pronounced for absconding or fleeing from justice, which tacitly confesses the guilt. And therefore either upon judgment of outlawry, or of death, for treason or felony, a man shall be said to be attainted.

The consequences of attainder are forfeiture, and corruption of blood.

I. Forfeiture is twofold; of real, and personal, estates. First, as to real estates: by

attainder in high treasonl a man forfeits to the king all his lands and tenements of inheritance, whether fee-simple or fee-tail, and all his rights of entry on lands and tenements, which 〈10〉 he held at the time of the offence committed, or at any time afterwards, to be for ever vested in the crown: and also the profits of all lands and tenements, which he had in his own right for life or years, so long as such interest

375 shall subsist. This forfeiture relates backwards to the time of the treason committed;

so as to avoid all intermediate sales and incumbrancesm, but not those before the fact: and therefore a wife’s jointure is not forfeitable for the treason 〈11〉 of the husband; because settled upon her previous to the treason committed. But her dower is for-feited, by the express provision of statute 5 & 6 Edw. VI. c. 11. And yet the husband shall be tenant by the curtesy of the wife’s lands, if the wife be attainted of treasonn: for that is not prohibited by the statute. But, though after attainder the forfeiture relates back to the time of the treason committed, yet it does not take effect unless an attainder be had, of which it is one of the fruits: and therefore, if a traitor dies before judgment pronounced, or is killed in open rebellion, or is hanged by martial law, it works no forfeiture of his lands; for he never was 〈12〉 attainted of treasono.

The natural justice of forfeiture or confiscation of property, for treasonp, is founded

in this consideration: that he who hath thus violated the fundamental principles of government, and broken his part of the original contract between king and people, hath abandoned his connexions with society; and hath no longer any right to those advantages, which before belonged to him purely as a member of the community: among which social advantages the right of transferring or transmitting property to others is one of the chief. Such forfeitures moreover, whereby his posterity must suf-fer as well as himself, will help to restrain a man, not only by the sense of his duty, and dread of personal punishment, but also by his passions and natural affections; and will interest every dependent and relation he has, to keep him from offending: according to that beautiful sentiment of Ciceroq, “nec vero me fugit quam sit acerbum, parentum scelera filiorum poenis lui: sed hoc praeclare legibus comparatum est, ut cari-

376 tas liberorum amiciores parentes reipublicae redderet.”4 And therefore Aulus Cascellius,

l Co. Litt. 392. 3 Inst. 19. 1 Hal. P. C. 240. 2 Hawk. P. C. 448.

m 3 Inst. 211.

n 1 Hal. P. C. 359.

o Co. Litt. 13.

p See Vol. I. pag. 299 [I. 193].

q ad Brutum, op. 12.





chapter 29 247


a Roman lawyer in the time of the triumvirate, used to boast that he had two reasons for despising the power of the tyrants; his old age, and his want of children: for chil-dren are pledges to the prince of the father’s obediencer. Yet many nations have thought, that this posthumous punishment savours of hardship to the innocent; especially for crimes that do not strike at the very root and foundation of society, as treason against the government expressly does. And therefore, though confiscations were very frequent in the times of the earlier emperors, yet Arcadius and Honorius5 in every other instance but that of treason thought it more just, “ibi esse poenam, ubi et noxa est;” [that where the crime is there the punishment should be] and ordered that “peccata suos teneant auctores, nec ulterius progrediatur metus, quam reperiatur delictums [crimes should affect only the perpetrators of them, and the dread of pun-ishment not extend beyond the sphere of offence]:” and Justinian also made a law to restrain the punishment of relationst; which directs the forfeiture to go, except in the case of crimen majestatis [high treason], to the next of kin to the delinquent. On the other hand the Macedonian laws extended even the capital punishment of treason, not only to the children but to all the relations of the delinquentu: and of course their estates must be also forfeited, as no man was left to inherit them. And in Germany, by the famous golden bullev, (copied almost verbatim from Justinian’s codew) the lives of the sons of such as conspire to kill an elector are spared, as it is expressed, by the emperor’s particular bounty. But they are deprived of all their effects and rights of succession, and are rendered incapable of any honour ecclesiastical or civil: “to the end that, being always poor and necessitous, they may for ever be accompanied by the infamy of their father; may languish in continual indigence; and may find (says this merciless edict) their punishment in living, and their relief in dying.”

With us in England, forfeiture of lands and tenements to the crown for treason is

by no means derived from the feodal policy, (as has been already observedx) but was 377

antecedent to the establishment of that system in this island; being transmitted from our Saxon ancestorsy, and forming a part of the antient Scandinavian constitutionz. But 〈13〉 in some treasons relating to the coin, (which, as we formerly observed, seem rather a species of the crimen falsi [fraud or deceit], than the crimen laesae majestatis [high treason]) it is provided by the several modern statutes which constitute the offence, that it shall work no forfeiture of lands. And, in order to abolish such hered-itary punishment intirely, it was enacted by statute 7 Ann. c. 21. that, after the decease of the late pretender, no attainder for treason should extend to the disinheriting of

r Gravin. 1. §. 68.

s Cod. 9. 47. 22.

t Nov. 134. c. 13.

u Qu. Curt. l. 6.

v cap. 24.

w l. 9. t. 8. l. 5.

x See Vol. II. pag. 251 [II. 171].

y LL. Aelfr. c. 4. Canut. c. 54.

z Stiernh. de jure Goth. l. 2. c. 6. & l. 3. c. 3.

248 of public wrongs

any heir, nor to the prejudice of any person, other than the traitor himself. By which, the law of forfeitures for high treason would by this time have been at an end, had not a subsequent statute intervened to give them a longer duration. The history of this matter is somewhat singular and worthy observation. At the time of the union, the crime of treason in Scotland was, by the Scots law, in many respects different from that of treason in England; and particularly in its consequence of forfeitures of intailed estates, which was more peculiarly English: yet it seemed necessary, that a crime so nearly affecting government should, both in its essence and consequences, be put upon the same footing in both parts of the united kingdoms. In new-modelling these laws, the Scotch nation and the English house of commons struggled hard, partly to maintain, and partly to acquire, a total immunity from forfeiture and cor-ruption of blood: which the house of lords as firmly resisted. At length a compromise was agreed to, which is established by this statute, viz. that the same crimes, and no other, should be treason in Scotland that are so in England; and that the English for-feitures and corruption of blood, should take place in Scotland, till the death of the then pretender; and then cease throughout the whole of Great Britaina: the lords art-

378 fully proposing this temporary clause, in hopes (it is saidb) that the prudence of suc-

ceeding parliaments would make it perpetualc. This has partly been done by the statute 17 Geo. II. c. 39. (made in the year preceding the late rebellion)6 the operation of these indemnifying clauses being thereby still farther suspended, till the death of the sons of the pretenderd.

In petit treason and felony, the offender also forfeits all his chattel interests abso-

lutely, and the profits of all estates of freehold during life; and, after his death, all his lands and tenements in fee-simple (but not those in tail) to the crown, for a very short period of time: for the king shall have them for a year and a day, and may com-mit therein what waste he pleases; which is called the king’s year, day, and wastee. Formerly the king had only a liberty of committing waste on the lands of felons, by pulling down their houses, extirpating their gardens, ploughing their meadows, and cutting down their woods. And a punishment of a similar spirit appears to have obtained in the oriental countries, from the decrees of Nebuchadnezzar and Cyrus in the books of Danielf and Ezrag; which, besides the pain of death inflicted on the delinquents there specified, ordain, “that their houses shall be made a dunghill.” But this tending greatly to the prejudice of the public, it was agreed in the reign of Henry the first, in this kingdom, that the king should have the profits of the land for one year and a day, in lieu of the destruction he was otherwise at liberty to commith: and

a Burnet’s Hist. a.d. 1709 [ii. 523].

b Consid. on the law of forfeiture. 6.

c See Fost. 250.

d The justice and expediency of this provision were defended at the time, with much learning and strength of

argument, in the considerations on the law of forfeiture, first published a.d. 1744. (See Vol. I. pag. 244 [I. 158].)

e 2 Inst. 37.

f ch. iii. v. 29.

g ch. vi. v. 11.

h Mirr. c. 4. §. 16. Flet. l. 1. c. 28.





chapter 29 249


therefore magna cartai provides, that the king shall only hold such lands for a year and a day, and then restore them to the lord of the fee; without any mention made of waste. But the statute 17 Edw. II. de praerogativa regis [of the king’s prerogative], seems to suppose, that the king shall have his year, day, and waste; and not the year 379

and day instead of waste. Which sir Edward Coke (and the author of the mirror, before him) very justly look upon as an encroachment, though a very antient one, of the royal prerogativek. This year, day, and waste are now usually compounded for; but otherwise they regularly belong to the crown: and, after their expiration, the land would naturally have descended to the heir, (as in gavelkind tenure it still does) did not its feodal quality intercept such descent, and give it by way of escheat to the lord. These forfeitures for felony do also arise only upon attainder; and therefore a felo de se [suicide] forfeits no lands of inheritance or freehold, for he never is attainted as a felonl. They likewise relate back to the time of the offence committed, as well as for-feitures for treason; so as to avoid all intermediate charges and conveyances. This may be hard upon such as have unwarily engaged with the offender: but the cruelty and reproach must lie on the part, not of the law, but of the criminal; who has thus knowingly and dishonestly involved others in his own calamities.

These are all the forfeitures of real estates, created by the common law, as conse-

quential upon attainders by judgment of death or outlawry. I here omit the particular forfeitures created by the statutes of praemunire and others: because I look upon them rather as a part of the judgment and penalty, inflicted by the respective statutes, than as consequences of such judgment; as in treason and felony they are. But I shall just 〈14〉 mention, under this division of real estates, the forfeiture of the profits of lands during life: which extends to two other instances, besides those already spoken of; misprision of treasonm, and striking in Westminster-hall, or drawing a weapon upon a judge there, sitting [in] the king’s courts of justicen.

The forfeiture of goods and chattels accrues in every one of the higher kinds of

offence: in high treason or misprision thereof, petit treason, felonies of all sorts 380 whether clergyable or not, self-murder or felony de se, petty larciny, standing mute, and the above-mentioned 〈15〉 offence of striking in Westminster-hall. For flight also, on an accusation of treason, felony, or even petit larciny, whether the party be found guilty or acquitted, if the jury find the flight, the party shall forfeit his goods and chattels: for the very flight is an offence, carrying with it a strong presumption of guilt, and is at least an endeavour to elude and stifle the course of justice prescribed by the law. But the jury very seldom find 〈16〉 the flight: forfeiture being looked upon, since the vast increase of personal property of late years, as rather too large a penalty for an offence, to which a man is prompted by the natural love of liberty.

There is a remarkable difference or two between the forfeiture of lands and of

goods and chattels. 1. Lands are forfeited upon attainder, and not before: goods and



i 9 Hen. III. c. 22.

k Mirr. c. 5. §. 2. 2 Inst. 37.

l 3 Inst. 55.

250 of public wrongs

chattels are forfeited by conviction. Because in many of the cases where goods are forfeited, there never is any attainder; which happens only where judgment of death or outlawry is given: therefore in those cases the forfeiture must be upon conviction, or not at all; and, being necessarily upon conviction in those, it is so ordered in all other cases, for the law loves uniformity. 2. In outlawries for treason or felony, lands are forfeited only by the judgment: but the goods and chattels are forfeited by a man’s being first put in the exigent, without staying till he is quinto exactus [required for the fifth time, i.e. the final call to appear before outlawry], or finally outlawed; for the secreting himself so long from justice, is construed a flight in law o. 3. The forfeiture of lands has relation to the time of the fact committed, so as to avoid all subsequent sales and incumbrances: but the forfeiture of goods and chattels has no relation back-wards; so that those only which a man has at the time of conviction shall be forfeited. Therefore a traitor or felon may bona fide [in good faith] sell any of his chattels, real or personal, for the sustenance of himself and family between the fact and convic-

381 tionp: for personal property is of so fluctuating a nature, that it passes through many

hands in a short time; and no buyer could be safe, if he were liable to return the goods which he had fairly bought, provided any of the prior vendors had committed a trea-son or felony. Yet if they be collusively and not bona fide parted with, merely to defraud the crown, the law (and particularly the statute 13 Eliz. c. 5.) will reach them; for they are all the while truly and substantially the goods of the offender: and as he, if acquitted, might recover them himself, as not parted with for a good consideration; so, in case he happens to be convicted, the law will recover them for the king.

II. Another immediate consequence of attainder is the corruption of blood, both

upwards and downwards; so that an attainted person can neither inherit lands or other hereditaments from his ancestors, nor retain those he is already in possession of, nor transmit them by descent to any heir; but the same shall escheat to the lord of the fee, subject to the king’s superior right of forfeiture: and the person attainted shall also obstruct all descents to his posterity, wherever they are obliged to derive a title through him to a remoter ancestorq.

This is one of those notions which our laws have adopted from the feodal consti-

tutions, at the time of the Norman conquest; as appears from its being unknown in those tenures which are indisputably Saxon, or gavelkind: wherein, though by trea-son, according to the antient Saxon laws, the land is forfeited to the king, yet no corruption of blood, no impediment of descents, ensues; and on judgment of mere felony no escheat accrues to the lord. And therefore, as every other oppressive mark of feodal tenure is now happily worn away in these kingdoms, it is to be hoped, that this corruption of blood, with all its connected consequences, not only of present escheat, but of future incapacities of inheritance even to the twentieth generation, may in process of time be abolished by act of parliament: as it stands upon a very

382 different footing from the forfeiture of lands for high treason, affecting the king’s

o 3 Inst. 232.

p 2 Hawk. P. C. 454.





chapter 29 251


person or government. And indeed the legislature has, from time to time, appeared very inclinable to give way to so equitable a provision; by enacting, that, 〈17〉 in trea-sons respecting the papal supremacyr and counterfeiting the public coins, and in many of the new-made felonies, created since the reign of Henry the eighth by act of parliament, corruption of blood shall be saved. But as in some of the acts for creating felonies (and those not of the most atrocious kind) this saving was neglected, or forgotten, to be made, it seems to be highly reasonable and expedient to antiquate the whole of this doctrine by one undistinguishing law: especially as by the afore- mentioned statute of 7 Ann. c. 21. (the operation of which is postponed by statute 17 Geo. II. c. 39.) after the death of the sons of the late pretender, no attainder for treason will extend to the disinheriting any heir, nor the prejudice of any person, other than the offender himself; which virtually abolishes all corruption of blood for treason, though (unless the legislature should interpose) it will still continue for many sorts of felony.7

r Stat. 5 Eliz. c. 1.

s Stat. 5 Eliz. c. 11. 18 Eliz. c. 1. 8 & 9 W. III. c. 26. 15 & 16 Geo. II. c. 28.

7 Cf. II. 170–4, esp. 173–4.



383 chapter the thirtieth.



of reversal of judgment.

We are next to consider how judgments, with their several connected consequences, of attainder, forfeiture, and corruption of blood, may be set aside. There are two ways of doing this; either by falsifying or reversing the judgment, or else by reprieve or pardon.

A judgment may be falsified, reversed, or 〈1〉 voided, in the first place, without a

writ of error, for matters foreign to or dehors [outside] the record, that is, not appar-ent upon the face of it; so that they cannot be assigned for error in the superior court, which can only judge from what appears in the record itself: and therefore, if the whole record be not certified, or not truly certified, by the inferior court; the party injured thereby (in both civil and criminal cases) may allege a diminution of the record, and cause it to be rectified. Thus, if any judgment whatever be given by persons, who had no good commission to proceed against the person condemned, it is void; and may be falsified by shewing the special matter, without writ of error. As, where a commission issues to A and B, and twelve others, or any two of them, of which A or B shall be one, to take and try indictments; and any of the other twelve

384 proceed without the interposition or presence of either A, or B: in this case all pro-

ceedings, trials, convictions, and judgments are void for want of a proper authority in the commissioners, and may be falsified upon bare inspection without the trouble of a writ of error a; it being a high misdemesnor in the judges so proceeding, and little (if any thing) short of murder in them all, in case the person so attainted be executed and suffer death. So likewise if a man purchases land of another; and afterwards the vendor is, either by outlawry, or his own confession, convicted and attainted of trea-son or felony previous to the sale or alienation; whereby such land becomes liable to forfeiture or escheat: now, upon any trial, the purchasor is at liberty, without bringing any writ of error, to falsify not only the time of the felony or treason supposed, but the very point of the felony or treason itself; and is not concluded by the confession or the outlawry of the vendor; though the vendor himself is concluded, and not suf-fered now to deny the fact, which he has by confession or flight acknowleged. But if such attainder of the vendor was by verdict, on the oath of his peers, the alienee cannot be received to falsify or contradict the fact of the crime committed; though he is at liberty to prove a mistake in time, or that the offence was committed after the alienation, and not beforeb.

Secondly, a judgment may be reversed, by writ of error: which lies from all infe-

rior criminal jurisdictions to the court of king’s bench, and from the king’s bench to the house of peers; and may be brought for notorious mistakes in the judgment or

a 2 Hawk. P. C. 459.

b 3 Inst. 231. 1 Hal. P. C. 361.





chapter 30 253


other parts of the record: as where a man is found guilty of perjury and receives the judgment of felony, or for other less palpable errors; such as any irregularity, omis-sion, or want of form in the process of outlawry, or proclamations; the want of a proper addition to the defendant’s name, according to the statute of additions; for not properly naming the sheriff or other officer of the court, or not duly describing where his county court was held; for laying an offence, committed in the time of the late 385 king, to be done against the peace of the present; and for many other similar causes, which (though allowed out of tenderness to life and liberty) are not much to the credit or advancement of the national justice. These writs of error, to reverse judg-ments in case of misdemesnors, are not to be allowed of course, but on sufficient probable cause shewn to the attorney general; and then they are understood to be grantable of common right, and ex debito justitiae [as due to justice]. But writs of error to reverse attainders in capital cases are only allowed ex gratia [as a matter of favour]; and not without express warrant under the king’s sign manual, or at least by the consent of the attorney generalc. These therefore, can rarely be brought by the party himself, especially where he is attainted for an offence against the state: but they may be brought by his heir, or executor, after his death, in more favour-able times; which may be some consolation to his family. But the easier, and more effectual way, is

Lastly, to reverse the attainder by act of parliament. This may be and hath

been frequently done, upon motives of compassion, or 〈2〉 perhaps the zeal of the times, after a sudden revolution in the government, without examining too closely into the truth or validity of the errors assigned. And sometimes, though the crime be universally acknowleged and confessed, yet the merits of the criminal’s family shall after his death obtain a restitution in blood, honours, and estate, or some, or one of them, by act of parliament; which (so far as it extends) has all the effect of reversing the attainder, without casting any reflections upon the justice of the preceding sentence.

The effect of falsifying, or reversing, an outlawry is that the party shall be in the

same plight as if he had appeared upon the capias: and, if it be before plea pleaded, he shall be put to plead to the indictment; if after conviction, he shall receive the sentence of the law: for all the other proceedings, except only the process of outlawry for his non-appearance, remain good and effectual as before. But when judgment, 386 pronounced upon conviction, is falsified or reversed, all former proceedings are abso-lutely set aside, and the party stands as if he had never been at all accused; restored in his credit, his capacity, his blood, and his estates: with regard to which last, though they be granted away by the crown, yet the owner may enter upon the grantee, with as little ceremony as he might enter upon a disseisor d. But he still remains liable to another prosecution for the same offence: for, the first being erroneous, he never was in jeopardy thereby.

c [Crawle v Crawle] 1 Vern. 170. [Case of Lord Gray et al, Rioters’ case.] 175.

d 2 Hawk. P. C. 462.

387 chapter the thirty first.



of reprieve, and pardon.

The only other remaining ways of avoiding the execution of the judgment are by a reprieve, or a pardon; whereof the former is temporary only, the latter permanent.

I. A reprieve, from reprendre, to take back, is the withdrawing of a sentence for

an interval of time; whereby the execution is suspended. This may be, first, ex arbitrio judicis [at the judge’s discretion]; either before or after judgment: as, where the judge is not satisfied with the verdict, or the evidence is suspicious, or the indictment is insufficient, or he is doubtful whether the offence be within clergy; or sometimes if it be a small felony, or any favourable circumstances appear in the criminal’s character, in order to give room to apply to the crown for either an absolute or conditional pardon. These arbitrary reprieves may be granted or taken off by the justices of gaol delivery, although their session be finished, and their commission expired: but this rather by common usage, than of strict righta.

Reprieves may also be ex necessitate legis [from legal necessity]: as, where a

woman is capitally convicted, and pleads her pregnancy; though this is no cause to stay the judgment, yet it is to respite the execution till she be delivered. This is a

388 mercy dictated by the law of nature, in favorem prolis [in favour of the offspring]; and

therefore no part of the bloody proceedings, in the reign of queen Mary, hath been more justly detested than the cruelty, that was exercised in the island of Guernsey, of burning a woman big with child: and, when through the violence of the flames the infant sprang forth at the stake, and was preserved by the bystanders, after some deliberation of the priests who assisted at the sacrifice, they cast it again into the fire1 as a young hereticb. A barbarity which they never learned from the laws of antient Rome; which directc, with the same humanity as our own, “quod praegnantis mulieris damnatae poena differatur, quoad pariat [that the punishment of a pregnant woman condemned, shall be respited until after her delivery]:” which doctrine has also pre-vailed in England, as early as the first memorials of our law will reachd. In case this plea be made in stay of execution, the judge must direct a jury of twelve matrons or discreet women to enquire the fact: and if they bring in their verdict quick with child (for barely, with child, unless it be alive in the womb, is not sufficient) execution shall be staid generally till the next session; and so from session to session, till either she is delivered, or proves by the course of nature not to have been with child at all. But if

a 2 Hal. P. C. 412.

b Fox, Acts and Mon.

c Ff. 48. 19. 3.

d Flet. l. 1. c. 38.

1 The reference is to the ‘Guernsey Martyrs’, Catherine Cauchés and her daughters Guillemine and Perotine,

condemned to death as heretics in July 1556. According to Foxe, it was the bailiff of Guernsey who ordered Perotine’s child to be thrown back into the fire.





chapter 31 255


she once hath had the benefit of this reprieve, and been delivered, and afterwards becomes pregnant again, she shall not be intitled to the benefit of a farther respite for that causee. For she may now be executed before the child is quick in the womb; and shall not, by her own incontinence, evade the sentence of justice.

Another cause of regular reprieve is, if the offender become non compos [not in

their right mind], between the judgment and the award of executionf: for regularly, as was formerlyg observed, though a man be compos when he commits a capital crime, yet if he becomes non compos after, he shall not be indicted; if after indict-ment, he shall not be convicted; if after conviction, he shall not receive judgment; if after judgment, he shall not be ordered for execution: for “furiosus solo furore punitur 389

[a mad person is punished by his or her madness alone],” and the law knows not but he might have offered some reason, if in his senses, to have stayed these respective proceedings. It is therefore an invariable rule, when any time intervenes between the attainder and the award of execution, to demand of the prisoner what he hath to allege, why execution should not be awarded against him: and, if he appears to be insane, the judge in his discretion may and ought to reprieve him. 〈1〉 Or, he may plead in bar of execution; which plea may be either pregnancy, the king’s pardon, an act of grace, or diversity of person, viz. that he is not the same that was attainted, and the like. In this last case a jury shall be impanelled to try this collateral issue, namely, the identity of his person; and not whether guilty or innocent; for that has been decided before. And in these collateral issues the trial shall be instanterh [immedi-ately], and no time allowed the prisoner to make his defence or produce his wit-nesses, unless he will make oath that he is not the person attaintedi: neither shall any peremptory challenges of the jury be allowed the prisonerk; though formerly such challenges were held to be allowable, whenever a man’s life was in questionl.

II. If neither pregnancy, insanity, non-identity, nor other plea will avail to avoid

the judgment, and stay the execution consequent thereupon, the last and surest resort is in the king’s most gracious pardon; the granting of which is the most amiable pre-rogative of the crown. Laws (says an able writer) cannot be framed on principles of compassion to guilt: yet justice, by the constitution of England, is bound to be admin-istred in mercy: this is promised by the king in his coronation oath, and it is that act of his government, which is the most personal, and most entirely his ownm. The king himself condemns no man; that rugged task he leaves to his courts of justice: the great operation of his sceptre is mercy. His power of pardoning was said by our Saxon 390

ancestorsn to be derived a lege suae dignitatis [from the law of his dignity]: and it is declared in parliament, by statute 27 Hen. VIII. c. 24. that no other person hath power

e 1 Hal. P. C. 369.

f Ibid. 370.

g See pag. 24 [IV. 15–16].

h 〈2〉 [R. v Corbet, Okey, and Barkstead] 1 Sid. 72.

i [Case of Charles Ratcliffe] Fost. 42.

k [R. v Okey, Barkstead, and Corbet] 1 Lev. 61. [Case of Charles Ratcliffe] Fost. 42. [Case of Roger Johnson] 46.

l Staundf. P. C. 163. Co. Litt. 157. Hal. Sum. 259.

m Law of Forfeit. 99.

256 of public wrongs

to pardon or remit any treason or felonies whatsoever; but that the king hath the whole and sole power thereof, united and knit to the imperial crown of this 〈3〉 realm.

This is indeed one of the great advantages of monarchy in general, above any

other form of government; that there is a magistrate, who has it in his power to extend mercy, wherever he thinks it is deserved: holding a court of equity in his own breast, to soften the rigour of the general law, in such criminal cases as merit an exemption from punishment. Pardons (according to some theoristso) should be excluded in a perfect legislation, where punishments are mild but certain: for that the clemency of the prince seems a tacit disapprobation of the laws. But the exclusion of pardons must necessarily introduce a very dangerous power in the judge or jury, that of construing the criminal law by the spirit instead of the letterp; or else it must be holden, what no man will seriously avow, that the situation and circumstances of the offender (though they alter not the essence of the crime) ought to make no distinc-tion in the punishment. In democracies, however, this power of pardon can never subsist; for there nothing higher is acknowleged than the magistrate who adminis-ters the laws: and it would be impolitic for the power of judging and of pardoning to center in one and the same person. This (as the president Montesquieu observesq) would oblige him very often to contradict himself, to make and to unmake his deci-sions: it would tend to confound all ideas of right among the mass of the people; as they would find it difficult to tell, whether a prisoner were discharged by his inno-cence, or obtained a pardon through favour. In Holland therefore, if there be no stadtholder,2 there is no power of pardoning lodged in any other member of the state.

391 But in monarchies the king acts in a superior sphere; and, though he regulates the

whole government as the first mover, yet he does not appear in any of the disagree-able or invidious parts of it. Whenever the nation see him personally engaged, it is only in works of legislature, magnificence, or compassion. To him therefore the peo-ple look up as the fountain of nothing but bounty and grace; and these repeated acts of goodness, coming immediately from his own hand, endear the sovereign to his subjects, and contribute more than any thing to root in their hearts that filial affec-tion, and personal loyalty, which are the sure establishment of a prince.

Under this head, of pardons, let us briefly consider, 1. The object of pardon: 2. The

manner of pardoning: 3. The method of allowing a pardon: 4. The effect of such par-don, when allowed.

1. And, first, the king may pardon all offences merely against the crown, or the

public; excepting, 1. That, to preserve the liberty of the subject, the committing any man to prison out of the realm, is by the habeas corpus act, 31 Car. II. c. 2. made a praemunire, unpardonable even by the king. Nor, 2. Can the king pardon, where private justice is principally concerned in the prosecution of offenders: “non potest rex gratiam facere cum injuria et damno aliorumr [the king cannot confer a favour by

o Beccar. ch. 46.

p Ibid. ch. 4.

q Sp. L. b. 6. c. 5.

r 3 Inst. 236.





chapter 31 257


the injury and loss of others].” Therefore in appeals of all kinds (which are the suit, not of the king, but of the party injured) the prosecutor may release, but the king cannot pardons. Neither can he pardon a common nusance, while it remains unre-dressed, or so as to prevent an abatement of it; though afterwards he may remit the fine: because, though the prosecution is vested in the king to avoid multiplicity of suits, yet (during its continuance) this offence savours more of the nature of a private injury to each individual in the neighbourhood, than of a public wrongt. Neither, lastly, can the king pardon an offence against a popular or penal statute, after infor-mation brought: for thereby the informer hath acquired a private property in his part 392

of the penaltyu.

There is also a restriction of a peculiar nature, that affects the prerogative of par-

doning, in case of parliamentary impeachments; viz. that the king’s pardon cannot be pleaded to any such impeachment, so as to impede the inquiry, and stop the prosecu-tion of great and notorious offenders. Therefore when, in the reign of Charles the second, the earl of Danby was impeached by the house of commons of high treason and other misdemesnors,3 and pleaded the king’s pardon in bar of the same, the com-mons allegedw, “that there was no precedent, that ever any pardon was granted to any person impeached by the commons of high treason, or other high crimes, depending the impeachment;” and 〈4〉 therefore resolvedx, “that the pardon so pleaded was illegal and void, and ought not to be allowed in bar of the impeachment of the commons of England:” for which resolution they assignedy this reason to the house of lords, “that the setting up a pardon to be a bar of an impeachment defeats the whole use and effect of impeachments: for should this point be admitted, or stand doubted, it would totally discourage the exhibiting any for the future; whereby the chief institution for the preservation of the government would be destroyed.” Soon after the revolution, the commons renewed the same claim, and votedz, “that a pardon is not pleadable in bar of an impeachment.” And, at length, it was enacted by the act of settlement, 12 & 13 W. III. c. 2. “that no pardon under the great seal of England shall be pleadable to an impeachment by the commons in parliament.” But, after the impeachment has been solemnly heard and determined, it is not understood that the king’s royal grace is farther restrained or abridged: for, after the impeachment and attainder of the six rebel lords in 1715, three of them were from time to time reprieved by the crown, and 393

at length received the benefit of the king’s most gracious pardon.4

s Ibid. 237.

t 2 Hawk. P. C. 391.

u 3 Inst. 238.

w Com. Journ. 28 Apr. 1679.

x Ibid. 5 May 1679.

y Ibid. 26 May 1679.

z Ibid. 6 Jun. 1689.

3 Thomas Osborne, first earl of Danby, who as Charles II’s chief minister built up a strong court party in the House of Commons, was impeached during the Exclusion Crisis and imprisoned in the Tower from 1679 to 1684.

4 Seven peers were impeached and convicted for their part in the Jacobite rising of 1715. Two (Lords Nithsdale and Winton) escaped from custody, two (Lords Derwentwater and Kenmure) were executed, and three (Lords 258 of public wrongs

2. As to the manner of 〈5〉 pardoning: it is a general rule, that, wherever it may

reasonably be presumed the king is deceived, the pardon is voida. Therefore any sup-pression of truth, or suggestion of falshood, in a charter of pardon, will vitiate the whole; for the king was misinformedb. General words have also a very imperfect effect in pardons. A pardon of all felonies will not pardon a conviction or attainder of felony; (for it is presumed the king knew not of those proceedings) but the convic-tion or attainder must be particularly mentionedc: and a pardon of felonies will not include piracy d; for that is no felony punishable at the common law. It is also enacted by statute 13 Ric. II. st. 2. c. 1. that no pardon for treason, murder, or rape, shall be allowed, unless the offence be particularly specified therein; and particularly in mur-der it shall be expressed, whether it was committed by lying in wait, assault, or malice prepense. Upon which sir Edward Coke observese, that it was not the intention of the parliament that the king should ever pardon murder under these aggravations; and therefore they prudently laid the pardon under these restrictions, because they did not conceive it possible that the king would ever excuse an offence by name, which was attended with such high aggravations. And it is remarkable enough, that there is no precedent of a pardon in the register for any other homicide, than that which happens se defendendo [in self defence] or per infortunium [by misadventure]: to which two species the king’s pardon was expressly confined by the statutes 2 Edw. III. c. 2. and 14 Edw. III. c. 15 which declare that no pardon of homicide shall be granted, but only where the king may do it by the oath of his crown; that is to say, where a man slayeth another in his own defence, or by misfortune. But the statute of Richard the second, before-mentioned, enlarges by implication the royal power; provided the

394 king is not deceived in the intended object of his mercy. And therefore pardons of

murder were always granted with a non obstante [notwithstanding] of the statute of king Richard, till the time of the revolution; when, the doctrine of non obstante’s ceasing, it was doubted whether murder could be pardoned generally: but it was determined by the court of king’s benchf, that the king may pardon on an indictment of murder, as well as a subject may discharge an appeal. Under these and a few other restrictions, it is a general rule, that a pardon shall be taken most beneficially for the subject, and most strongly against the king.

A pardon may also be conditional: that is, the king may extend his mercy upon

what terms he pleases; and may annex to his bounty a condition either precedent or subsequent, on the performance whereof the validity of the pardon will depend: and this by the common lawg. Which prerogative is daily exerted in the pardon of felons, 〈 6〉 on condition of transportation to some foreign country (usually to some of his

a 2 Hawk. P. C. 383.

b 3 Inst. 238.

c 2 Hawk. P. C. 383.

d 1 Hawk. P. C. 99.

e 3 Inst. 236.

f [R. v Parsons] Salk. 499.

g 2 Hawk. P. C. 394.





chapter 31 259


majesty’s colonies and plantations in America) for life, or for a term of years; such transportation or banishmenth being allowable and warranted by the habeas corpus act, 31 Car. II. c. 2. §. 14. and rendered more easy and effectual by statute 8 Geo. III. c. 15.

3. With regard to the manner of allowing pardons; we may observe, that a pardon

by act of parliament is more beneficial than by the king’s charter: for a man is not bound to plead it, but the court must ex officio [by virtue of office] take notice of iti; neither can he lose the benefit of it by his own laches [lack of vigilance] or negligence, as he may of the king’s charter of pardonk. The king’s charter of pardon must be spe-cially pleaded, and that at a proper time: for if a man is indicted, and has a pardon in his pocket, and afterwards puts himself upon his trial by pleading the general issue, he has waived the benefit of such pardonl. But, if a man avails himself thereof as soon 395

as by course of law he may, a pardon may either be pleaded upon arraignment, or in arrest of judgment, or in the present stage of proceedings, in bar of execution. Antiently, by statute 10 Edw. III. c. 2. no pardon of felony could be allowed, unless the party found sureties for the good behaviour before the sheriff and coroners of the countym. But that statute is repealed by the statute 5 & 6 W. & M. c. 13. which, instead thereof, gives the judges of the court a discretionary power to bind the criminal, pleading such pardon, to his good behaviour, with two sureties, for any term not exceeding seven years.

4. Lastly, the effect of such pardon by the king, is to make the offender a new

man; to acquit him of all corporal penalties and forfeitures annexed to that offence for which he obtains his pardon; and not so much to restore his former, as to give him a new, credit and capacity. But nothing can restore or purify the blood when once corrupted, if the pardon be not allowed till after attainder, but the high and transcendent power of parliament. Yet if a person attainted receives the king’s par-don, and afterwards hath a son, that son may be heir to his father; because the father, being made a new man, might transmit new inheritable blood: though, had he been born before the pardon, he could never have inherited at alln.

h Transportation is said (Barr. 352.) to have been first inflicted, as a punishment, by statute 39 Eliz. c. 4. [This statute dealt with the punishment of those deemed to be ‘rogues and vagabonds’, permitting any who ‘shall appeare to be dangerous to the inferior sorte of People or … will not be reformed of their rogish kinde of lyfe’ to be ‘banyshed’ from the realm.]

i [Case of Charles Ratcliffe] Fost. 43.

k 2 Hawk. P. C. 397.

l Ibid. 396.

m [R. v Parsons] Salk. 499.

n See Vol. II. pag. 254 [II. 172].



396 chapter the thirty second.



of execution.

There now remains nothing to speak of, but execution; the completion of human punishment. And this, in all cases, as well capital as otherwise, must be performed by the legal officer, the sheriff or his deputy; whose warrant for so doing was antiently by precept under the hand and seal of the judge, as it is still practised in the court of the lord high steward, upon the execution of a peera: though, in the court of the peers in parliament, it is done by writ from the kingb. Afterwards it was establishedc, that, in case of life, the judge may command execution to be done without any writ. And now the usage is, for the judge to sign the calendar, or list of all the prisoners’ names, with their separate judgments in the margin, which is left with the sheriff. As, for a capital felony, it is written opposite to the prisoner’s 〈1〉 name, “hanged by the neck;” formerly, in the days of Latin and abbreviationd, “sus. per coll.” for “suspendatur per collum.” And this is the only warrant that the sheriff has, for so material an act as taking away the life of anothere. It may certainly afford matter of speculation, that in civil causes there should be such a variety of writs of execution to recover a trifling debt, issued in the

397 king’s name, and under the seal of the court, without which the sheriff cannot legally

stir one step; and yet that the execution of a man, the most important and terrible task of any, should depend upon a marginal note.

The sheriff, upon receipt of his warrant, is to do execution within a convenient

time; which in the country is also left at large. In London indeed a more solemn and becoming exactness is used, both as to the warrant of execution, and the time of executing thereof: for the recorder,f after reporting to the king in person the case of the several prisoners, and receiving his royal pleasure, that the law must take its course, issues his warrant to the sheriffs; directing them to do execution on the day and at the place assignedg. And, in the court of king’s bench, if the prisoner be tried at the bar, or brought there by habeas corpus, a rule is made for his execution; either specifying the time and placeh, or leaving it to the discretion of the sheriff i. And, throughout the kingdom, by statute 25 Geo. II. c. 37. it is enacted that, in case of murder, the judge shall in his sentence direct execution to be performed on the next day but one after 〈2〉 sentence passedj. It has been well observedk, that it is of great

a 2 Hal. P. C. 409.

b See appendix. §. 5 [IV. 292].

c Finch. L. 478.

d Staundf. P. C. 182.

e [R. v Bethell] 5 Mod. 22.

f The recorder of London, the city’s chief legal officer, traditionally sat as judge at the Old Bailey sessions.

g See appendix, §. 4 [IV. 291–2].

h St. Trials. VI. 332. [Case of Charles Ratcliffe] Fost. 43.

i See appendix, §. 3 [IV. 291].

j See pag. 202 [IV. 133–4].





chapter 32 261


importance, that the punishment should follow the crime as early as possible; that the prospect of gratification or advantage, which tempts a man to commit the crime, should instantly awake the attendant idea of punishment. Delay of execution serves only to separate these ideas; and then the execution itself affects the minds of the spectators rather as a terrible sight, than as the necessary consequence of transgression.

The sheriff cannot alter the manner of the execution by substituting one death for

another, without being guilty of felony himself, as has been formerly said l. It is held also by sir Edward Cokem and sir Matthew Halen, that even the king cannot change 398 the punishment of the law, by altering the hanging or burning into beheading; though, when beheading is part of the sentence, the king may remit the rest. And, notwithstanding some examples to the contrary, sir Edward Coke stoutly maintains, that “judicandum est legibus, non exemplis [Judgment should be given according to law and not precedent].” But others have thought o, and more justly, that this prerogative, being founded in mercy and immemorially exercised by the crown, is part of the common law. For hitherto, in every instance, all these exchanges have been for more merciful kinds of death; and how far this may also fall within the king’s power of granting conditional pardons, (viz. by remitting a severe kind of death, on condition that the criminal submits to a milder) is a matter that may bear consideration. It is observable, that when lord Stafford was executed for the popish plot in the reign of king Charles the second, the then sheriffs of London, having received the king’s writ for beheading him, petitioned the house of lords, for a command or order from their lordships, how the said judgment should be executed: for, he being prosecuted by impeachment, they entertained a notion (which is said to have been countenanced by lord Russel) that the king could not pardon any part of the sentencep. The lords resolvedq, that the scruples of the sheriffs were unnecessary, and declared, that the king’s writ ought to be obeyed. Disappointed of raising a flame in that assembly, they immediately signifiedr to the house of commons by one of the members, that they were not satisfied as to the power of the said writ. That house took two days to consider of it; and thens sullenly resolved, that the house was content that the sheriff do execute lord Stafford by severing his head from his body. It is farther related, that when afterwards the same lord Russel was condemned for high treason upon indictment, the king, while he remitted the ignominious part of the sentence, observed, “that his lordship would now find he was possessed of that 399 prerogative, which in the case of lord Stafford he had denied himt.” One can hardly determine (at this distance from those turbulent times) which most to disapprove of,



l See pag. 179 [IV. 117–18].

m 3 Inst. 52.

n 2 Hal. P. C. 412.

o 〈3〉 Fost. 270.

p 2 Hume Hist. of G. B. 328.

q Lords Journ. 21 Dec. 1680.

r Com. Journ. 21 Dec. 1680.

s Ibid. 23 Dec. 1680.

262 of public wrongs

the indecent and sanguinary zeal of the subject, or the cool and cruel sarcasm of the sovereign.

To conclude: it is clear, that if, upon judgment to be hanged by the neck till he is

dead, the criminal be not thoroughly killed, but revives, the sheriff must hang him againu. For the former hanging was no execution of the sentence; and, if a false tenderness were to be indulged in such cases, a multitude of collusions might ensue. Nay, even while abjurations were in forcew, such a criminal, so reviving, was not allowed to take sanctuary and abjure the realm; but his fleeing to sanctuary was held an escape in the officerx.

And, having thus arrived at the last stage of criminal proceedings, or execution,

the end and completion of human punishment, which was the sixth and last head to be considered under the division of public wrongs, the fourth and last object of the laws of England; it may now seem high time to put a period to these commentaries, which, the author is very sensible, have already swelled to too great a length. But he cannot dismiss the student, for whose use alone these rudiments were originally compiled, without endeavouring to recall to his memory some principal outlines of the legal constitution of this country; by a short historical review of the most considerable revolutions, that have happened in the laws of England, from the earliest to the present times. And this task he will attempt to discharge, however imperfectly, in the next or concluding chapter.

u 2 Hal. P. C. 412. 2 Hawk. P. C. 463.

w See pag. 326 [IV. 215].

x Fitzh. Abr. t. corone. 335. Finch. L. 467.





chapter the thirty third. 400




of the rise, progress, and

gradual improvements,

of the laws of england.

Before we enter on the subject of this chapter, in which I propose, by way of supplement to the whole, to attempt an historical review of the most remarkable changes and alterations, that have happened in the laws of England, I must first of all remind the student, that the rise and progress of many principal points and doctrines have been already pointed out in the course of these commentaries, under their respective divisions: these having therefore been particularly discussed already, it cannot be expected that I should re-examine them with any degree of minuteness; which would be a most tedious undertaking. What I therefore at present propose, is only to mark out some outlines of an English juridical history, by taking a chronological view of the state of our laws, and their successive mutations at different periods of time.

The several periods, under which I shall consider the state of our legal polity, are

the following six: 1. From the earliest times to the Norman conquest: 2. From the Norman conquest to the reign of king Edward the first: 3. From thence to the refor- 401

mation: 4. From the reformation to the restoration of king Charles the second: 5. From thence to the revolution in 1688: 6. From the revolution to the present time.

I. And, first, with regard to the antient Britons, the aborigines of our island, we

have so little handed down to us concerning them with any tolerable certainty, that our enquiries here must needs be very fruitless and defective. However, from Caesar’s account of the tenets and discipline of the antient Druids in Gaul,1 in whom centered all the learning of these western parts, and who were, as he tells us, sent over to Britain, (that is, to the island of Mona or Anglesey2) to be instructed; we may collect a few points, which bear a great affinity and resemblance to some of the modern doctrines of our English law. Particularly, the very notion itself of an oral unwritten law, delivered down from age to age, by custom and tradition merely, seems derived from the practice of the Druids, who never committed any of their instructions to writing: possibly for want of letters; since it is remarkable that in all the antiquities, unquestionably British, which the industry of the moderns has discovered, there is not in any of them the least trace of any character or letter to be found. The partible quality also of lands, by the custom of gavelkind, which still obtains in many parts of

1 A territory of the Roman empire that was made up of modern France, Luxembourg, Belgium, most of Switzerland, parts of Northern Italy, the Netherlands, and Germany.

2 Anglesey (Ynys Môn in Welsh) is an island off the north-west coast of Wales.

264 of public wrongs

England, and did universally over Wales till the reign of Henry VIII, is undoubtedly of British original. So likewise is the antient division of the goods of an intestate between his widow and children, or next of kin; which has since been revived by the statute of distributions.3

And we may also remember an instance of a slighter nature mentioned in the

present volume; where the same custom has continued from Caesar’s time to the present, that of burning a woman guilty of the crime of petit treason by killing her husband.

The great variety of nations, that successively broke in upon, and destroyed both

402 the British inhabitants and constitution, the Romans, the Picts, and, after them, the

various clans of Saxons and Danes, must necessarily have caused great confusion and uncertainty in the laws and antiquities of the kingdom; as they were very soon incor-porated and blended together, and therefore, we may suppose, mutually communi-cated to each other their respective usagesa, in regard to the rights of property and the punishment of crimes. So that it is morally impossible to trace out, with any degree of accuracy, when the several mutations of the common law were made, or what was the respective original of those several customs we at present use, by any chemical resolution of them to their first and component principles. We can seldom pronounce, that this custom was derived from the Britons; that was left behind by the Romans; this was a necessary precaution against the Picts; that was introduced by the Saxons, discontinued by the Danes, but afterwards restored by the Normans.

Wherever this can be done, it is matter of great curiosity, and some use: but this

can very rarely be the case; not only from the reason above-mentioned, but also from many others. First, from the nature of traditional laws in general; which, being accommodated to the exigences of the times, suffer by degrees insensible variations in practiceb: so that, though upon comparison we plainly discern the alteration of the law from what it was five hundred years ago, yet it is impossible to define the precise period in which that alteration accrued, any more than we can discern the changes of the bed of a river, which varies its shores by continual decreases and alluvions. Secondly, this becomes impracticable from the antiquity of the kingdom and its gov-ernment: which alone, though it had been disturbed by no foreign invasions, would 〈1〉 make it an impossible thing to search out the original of its laws; unless we had as

403 authentic monuments thereof, as the Jews had by the hand of Mosesc. Thirdly, this

uncertainty of the true origin of particular customs must also in part have arisen from the means, whereby christianity was propagated among our Saxon ancestors in this island; by learned foreigners brought over from Rome and other countries: who undoubtedly carried with them many of their own national customs; and probably prevailed upon the state to abrogate such usages as were inconsistent with our holy religion, and to introduce many others that were more conformable thereto. And this

a Hal. Hist. C. L. 62.

b Ibid. 57.

c Ibid. 59.





chapter 33 265


perhaps may have partly been the cause, that we find not only some rules of the mosaical, but also of the imperial and pontificial laws, blended and adopted into our own system.

A farther reason may also be given for the great variety, and of course the uncer-

tain original, of our antient established customs; even after the Saxon government was firmly established in this island: viz. the subdivision of the kingdom into an heptarchy, consisting of seven independent kingdoms, peopled and governed by dif-ferent clans and colonies. This must necessarily create an infinite diversity of laws: even though all those colonies, of Jutes, 〈2〉 Angles, proper Saxons, and the like, orig-inally sprung from the same mother country, the great northern hive; which poured forth its warlike progeny, and swarmed all over Europe, in the sixth and seventh centuries. This multiplicity of laws will necessarily be the case in some degree, where any kingdom is cantoned out into provincial establishments; and not under one common dispensation of laws, though under the same sovereign power. Much more will it happen, where seven unconnected states are to form their own constitution and super-structure of government, though they all begin to build upon the same or similar foundations.

When therefore the West-Saxons had swallowed up all the rest, and king Alfred

succeeded to the monarchy of England, whereof his grandfather Egbert was the founder, his mighty genius prompted him to undertake a most great and necessary work, which he is said to have executed in as masterly a manner. No less than to new- 404

model the constitution; to rebuild it on a plan that should endure for ages; and, out of its old discordant materials, which were heaped upon each other in a vast and rude irregularity, to form one uniform and well connected whole. This he effected, by reducing the whole kingdom under one regular and gradual subordination of gov-ernment, wherein each man was answerable to his immediate superior for his own conduct and that of his nearest neighbours: for to him we owe that masterpiece of judicial polity, the subdivision of England into tithings, and hundreds, if not into counties; all under the influence and administration of one supreme magistrate, the king; in whom, as in a general reservoir, all the executive authority of the law was lodged, and from whom justice was dispersed to every part of the nation by distinct, yet communicating, ducts and chanels: which wise institution has been preserved for near a thousand years unchanged, from Alfred’s to the present time. He also, like another Theodosius, collected the various customs that he found dispersed in the kingdom, and reduced and digested them into one uniform system or code of laws, in his dom-bec, or liber judicialis [judgment book].4 This he compiled for the use of the court-baron, hundred, and county court, the court-leet, and sheriff’s tourn; tri-bunals, which he established, for the trial of all causes civil and criminal, in the very districts wherein the complaint arose: all of them subject however to be inspected, controlled, and kept within the bounds of the universal or common law, by the king’s

4 A book, once thought lost, said to have been composed under the direction of King Alfred, containing the local customs of the several provinces of the kingdom. No original manuscript survives, but there are several later 266 of public wrongs

own courts; which were then itinerant, being kept in the king’s palace, and removing with his houshold in those royal progresses, which he continually made from one end of the kingdom to the other.

The Danish invasion and conquest, which introduced new foreign customs, was a

severe blow to this noble fabric: but a plan, so excellently concerted, could never be long thrown aside. So that, upon the expulsion of these intruders, the English returned to their antient law: retaining however some few of the customs of their late

405 visitants; which went under the name of Dane-Lage: as the code compiled by Alfred

was called the West-Saxon-Lage; and the local constitutions of the antient kingdom of Mercia, which obtained in the counties nearest to Wales, and probably abounded with many British customs, were called the Mercen-Lage. And these three laws were, about the beginning of the eleventh century, in use in different counties of the realm: the provincial polity of counties, and their subdivisions, having never been altered or discontinued through all the shocks and mutations of government, from the time of its first institution; though the laws and customs therein used, have (as we shall see) often suffered considerable changes.

For king Edgar, (who besides his military merit, as founder of the English navy,

was also a most excellent civil governor) observing the ill effects of three distinct bod-ies of laws, prevailing at once in separate parts of his dominions, projected and begun, what his grandson king Edward the confessor afterwards completed; viz. one uniform digest or body of laws, to be observed throughout the whole kingdom: being probably no more than a revival of king Alfred’s code, with some improvements suggested by necessity and experience; particularly the incorporating some of the British or rather Mercian customs, and also such of the Danish as were reasonable and approved, into the West-Saxon-Lage, which was still the groundwork of the whole. And this 〈3〉 appears to me the best supported and most plausible conjecture (for certainty is not to be expected) of the rise and original of that admirable system of maxims and unwrit-ten customs, which is now known by the name of the common law, as extending its authority universally over all the realm; and which is doubtless of Saxon parentage.

Among the most remarkable of the Saxon laws we may reckon, 1. The constitution

of parliaments, or rather, general assemblies of the principal and wisest men in the nation; the wittena-gemote, or commune concilium [common council] of the antient

406 Germans; which was not yet reduced to the forms and distinctions of our modern

parliament: without whose concurrence however, no new law could be made, or old one altered. 2. The election of their magistrates by the people; originally even that of their kings, till dearbought experience evinced the convenience and necessity of establishing an hereditary succession to the crown. But that of all subordinate mag-istrates, their military officers or heretochs, their sheriffs, their conservators of the peace, their coroners, their port-reeves, (since changed into mayors and bailiffs) and even their tythingmen and borsholders at the leet, continued, some till the Norman conquest, others for two centuries after, and some remain to this day. 3. The descent of the crown, when once a royal family was established, upon nearly the same hered-itary principles upon which it has ever since continued: only that perhaps, in case of minority, the next of kin of full age would ascend the throne, as king, and not as





chapter 33 267


protector; though, after his death, the crown immediately reverted back to the heir. 4. The great paucity of capital punishments for the first offence: even the most noto-rious offenders being allowed to commute it for a fine or weregild, or, in default of payment, perpetual bondage; to which our benefit of clergy has now in some meas-ure succeeded. 5. The prevalence of certain customs, as heriots and military services in proportion to every man’s land, which much resembled the feodal constitution; but yet were exempt from all its rigorous hardships: and which may be well enough accounted for, by supposing them to be brought from the continent by the first Saxon invaders, in the primitive moderation and simplicity of the feodal law; before it got into the hands of the Norman jurists, who extracted the most slavish doctrines, and oppressive consequences, out of what was originally intended as a law of liberty. 6. That their estates were liable to forfeiture for treason, but that the doctrine of escheats and corruption of blood for felony, or any other cause, was utterly unknown amongst them. 7. The descent of 〈4〉 their lands was to all the males equally, without any right of primogeniture; a custom, which obtained among the Britons, was agreeable to the Roman law, and continued among the Saxons till the Norman conquest: though 407 really inconvenient, and more especially destructive to antient families; which are in monarchies necessary to be supported, in order to form and keep up a nobility, or intermediate state between the prince and the common people. 8. The courts of jus-tice consisted principally of the county courts, and in cases of weight or nicety the 〈5〉 king’s courts held before himself in person, at the time of his parliaments; which were usually holden in different places, according as he kept the three great festivals of christmas, easter, and whitsuntide. An institution which was adopted by king Alonso VII of Castile about a century after the conquest: who at the same three great feasts was wont to assemble his nobility and prelates in his court; who there heard and decided all controversies, and then, having received his instructions, departed homed. These county courts however differed from the modern ones, in that the ecclesiasti-cal and civil jurisdiction were blended together, the bishop and the ealdorman or sheriff sitting in the same county court; and also that the decisions and proceedings therein were much more simple and unembarrassed: an advantage which will always attend the infancy of any laws, but wear off as they gradually advance to antiquity. 9. Trials, among a people who had a very strong tincture of superstition, were per-mitted to be by ordeal, by the corsned or morsel of execration, or by wager of law with compurgators, if the party chose it; but frequently they were also by jury: for, whether or no their juries consisted precisely of twelve men, or were bound to a strict una-nimity; yet the general constitution of this admirable criterion of truth, and most important guardian both of public and private liberty, we owe to our Saxon ances-tors. Thus stood the general frame of our polity at the time of the Norman invasion; when the second period of our legal history commences.

II. This remarkable event wrought as great an alteration in our laws, as it did in

our antient line of kings: and, though the alteration of the former was effected rather by the consent of the people, than any right of conquest, yet that consent seems to 408 268 of public wrongs

have been partly extorted by fear, and partly given without any apprehension of the consequences which afterwards ensued.

1. Among the first of these alterations we may reckon the separation of the eccle-

siastical courts from the civil: effected in order to ingratiate the new king with the popish clergy, who for some time before had been endeavouring all over Europe to exempt themselves from the secular power; and whose demands the conqueror, like a politic prince, thought it prudent to comply with, by reason that their reputed sanc-tity had a great influence over the minds of the people; and because all the little learning of the times was engrossed into their hands, which made them necessary men, and by all means to be gained over to his interests. And this was the more easily effected, because, the disposal of all the episcopal sees being then in the breast of the king, he had taken care to fill them with Italian and Norman prelates.

2. Another violent alteration of the English constitution consisted in the depop-

ulation of whole countries, for the purposes of the king’s royal diversion; and sub-jecting both them, and all the antient forests of the kingdom, to the unreasonable severities of forest laws imported from the continent, whereby the slaughter of a beast was made almost as penal as the death of a man. In the Saxon times, though no man was allowed to kill or chase the king’s deer, yet he might start any game, pursue, and kill it, upon his own estate. But the rigour of these new constitutions vested the sole property of all the game in England in the king alone; and no man was entitled to disturb any fowl of the air, or any beast of the field, of such kind as were specially reserved for the royal amusement of the sovereign, without express licence from the king, by a grant of a chase or free warren: and those franchises were granted as much with a view to preserve the breed of animals, as to indulge the subject. From a similar

409 principle to which, though the forest laws are now mitigated, and by degrees grown

intirely obsolete, yet from this root has sprung a bastard slip, known by the name of the game law, now arrived to and wantoning in its highest vigour: both founded upon the same unreasonable notions of permanent property in wild creatures; and both productive of the same tyranny to the commons: but with this difference; that the forest laws established only one mighty hunter throughout the land, the game laws have raised a little Nimrod in every manor.5 And in one respect the antient law was much less unreasonable than the modern: for the king’s grantee of a chase or free-warren might kill game in every part of his franchise; but now, though a free-holder of less than 100l. a year is forbidden to kill a partridge upon his own estate, yet nobody else (not even the lord of the manor, unless he hath a grant of free-warren) can do it without committing a trespass, and subjecting himself to an action.6

3. A third alteration in the English laws was by narrowing the remedial influence

of the county courts, the great seats of Saxon justice, and extending the original juris-diction of the king’s justiciars to all kinds of causes, arising in all parts of the king-dom. To this end the aula regis [the king’s hall, i.e. council sitting there], with all its multifarious authority, was erected; and a capital justiciary appointed, with powers

5 Nimrod, king of Shinar, is depicted in the Bible (Gen. x. 9) as ‘a mighty hunter’.





chapter 33 269


so large and boundless, that he became at length a tyrant to the people, and formida-ble to the crown itself. The constitution of this court, and the judges themselves who presided there, were fetched from the duchy of Normandy: and the consequence naturally was, the ordaining that all proceedings in the king’s courts should be car-ried on in the Norman, instead of the English, language. A provision the more nec-essary, because none of his Norman justiciars understood English; but as evident a badge of slavery, as ever was imposed upon a conquered people. This lasted till king Edward the third obtained a double victory, over the armies of France in their own country, and their language in our courts here at home. But there was one mischief too deeply rooted thereby, and which this caution of king Edward came too late to 410 eradicate. Instead of the plain and easy method of determining suits in the county courts, the chicanes and subtilties of Norman jurisprudence had taken possession of the king’s courts, to which every cause of consequence was drawn. Indeed that age, and those immediately succeeding it, were the aera of refinement and subtilty. There is an active principle in the human soul, that will ever be exerting its faculties to the utmost stretch, in whatever employment, by the accidents of time and place, the general plan of education, or the customs and manners of the age and country, it may happen to find itself engaged. The northern conquerors of Europe were then emerg-ing from the grossest ignorance in point of literature; and those, who had leisure to cultivate its progress, were such only as were cloistered in monasteries, the rest being all soldiers or peasants. And, unfortunately, the first rudiments of science which they imbibed were those of Aristotle’s philosophy, conveyed through the medium of his Arabian commentators; which were brought from the east by the Saracens into Palestine and Spain, and translated into barbarous Latin. So that, though the materi-als upon which they were naturally employed, in the infancy of a rising state, were those of the noblest kind; the establishment of religion, and the regulations of civil polity; yet, having only such tools to work with, their execution was trifling and flim-sey. Both the divinity and the law of those times were therefore frittered into logical distinctions, and drawn out into metaphysical subtilties, with a skill most amazingly artificial; but which serves no other purpose, than to shew the vast powers of the human intellect, however vainly or preposterously employed. Hence law in particu-lar, which (being intended for universal reception) ought to be a plain rule of action, became a science of the greatest intricacy; especially when blended with the new refinements engrafted upon feodal property: which refinements were from time to time gradually introduced by the Norman practitioners, with a view to supersede (as they did in great measure) the more homely, but more intelligible, maxims of distrib-utive justice among the Saxons. And, to say the truth, these scholastic reformers have 411

transmitted their dialect and finesses to posterity, so interwoven in the body of our legal polity, that they cannot now be taken out without a manifest injury to the sub-stance. Statute after statute has in later times been made, to pare off these trouble-some excrescences, and restore the common law to its pristine simplicity and vigour; and the endeavour has greatly succeeded: but still the scars are deep and visible; and the liberality of our modern courts of justice is frequently obliged to have recourse to unaccountable fictions and circuities, in order to recover that equitable and substantial 270 of public wrongs

justice, which for a long time was totally buried under the narrow rules and fanciful niceties of metaphysical and Norman jurisprudence.

4. A fourth innovation was the introduction of the trial by combat, for the deci-

sion of all civil and criminal questions of fact in the last resort. This was the imme-morial practice of all the northern nations; but first reduced to regular and stated forms among the Burgundi, about the close of the fifth century: and from them it passed to other nations, particularly the Franks and the Normans; which last had the honour to establish it here, though clearly an unchristian, as well as most uncertain, method of trial. But it was a sufficient recommendation of it to the conqueror and his warlike countrymen, that it was the usage of their native duchy of Normandy.

5. But the last and most important alteration, both in our civil and military pol-

ity, was the engrafting on all landed estates, a few only excepted, the fiction of feodal tenure; which drew after it a numerous and oppressive train of servile fruits and appendages; aids, reliefs, primer seisins, wardships, marriages, escheats, and fines for alienation; the genuine consequences of the maxim then adopted, that all the lands in England were derived from, and holden, mediately or immediately, of the crown.

The nation at this period seems to have groaned under as absolute a slavery, as was

412 in the power of a warlike, an ambitious, and a politic prince to create. The consciences

of men were enslaved by sour ecclesiastics, devoted to a foreign power, and uncon-nected with the civil state under which they lived: who now imported from Rome for the first time the whole farrago of superstitious novelties, which had been engen-dered by the blindness and corruption of the times, between the first mission of Augustin the monk, and the Norman conquest; such as transubstantiation, purga-tory, communion in one kind, and the worship of saints and images; not forgetting the universal supremacy and dogmatical infallibility of the holy see. The laws too, as well as the prayers, were administered in an unknown tongue. The antient trial by jury gave way to the impious decision by battel. The forest laws totally restrained all rural pleasures and manly recreations. And in cities and towns the case was no bet-ter; all company being obliged to disperse, and fire and candle to be extinguished, by eight at night, at the sound of the melancholy curfeu. The ultimate property of all lands, and a 〈6〉 considerable share out of the present profits, were vested in the king, or by him granted out to his Norman favourites; who, by a gradual progression of slavery, were absolute vasals to the crown, and as absolute tyrants to the commons. Unheard of forfeitures, talliages, aids, and fines, were arbitrarily extracted from the pillaged landholders, in pursuance of the new system of tenure. And, to crown all, as a consequence of the tenure by knight-service, the king had always ready at his com-mand an army of sixty thousand knights or milites: who were bound, upon pain of confiscating their estates, to attend him in time of invasion, or to quell any domestic insurrection. Trade, or foreign merchandize, such as it then was, was carried on by the Jews and Lombards; and the very name of an English fleet, which king Edgar had rendered so formidable, was utterly unknown to Europe: the nation consisting wholly of the clergy, who were also the lawyers; the barons, or great lords of the land; the knights or soldiery, who were the subordinate landholders; and the burghers, or inferior tradesmen, who from their insignificancy happily retained, in their socage





chapter 33 271


and burgage tenure, some points of their antient freedom. All the rest were villeins or 413

bondmen.

From so complete and well concerted a scheme of servility, it has been the work of

generations for our ancestors, to redeem themselves and their posterity into that state of liberty, which we now enjoy: and which therefore is not to be looked upon as consisting of mere incroachments on the crown, and 〈7〉 infringements of the prerog-ative, as some slavish and narrow-minded writers in the last century endeavoured to maintain; but as, in general, a gradual restoration of that antient constitution, whereof our Saxon forefathers had been unjustly deprived, partly by the policy, and partly by the force, of the Norman. How that restoration has, in a long series of years, been step by step effected, I now proceed to enquire.

William Rufus proceeded on his father’s plan, and in some points extended it;

particularly with regard to the forest laws. But his brother and successor, Henry the first, found it expedient, when first he came to the crown, to ingratiate himself with the people; by restoring (as our monkish historians tell us) the laws of king Edward the confessor. The ground whereof is this: that by charter he gave up the great griev-ances of marriage, ward, and relief, the beneficial pecuniary fruits of his feodal ten-ures; but reserved the tenures themselves, for the same military purposes that his father introduced them. He also abolished the curfeue; for, though it is mentioned in our laws a full century afterwardsf, yet it is rather spoken of as a known time of night (so denominated from that abrogated usage) than as a still subsisting custom. There is extant a code of laws in his name, consisting partly of those of the confessor, but with great additions and alterations of his own; and chiefly calculated for the regula-tion of the county courts. It contains some directions as to crimes and their punish-ments, (that of theft being made capital in his reign) and a few things relating to estates, particularly as to the descent of lands: which being by the Saxon laws equally 414

to all the sons, by the feodal or Norman to the eldest only, king Henry here moder-ated the difference; directing the eldest son to have only the principal estate, “pri-mum patris feudum [the father’s principal estate],” the rest of his estates, if he had any others, being equally divided among them all. On the other hand, he gave up to the clergy the free election of bishops and mitred abbots; reserving however these ensigns of patronage, conge d’eslire [leave to elect], custody of the temporalties7 when vacant, and homage upon their restitution. He lastly united again for a time the civil and ecclesiastical courts, which union was soon dissolved by his Norman clergy: and, upon that final dissolution, the cognizance of testamentary causes seems to have been first given to the ecclesiastical court. The rest remained as in his father’s time: from whence we may easily perceive how far short this was of a thorough restitution of king Edward’s, or the Saxon, laws.

The usurper Stephen, as the manner of usurpers is, promised much at his

accession, especially with regard to redressing the grievances of the forest laws,

e Spelm. Cod. LL. W. I. 288. Hen. I. 299.

f Stat. Civ. Lond. 13 Edw. I.

272 of public wrongs

but performed no great matter either in that or in any other point. It is from his reign however, that we are to date the introduction of the Roman civil and canon laws into this realm: and at the same time was imported the doctrine of appeals to the court of Rome, as a branch of the canon law.

By the time of king Henry the second, if not earlier, the charter of Henry the first

seems to have been forgotten: for we find the claim of marriage, ward, and relief, then flourishing in full vigour. The right of primogeniture seems also to have tacitly revived, being found more convenient for the public than the parcelling of estates into a multitude of minute subdivisions. However in this prince’s reign much was done to methodize the laws, and reduce them into a regular order; as appears from that excellent treatise of Glanvil: which, though some of it be now antiquated and

415 altered, yet, when compared with the code of Henry the first, it carries a manifest

superiority g. Throughout his reign also was continued the important struggle, which we have had occasion so often to mention, between the laws of England and Rome; the former supported by the strength of the temporal nobility, when endeavoured to be supplanted in favour of the latter by the popish clergy. Which dispute was kept on foot till the reign of Edward the first; when the laws of England, under the new dis-cipline introduced by that skilful commander, obtained a complete and permanent victory. In the present reign, of Henry the second, there are four things which pecu-liarly merit the attention of a legal antiquarian: 1. The constitutions of the parliament at Clarendon, a.d. 1164. whereby the king checked the power of the pope and his clergy, and greatly narrowed the total exemption they claimed from the secular juris-diction: though his farther progress was unhappily stopped, by the fatal event of the disputes between him and archbishop Becket. 2. The institution of the office of jus-tices in eyre, in itinere; the king having divided the kingdom into six circuits (a little different from the present) and commissioned these new created judges to adminis-ter justice, and try writs of assise, in the several counties. These remedies are said to have been then first invented: before which all causes were usually terminated in the county courts, according to the Saxon custom; or before the king’s justiciaries in the aula regis, in pursuance of the Norman regulations. The latter of which tribunals, travelling about with the king’s person, occasioned intolerable expense and delay to the suitors; and the former, however proper for little debts and minute actions, where even injustice is better than procrastination, were now become liable to too much ignorance of the law, and too much partiality as to facts, to determine matters of considerable moment. 3. The introduction and establishment of the grand assise, or trial by a special kind of jury in a writ of right, at the option of the tenant or defend-ant, instead of the barbarous and Norman trial by battel. 4. To this time must also be

416 referred the introduction of escuage, or pecuniary commutation for personal mili-

tary service; which in process of time was the parent of the antient subsidies granted to the crown by parliament, and the land tax of later times.

Richard the first, a brave and magnanimous prince, was a sportsman as well as a

soldier; and therefore inforced the forest laws with some rigour; which occasioned





chapter 33 273


many discontents among his people: though (according to Matthew Paris) he repealed the penalties of castration, loss of eyes, and cutting off the hands and feet, before inflicted on such as transgressed in hunting; probably finding that their sever-ity prevented prosecutions. He also, when abroad, composed a body of naval laws at the isle of Oleron;8 which are still extant, and of high authority: for in his time we began again to discover, that (as an island) we were naturally a maritime power. But, with regard to civil proceedings, we find nothing very remarkable in this reign, except a few regulations regarding the jews, and the justices in eyre: the king’s thoughts being chiefly taken up by the knight errantry of a croisade against the Saracens in the holy land.

In king John’s time, and that of his son Henry the third, the rigours of the feodal

tenures and the forest laws were so warmly kept up, that they occasioned many insurrections of the barons or principal feudatories: which at last had this effect, that first king John, and afterwards his son, consented to the two famous charters of English liberties, magna carta, and carta de foresta [charter of the forest]. Of these the latter was well calculated to redress many grievances, and encroachments of the crown, in the exertion of forest-law: and the former confirmed many liberties of the church, and redressed many grievances incident to feodal tenures, of no small moment at the time; though now, unless considered attentively and with this retro-spect, they seem but of trifling concern. But, besides these feodal provisions, care was also taken therein to protect the subject against other oppressions, then frequently arising from unreasonable amercements, from illegal distresses or other process for debts or services due to the crown, and from the tyrannical abuse of the prerogative 417

of purveyance and pre-emption. It fixed the forfeiture of lands for felony in the same manner as it still remains; prohibited for the future the grants of exclusive fisheries; and the erection of new bridges so as to oppress the neighbourhood. With respect to private rights: it established the testamentary power of the subject over part of his personal estate, the rest being distributed among his wife and children; it laid down the law of dower,9 as it hath continued ever since; and prohibited the appeals of women, unless for the death of their husbands. In matters of public police and national concern: it injoined an uniformity of weights and measures; gave new encouragements to commerce, by the protection of merchant-strangers; and forbad the alienation of lands in mortmain. With regard to the administration of justice: besides prohibiting all denials or delays of it, it fixed the court of commonpleas at Westminster, that the suitors might no longer be harassed with following the king’s per-son in all his progresses; and at the same time brought the trial of issues home to the very doors of the freeholders, by directing assises to be taken in the proper counties, and establishing annual circuits: it also corrected some abuses then incident to the trials by wager of law and of battel; directed the regular awarding of inquests for life or member; prohibited the king’s inferior ministers from holding pleas of the crown, or trying any

8 The Ile d’Oléron is an island off the north-west Atlantic coast of France.

9 Dower: unless otherwise barred (as by Blackstone’s time, it frequently was), English law provided that a third 274 of public wrongs

criminal charge, whereby many forfeitures might otherwise have unjustly accrued to the exchequer; and regulated the time and place of holding the inferior tribunals of justice, the county court, sheriff’s turn, and court-leet. It confirmed and established the liberties of the city of London, and all other cities, boroughs, towns, and ports of the kingdom. And, lastly, (which alone would have merited the title that it bears, of the great charter) it protected every individual of the nation in the free enjoyment of his life, his liberty, and his property, unless declared to be forfeited by the judg-ment of his peers or the law of the land.

418 However, by means of these struggles, the pope in the reign of king John gained a

still greater ascendant here, than he ever before had enjoyed; which continued through the long reign of his son Henry the third: in the beginning of whose time the old Saxon trial by ordeal was also totally abolished. And we may by this time perceive, in Bracton’s treatise, a still farther improvement in the method and regularity of the common law, especially in the point of pleadingsh. Nor must it be forgotten, that the first traces which remain, of the separation of the greater barons from the less, in the constitution of parliaments, are found in the great charter of king John; though omitted in that of Henry III: and that, towards the end of the latter of these reigns, we find the first record of any writ for summoning knights, citizens, and burgesses to parliament. And here we conclude the second period of our English legal history.

III. The third commences with the reign of Edward the first; 〈8〉 who may justly

be stiled our English Justinian. For in his time the law did receive so sudden a perfec-tion, that sir Matthew Hale does not scruple to affirmi, that more was done in the first thirteen years of his reign to settle and establish the distributive justice of the king-dom, than in all the ages since that time put together.

It would be endless to enumerate all the particulars of these regulations; but the

principal may be reduced under the following general heads. 1. He established, con-firmed, and settled, the great charter and charter of forests. 2. He gave a mortal wound to the encroachments of the pope and his clergy, by limiting and establishing the bounds of ecclesiastical jurisdiction: and by obliging the ordinary, to whom all the goods of intestates at that time belonged, to discharge the debts of the deceased. 3. He defined the limits of the several temporal courts of the highest jurisdiction,

419 those of the king’s bench, common pleas, and exchequer; so as they might not inter-

fere with each other’s proper business: to do which, they must now have recourse to a fiction, very necessary and beneficial in the present enlarged state of property. 4. He settled the boundaries of the inferior courts in counties, hundreds, and manors: con-fining them to causes of no great amount, according to their primitive institution; though of considerably greater, than by the alteration of the value of money they are now permitted to determine. 5. He secured the property of the subject, by abolishing all arbitrary taxes, and talliages, levied without consent of the national council. 6. He guarded the common justice of the kingdom from abuses, by giving up the royal prerogative of sending mandates to interfere in private causes. 7. He settled the form,

h Hal. Hist. C. L. 156.





chapter 33 275


solemnities, and effects, of fines levied in the court of common pleas; though the thing itself was of Saxon original. 8. He first established a repository for the public records of the kingdom; few of which are antienter than the reign of his father, and those were by him collected. 9. He improved upon the laws of king Alfred, by that great and orderly method of watch and ward, for preserving the public peace and preventing robberies, established by the statute of Winchester. 10. He settled and reformed many abuses incident to tenures, and removed some restraints on the alienation of landed property, by the statute of quia emptores.10 11. He instituted a speedier way for the recovery of debts, by granting execution not only upon goods and chattels, but also upon lands, by writ of elegit; which was of signal benefit to a trading people: and, upon the same commercial ideas, he also allowed the charging of lands in a statute merchant, to pay debts contracted in trade, contrary to all feodal principles. 12. He effectually provided for the recovery of advowsons, as temporal rights; in which, before, the law was extremely deficient. 13. He also effectually closed the great gulph, in which all the landed property of the kingdom was in danger of being swallowed, by his re-iterated statutes of mortmain; most admirably adapted to meet the frauds that had then been devised, though afterwards contrived to be evaded by the invention of uses. 14. He established a new limitation of property by 420 the creation of estates tail; concerning the good policy of which, modern times have however entertained a very different opinion. 15. He reduced all Wales to the subjec-tion, not only of the crown, but in great measure of the laws, of England; (which was thoroughly completed in the reign of Henry the eighth) and seems to have enter-tained a design of doing the like by Scotland, so as to have formed an intire and complete union of the island of Great Britain.

I might continue this catalogue much farther:—but, upon the whole, we may

observe, that the very scheme and model of the administration of common justice between party and party, was entirely settled by this kingk; and has continued nearly the same, in all succeeding ages, to this day; abating some few alterations, which the humour or necessity of subsequent times hath occasioned. The forms of writs, by which actions are commenced, were perfected in his reign, and established as models for posterity. The pleadings, consequent upon the writs, were then short, nervous, and perspicuous; not intricate, verbose, and formal. The legal treatises, written in his time, as Britton, Fleta, Hengham, and the rest, are for the most part, law at this day; or at least were so, till the alteration of tenures took place. And, to conclude, it is from this period, from the exact observation of magna carta, rather than from its making or renewal, in the days of his grandfather and father, that the liberty of Englishmen began again to rear its head; though the weight of the military tenures hung heavy upon it for many ages after.

I cannot give a better proof of the excellence of his constitutions, than that from

his time to that of Henry the eighth there happened very few, and those not very

k Hal. Hist. C. L. 162.

10 So known from its opening words, literally ‘because the buyers’, see further II. 61.

276 of public wrongs

considerable, alterations in the legal forms of proceedings. As to matter of substance:

421 the old Gothic powers of electing the principal subordinate magistrates, the sheriffs,

and conservators of the peace, were taken from the people in the reigns of Edward II and Edward III; and justices of the peace were established instead of the latter. In the reign also of Edward the third the parliament is supposed most probably to have assumed its present form; by a separation of the commons from the lords. The statute for defining and ascertaining treasons was one of the first productions of this new-modelled assembly; and the translation of the law proceedings from French into Latin another. Much also was done, under the auspices of this magnanimous prince, for establishing our domestic manufactures; by prohibiting the exportation of English wool, and the importation or wear of foreign cloth or furs; and by encour-aging clothworkers from other countries to settle here. Nor was the legislature inat-tentive to many other branches of commerce, or indeed to commerce in general: for, in particular, it enlarged the credit of the merchant, by introducing the statute staple; whereby he might the more readily pledge his lands for the security of his mercantile debts. And, as personal property now grew, by the extension of trade, to be much more considerable than formerly, care was taken, in case of intestacies, to appoint administrators particularly nominated by the law; to distribute that personal prop-erty among the creditors and kindred of the deceased, which before had been usually applied, by the officers of the ordinary, to uses then denominated pious. The statutes also of praemunire, for effectually depressing the civil power of the pope, were the work of this and the subsequent reign. And the establishment of a laborious paro-chial clergy, by the endowment of vicarages out of the overgrown possessions of the monasteries, added lustre to the close of the fourteenth century: though the seeds of the general reformation, which were thereby first sown in the kingdom, were almost overwhelmed by the spirit of persecution, introduced into the laws of the land by the influence of the regular clergy.

From this time to that of Henry the seventh, the civil wars and disputed titles to

422 the crown gave no leisure for farther juridical improvement: “nam silent leges inter

arma [for the laws are silent during war].”—And yet it is to these very disputes that we owe the happy loss of all the dominions of the crown on the continent of France; which turned the minds of our subsequent princes entirely to domestic concerns. To these likewise we owe the method of barring entails by the fiction of common recoveries; invented originally by the clergy, to evade the statutes of mortmain, but introduced under Edward the fourth, for the purpose of unfettering estates, and making them more liable to forfeiture: while, on the other hand, the owners endeav-oured to protect them by the universal establishment of uses, another of the clerical inventions.

In the reign of king Henry the seventh, his ministers (not to say the king him-

self) were more industrious in hunting out prosecutions upon old and forgotten penal laws, in order to extort money from the subject, than in framing any new beneficial regulations. For the distinguishing character of this reign was that of amassing 〈9〉 treasure into the king’s coffers, by every means that could be devised: and almost every alteration in the laws, however salutary or otherwise in their





chapter 33 277


future consequences, had this and this only for their great and immediate object. To this end the court of star-chamber was new-modelled, and armed with powers, the most dangerous and unconstitutional, over the persons and properties of the subject. Informations were allowed to be received, in lieu of indictments, at the assises and sessions of the peace, in order to multiply fines and pecuniary penalties. The statute of fines for landed property was craftily and covertly contrived, to facilitate the destruction of entails, and make the owners of real estates more capable to forfeit as well as to aliene. The benefit of clergy (which so often intervened to stop attainders and save the inheritance) was now allowed only once to lay offenders, who only could have inheritances to lose. A writ of capias was permitted in all actions on the case, and the defendant might in consequence be outlawed; because upon such out-lawry his goods became the property of the crown. In short, there is hardly a statute in this reign, introductive of a new law or modifying the old, but what either directly 423

or obliquely tended to the emolument of the exchequer.

IV. This brings us to the fourth period of our legal history, viz. the reformation of

religion, under Henry the eighth, and his children: which opens an intirely new scene in ecclesiastical matters; the usurped power of the pope being now for ever routed and destroyed, all his connexions with this island cut off, the crown restored to its supremacy over spiritual men and causes, and the patronage of bishopricks being once more indisputably vested in the king. And, had the spiritual courts been at this time re-united to the civil, we should have seen the old Saxon constitution with regard to ecclesiastical polity completely restored.

With regard also to our civil polity, the statute of wills,11 and the statute of uses,12

(both passed in the reign of this prince) made a great alteration as to property: the former, by allowing the devise of real estates by will, which before was in general for-bidden; the latter, by endeavouring to destroy the intricate nicety of uses, though the narrowness and pedantry of the courts of common law prevented this statute from having its full beneficial effect. And thence the courts of equity assumed a jurisdiction, dictated by common justice and common sense: which, however arbitrarily exercised or productive of jealousies in its infancy, has at length been matured into a most elegant system of rational jurisprudence; the principles of which (notwithstanding they may differ in forms) are now equally adopted by the courts of both law and equity. From the statute of uses, and another statute of the same antiquity, (which protected estates for years from being destroyed by the reversioner) a remarkable alteration took place in the mode of conveyancing: the antient assurance by feoffment and livery upon the land being now very seldom practiced, since the more easy and more private invention of transferring property, by secret conveyances to uses; and long terms of years being now continually created in mortgages and family settlements, which may be moulded to a 424 thousand useful purposes by the ingenuity of an able artist.

The farther attacks in this reign upon the immunity of estates-tail, which reduced

them to little more than the conditional fees at the common law, before the passing

11 32 Hen. VIII. c. 1.

278 of public wrongs

of the statute de donis; the establishment of recognizances in the nature of a statute- staple,13 for facilitating the raising of money upon landed security; and the introduc-tion of the bankrupt laws, as well for the punishment of the fraudulent, as the relief of the unfortunate, trader; all these were capital alterations of our legal polity, and highly convenient to that character, which the English began now to re-assume, of a great commercial people. The incorporation of Wales with England, and the more uniform administration of justice, by destroying some counties palatine, and abridg-ing the unreasonable privileges of such as remained, added dignity and strength to the monarchy: and, together with the numerous improvements before observed upon, and the redress of many grievances and oppressions which had been introduced by his father, will ever make the administration of Henry VIII a very distinguished aera in the annals of juridical history.

It must be however remarked, that (particularly in his later years) the royal preroga-

tive was then strained to a very tyrannical and oppressive height; and, what was the worst circumstance, its encroachments were established by law, under the sanction of those pusillanimous parliaments, one of which to its eternal disgrace passed a statute, whereby it was enacted that the king’s proclamations should have the force of acts of parliament;14 and others concurred in the creation of that amazing heap of wild and new-fangled treasons, which were slightly touched upon in a former chapterl. Happily for the nation, this arbitrary reign was succeeded by the minority of an amiable prince; during the short sunshine of which, great part of these extravagant laws were repealed.

425 And, to do justice to the shorter reign of queen Mary, many salutary and popular laws,

in civil matters, were made under her administration; perhaps the better to reconcile the people to the bloody measures which she was induced to pursue, for the re-establishment of religious slavery: the well concerted schemes for effecting which, were (through the providence of God) defeated by the seasonable accession of queen Elizabeth.

The religious liberties of the nation being, by that happy event, established (we

trust) on an eternal basis; (though obliged in their infancy to be guarded, against papists and other nonconformists, by laws of too sanguinary a nature) the forest laws having fallen into disuse; and the administration of 〈10〉 civil right in the courts of justice being carried on in a regular course, according to the wise institutions of king Edward the first, without any material innovations; all the principal grievances intro-duced by the Norman conquest seem to have been gradually shaken off, and our Saxon constitution restored, with considerable improvements: except only in the continuation of the military tenures, and a few other points, which still armed the crown with a very oppressive and dangerous prerogative. It is also to be remarked, that the spirit of inriching the clergy and endowing religious houses had (through the former abuse of it) gone over to such a contrary extreme, and the princes of the house of Tudor and their favourites had fallen with such avidity upon the spoils of

l See pag. 86 [IV. 57].

13 Simplified provisions for validating and recovering debts operated in certain towns with ‘staples’ (monopoly

trading rights in wool and other goods); Blackstone refers to a national extension of this system from 1532.





chapter 33 279


the church, that a decent and honourable maintenance was wanting to many of the bishops and clergy. This produced the restraining statutes, to prevent the alienations of lands and tithes belonging to the church and universities.15 The number of indi-gent persons being also greatly increased, by withdrawing the alms of the monaster-ies, a plan was formed in the reign of queen Elizabeth, more humane and beneficial than even feeding and cloathing of millions; by affording them the means (with proper industry) to feed and to cloath themselves.16 And, the farther any subsequent plans for maintaining the poor have departed from this institution, the more imprac-ticable and even pernicious their visionary attempts have proved.

However, considering the reign of queen Elizabeth in a great and political view, 426

we have no reason to regret many subsequent alterations in the English constitution. For, though in general she was a wise and excellent princess, and loved her people; though in her time trade flourished, riches increased, the laws were duly adminis-tred, the nation was respected abroad, and the people happy at home; yet, the encrease of the power of the star-chamber, and the erection of the high commission court in matters ecclesiastical, were the work of her reign. She also kept her parliaments at a very awful distance: and in many particulars she, at times, would carry the preroga-tive as high as her most arbitrary predecessors. It is true, she very seldom exerted this prerogative, so as to oppress individuals; but still she had it to exert: and therefore the felicity of her reign depended more on her want of opportunity and inclination, than want of power, to play the tyrant. This is a high encomium on her merit; but at the same time it is sufficient to shew, that these were not those golden days of genuine liberty, that we formerly were taught to believe: for, surely, the true liberty of the subject consists not so much in the gracious behaviour, as in the limited power, of the sovereign.

The great revolutions that had happened, in manners and in property, had paved

the way, by imperceptible yet sure degrees, for as great a revolution in government: yet, while that revolution was effecting, the crown became more arbitrary than ever, by the progress of those very means which afterwards reduced its power. It is obvious to every observer, that, till the close of the Lancastrian civil wars, the property and the power of the nation were chiefly divided between the king, the nobility, and the clergy. The commons were generally in a state of great ignorance; their personal wealth, before the extension of trade, was comparatively small; and the nature of their landed property was such, as kept them in continual dependence upon their feodal lord, being usually some powerful baron, some opulent abbey, or sometimes 427 the king himself. Though a notion of general liberty had strongly pervaded and ani-mated the whole constitution, yet the particular liberty, the natural equality, and per-sonal independence of individuals, were little regarded or thought of; nay even to assert them was treated as the height of sedition and rebellion. Our ancestors heard,

15 13 Eliz. I. cc. 10, 20.

16 The Poor Law Act of 1601 (43 Eliz. I. c. 2.) established a national welfare system for England and Wales,

requiring each parish to levy a property rate to support their own aged, disabled, ill, and unemployed; see further 280 of public wrongs

with detestation and horror, those sentiments rudely delivered, and pushed to most absurd extremes, by the violence of a Cade and a Tyler; which have since been applauded, with a zeal almost rising to idolatry, when softened and recommended by the eloquence, the moderation, and the arguments of a Sidney, a Locke, and a Milton.

But when learning, by the invention of printing and the progress of religious ref-

ormation, began to be universally disseminated; when trade and navigation were suddenly carried to an amazing extent, by the use of the compass and the consequent discovery of the Indies; the minds of men, thus enlightened by science and enlarged by observation and travel, began to entertain a more just opinion of the dignity and rights of mankind. An inundation of wealth flowed in upon the merchants, and mid-dling rank; while the two great estates of the kingdom, which formerly had ballanced the prerogative, the nobility and clergy, were greatly impoverished and weakened. The popish clergy, detected in their frauds and abuses, exposed to the resentment of the populace, and stripped of their lands and revenues, stood trembling for their very existence. The nobles, enervated by the refinements of luxury, (which knowlege, foreign travel, and the progress of the politer arts, are too apt to introduce with them-selves) and fired with disdain at being rivalled in magnificence by the opulent citi-zens, fell into enormous expenses: to gratify which they were permitted, by the policy of the times, to dissipate their overgrown estates, and alienate their antient patri-monies. This gradually reduced their power and their influence within a very mod-erate bound: while the king, by the spoil of the monasteries and the great increase of

428 the customs, grew rich, independent, and haughty: and the commons were not yet

sensible of the strength they had acquired, nor urged to examine its extent by new burthens or oppressive taxations, during the sudden opulence of the exchequer. Intent upon acquiring new riches, and happy in being freed from the insolence and tyranny of the orders more immediately above them, they never dreamt of opposing the prerogative, to which they had been so little accustomed; much less of taking the lead in opposition, to which by their weight and their property they were now enti-tled. The latter years of Henry the eighth were therefore the times of the greatest despotism, that have been known in this island since the death of William the Norman: the prerogative, as it then stood by common law, (and much more when extended by act of parliament) being too large to be endured in a land of liberty.

Queen Elizabeth, and the intermediate princes of the Tudor line, had almost the

same legal powers, and sometimes exerted them as roughly, as their father king Henry the eighth. But the critical situation of that princess with regard to her legiti-macy, her religion, her enmity with Spain, and her jealousy of the queen of Scots, occasioned greater caution in her conduct. She probably, or her able advisers, had penetration enough to discern how the power of the kingdom had gradually shifted its chanel, and wisdom enough not to provoke the commons to discover and feel their strength. She therefore drew a veil over the odious part of prerogative; which was never wantonly thrown aside, but only to answer some important purpose: and, though the royal treasury no longer overflowed with the wealth of the clergy, which had been all granted out, and had contributed to enrich the people, she asked for supplies with such moderation, and managed them with so much oeconomy, that the





chapter 33 281


commons were happy in obliging her. Such, in short, were her circumstances, her necessities, her wisdom, and her good disposition, that never did a prince so long and so intirely, for the space of half a century together, reign in the affections of the people.

On the accession of king James I, no new degree of royal power was added to, or 429

exercised by, him; but such a sceptre was too weighty to be wielded by such a hand. The unreasonable and imprudent exertion of what was then deemed to be preroga-tive, upon trivial and unworthy occasions, and the claim of a more absolute power inherent in the kingly office than had ever been carried into practice, soon awakened the sleeping lion. The people heard with astonishment doctrines preached from the throne and the pulpit, subversive of liberty and property, and all the natural rights of humanity. They examined into the divinity of this claim, and found it weakly and fallaciously supported: and common reason assured them, that, if it were of human origin, no constitution could establish it without power of revocation, no precedent could sanctify, no length of time could confirm it. The leaders felt the pulse of the nation, and found they had ability as well as inclination to resist it: and accordingly resisted and opposed it, whenever the pusillanimous temper of the reigning mon-arch had courage to put it to the trial; and they gained some little victories in the cases of concealments, monopolies, and the dispensing power.17 In the mean time very little was done for the improvement of private justice, except the abolition of sanctuaries, and the extension of the bankrupt laws, the limitation of suits and actions, and the regulating of informations upon penal statutes. For I cannot class the laws against witchcraft and conjuration under the head of improvements; nor did the dispute between lord Ellesmere and sir Edward Coke, concerning the powers of the court of chancery, tend much to the advancement of justice.

Indeed when Charles the first succeeded to the crown of his father, and attempted

to revive some enormities, which had been dormant in the reign of king James, the loans and benevolences extorted from the subject, the arbitrary imprisonments for refusal, the exertion of martial law in time of peace, and other domestic grievances, clouded the morning of that misguided prince’s reign; which, though the noon of it 430 began a little to brighten, at last went down in blood, and left the whole kingdom in darkness. It must be acknowleged that, by the petition of right, enacted to abolish these encroachments, the English constitution received great alteration and improve-ment. But there still remained the latent power of the forest laws, which the crown most unseasonably revived. The legal jurisdiction of the star-chamber and high com-mission courts was also extremely great; though their usurped authority was still greater. And, if we add to these the disuse of parliaments, the ill-timed zeal and des-potic proceedings of the ecclesiastical governors in matters of mere indifference, together with the arbitrary levies of tonnage and poundage, ship money, and other

17 James I’s last parliament passed both ‘An Act concerning Monopolies and Dispensations with Penal Laws’ (21

Jac. I. c. 3) and ‘An Act for the General Quiet of the Subjects against all Pretences of Concealment’ (21 Jac. I. c. 2); the former restricted the Crown’s powers to grant patents of monopoly or exemptions from sanctions provided under 282 of public wrongs

projects, we may see grounds most amply sufficient for seeking redress in a legal constitutional way. This redress, when sought, was also constitutionally given: for all these oppressions were actually abolished by the king in parliament, before the rebel-lion broke out, by the several statutes for triennial parliaments, for abolishing the star-chamber and high commission courts, for ascertaining the extent of forests and forest-laws, for renouncing ship-money and other exactions, and for giving up the prerogative of knighting the king’s tenants in capite [in chief] in consequence of their feodal tenures: though it must be acknowleged that these concessions were not made with so good a grace, as to conciliate the confidence of the people. Unfortunately, either by his own mismanagement, or by the arts of his enemies, the king had lost the reputation of sincerity; which is the greatest unhappiness that can befal a prince. Though he formerly had strained his prerogative, not only beyond what the genius of the present times would bear, but also beyond 〈11〉 the example of former ages, he had now consented to reduce it to a lower ebb than was consistent with monarchical government. A conduct so opposite to his temper and principles, joined with some rash actions and unguarded expressions, made the people suspect that this conde-scension was merely temporary. Flushed therefore with the success they had gained,

431 fired with resentment for past oppressions, and dreading the consequences if the

king should regain his power, the popular leaders (who in all ages have called them-selves the people) began to grow insolent and ungovernable: their insolence soon rendered them desperate: 〈12〉 and, joining with a set of military hypocrites and enthusiasts, they overturned the church and monarchy, and proceeded with deliber-ate solemnity to the trial and murder of their sovereign.

I pass by the crude and abortive schemes for amending the laws in the times of

confusion which followed; the most promising and sensible whereof (such as the establishment of new trials, the abolition of feodal tenures, the act of navigation, and some others) were adopted in the

V. Fifth period, which I am next to mention, viz. after the restoration of king

Charles II. Immediately upon which, the principal remaining grievance, the doctrine and consequences of military tenures, were taken away and abolished, except in the instance of corruption of inheritable blood, upon attainder of treason and felony. And though the monarch, in whose person the royal government was restored, and with it our antient constitution, deserves no commendation from posterity, yet in his reign, (wicked, sanguinary, and turbulent as it was) the concurrence of happy cir-cumstances was such, that from thence we may date not only the re-establishment of our church and monarchy, but also the complete restitution of English liberty, for the first time, since its total abolition at the conquest. For therein not only these slavish tenures, the badge of foreign dominion, with all their oppressive appendages, were removed from incumbering the estates of the subject; but also an additional security of his person from imprisonment was obtained, by that great bulwark of our consti-tution, the habeas corpus act.18 These two statutes, with regard to our property and





chapter 33 283


persons, form a second magna carta, as beneficial and effectual as that of Runing-Mead.19 That only pruned the luxuriances of the feodal system; but the statute of Charles the second extirpated all its slaveries: except perhaps in copyhold tenure; 432 and there also they are now in great measure enervated by gradual custom, and the interposition of our courts of justice. Magna carta only, in general terms, declared, that no man shall be imprisoned contrary to law: the habeas corpus act points him out effectual means, as well to release himself, though committed even by the king in council, as to punish all those who shall thus unconstitutionally misuse him.

To these I may add the abolition of the prerogatives of purveyance and pre-emption;

the statute for holding triennial parliaments; the test and corporation acts, which secure both our civil and religious liberties; the abolition of the writ de haeretico com-burendo [for burning heretics]; the statute of frauds and perjuries, a great and neces-sary security to private property; the statute for distribution of intestates’ estates; and that of amendments and jeofails, which cut off those superfluous niceties which so long had disgraced our courts; together with many other wholsome acts, that were passed in this reign, for the benefit of navigation and the improvement of foreign commerce: and the whole, when we likewise consider the freedom from taxes and armies which the subject then enjoyed, will be sufficient to demonstrate this truth, “that the constitution of England had arrived to its full vigour, and the true balance between liberty and pre-rogative was happily established by law, in the reign of king Charles the second.”20

It is far from my intention to palliate or defend many very iniquitous proceedings,

contrary to all law, in that reign, through the artifice of wicked politicians, both in and out of employment. What seems incontestable is this; that by the lawm, as it then stood, (notwithstanding some invidious, nay dangerous, branches of the prerogative have since been lopped off, and the rest more clearly defined) the people had as large 433

a portion of real liberty, as is consistent with a state of society; and sufficient power, residing in their own hands, to assert and preserve that liberty, if invaded by the royal prerogative. For which I need but appeal to the memorable catastrophe of the next reign. For when king Charles’s deluded brother attempted to enslave the nation, he found it was beyond his power: the people both could, and did, resist him; and, in consequence of such resistance, obliged him to quit his enterprize and his throne together. Which introduces us to the last period of our legal history; viz.

VI. From the revolution in 1688 to the present time. In this period many laws

have passed; as the bill of rights, the toleration-act, the act of settlement with its con-ditions, the act for uniting England with Scotland, and some others: which have asserted our liberties in more clear and emphatical terms; have regulated the succes-sion of the crown by parliament, as the exigences of religious and civil freedom required; have confirmed, and exemplified, the doctrine of resistance, when the

m The point of time, at which I would chuse to fix this theoretical perfection of our public law, is the year 1679;

after the habeas corpus act was passed, and that for licensing the press had expired: though the years which immediately followed it were times of great practical oppression.

19 i.e. Runnymede, site of the sealing of Magna Carta in 1215.

284 of public wrongs

executive magistrate endeavours to subvert the constitution; have maintained the superiority of the laws above the king, by pronouncing his dispensing power to be illegal; have indulged tender consciences with every religious liberty, consistent with the safety of the state; have established triennial, since turned into septennial, elec-tions of members to serve in parliament; have excluded certain officers from the house of commons; have restrained the king’s pardon from obstructing parliamen-tary impeachments; have imparted to all the lords an equal right of trying their fel-low peers; have regulated trials for high treason; have afforded our posterity a hope that corruption of blood may one day be abolished and forgotten; have (by the desire of his present majesty) set bounds to the civil list, and placed the administration of that revenue in hands that are accountable to parliament; and have (by the like desire) made the judges completely independent of the king, his ministers, and his succes-

434 sors. Yet, though these provisions have, in appearance and nominally, reduced the

strength of the executive power to a much lower ebb than in the preceding period; if on the other hand we throw into the opposite scale (what perhaps the immoderate reduction of the antient prerogative may have rendered in some degree necessary) the vast acquisition of force, arising from the riot-act, and the annual expedience of a standing army; and the vast acquisition of personal attachment, arising from the mag-nitude of the national debt, and the manner of levying those yearly millions that are appropriated to pay the interest; we shall find that the crown has, gradually and imper-ceptibly, gained almost as much in influence, as it has apparently lost in prerogative.

The chief alterations of moment, (for the time would fail me to descend to minu-

tiae) in the administration of private justice during this period, are the solemn rec-ognition of the law of nations with respect to the rights of embassadors: the cutting off, by the statute for the amendment of the law, a vast number of excrescences, that in process of time had sprung out of the practical part of it: the protection of corpo-rate rights by the improvements in writs of mandamus, and informations in nature of quo warranto: the regulations of trials by jury, and the admitting witnesses for prisoners upon oath: the farther restraints upon alienation of lands in 〈13〉 mortmain: the extension of the benefit of clergy, by abolishing the pedantic criterion of reading: the counterballance to this mercy, by the vast encrease of capital punishment: the new and effectual methods for the speedy recovery of rents: the improvements which have been made in ejectments for the trying of titles: the introduction and establish-ment of paper credit, by indorsments upon bills and notes, which have 〈14〉 shewn the possibility (so long doubted) of assigning a chose in action: the translation of all legal proceedings into the English language: the erection of courts of conscience for recovering small debts, and (which is much the better plan) the reformation of county courts: the great system of marine jurisprudence, of which the foundations have been laid, by clearly developing the principles on which policies of insurance

435 are founded, and by happily applying those principles to particular cases: and, lastly,

the liberality of sentiment, which (though late) has now taken possession of our courts of common law, and induced them to adopt (where facts can be clearly ascer-tained) the same principles of redress as have prevailed in our courts of equity, from the time that lord Nottingham presided there; and this, not only where specially





chapter 33 285


impowered by particular statutes, (as in the case of bonds, mortgages, and set-offs) but by extending the remedial influence of the equitable writ of trespass on the case, according to its primitive institution by king Edward the first, to almost every instance of injustice not remedied by any other process. And these, I think, are all the material alterations, that have happened with respect to private justice, in the course of the present century.

Thus therefore, for the amusement and instruction of the student, I have endeav-

oured to delineate some rude outlines of a plan for the history of our laws and liber-ties; from their first rise, and gradual progress, among our British and Saxon ancestors, till their total eclipse at the Norman conquest; from which they have grad-ually emerged, and risen to the perfection they now enjoy, at different periods of time. We have seen, in the course of our enquiries, in this and the former volumes, that the fundamental maxims and rules of the law, which regard the rights of per-sons, and the rights of things, the private injuries that may be offered to both, and the crimes which affect the public, have been and are every day improving, and are now fraught with the accumulated wisdom of ages: that the forms of administring justice came to perfection under Edward the first; and have not been much varied, nor always for the better, since: that our religious liberties were fully established at the reformation: but that the recovery of our civil and political liberties was a work of longer time; they not being throughly and completely regained, till after the restora-tion of king Charles, nor fully and explicitly acknowleged and defined, till the aera of the happy revolution. Of a constitution, so wisely contrived, so strongly raised, and 436

so highly finished, it is hard to speak with that praise, which is justly and severely its due:—the thorough and attentive contemplation of it will furnish its best panegyric. It hath been the endeavour of these commentaries, however the execution may have succeeded, to examine its solid foundations, to mark out its extensive plan, to explain the use and distribution of its parts, and from the harmonious concurrence of those several parts to demonstrate the elegant proportion of the whole. We have taken occasion to admire at every turn the noble monuments of antient simplicity, and the more curious refinements of modern art. Nor have its faults been concealed from view; for faults it has, lest we should be tempted to think it of more than human structure: defects, chiefly arising from the decays of time, or the rage of unskilful improvements in later ages. To sustain, to repair, to beautify this noble pile, is a charge intrusted principally to the nobility, and such gentlemen of the kingdom, as are delegated by their country to parliament. The protection of the liberty of Britain is a duty which they owe to themselves, who enjoy it; to their ancestors, who transmitted it down; and to their posterity, who will claim at their hands this, the best birthright, and noblest inheritance of mankind.



The End.

Appendix. i



§. 1. Record of an Indictment and Conviction of

Murder, at the Assises.

Warwickshire, to wit} Be it remembered, that at the general session of the lord Session of oyer and terminer . the king of oyer and terminer holden at Warwick, in and for the said county of Warwick, on Friday the twelfth day of March in the second year of the reign of the lord George the third, now king of Great Britain, before sir Michael Foster, knight, one of the justices of the said lord the king assigned to hold pleas before the king himself, sir Edward Clive, knight, one of the justices of the said lord the king of his court of common bench, and others their fellows, justices of the said lord the king, assigned by letters patent of Commission of. the said lord the king, under his great seal of Great Britain, made to them the aforesaid justices and others, and any two or more of them, whereof one of them the said sir Michael Foster and sir Edward Clive, the said lord the king would have to be one, to enquire (by the oath of good and lawful men of the county aforesaid, by whom the truth of the matter might be the better known, and by other ways, methods, and means, whereby they could or might the better know, as well within liberties as without) more fully the truth of all treasons, misprisions of treasons, insurrections, rebel-lions, counterfeitings, clippings, washings, false coinings, and other falsi-ties of the monies of Great Britain, and of other kingdoms or dominions whatsoever; and of all murders, felonies, manslaughters, killings, burglaries, rapes of women, unlawful meetings and conventicles, unlawful uttering of words, unlawful assemblies, misprisions, confederacies, false allegations, trespasses, riots, routs, retentions, escapes, contempts, falsities, negligences, concealments, maintenances, oppressions, champarties, deceits, and all other misdeeds, offences, and injuries whatsoever, and also the accessories ii

of the same, within the county aforesaid, as well within liberties as without, by whomsoever and howsoever done, had, perpetrated, and committed, and by whom, to whom, when, how, and in what manner; and of all other art-icles and circumstances in the said letters patent of the said lord the king specified, the premises and every or any of them howsoever concerning; oyer and terminer, and for this time to hear and determine the said treasons and other the premises, according to the law and custom of the realm of England; and also and of the peace. keepers of the peace, and justices of the said lord the king, assigned to hear and determine divers felonies, trespasses, and other misdemesnors commit-ted within the county aforesaid: by the oath of sir James Thompson, baronet, Grand jury. Charles Roper, Henry Dawes, Peter Wilson, Samuel Rogers, John Dawson, James Philips, John Mayo, Richard Savage, William Bell, James Morris,

288 of public wrongs

Laurence Hall, and Charles Carter, esquires, good and lawful men of the county aforesaid, then and there impanelled, sworn, and charged to enquire for the said lord the king and for the body of the said county, it is presented,

Indictment. that Peter Hunt, late of the parish of Lighthorne in the said county, gentle-

man, not having the fear of God before his eyes, but being moved and seduced by the instigation of the devil, on the fifth day of March in the said second year of the reign of the said lord the king, at the parish of Lighthorne aforesaid, with force and arms, in and upon one Samuel Collins, in the peace of God and of the said lord the king then and there being, feloniously, wil-fully, and of his malice aforethought, did make an assault; and that the said Peter Hunt with a certain drawn sword, made of iron and steel, of the value of five shillings, which he the said Peter Hunt in his right hand then and there had and held, him the said Samuel Collins in and upon the left side of the belly of him the said Samuel Collins then and there feloniously, wilfully, and of his malice aforethought, did strike, thrust, stab, and penetrate; giving unto the said Samuel Collins, then and there, with the sword drawn as afore-said, in and upon the left side of the belly of him the said Samuel Collins, one mortal wound of the breadth of one inch, and the depth of nine inches; of which said mortal wound he the said Samuel Collins, at the parish of Lighthorne aforesaid in the said county of Warwick, from the said fifth day of March in the year aforesaid until the seventh day of the same month in the same year, did languish, and languishing did live; on which said seventh day of March, in the year aforesaid, the said Samuel Collins, at the parish of Lighthorne aforesaid in the county aforesaid, of the said mortal wound did die: and so the jurors aforesaid, upon their oath aforesaid, do say, that the said Peter Hunt him the said Samuel Collins, in manner and form aforesaid, feloniously, wilfully, and of his malice aforethought, did kill and murder,

iii against the peace of the said lord the now king, his crown, and dignity.

Capias. Whereupon the sheriff of the county aforesaid is commanded, that he omit

not for any liberty in his bailiwick, but that he take the said Peter Hunt, if he may be found in his bailiwick, and him safely keep, to answer to the felony

Session of and murder whereof he stands indicted. Which said indictment the said

gaol-delivery. justices of the lord the king abovenamed, afterwards, to wit, at the delivery

of the gaol of the said lord the king, holden at Warwick in and for the county aforesaid, on Friday the sixth day of August, in the said second year of the reign of the said lord the king, before the right honourable William lord Mansfield, chief justice of the said lord the king assigned to hold pleas before the king himself, sir Sidney Stafford Smythe, knight, one of the barons of the said lord the king, and others their fellows, justices of the said lord the king, assigned to deliver his said gaol of the county aforesaid of the prisoners therein being, by their proper hands do deliver here in court of record in

Arraignment. form of law to be determined. And afterwards, to wit, at the same delivery of

the gaol of the said lord the king of his county aforesaid, on the said Friday

appendix 289

the sixth day of August, in the said second year of the reign of the said lord the king, before the said justices of the lord the king last abovenamed and others their fellows aforesaid, here cometh the said Peter Hunt, under the custody of William Browne, esquire, sheriff of the county aforesaid, (in whose custody in the gaol of the county aforesaid, for the cause aforesaid, he had been before committed) being brought to the bar here in his proper person by the said sheriff, to whom he is here also committed: And forth-with being demanded concerning the premises in the said indictment above specified and charged upon him, how he will acquit himself thereof, he saith, that he is not guilty thereof; and thereof for good and evil he puts himself Plea; not guilty. upon the country: And John Blencowe, esquire, clerk of the assises for the Issue. county aforesaid, who prosecutes for the said lord the king in this behalf, doth the like: therefore let a jury thereupon here immediately come before Venire. the said justices of the lord the king last abovementioned, and others their fellows aforesaid, of free and lawful men of the neighbourhood of the said parish of Lighthorne in the county of Warwick aforesaid, by whom the truth of the matter may be the better known, and who are not of kin to the said Peter Hunt, to recognize upon their oath, whether the said Peter Hunt be guilty of the felony and murder in the indictment aforesaid above speci-fied, or not guilty: because as well the said John Blencowe, who prosecutes for the said lord the king in this behalf, as the said Peter Hunt, have put themselves upon the said jury. And the jurors of the said jury by the said sheriff for this purpose impanelled and returned, to wit, David Williams, John Smith, Thomas Horne, Charles Nokes, Richard May, Walter Duke, Matthew Lyon, James White, William Bates, Oliver Green, Bartholomew Nash, and Henry Long, being called, come; who being elected, tried, and iv

sworn, to speak the truth of and concerning the premises, upon their oath say, that the said Peter Hunt is guilty of the felony and murder aforesaid, on Verdict; guilty him above charged in the form aforesaid, as by the indictment aforesaid is of murder. above supposed against him; and that the said Peter Hunt at the time of committing the said felony and murder, or at any time since to this time, had not nor hath any goods or chattels, lands or tenements, in the said county of Warwick, or elsewhere, to the knowlege of the said jurors. And upon this it is forthwith demanded of the said Peter Hunt, if he hath or knoweth any thing to say, wherefore the said justices here ought not upon the premises and verdict aforesaid to proceed to judgment and execution against him: who nothing farther saith, unless as he before had said. Whereupon, all and singular the premises being seen, and by the said justices here fully understood, Judgment of it is considered by the court here, that the said Peter Hunt be taken to the gaol of death, the said lord the king of the said county of Warwick from whence he came, and from thence to the place of execution on Monday now next ensuing, being the ninth day of this instant August, and there be hanged by the neck until he be dead; and that afterwards his body be dissected and anatomized. and dissection.

290 of public wrongs

§. 2. Conviction of Manslaughter.

Verdict;—not guilty —— upon their oath say, that the said Peter Hunt is not guilty of the murder

of murder; guilty aforesaid, above charged upon him; but that the said Peter Hunt is guilty of of manslaughter. the felonious slaying of the aforesaid Samuel Collins; and that he had not

nor hath any goods or chattels, lands or tenements, at the time of the felony and manslaughter aforesaid, or ever afterwards to this time, to the knowlege of the said jurors. And immediately it is demanded of the said Peter Hunt, if he hath or knoweth any thing to say, wherefore the said justices here ought not upon the premises and verdict aforesaid to proceed to judgment and

Clergy prayed. execution against him: who saith that he is a clerk, and prayeth the benefit of

clergy to be allowed him in this behalf. Whereupon, all and singular the prem-

Judgment to ises being seen, and by the said justices here fully understood, it is considered be burned in by the court here, that the said Peter Hunt be burned in his left hand, and

the hand, and delivered. delivered. And immediately he is burned in his left hand, and is delivered,

according to the form of the statute.



v §. 3. Entry of a Trial instanter in the Court of

King’s Bench, upon a collateral Issue; and Rule of Court for

Execution thereon.

Michaelmas term, in the sixth year of the reign of

king George the third.

Kent: The King against Thomas Rogers.} The prisoner at the bar being

Habeas corpus. brought into this court in custody of the sheriff of the county of Sussex, by

virtue of his majesty’s writ of habeas corpus, it is ordered that the said writ and

Record of the return thereto be filed. And it appearing by a certain record of attainder,

attainder read; which hath been removed into this court by his majesty’s writ of certiorari,

for felony that the prisoner at the bar stands attainted, by the name of Thomas Rogers,

and robbery. of felony for a robbery on the highway, and the said prisoner at the bar

Prisoner asked having heard the record of the said attainder now read to him, is now

what he can asked by the court here, what he hath to say for himself, why the court here say in bar of execution: should not proceed to award execution against him upon the said attainder. Plea; not the He for plea saith, that he is not the same Thomas Rogers in the said record

same person. of attainder named, and against whom judgment was pronounced: and

this he is ready to verify and prove, &c. To which said plea the honourable

Replication, Charles Yorke, esquire, attorney general of our present sovereign lord the

king, who for our said lord the king in this behalf prosecuteth, being now present here in court, and having heard what the said prisoner at the bar

averring hath now alleged, for our said lord the king by way of reply saith, that the

that he is. said prisoner now here at the bar is the same Thomas Rogers in the said

record of attainder named, and against whom judgment was pronounced as

Issue joined. aforesaid: and this he prayeth may be enquired into by the country; and the appendix 291

said prisoner at the bar doth the like: Therefore let a jury in this behalf imme-Venire diately come here into court, by whom the truth of the matter will be the awarded better known, and who have no affinity to the said prisoner, to try upon instanter. their oath, whether the said prisoner at the bar be the same Thomas Rogers in the said record of attainder named, and against whom judgment was so pronounced as aforesaid, or not: because as well the said Charles Yorke, esquire, attorney general of our said lord the king, who for our said lord the king in this behalf prosecutes, as the said prisoner at the bar, have put them-selves in this behalf upon the said jury. And immediately thereupon the said Jury sworn. jury come here into court; and being elected, tried, and sworn to speak the truth touching and concerning the premises aforesaid, and having heard the said record read to them, do say upon their oath, that the said prisoner Verdict; that at the bar is the same Thomas Rogers in the said record of attainder named, he is the same. and against whom judgment was so pronounced as aforesaid, in manner vi

and form as the said attorney general hath by his said replication to the said plea of the said prisoner now here at the bar alleged. And hereupon the said attorney general on behalf of our said lord the king now prayeth, that the court here would proceed to award execution against him the said Thomas Rogers upon the said attainder. Whereupon, all and singular the premises Award of being now seen and fully understood by the court here, it is ordered execution. by the court here, that execution be done upon the said prisoner at the bar for the said felony in pursuance of the said judgment, according to due form of law: And it is lastly ordered, that he the said Thomas Rogers, the prisoner at the bar, be now committed to the custody of the sheriff of the county of Kent (now also present here in court) for the purpose aforesaid; and that the said sheriff of Kent do execution upon the said defendant the prisoner at the bar for the said felony, in pursuance of the said judgment, according to due form of law.

On the motion of Mr. Attorney General.

By the Court.



§. 4. Warrant of Execution on Judgment of

Death, at the general Gaol-delivery in London

and Middlesex.

London and Middlesex.} To the sheriffs of the city of London; and to the sheriff of the county of Middlesex: and to the keeper of his majesty’s gaol of Newgate.

Whereas at the session of gaol delivery of Newgate, for the city of London

and county of Middlesex, holden at Justice Hall in the Old Bailey, on the nineteenth day of October last, Patrick Mahony, Roger Jones, Charles King, and Mary Smith, received sentence of death for the respective offences in

292 of public wrongs

their several indictments mentioned; Now it is hereby ordered, that execution of the said sentence be made and done upon them the said Patrick Mahony and Roger Jones, on Wednesday the ninth day of this instant month of November at the usual place of execution. And it is his majesty’s command, that execution of the said sentence upon them the said Charles King and Mary Smith be respited, until his majesty’s pleasure touching them be farther known.

Given under my hand and seal this fourth day of November,

one thousand seven hundred and sixty eight.

James Eyre, Recorder. L. S.1

vii §. 5. Writ of Execution upon a judgment of

Murder, before the King in parliament.

GeorGe the second by the grace of God of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, king, defender of the faith, and so forth; to the sheriffs of London and sheriff of Middlesex, greeting. Whereas Lawrence earl Ferrers, viscount Tamworth, hath been indicted of felony and murder by him done and com-mitted, which said indictment hath been certified before us in our present parliament; and the said Lawrence earl Ferrers, viscount Tamworth, hath been thereupon arraigned, and upon such arraignment hath pleaded not guilty; and the said Lawrence earl Ferrers, viscount Tamworth, hath before us in our said parliament been tried, and in due form of law convicted thereof; and whereas judgment hath been given in our said parliament, that the said Lawrence earl Ferrers, viscount Tamworth, shall be hanged by the neck till he is dead, and that his body be dissected and anatomized, the exe-cution of which judgment yet remaineth to be done: We require, and by these presents strictly command you, that upon Monday the fifth day of May instant, between the hours of nine in the morning and one in the after-noon of the same day, him the said Lawrence earl Ferrers, viscount Tamworth, without the gate of our tower of London (to you then and there to be deliv-ered, as by another writ to the lieutenant of our tower of London or to his deputy directed, we have commanded) into your custody you then and there receive: and him in your custody so being, you forthwith convey to the accustomed place of execution at Tyburn: and that you do cause execution to be done upon the said Lawrence earl Ferrers, viscount Tamworth, in your custody so being, in all things according to the said judgment. And this you are by no means to omit, at your peril. Witness ourself at Westminster the second day of May, in the thirty third year of our reign.

Yorke and Yorke.

THE END.





Varia





Chapter 1


〈1〉 [ed. 9] divided into two sorts or species | divided into two species 〈2〉 [ed. 4] inconveniences | inconveniencies 〈3〉 [ed. 4] it is part | it is a part

〈4〉 [ed. 4] robbery | theft

〈5〉 [ed. 4] not even robbery itself, unless it be a robbery from one’s person: | not

even theft itself, unless it be accompanied with violence to one’s house or person:

〈6〉 [ed. 4] experience | persuasion

〈7〉 [ed. 8] security of the world; | security of mankind; 〈8〉 [ed. 8] evaded. With regard indeed to crimes that are incomplete, which con­

sist merely in the intention, and are not yet carried into act, as conspiracies and the like; the innocent has a chance to frustrate or avoid the villany, as the conspirator has also a chance to escape his punishment: and this may be one reason why the lex talionis is more proper to be inflicted, if at all, for crimes that consist in intention, than for such as are carried into act. It seems | evaded. It seems

〈9〉 [ed. 8] reasons | reason

〈10〉 [ed. 4] trifle, privately from one’s person | trifle of above the value of twelve­

pence, privately from one’s person

〈11〉 [ed. 4] Thus the statute | Thus also the statute 〈12〉 [ed. 4] the needy or hardened offender | the needy and hardened offender





Chapter 2


〈1〉 [ed. 9] utmost rigor of the law. | utmost rigor of the law [Footnote: Ff. 29. 5. 14.

50. 17. 111. 47. 2. 23.].

〈2〉 [ed. 8] warmer | warm

〈3〉 [ed. 5] by the coercion of her husband; or merely by his command, which the

law construes a coercion; or even in his company, his example being equiva­ lent to a command | by the coercion of her husband; or even in his company, which the law construes a coercion

〈4〉 [ed. 7] plea of | plea in

〈5〉 [ed. 5] command | coercion

〈6〉 [ed. 5] In the several cases before­mentioned, the incapacity of committing 294 varia: chapter 4

To these several cases, in which the incapacity of committing crimes arises from a deficiency of the will, we may add one more,





Chapter 3


〈1〉 [ed. 8] he who is | he is who is 〈2〉 [ed. 5] or giving it to another (who is ignorant of its poisonous quality) for

that purpose | or persuading another to drink it [Footnote: Kel. 52.] who is ignorant of its poisonous quality, or giving it to him for that purpose

〈3〉 [ed. 9] felonies of all kinds, there may be accessories: | felonies with or without

benefit of clergy, there may be accessories:

〈4〉 [ed. 9] the fact. But in petit larciny, or minute thefts, and all other crimes

under the degree of felony, there are no accessories; but all | the fact. So too in petit larceny, and in all crimes under the degree of felony, there are no acces­ sories either before or after the fact; but all

〈5〉 [ed. 8] that he dies | and dies 〈6〉 [ed. 9] are made accessories, and | are made accessories (where the principal

felony admits of accessories [Footnote: [Case of Abraham Evans] Foster 73.]) and

〈7〉 [ed. 5] transported for fourteen years. In France this is punished with death |

transported for fourteen years; and, in the case of receiving linen goods stolen from the bleaching grounds, are by statute 18 Geo. II c. 27 declared felons without benefit of clergy. In France such receivers are punished with death

〈8〉 [ed. 8] his brother | the brother 〈9〉 [ed. 5] in all cases; which is denied to the principals, and accessories before the

fact, in many cases; as in petit treason, | in all cases, except horse­stealing [Footnote: Stat. 31 Eliz. c. 12.] and stealing of linen from the bleaching grounds [Footnote: Stat. 18 Geo. II. c. 27.], which is denied to the principals, and acces­ sories before the fact, in many cases; as among others, in petit treason,

〈10〉 [ed. 4] or at least at the same time | or at least he must have been tried at the

same time

〈11〉 [ed. 8] as offend a priori. | as offend before the fact is committed.





Chapter 4


〈1〉 [ed. 8] and lying | and malevolent lying 〈2〉 [ed. 8] that are in themselves nothing criminal, but are made so by the posi­

tive constitutions of the state | that have in themselves nothing criminal, but are made unlawful by the positive constitutions of the state

varia: chapter 4 295

〈3〉 [ed. 4] Valennian | Valentinian 〈4〉 [ed. 5] A punishment too severe for any temporal laws to inflict: and yet | A

punishment too severe for any temporal laws to inflict upon any spiritual offence: and yet

〈5〉 [ed. 5] total infidelity. Wherefore all | total infidelity [Footnote: Utiles esse

opiniones has, quis negat, cum intelligat, quam multa firmentur jurejurando; quantae salutis sint foederum religiones; quam multos divini supplicii metus a scelere revocarit; quamque sancta sit societas civium inter ipsos, Diis immortal-ibus interpositis tum judicibus tum testibus? [Who will deny the utility of these opinions when he considers how many things are established by an oath; what benefits arise form the religious obligations of treaties; how many are deterred from crime by the fear of divine punishment; and how sanctified the inter­ course of men will become, when the gods are interposed as judges and wit­ nesses of their conduct?] Cic. De LL. ii. 7.]. Wherefore all

〈6〉 [ed. 4] endeavours to depreciate its efficacy, are highly deserving of human

punishment. But yet | endeavours to depreciate its efficacy, in those who have once professed it, are highly deserving of censure. But yet

〈7〉 [ed. 4] found necessary| thought necessary 〈8〉 [ed. 8] being defined, “sententia | being defined by sir Matthew Hale, “sententia 〈9〉 [ed. 4] or tares, (which was afterwards devised, in order to justify the burning

of them from Matth. xiii. 30) but from one Walter Lolhard, a German reformer. Mod. | or tares, (an etymology which was afterwards devised, in order to jus­ tify the burning of them: Matt. xiii. 30.) but from one Walter Lolhard, a German reformer. [ed. 9: a.d. 1315.] Mod.

〈 10〉 [ed. 4] Every thing is now as it should be: unless perhaps that heresy ought to

be more strictly defined | Every thing is now as it should be, with respect to the spiritual cognizance, and spiritual punishment of heresy: unless perhaps that the crime ought to be more strictly defined

〈 11〉 [ed. 4] but not to exterminate or destroy them. It has also been thought proper

for the civil magistrate again to interpose | yet not to harrass them with tem­ poral penalties, much less to exterminate or destroy them. The legislature hath indeed thought it proper, that the civil magistrate should again interpose

〈12〉 [ed. 7] positive, as by reviling | positive, by reviling 〈13〉 [ed. 4] judgment in opposition to public; arrogance, | judgment in virulent

and factious opposition to public authority; arrogance,

〈14〉 [ed. 4] and liberty of conscience | and undisturbed liberty of conscience 〈15〉 [ed. 5] he shall be imprisoned six months, and forfeit a year’s value of his

benefice; and for the second offence he shall be deprived. And if | he shall, if not beneficed, be imprisoned one year for the first offence, and for life for the second; and, if he be beneficed, he shall for the first offence be imprisoned six months, and forfeit a year’s value of his benefice; and for the second offence he 296 varia: chapter 4

shall be deprived, and suffer one year’s imprisonment; and for the third, shall in like manner be deprived and suffer imprisonment for life. And if

〈16〉 [ed. 5] book, he shall forfeit for the first offence | book, or shall forcibly pre­

vent the reading of it, or cause any other service to be used in its stead, he shall forfeit for the first offence

〈17〉 [ed. 4] time be thought too severe and intolerant; when we consider, that they

are levelled at an offence, to which men cannot now be prompted by any laud­ able motive; not even by a mistaken zeal for reformation: since from political reasons, sufficiently hinted at in a former volume, it would now be extremely unadvisable to make any alterations in the service of the church; unless it could be shewn that some manifest impiety or shocking absurdity would fol­ low from continuing it in its present form. And therefore the virulent decla­ mations of peevish or opinionated men on topics so often refuted, and of which the preface to the liturgy is itself a perpetual refutation, can be calcu­ lated for no other purpose, than merely to disturb the consciences, and poi­ son the minds of the people. 2. Non­conformity | time (in terrorem at least) be thought too severe and intolerant; when we consider, that they are levelled at the offence, not of thinking differently from the national church, but of rail-ing at that church and its ordinances, for not submitting its public judgment to the private opinion of others. For, though it is clear, that no restraint should be laid upon rational and dispassionate enquiries into the rectitude and pro­ priety of the established mode of worship; yet contumely and contempt are what no establishment can tolerate [Footnote: By an ordinance 23 Aug. 1645, which continued until the restoration, to preach, write, or print, any thing in derogation or depraving of the directory, for the then established presbyterian worship, subjected the offender upon indictment to a discretionary fine, not exceeding fifty pounds. (Scobell 98.)]. A rigid attachment to trifles, and an intemperate zeal for reforming them, are equally ridiculous and absurd: but the latter is at present the less excusable, because from political reasons, suffi­ ciently hinted at in a former volume, it would now be extremely unadvisable to make any alterations in the service of the church; unless it could be shewn that some manifest impiety or shocking absurdity would follow from contin­ uing it in its present form. 2. Non­conformity

[ed. 5] time (of the milder penalties at least) be thought too severe and intol­ erant; so far as they are levelled at the offence, not of thinking differently from the national church, but of railing at that church and obstructing its ordi­ nances, for not submitting its public judgment to the private opinion of oth­ ers. For, though it is clear, that no restraint should be laid upon rational and dispassionate discussions of the rectitude and propriety of the established mode of worship; yet contumely and contempt are what no establishment can tolerate. A rigid attachment to trifles, and an intemperate zeal for reforming them, are equally ridiculous and absurd: but the latter is at present the less excusable, because from political reasons, sufficiently hinted at in a former

varia: chapter 4 297

service of the church; unless by its own consent, or unless it can be shewn that some manifest impiety or shocking absurdity will follow from continuing the present forms. 2. Non­conformity

〈18〉 [ed. 4] from the divine worship | from divine worship 〈19〉 [ed. 4] schismatics in departing from the national church; with this differ­

ence, that the papists divide from us | schismatics in not communicating with the national church; with this difference, that the papists divided from it

〈20〉 [ed. 4] or, in other words, upon no reason at all. However the laws against the

former are much more severe than against the latter; the principles of the papists being deservedly looked upon to be subversive of the civil govern­ ment, but not those of the protestant dissenters. As to the papists, their tenets are undoubtedly calculated for the introduction of all slavery, both civil and religious: but it may with justice be questioned, whether the spirit, the doc­ trines, and the practice of the sectaries are better calculated to make men good subjects. One thing is obvious to observe, that these have once within the compass of the last century, effected the ruin of our church and monarchy; which the papists have attempted indeed, but have never yet been able to exe­ cute. Yet certainly | or, in other words, upon no reason at all. Yet certainly

〈21〉 [ed. 4] established church, by admitting none but its genuine members to offices

of trust and emolument: for, if every sect was to be indulged in a free commun­ ion of civil employments, the idea of a national establishment would at once be destroyed, and the episcopal church would be no longer the church of England. But | established church: and, if this can be better effected, by admitting none but its genuine members to offices of trust and emolument, he is certainly at liberty so to do; the disposal of offices being matter of favour and discretion. But

〈22〉 [ed. 4] 31 Eliz. c. 1. 17 Car. II. c. 2. 22 Car. II. c. 1 | 23 Eliz. c. 1. 35 Eliz. c. 1. 17

Car. II. c. 2. 22 Car. II. c. 1

[ed. 5] | 23 Eliz. c. 1. 29 Eliz. c. 6. 35 Eliz. c. 1. 22 Car. II. c. 1.

〈23〉 [ed. 4] denied to the Church of England. The penalties are all of them sus­

pended by the statute 1 W. & M. st. 2. c. 18. commonly called the toleration act; which exempts all dissenters (except papists, and such as deny the trinity) from all penal laws relating to religion, provided they take the oaths of alle­ giance and supremacy, and subscribe the declaration against popery, and repair to some congregation registered in the bishop’s court or at the sessions, the doors whereof must be always open: and dissenting teachers are also to subscribe the thirty nine articles, except those relating to church government and infant baptism. Thus are all persons, who will approve themselves no papists or oppugners of the trinity, left at full liberty to act as their conscience shall direct them, in the matter of religious worship. But by statute | denied to the Church of England [Footnote: The ordinance of 1645 (before­cited) inflicted imprisonment for a year on the third offence, and pecuniary penal­ ties on the former two, in case of using the book of common­prayer, not only 298 varia: chapter 4

all of them suspended by the statute 1 W. & M. st. 2. c. 18. “for exempting their majesties protestant subjects, dissenting from the church of England, from the penalties of certain laws,” commonly called the toleration act; which exempts all dissenters (except papists, and such as deny the trinity) from all penal laws relating to religion, provided they take the oaths of allegiance and supremacy (or make a similar affirmation, being quakers [Footnote: See Stat. 8 Geo. I. c. 6]) and subscribe the declaration against popery, and repair to some congregation registered in the bishop’s court or at the sessions, the doors whereof must be always open: and dissenting teachers are also to subscribe the thirty nine articles, except those relating to church government and infant baptism. Thus are all persons, who will approve themselves no papists or oppugners of the trinity, left at full liberty to act as their conscience shall direct them, in the matter of religious worship. And, if any person shall wil­ fully, maliciously, or contemptuously disturb any congregation, assembled in any church or permitted meeting­house, or shall misuse any preacher or teacher there, he shall (by virtue of the same statute) be bound over to the sessions of the peace, and forfeit twenty pounds. But by statute [ed. 5] denied to the Church of England. The penalties are conditionally sus­ pended by the statute 1 W. & M. st. 2. c. 18. “for exempting their majesties protestant subjects, dissenting from the church of England, from the penalties of certain laws,” commonly called the toleration act; which declares, that nei­ ther the laws above­mentioned, nor the statutes 1 Eliz. c. 2. § 14. 3 Jac. I. c. 4. & 5. nor any other penal laws made against popish recusants (except the test acts) shall extend to any dissenters, other than papists and such as deny the trinity: provided, 1. that they take the oaths of allegiance and supremacy (or make a similar affirmation, being quakers) and subscribe the declaration against popery; 2. that they repair to some congregation certified to and regis­ tered in the court of the bishop or archdeacon, or at the county sessions; 3. that the doors of such meeting­house shall be unlocked, unbarred, and unbolted; in default of which the persons meeting there are still liable to all the penalties of the former acts. Dissenting teachers, in order to be exempted from the penal­ ties of the statutes 13 & 14 Car. II. c. 4. 17 Car. II. c. 2. and 22 Car. II. c. 1. are also to subscribe the articles of religion mentioned in the statute 13 Eliz. c. 12 (viz. those [ed. 8: ‘viz. those’ omitted] which only concern the confession of the true christian faith and the doctrine of the sacraments) with an express exception of those relating to church government and powers of the church and to infant baptism. And by statute 10 Ann. c. 2. this toleration is ratified and confirmed; and it is declared that the said act shall at all times be inviolably observed for the exempting such protestant dissenters, as are thereby intended, from the pains and penalties therein mentioned. Thus, though the crime of non­ conformity is by no means universally abrogated, it is suspended and ceases to exist with regard to these protestant dissenters, during their compliance with the conditions imposed by the act of toleration: and, under these conditions,

varia: chapter 4 299

are left at full liberty to act as their consciences shall direct them. And, if any person [ … ] forfeit twenty pounds. But by statute

[ed. 9] denied to the Church [ … ] the penalties of the statutes 13 & 14 Car. II. c. 4. 15 Car. II. c. 6. 17 Car. II. c. 2. and 22 Car. II. c. 1. are also to subscribe [ … ] infant baptism; or if they scruple subscribing the same, shall make and sub­ scribe the declaration prescribed by statute 19 Geo. III. c. 44. professing them­ selves to be christians and protestants, and that they believe the scriptures to contain the revealed will of God, and to be the rule of doctrine and practice. Thus, though the crime of non­conformity is by no means universally abro­ gated, it is suspended and ceases to exist with regard to these protestant dis­ senters, during their compliance with the conditions imposed by these acts: and, under these conditions, all persons, who will approve themselves no papists or oppugners of the trinity, are left at full liberty to act as their con­ sciences shall direct them in the matter of religious worship. And, if any per­ son [ … ] he shall (by virtue of the same statute) be bound over to the sessions of the peace, and forfeit twenty pounds. But by statute

〈24〉 [ed. 5] and humility. As to papists | and humility. Neither doth the act of tol­

eration extend to enervate those clauses of the statutes 13 & 14 Car. II c. 4. & 17 Car. II. c. 2. which prohibit (upon pain of fine and imprisonment) all per­ sons from teaching school unless they be licensed by the ordinary, and sub­ scribe a declaration of conformity to the liturgy of the church, and reverently frequent divine service established by the laws of this kingdom. As to papists [ed. 9] and humility. Dissenters also, who subscribe the declaration of the act 19 Geo. III. are exempted (unless in the case of endowed schools and colleges) from the penalties of the statutes 13 & 14 Car. II c. 4. & 17 Car. II. c. 2. [ … ] by the laws of this kingdom. As to papists

〈 25〉 [ed. 5] are by several statutes, too numerous to be here recited, disabled from

taking any lands | are disabled from taking any [ed. 9: their] lands

〈 26〉 [ed. 5] avoidance of the same, in prejudice of the two universities; they may

not keep or teach any school under pain of perpetual imprisonment; they are liable also in some instances to pay double taxes; and, if they willingly say or hear mass | avoidance of the same; they may not keep or teach any school under pain of perpetual imprisonment; and, if they willingly say or hear mass

〈 27〉 [ed. 5] or contributes any thing to their maintenance | or contributes to their

maintenance

〈 28〉 [ed. 5] before­mentioned. They can hold no office or employment | before­

mentioned. They are considered as persons excommunicated; they can hold no office or employment

〈29〉 [ed. 5] suffer death as felons. | suffer death as felons without benefit of clergy. 〈30〉 [ed. 5] now in being, of a lay papist. | now in being [Footnote: Stat. 23 Eliz. c. 1.

27 Eliz. c. 2. 29 Eliz. c. 6. 35 Eliz. c. 2. 1 Jac. I. c. 4. 3 Jac. I. c. 4 & 5. 3 Car. I. c. 3. 25 Car. II. c. 2. 30 Car. II. st. 2. 1 W. & M. c. 9, 15, & 26. 11 & 12 W. III. c. 4. 12

300 varia: chapter 5

Ann. st. 2. c. 14. 1 Geo. I. st. 2. c. 55. 3 Geo. I. c. 18. 11 Geo. II. c. 17.], of a lay papist.

〈31〉 [ed. 9] By statute | For by statute 〈32〉 [ed. 7] any parts of their functions | any part of their functions 〈33〉 [ed. 5] from beyond sea, or shall be in England | from beyond sea, (unless driven

by stress of weather and tarrying only a reasonable time) or shall be in England [Footnote: [R. v Ocullean] Raym. 377. [Sir Simon Clark’s case] Latch. 1.]

〈34〉 [ed. 5] and perhaps | and then perhaps 〈35〉 [ed. 5] to the crown, will account | to the crown in subsequent reigns, will

account

〈36〉 [ed. 9] religious liberty. In order the better to secure | religious liberty. This

hath partly been done by statute 18 Geo. III. c. 60, with regard to such papists as duly take the oath therein prescribed, of allegiance to his majesty, abjur­ ation of the pretender, renunciation of the pope’s civil power, and abhorrence of the doctrines of destroying and not keeping faith with heretics, and depos­ ing or murdering princes excommunicated by authority of the see of Rome: in respect of whom only, the statute of 11 & 12. W. III, is repealed, so far as it disables them from purchasing or inheriting, or authorizes the apprehending or prosecuting the popish clergy, or subjects to perpetual imprisonment either them or any teachers of youth. In order the better to secure

〈37〉 [ed. 5] test act, directs all officers civil and military to take the oaths and make

the declaration against transubstantiation, in the court of king’s bench or chancery, the next term, or at the next quarter sessions, or (by subsequent statutes) within six months | test act [Footnote: Stat. 25 Car. II. c. 2. explained by 9 Geo. II. c. 26.], directs all officers civil and military to take the oaths and make the declaration against transubstantiation, in any of the king’s courts at Westminster, or at the quarter sessions, within six calendar months

〈38〉 [ed. 7] or soldier shall forfeit 1s. for every profane oath or curse | or soldier

profanely cursing or swearing shall forfeit 1s.

〈39〉 [ed. 7] conviction | offence

〈40〉 [ed. 4] Siecl. Louis xiv. | Siecl. Louis xiv. ch. 29. 〈41〉 [ed. 8] day, or sabbath-breaking, is a ninth offence against God and religion,

punished by the municipal laws of England | day, vulgarly (but improperly) called sabbath-breaking, is a ninth offence against God and religion, punished by the municipal law of England

〈42〉 [ed. 5] to the celibacy of | to the constrained celibacy of





Chapter 5


〈1〉 [ed. 9] hostility | hostilities

varia: chapter 6 301

〈3〉 [ed. 5] with an express | within an express 〈4〉 [ed. 5] confining the commander of a vessel, to hinder him from fighting in

defence of his ship, or to cause a revolt | assaulting the commander of a vessel, to hinder him from fighting in defence of his ship, or confining him, or causing or endeavouring to cause [ed. 8: making or endeavouring to make] a revolt

〈5〉 [ed. 5] or accessory. By the statute 8 Geo. I. c. 24 | or merely accessory by set­

ting forth such pirates, or abetting them before the fact, or receiving or con­ cealing them or their goods after it. And the statute 4 Geo. I. c. 11. expressly excludes the principals from the benefit of clergy. By the statute 8 Geo. I. c. 24

〈6〉 [ed. 5] all accessories to piracy, are declared to be principal pirates, and felons

| such accessories to piracy as are described by the statute of king William, are declared to be principal pirates, and all pirates convicted by virtue of this act are made felons

〈7〉 [ed. 5] six months imprisonment. These are | six months imprisonment.

Lastly, by statute 18 Geo. II. c. 30. any natural born subject, or denizen, who in time of war shall commit hostilities at sea against any of his fellow­subjects, or shall assist an enemy on that element, is liable to be tried and convicted as a pirate. These are





Chapter 6


〈1〉 [ed. 9] two sorts or species | two species 〈2〉 [ed. 4] such his superior or lord. | such superior or lord. [ed. 5: Footnote: LL.

Aelfredi. c. 5. Aethelst. c. 4. Cnuti. c. 54. 61.]

〈3〉 [ed. 4] levy war against each other, it is only a great riot | levy war against each

other, (in that spirit of private war, which prevailed all over Europe [Footnote: Robertson Cha. V, i. 45. 286.] in the early feodal times) it is only a great riot

〈4〉 [ed. 5] knowing the money to be false.” As to the first | knowing the money to

be false, to merchandize and make payment withal.” As to the first

〈5〉 [ed. 5] protection of this act. Thus careful was the legislature | protection of

this act: but the lord keeper or commissioners of the great seal now seem to be within it, by virtue of the statutes 5 Eliz. c. 18. and 1 W. & M. c. 21. Thus careful was the legislature

〈6〉 [ed. 5] the preceding | a preceding 〈7〉 [ed. 5] from beyond the seas; or shall tarry here three days without conform­

ing to the church; he is guilty | from beyond the seas, unless driven by stress of weather [Footnote: [R. v Ocullean] Sir T. Raym. 377.], and departing in reasonable [ed. 8: a reasonable] time [Footnote: [Sir Simon Clark’s case] Latch. 1.]; or shall tarry here three days without conforming to the church [ed. 9: and taking the oaths]; he is guilty 302 varia: chapter 6

〈9〉 [ed. 8] of that | that statute]

〈10〉 [ed. 5] as an endeavour | with an endeavour 〈11〉 [ed. 8] blow | stroke

〈12〉 [ed. 5] and shall utter | with intent to utter 〈13〉 [ed. 4] no high | not high

〈14〉 [ed. 8] appendix | conclusion 〈15〉 [ed. 5] by statute 18 Eliz. c. 1. the same offence is described in other more gen­

eral words | and by statute 18 Eliz. c. 1. (because “the same law, being penal, ought to be taken and expounded strictly according to the words thereof, and the like offences not by any equity to receive the like punishment or pains”) the same species of offence is therefore described in other more general words

〈16〉 [ed. 5] whoever shall knowingly make or mend, or assist in so doing, or shall

buy or sell, or have in his possession, any instruments proper only for the coinage of money; or shall convey such instruments out of the king’s mint; shall be guilty of high treason | whoever, without proper authority, shall knowingly make or mend, or assist in so doing, or shall buy, sell, conceal, hide, or knowingly have in his possession, any implements of coinage speci­ fied in the act, or other tools or instruments proper only for the coinage of money; or shall convey the same out of the king’s mint; he, together with his counsellors, procurers, aiders, and abettors, shall be guilty of high treason

〈17〉 [ed. 7] construed high treason. And, lastly | construed high treason. But all

prosecutions on this act are to be commenced within three months after the commission of the offence: except those for making or mending any coining tool or instrument, or for marking money round the edges; which are directed to be commenced within six months after the offence committed [Footnote: Stat. 7 Ann, c. 25.]. And, lastly

〈18〉 [ed. 5] colours or alters any silver current coin of this kingdom, to make it

resemble a gold one; or any copper coin, to make it resemble a silver one; this is also | colours or alters any shilling or sixpence, either lawful or counterfeit, to make them respectively resemble a guinea or half guinea; or any halfpenny or farthing to make them respectively resemble a shilling or sixpence; this is also

〈19〉 [ed. 5] in case he discovers | in case (being out of prison) he discovers 〈20〉 [ed. 8] or remit | or to remit

〈21〉 [ed. 5] though usually a sledge or hurdle is allowed | though usually (by con­

nivance [Footnote: [YB] 33 Ass. pl. 7.] at length ripened by humanity into law) a sledge or hurdle is allowed

〈22〉 [ed. 5] more hereafter. In the case | more hereafter [Footnote: See ch. 32 [IV. 260].].

In the case

〈 23〉 [ed. 8] the natural modesty of the sex forbids the exposing and publicly man­

varia: chapter 7 303

the other) | the decency due to the sex forbids the exposing and publicly mangling their bodies, their sentence (which is to the full as terrible to sen­ sation as the other)





Chapter 7


〈1〉 [ed. 5] felony: and | felony: but

〈2〉 [ed. 8] as works | as occasions

〈3〉 [ed. 5] in the case of heresy | in case of heresy 〈4〉 [ed. 7] nature is the punishment of standing mute, without pleading to an

indictment; which is capital, but without any forfeiture, and therefore such standing mute is no felony | nature was the punishment of standing mute, without pleading to an indictment; which at the common law was capital, but without any forfeiture, and therefore such standing mute was no felony

〈5〉 [ed. 9] to have, unless the same is expressly taken away | to have, provided the

same is not expressly taken away

〈6〉 [ed. 5] imbezzling the king’s armour | imbezzling or destroying the king’s

armour

〈7〉 [ed. 5] forfeiture thereof. By statute 14 Eliz. c. 3. | forfeiture thereof. By statute

17 Edw. III. none shall be so hardy to bring false and ill money into the realm, on pain of forfeiture of life and member by the persons importing, and the searchers permitting such importation. By statute 3 Hen. V. st. 1. to make, coin, buy, or bring into the realm any gally­halfpence, suskins, or dotkins, in order to utter them, is felony; and knowingly to receive or pay either them or blanks [Footnote: Stat. 2 Hen. VI. c. 9.] is forfeiture of an hundred shillings. By statute 14 Eliz. c. 3.

〈8〉 [ed. 7] or if any person shall receive or pay any counterfeit or diminished

money of this kingdom, not being cut in pieces (an operation which every man is thereby empowered to perform) at a less rate than it shall import to be of: (which demonstrates a consciousness of its baseness, and a fraudulent design) all such persons shall be guilty of felony. But these precautions | or if any person shall receive or pay any counterfeit or diminished milled money of this kingdom, not being cut in pieces (an operation which is expressly directed to be performed when any such money shall be produced in evi­ dence; and which any person, to whom any gold or silver money is tendered, is empowered by statutes 9 & 10 W. III. c. 21. 13 Geo. III. c. 71. and 14 Geo. III. c. 70. to perform at his own hazard, and the officers of the exchequer and receivers general of the taxes are particularly required to perform) at a less rate than it shall import to be of: (which demonstrates a consciousness of its baseness, and a fraudulent design) all such persons shall be guilty of felony; and may be prosecuted for the same at any time within three months after the 304 varia: chapter 7

[ed. 9] or if any person shall receive or pay at a less rate than it imports to be of (which demonstrates a consciousness of its baseness, and a fraudulent design) any counterfeit or diminished milled money, not being cut in pieces; an opera­ tion which is expressly directed to be performed when any such money shall be produced in evidence, and which any person, to whom any gold or silver money is tendered, is empowered by statutes 9 & 10 W. III. c. 21. 13 Geo. III. c. 71. and 14 Geo. III. c. 70. to perform at his own hazard, and the officers of the exchequer and receivers general of the taxes are particularly required to perform; all such persons shall be guilty of felony; and may be prosecuted for the same at any time within three months after the offence committed. But these precautions

〈9〉 [ed. 5] diminished money | diminished milled money 〈10〉 [ed. 5] shall tender | shall utter or tender 〈11〉 [ed. 5] shall be imprisoned and find sureties for two years: and, for | shall be

imprisoned two years, and find sureties for two years longer: and, for

〈12〉 [ed. 5] he shall for the first offence | he shall be deemed a common utterer of

counterfeit money, and shall for the first offence

〈13〉 [ed. 5] for two years more. Thus much for offences | for two years more. And by

statute 11 Geo. III. c. 40. persons counterfeiting copper halfpence or farthings, with their abettors; or buying, selling, receiving, or putting off any counterfeit copper money (not being cut in pieces or melted down) at a less value than it imports to be of; shall be guilty of single felony. Thus much for offences [ed. 7] for two years more. By statute 11 Geo. III. c. 40. persons counterfeiting copper halfpence or farthings, with their abettors; or buying, selling, receiv­ ing, or putting off any counterfeit copper money (not being cut in pieces or melted down) at a less value than it imports to be of; shall be guilty of single felony. And by a temporary statute (14 Geo. III. c. 42.) if any quantity of money, exceeding the sum of five pounds, being or purporting to be the silver coin of this realm, but below the standard of the mint in weight or fineness, shall be imported into Great Britain or Ireland, the same shall be forfeited in equal moieties to the crown and prosecutor. Thus much for offences

〈14〉 [ed. 9] are; first, by statute | are these; first, by statute 〈15〉 [ed. 5] he shall himself be indemnified | he shall be indemnified 〈16〉 [ed. 5] imbezzling the king’s armour or warlike stores, is so declared | imbezzling

or destroying the king’s armour or warlike stores, is, in the first place, so declared

〈17〉 [ed. 5] this offence, so far as it relates to naval stores. Other inferior | this

offence, and from stealing the king’s naval stores to the value of twenty shil­ lings [ed. 9: with a power for the judge, after sentence, to transport the offender for seven years]. Other inferior

〈18〉 [ed. 5] are punished by statute 1 Geo. I. c. 25. with fine and imprisonment. | are

punished by statutes 9 & 10 W. III. c. 41. 1 Geo. I. c. 25. & 9 Geo. I. c. 8 [ed. 8: c. 25. 9 Geo. I. c. 8. & 17 Geo. II. c. 4] with fine [ed. 8: fine, corporal punish­

varia: chapter 8 305

or destroy any of his majesty’s ships of war, whether built, building, or repairing; or any of the king’s arsenals, magazines, dock­yards, rope­yards, or victual­ ling offices, or materials thereunto belonging; or military, naval, or victualling stores, or ammunition; or causing, aiding, procuring, abetting, or assisting in, such offence; shall be felony without benefit of clergy.





Chapter 8


〈1〉 [ed. 7] forewarn A. B. | cause A. B. to be forewarned 〈2〉 [ed. 4] And it is the glory of the church of England, as well as a strong pre­

sumptive argument in favour of the purity of her faith, that she hath been | It is therefore the glory of the church of England, that she inculcates due obedi­ ence to lawful authority, and hath been

〈3〉 [ed. 4] nothing so justly, as in being true members of the church, emphatically

by law established. Whereas the principles of those who differ from them, as well in one extreme as the other, are equally | nothing more justly, than in being true members of the church, emphatically by law established. Whereas the notions of ecclesiastical liberty, in those who differ from them, as well in one extreme as the other (for I here only speak of extremes) are equally

〈4〉 [ed. 9] donatives | donative

〈5〉 [ed. 9] papal provisions, which, according to sir Edward Coke, is the founda­

tion | papal provisions, being, according sir Edward Coke, the foundation

〈6〉 [ed. 5] his crown | the crown

〈7〉 [ed. 4] were enacted | were devised 〈8〉 [ed. 9] shall present or collate to no bishoprick | shall not present or collate to

any bishoprick

〈9〉 [ed. 5] (as was said) | (as we said) 〈10〉 [ed. 4] king’s brother | king’s uncle 〈11〉 [ed. 4] only a penalty | only liable to a penalty 〈12〉 [ed. 4] subscribing | subscribed 〈13〉 [ed. 5] 11. The last offence that has been made a praemunire, was by statute 6

Geo. I. c. 18. the year after the infamous south sea project had beggared half the nation. This therefore makes all unwarrantable undertakings by unlawful sub­ scriptions, then commonly known by the name of bubbles, subject to the pen­ alties of a praemunire. Having thus enquired | 11. The statute 6 Geo. I. c. 18. (enacted in the year after the infamous south sea project had beggared half the nation) makes all unwarrantable undertakings by unlawful subscriptions, then commonly known by the name of bubbles, subject to the penalties of a prae-munire. 12. The statute 12 Geo. III. c. 11. subjects to the penalties of the statute of praemunire all such as knowingly and wilfully solemnize, assist, or are pres­ 306 varia: chapter 10

George II, as are by that act prohibited to contract matrimony without the consent of the crown [Footnote: Stat. 2 Hen. VI. c. 9.]. Having thus enquired

〈14〉 [ed. 5] mistaken notions | mistaken notions [Footnote: Bro. Abr. t. corone. 196].





Chapter 9


〈1〉 [ed. 8] Yearb. 2 Ric. III. 10. Staundf. P. C. 37. 1 Hawk. P. C. 55, 56. | Yearb. 2 Ric.

III. 10. Staundf. P. C. 37. [Attorney General v Messenger et al.] Kel. 71. Hal. P. C. 374. 1 Hawk. P. C. 55, 56.

〈2〉 [ed. 5] principal | actual





Chapter 10


〈1〉 [ed. 9] it is felony | it shall be felony 〈2〉 [ed. 6] and abettors. Likewise by statute 21 Jac. I. c. 26. to acknowlege any fine

| and abettors. Likewise by statute 21 Jac. I. c. 26. to acknowlege, or procure to be acknowleged, any fine

[ed. 7] and abettors. And this may be tried either in the king’s bench or com­ mon pleas, by a jury de medietate; half, officers of any of the superior courts, and the other half common jurors. Likewise by statute 21 Jac. I. c. 26. to acknowlege any fine

〈3〉 [ed. 5] any other person before any commissioner | any other person (as bail)

before any judge of assize or other commissioner

〈4〉 [ed. 5] transported for seven years. 4. An escape | transported for seven years:

and persons in disguise, joining in or abetting any riot or tumult on such account, or opposing any process, or assaulting and abusing any officer exe­ cuting or for having executed the same, shall be felons without benefit of clergy. 4. An escape

〈5〉 [ed. 9] is actually found guilty or convicted, by verdict | hath actually received

judgment, or been attainted, upon verdict

〈6〉 [ed. 5] So that to break prison, when lawfully committed for any treason or

felony, remains still felony as at the common law; and to break prison, when lawfully confined | So that to break prison and escape, when lawfully commit­ ted for any treason or felony, remains still felony as at the common law; and to break prison, (whether it be the county gaol, the stocks, or other usual place of security) when lawfully confined

〈7〉 [ed. 5] forcibly freeing another | forcibly and knowingly freeing another 〈8〉 [ed. 4] and is always the same | and is [ed. 5: and it is] generally the same

varia: chapter 10 307

〈9〉 [ed. 5] as it would have been in the party himself to have broken prison. A

rescue | as it would have been in a gaoler to have voluntarily permitted an escape. A rescue

〈10〉 [ed. 5] But here, as upon voluntary escapes | But here, likewise, as upon vol­

untary escapes

〈11〉 [ed. 9] be attainted before | be attainted or receive judgment before 〈12〉 [ed. 4] 1 Hal. P. C. 607. | 1 Hal. P. C. 607. Fost. 344. 〈13〉 [ed. 5] committed. By the statute, 16 Geo. II. | committed. By statute 11 Geo. II.

c. 26. and 24 Geo. II. c. 40. if five or more persons assemble to rescue any retailers of spirituous liquors, or to assault the informers against them, it is felony, and subject to transportation for seven years. By the statute 16 Geo. II.

〈14〉 [ed. 7] to assist a prisoner in custody for treason or felony with any arms,

instruments of escape, or disguise, without the knowlege of the gaoler; or any way | to convey to a prisoner in custody for treason or felony any arms, instru­ ments of escape, or disguise, without the knowlege of the gaoler though no escape be attempted; or any way

〈15〉 [ed. 5] seven years. And by the statutes 25 Geo. II. c. 37. and 27 Geo. II. c. 15.

to rescue, or attempt to rescue, any person committed for murder, or for any of the offences enumerated in that act, or in the black act 9 Geo. I. c. 22. is felony without benefit of clergy. | seven years: or if the prisoner be in custody for petty larciny or other inferior offence, or charged with a debt of 100l. it is then a misdemesnor, punishable with fine and imprisonment. And by several special statutes, [Footnote: 6 Geo. I. c. 23. (Transportation.) 9 Geo. I. c. 22. (Black­act.) 8 Geo. II. c. 20. (Destroying turnpikes, &c.) 19 Geo. II. c. 34. (Smuggling.) 25 Geo. II. c. 37. (Murder.) 27 Geo. II. c. 15. (Black­act.)] to rescue, or attempt to rescue, any person committed for the offences enumerated in those acts, is felony without benefit of clergy; and to rescue, or attempt to rescue, the body of a felon executed for murder, is single felony, and subject to transportation for seven years. Nay, even if any person be charged with any of the offences against the black act, 9 Geo. I. c. 22. and, being required by order of the privy council to surrender himself, neglects so to do for forty days, both he and all that knowingly conceal, aid, abet, or succour him, are felons with­ out benefit of clergy.

〈16〉 [ed. 4] enumerated in that act | enumerated in the latter of those acts [replaced

in ed. 5, see 〈15〉]

〈17〉 [ed. 4] sentenced to be transported. This is made felony without benefit of

clergy by statutes 4 Geo. I. c. 11. 6 Geo. I. c. 23. and 8 Geo. III. c. 15. | sentenced to be transported. This is made felony without benefit of clergy in most cases by statutes 4 Geo. I. c. 11. 6 Geo. I. c. 23. and 8 Geo. III. c. 15. [ed. 5] ordered to be transported, or had agreed to transport himself. This is made felony without benefit of clergy in all cases, by statutes 4 Geo. I. c. 11. 6

308 varia: chapter 10

Geo. I. c. 23. 16 Geo. II. c. 15. and 8 Geo. III. c. 15. as is also the assisting them to escape from such as are conveying them to the port of transportation.

〈18〉 [ed. 5] and shall also give evidence against him. Wild, upon this statute, (still

continuing in his old practice) was at last convicted and executed. | and also gives evidence against him. Wild, still continuing in his old practice, was upon this statute at last convicted and executed. [Footnote: See stat. 6 Geo. I. c. 23. §. 9.].

〈19〉 [ed. 5] by fine or imprisonment. | by fine or imprisonment. And by statute 10

Geo. III. c. 48. all knowing receivers of stolen plate or jewels, taken by robbery on the highway, or when a burglary accompanies the stealing, may be tried as well before as after the conviction of the principal, and whether he be in or out of custody; and, if convicted, shall be adjudged guilty of felony, and trans­ ported for fourteen years.

[ed. 9 (appended by Burn):

A. By statute 21 Geo. III. c. 68. the receiving any stolen copper, brass, bell­metal, or utensil fixed to any building, or any iron rails or fencing set up in any court or other place, is made transportation for seven years, or three years imprisonment to be kept to hard labour. By statute 21 Geo. III. c. 69. the receiving stolen pewter of any kind is subjected to the like penalty, although the principal has not been convicted. By 22 Geo. III. c. 58. the receiving any stolen goods (except lead, iron, copper, brass, bell­metal and solder) is made a misdemeanor, punishable by fine and imprison­ ment, or whipping, as the court shall appoint; which shall exempt the offender from being punished as accessory, altho’ the principal be afterwards convicted, and the offence shall appear to be grand larceny or some greater offence by fine or imprison­ ment.]

〈20〉 [ed. 5] disabled from practising for the future. Hereunto | disabled from prac­

tising for the future. And indeed it is enacted by statute 12 Geo. I. c. 29. that if any one, who hath been convicted of forgery, perjury, subornation of perjury, or common barretry, shall practise as an attorney, solicitor, or agent, in any suit; the court, upon complaint, shall examine it in a summary way; and, if proved, shall direct the offender to be transported for seven years. Hereunto

〈21〉 [ed. 5] ex communicatione | ex condemnatione 〈22〉 [ed. 5] disabled to be jurors | disabled as jurors 〈23〉 [ed. 7] must also be wilful, positive, and absolute | must also be corrupt (that

is, committed mala animo [with wrongful intent])

〈24〉 [ed. 5] house of correction for seven years | house of correction for a term not

exceeding seven years

〈25〉 [ed. 8] universally | in all cases 〈26〉 [ed. 9] See vol. III. pag. 402 [III. 264]. | See vol. III. pag. 402, 403 [III. 264–5]. 〈27〉 [ed. 8] their offices, fines, imprisonment | their offices, (either consequential

or immediate) fines, imprisonment

〈28〉 [ed. 4] censures | censure

varia: chapter 11 309





Chapter 11


〈1〉 [ed. 5] any persons, | any person 〈2〉 [ed. 5] to appear armed in any open place by day, or night, with faces blacked

or otherwise disguised, or (being so disguised) to hunt, wound, kill, or steal any deer, to rob a warren, or to steal fish, is felony without benefit of clergy. I mention this offence in this place, not on account of the damage thereby done to private property, but of the manner in which that damage is commit­ ted; namely, with the face blacked or with other disguise, to the breach of the public peace | to appear armed in any inclosed forest or place where deer are usually kept, or in any warren for hares or conies, or in any high road, open heath, common, or down, by day, or night, with faces blacked or otherwise disguised, or (being so disguised) to hunt, wound, kill, or steal any deer, to rob a warren, or to steal fish, or to procure by gift or promise of reward any person to join them in such unlawful act, is felony without benefit of clergy. I men­ tion these offences in this place, not on account of the damage thereby done to private property, but of the manner in which that damage is committed; namely, with the face blacked or with other disguise, and being armed with offensive weapons, to the breach of the public peace

〈3〉 [ed. 5] to kill, or fire the house of, any person, is made felony | to kill any of the

king’s subjects, or fire their houses, out­houses, barns, or ricks, is made felony

〈4〉 [ed. 5] To pull down or destroy any turnpike-gate, or fence thereunto belonging,

by the statute 1 Geo. II. c. 19. is punished with public whipping, and three months imprisonment; and to destroy the toll­houses, or any sluice or lock on a naviga­ ble river, is made felony to be punished with transportation for seven years. By the statute 5 Geo. II. c. 33. the offence of destroying turn­pike­gates or fences, is made felony also, with transportation for seven years. And, lastly, by statute 8 Geo. II. c. 20. the offences of destroying both turnpikes upon roads, and sluices upon rivers, are made felony, without benefit of clergy; and may be tried as well in an adjacent county, as that wherein the fact is committed. | To pull down or destroy any lock, sluice, or floodgate, erected by authority of parliament on a navigable river, is by statute 1 Geo. II. st. 2. c. 19. made punishable with transpor­ tation for seven years. [Ed. 9: Footnote (editorial intervention by Burn): This statute of 1 Geo. II. st. 2. c. 19, after several continuances, was suffered to expire in 1748.]

By the statute 8 Geo. II. c. 20 the offence of destroying such works, or rescuing any person in custody for the same, is made felony, without benefit of clergy; and it may be inquired of and tried in any adjacent county, as if the fact had been there committed. By the statute 4 Geo. III. c. 12 malicously to damage or destroy any banks, sluices, or other works on such navigable river, to open the floodgates, or otherwise obstruct the navigation, is again made felony, pun­ ishable with transportation for seven years. And by the statute 7 Geo. III.

310 varia: chapter 12

c. 40. (which repeals all former acts relating to turnpikes) maliciously to pull down or otherwise destroy any turnpike-gate, or fence, toll­house, or weigh­ ing engine thereunto belonging, erected by authority of parliament, or to res­ cue any person in custody for the same, is made felony without benefit of clergy; and the indictment may be inquired of and tried in any adjacent county [Ed. 9: Footnote (editorial intervention by Burn): This statute of 7 Geo. III. c. 40. is repealed by the 13 Geo. III. c. 84. and thereby the offence is made felony, and transportation for seven years, or imprisonment for any time not exceeding three years, at the discretion of the judge.].

〈5〉 [ed. 8] also all affrays | also affrays 〈6〉 [ed. 4] possession, with menaces, force, and arms, of lands and tenements,

without the authority of law. | possession of lands and tenements, with men­ aces, force, and arms, and without the authority of law.

〈7〉 [ed. 5] for three years immediately preceding. | for three years immediately

preceding [Footnote: Holding over by force, where the tenant’s title was under a lease, now expired, is said to be a forcible detainer, [Baron Snigge v Shirton] Cro. Jac. 199.].

〈8〉 [ed. 9] punished | punishable 〈9〉 [ed. 9] 100l. | ten pounds

〈10〉 [ed. 9] the sole consideration of the law. And therefore, in such prosecutions,

the only facts to be considered | the whole that the law considers. And there­ fore, in such prosecutions, the only points to be inquired into

〈11〉 [ed. 4] their discretion | its discretion





Chapter 12


〈1〉 [ed. 9] the penalty of death | the penalty of death [Footnote (editorial inter­

vention by Burn):

By statute 19 Geo. III. c. 69. § 23. Whereas by an act [19 Geo. II. c. 34, 1746] made in the nineteenth year of his late majesty king Geo. II. which was to continue in force for seven years, and by several subsequent acts hath been continued until Sept. 29, 1785, and from thence to the end of the next session of parliament, persons charged with being guilty of offences in the said act mentioned were required to surrender themselves within a time limited, and that on their neglect or refusal of surrender they were to be deemed to be convicted and attainted of felony: and whereas doubts have arisen, whether the methods prescribed in the said act, relative to the appre­ hending and harbouring the offenders, or for causing them to surrender, were re­enacted and continued by the said several acts; it is enacted and declared, that all the rules, matters and things, relative to the surrender, proclaiming, apprehending, harbouring, and punishing such offenders, are continued and re­enacted by the said several acts continuing the said recited act. Which rules are to the following effect,

varia: chapter 12 311

When any person shall be charged with any the said offences, before a justice of the peace, by information on oath, the justice shall certify the same under his hand and seal, and return the information to a secretary of state, who shall lay the same before the king in council; who may thereon make his order, commanding the offender to surrender in forty days after the first publication thereof in the gazette, to one of the judges of the king’s bench or a justice of the peace, who thereon shall commit him to gaol, to answer the charge against him according to due course of law: which order the clerks of the privy council shall cause to be forthwith published in the two successive gazettes, and to be transmitted to the sheriff where the offence was com­ mitted; who shall in fourteen days cause the same to be proclaimed between ten in the morning and two in the afternoon, in the market places, on the market days, of two market towns in the same county, near the place where the offence was commit­ ted; and a copy of the order shall be affixed on some public place in the said towns: And if such offender shall not surrender pursuant to such order, or escape after sur­ render, he shall be attainted of felony without benefit of clergy. And if any person, after the time appointed for surrender, shall knowingly harbour such offender; he shall, on conviction within one year, be guilty of felony, and transported for seven years. And every person who shall take, or discover so that he may be taken, any person so advertised and not surrendering, and cause him to be brought before a judge of the king’s bench, or justice of the peace for London or Middlesex (who shall commit him to Newgate), shall receive 500l. in one month after execution awarded, from the com­ missioners of the customs or excise respectively and if an offender, against whom no such order in council shall have been made, shall himself so discover or apprehend any other against whom an order hath been made; he shall be acquitted of all his own offences for which no prosecution is then commenced, and shall also have his share of the reward: and if any person shall be maimed or grievously wounded in appre­ hending such offender; he shall receive 50l., over and above such other reward as he may have as apprehender: and if any person shall be killed in apprehending, his execu­ tors or administrators shall receive 100l. But this shall not prevent ministers of jus­ tice from taking such offender by the ordinary course of law; but if he shall be taken before the expiration of the time limited for his surrender, no further proceedings shall be had upon the order made in council, but the offender shall be brought to trial by due course of law. And if any offender, before order for his surrender, shall dis­ cover two or more accomplices, so as they be convicted; he shall receive 50l. for each, and be discharged of all offences for which no prosecution shall be then commenced.]

〈2〉 [ed. 9] in a former volume; when we thoroughly examined the nature of these

unfortunate traders. I shall therefore here barely mention over again some abuses incident to bankruptcy, viz. the bankrupt’s neglect | in a former vol­ ume; I shall therefore here barely mention the several species of fraud, taken notice of by the statute law; viz. the bankrupt’s neglect

〈3〉 [ed. 5] offender; or, | offender [Footnote: Stat. 5 Geo. II. c. 30.]; or 〈4〉 [ed. 9] it is allowed in general, by such | it is allowed, by such 〈5〉 [ed. 9] falsifying the coin. To this head | falsifying the coin. And, even without

actual fraud, if the bankrupt cannot make it appear that he is disabled from 312 varia: chapter 12

paying his debts by some casual loss, he shall by the statute 21 Jac. I. c. 19, be set on the pillory for two hours, with one of his ears nailed to the same, and cut off. To this head

〈6〉 [ed. 8] half a year. | half a year. And by statute 17 Geo. III. c. 26. to take more

than ten shillings per cent, for procuring any money to be advanced on any life­annuity, is made an indictable misdemesnor, and punishable with fine and imprisonment, as is also the offence of procuring or soliciting any infant to grant any life­annuity or to promise, or otherwise engage, to ratify it when he comes of age.

〈7〉 [ed. 9] to prevent deceits in particular trades, and which are chiefly of use

among the traders themselves. For so cautious has the legislature been, and so thoroughly abhors all indirect practices, that there is hardly a considerable fraud incident to any branch of trade, but what is restrained and punished by some particular statute. The | to restrain and punish deceits in particular trades, and which are enumerated by Hawkins and Burn, but are chiefly of use among the traders themselves. The

〈8〉 [ed. 5] statute | statutes

〈9〉 [ed. 7] 31 Geo. II. c. 29. and 3 Geo. III. c. 11. for ascertaining | 31 Geo. II. c. 29.

3 Geo. III. c. 11. and 13 Geo. III c. 62 for ascertaining

〈10〉 [ed. 5] at common law [Footnote: 2 Hawk. P. C. 235.], is | at common law

[Footnote: 1 Hawk P. C. 234.], was

〈11〉 [ed. 5] is described | was described 〈12〉 [ed. 4] them | it

〈13〉 [ed. 5] Engrossing, by the same statute, is the getting into one’s possession, or

buying up, of corn or other dead victuals, | Engrossing was also described to be the getting into one’s possession, or buying up, large quantities of corn or other dead victuals,

〈14〉 [ed. 5] And the penalty for these three offences by this statute (which is the

last that hath been made concerning them) is the forfeiture of the goods or their value, and two months imprisonment for the first offence; double value and six months imprisonment for the second; and, for the third, the offender shall forfeit all his goods, be set in the pillory, and imprisoned at the king’s pleasure. Among the Romans | And so the total engrossing of any other com­ modity, with intent to sell it at an unreasonable price, is an offence indictable and finable at the common law [Footnote: [R. v Maynard] Cro. Car. 232.]. And the general penalty for these three offences by the common law (for all the statutes concerning them were repealed by 12 Geo. III c. 71.) is, as in other minute misdemeanors, discretionary fine and imprisonment [Footnote: 1 Hawk P. C. 235.]. Among the Romans

〈15〉 [ed. 7] inventions;) and monopolists | inventions; and except also patents

concerning printing, salt­petre, gunpowder, great ordnance, and shot) and

varia: chapter 13 313

〈16〉 [ed. 7] and if any person exports any tools or utensils used in the silk or wool­

len manufactures | and by the same statute connected with 14 Geo. III. c. 71 if any person exports any tools or utensils used in the silk, linen, cotton, or woollen manufactures [ed. 8: (excepting woolcards to North America) [Footnote: Stat. 15 Geo. III. c. 5.]]

〈17〉 [ed. 7] any public office. | any public office: and every person collecting such

tools or utensils, in order to export the same, shall on conviction at the assises forfeit such tools and also 200l. [ed. 9: Footnote (editorial intervention by Burn):

By statute 21 Geo. III. c. 37. The said penalties on the captain of the ship and officer of the customs are augmented to 200l.: and if any person shall have in his custody, or apply for or procure to be made any such tool or utensil; he shall forfeit the same, and 200l., and be imprisoned for twelve months and till the forfeiture shall be paid. And by 22 Geo. III. c. 60. If any person shall contract with, or endeavour to persuade, any artificer concerned in printing callicoes, cottons, muslins, or linens of any sort, or in preparing any tools or utensils for such manufactory, to go out of the kingdom; he shall forfeit 500l., and be imprisoned for twelve months; for a second offence 1000l., and be imprisoned for two years. And if any person shall export or attempt to export any such tools or utensils, he shall forfeit the same and also 500l.: and any officer of the ship conniving thereat, shall forfeit 500l.; and if it is a king’s ship, he shall also forfeit his office and be incapacitated.]





Chapter 13


〈1〉 [ed. 7] the archbishop | the archbishop of Canterbury 〈2〉 [ed. 5] licence, or aid and abet such forgery | licence, to cause or procure, or

assist in such forgery

〈3〉 [ed. 8] what our law corruptly calls bigamy; which properly signifies being

twice married, but with us is used as synonymous to polygamy | what some have corruptly called bigamy; which properly signifies being twice married, but is more justly denominated polygamy

〈4〉 [ed. 8] 3 Inst. 88. | 3 Inst. 88. Bigamy according to the canonists consisted in

marrying two virgins successively one after the death of the other, or in once marrying a widow. Such were esteemed incapable of orders, &c; and by a canon of the council of Lyons, a.d. 1274 held under pope Gregory X, were omni privilegis clericali nudati, et coercioni fori secularis addicti [stripped of all benefit of clergy, and assigned to the coercion of a lay jurisdiction] (6 Decretal. l. 12). This canon was adopted and explained in England, by statute 4 Edw. I st. 3. c. 5. and bigamy thereupon became no uncommon counterplea to the claim of benefit of clergy. ([YB] M. 40 Edw. III. 42. M. 11 Hen. IV. 11. 48. M. 13 Hen. IV. 6. Staundf. P. C. 134). The cognizance of the plea of bigamy was declared 314 varia: chapter 13

by statute 18 Edw. III. st. 3. c. 2. to belong to the court christian, like that of bastardy. But by stat. 1 Edw. VI. c. 12. § 16. Bigamy was declared to be no longer an impediment to the claim of clergy. See [Clergie] Dal. 21. [Ellen Lambe’s case] Dyer 201.

〈5〉 [ed. 8] an evidence | a witness 〈6〉 [ed. 5] notice | knowledge

〈7〉 [ed. 5] a mensa et thoro | a mensa et thoro [Footnote: 3 Inst. 89. [Thomas

Middleton] Kel. 27. 1 Hal. P. C. 694.]

〈8〉 [ed. 5] this | the

〈9〉 [ed. 9] Munster, it is true, who is followed and relied upon by Spelman, fixes the

time of their first appearance to the year 1417; but, as he owns, that the first whom he ever saw were in 1524, it is probably an error of the press for 1517: espe­ cially as other historians inform us, that when sultan Selim conquered Egypt, in the year 1517, several of the natives refused to submit to the Turkish yoke; but, being at length subdued and banished, they agreed to disperse in small parties all over the world, where their supposed skill in the black art gave them an uni­ versal reception, in that age of superstition and credulity. In the compass of a very few years | Munster, who is followed and relied upon by Spelman, and other writers, fixes the time of their first appearance to the year 1417, under passports, real or pretended, from the emperor Sigismund, king of Hungary. And pope Pius II (who died a.d. 1464) mentions them in his history as thieves and vaga­ bonds, then wandering with their families over Europe, under the name of Zigari and whom he supposes to have migrated from the country of the Zigi, which nearly answers to the modern Circassia. In the compass of a few years

〈10〉 [ed. 4] persons | person

〈11〉 [ed. 4] in some cases fined. Where there is an house | in some cases fined. And

a presentment thereof by a judge of assise, &c, or a justice of the peace, shall be in all respects equivalent to an indictment [Footnote: Stat. 7 Geo. III. c. 42.]. Where there is an house

〈12〉 [ed. 8] contrary to law. 5. Cottages are held to be common nusances, if erected

singly on the waste, being harbours for thieves and other idle and dissolute persons. Therefore it is enacted by statute 31 Eliz. c. 7. that no person shall erect a cottage, unless he lays to it four acres of freehold land of inheritance to be occupied therewith, on pain to forfeit to the king 10l. for its erection, and 40s. per month for its continuance: and no owner or occupier of a cottage shall suffer any inmates therein, or more families than one to inhabit there, on pain to for­ feit 10s. per month to the lord of the leet. This seems, upon our present more enlarged notions, a hard and impolitic law; depriving the people of houses to dwell in, and consequently preventing the populousness of towns and parishes: which, though it is generally endeavoured to be guarded against, through a fatal rural policy, (being sometimes, when the poor are ill­managed, an intolerable hardship) yet, taken in a national view, and on a supposition of proper industry

varia: chapter 13 315

and good parochial government, is a very great advantage to any kingdom. But indeed this, like most other rigid or inconvenient laws, is rarely put in execu­ tion. 6. The making and selling of fireworks | contrary to law. 5. The making and selling of fireworks [subsequent points renumbered accordingly] [ed. 9] contrary to law. But, as state­lotteries have, for many years past, been found a ready mode for raising the supply, an act was made 19 Geo. III. c. 21. to licence and regulate the keepers of such lottery­offices. 5. The making and selling of fireworks

〈13〉 [ed. 5] punishable by fine. 7. Eaves-droppers | punishable by fine. And to this

head we may refer, (though not declared a common nuisance) the making, keeping, or carriage, of too large a quantity of gunpowder at one time, or in one place or vehicle; which is prohibited by statute 12 Geo. III. c. 61. under heavy penalties and forfeiture. 7. Eaves-droppers

〈14〉 [ed. 5] the | their

〈15〉 [ed. 8] signifies | is said to signify 〈16〉 [ed. 7] most | more

〈17〉 [ed. 5] learn | consider

〈18〉 [ed. 7] mortgagor: that, if any person at one time loses | mortgagor: that, if any

person at any time or sitting loses

〈19〉 [ed. 9] plaintiff in either case may examine | plaintiff may by bill in equity

examine

〈20〉 [ed. 9] person cheats at play, and at one time wins more than 10 l. or any valu­

able thing, he may be indicted thereupon, and shall forfeit five times the value, shall be deemed infamous | person by cheating at play shall win any money or valuable thing or shall at any one time or sitting win more than 10l. he may be indicted thereupon, and shall forfeit five times the value to any person who will sue for it, and (in case of cheating) shall be deemed infamous

〈21〉 [ed. 7] bag­gammon | back­gammon 〈22〉 [ed. 9] losing at any sitting 10l., or 20l. within twenty four hours, he shall for­

feit five times the sum | losing at play or by betting at any one time 10l. or 20l. within twenty four hours, he shall be fined five times the sum for the benefit of the poor of the parish.

〈23〉 [ed. 5] another offence, so constituted | another offence, constituted 〈24〉 [ed. 5] at unseasonable times of the year, there are various penalties assigned,

corporal and pecuniary, by different statutes; on any of which, but only on one at a time, the justices may convict in a summary way, or prosecutions may be carried on at the assises | at unseasonable times of the year, or unseasonable hours of the day or night there are various penalties assigned, corporal and pecuniary, by different statutes and some of them very extraordinary [Footnote: By Stat. 10 Geo. III. c. 19. Persons killing game upon any pretence whatsoever, above an hour before sunrise or after sunset, shall without any 316 varia: chapter 14

respect to sex or quality, and without any alternative or redemption, be com­ mitted to prison for three months at the least, and be publicly whipped at noonday in the town where the prison is situate. This statute hath now contin­ ued three sessions of parliament unrepealed.]: on any of which, but only on one at a time the justices may convict in a summary way, or (in most of them) prosecutions may be carried on at the assises

[ed. 7] at unseasonable times of the year, or unseasonable hours of the day or night, on sundays or on Christmas day, there are various penalties assigned, corporal and pecuniary, by different statutes: on any of which, but only on one at a time the justices may convict in a summary way, or (in most cases) pros­ ecutions may be carried on at assises





Chapter 14


〈1〉 [ed. 4] and which therefore no man can be entitled to deprive himself or

another of, but | and of which therefore no man can be entitled to deprive himself or another, but

〈2〉 [ed. 9] obliges one | oblige one 〈3〉 [ed. 8] This is of a piece with | This is similar to 〈4〉 [ed. 5] you will observe | it may be observed 〈5〉 [ed. 5] servant | apprentice

〈6〉 [ed. 5] of any | of an

〈7〉 [ed. 8] no other possible means of escaping | no other possible (or, at least,

probable) means of escaping

〈8〉 [ed. 9] In some cases this species of homicide (upon chance-medley in self­

defence) differs but little from manslaughter, which also happens frequently upon chance-medley in the proper legal sense of the word | It is frequently difficult to distinguish this species of homicide (upon chance-medley in self­ defence) from that of manslaughter in the proper legal sense of the word

〈9〉 [ed. 7] preferably | preferable 〈10〉 [ed. 5] on oneself. A felo de se | on oneself. And this admits of accessories

before the fact, as well as other felonies, for if one persuades another to kill himself, and he does so, the adviser be guilty of murder [Footnote: Keilw. 136.]. A felo de se

〈11〉 [ed. 5] manslaughter arises | manslaughter (when voluntary) arises 〈12〉 [ed. 5] a deliberate | deliberate 〈13〉 [ed. 5] either murder or manslaughter according to the nature of the act which

occasioned it. If it be in prosecution of a felonious intent, it will be murder; but if no more was intended than a mere trespass | either murder or man­ slaughter [Footnote: Our statute law has severely animadverted on one

varia: chapter 14 317

species of criminal negligence, whereby the death of a man is occasioned. For by statute law 10 Geo. II. c. 31. if any waterman between Gravesend and Windsor receives into his boat or barge a greater number of persons than the act allows, and any passenger shall then be drowned, such water­ man is guilty (not of manslaughter, but) of felony, and shall be transported as a felon.] according to the nature of the act which occasioned it. If it be in prosecution of a felonious intent, or in its consequences naturally tended to bloodshed, it will be murder; but, if no more was intended than a mere civil trespass

〈14〉 [ed. 5] Foster. 258. | Fost. 258; 1 Hawk. P. C. 84. 〈15〉 [ed. 5] stabbing stands | stabbing now stands 〈16〉 [ed. 5] this takes it out of the statute | this does not take it out of the statute 〈17〉 [ed 9] other weapon | other blunt weapon 〈18〉 [ed. 9] murder was antiently | murder (as a crime) was antiently 〈19〉 [ed. 9] Stiernh. de jure Sueon. l. 3. c. 3. | Stiernh. de jure Sueon. l. 3. c. 3. The

word murdre in our old statutes also signified any kind of concealment or stifling. So in the statute of Exeter, 14 Edw. I, “je riens ne celerai, ne sufferai estre celé ne murdré:” which is thus translated in Fleta. l. l. c. 18. §. 4. “Nullum veritatem celabo, nec celari permittam murdrari [I will not hide the truth, nor will I permit it to be hidden or concealed].” And the words “pur murder le droit” in the articles of that statute, are rendered in Fleta ibid. §. 8. “pro jure alicujus murdriendo [for smothering some man’s right].”

〈20〉 [ed. 5] a lunatic or infant | lunatics or infants 〈21〉 [ed. 8] may be overcome. Of these the most detestable of all is poison | may be

overcome. And if a person be indicted for one species of killing, as by poison-ing, he cannot be convicted by evidence of a totally different species of death, as by shooting with a pistol or starving. But where they only differ in circum­ stance, as if a wound be alleged to be given with a sword, and it proves to have arisen from a staff, an axe, or a hatchet, this difference is immaterial [Footnote: 3 Inst. 319. 2 Hal. P. C. 185.]. Of all species of death the most detestable is that of poison

〈22〉 [ed. 5] which is hardly so at this day, nor has there been an instance | which

may be dubious at this day; as there hath not been an instance

〈23〉 [ed. 4] the attorney general | the then attorney general 〈24〉 [ed. 5] I have grounds to believe it was not from any apprehension that | I have

good grounds to believe it was not from any apprehension of his that

〈25〉 [ed. 7] Britt. c. 5. Bracton. l. 3. c. 4. | Brit. c. 52. Bracton. l. 3. c. 4. 〈26〉 [ed. 5] struck by himself: as was the case | struck by himself, and no killing

may be primarily intended: as was the case

〈27〉 [ed. 5] child in an orchard, where a kite struck it and killed it. | child under

leaves in an orchard, where a kite struck it and killed it.

318 varia: chapter 14

[ed. 8] child under leaves in an orchard, where a kite struck it and killed it, and of the parish officers, who shifted a child from parish to parish, till it died for want of care and sustenance [Footnote: [Holloway’s case] Palm. 545.].

〈28〉 [ed. 8] a bear or a dog | a bear or dog 〈 29〉 [ed. 8] determination; since physic and salves were in use before licensed

physicians and surgeons: wherefore he treats this doctrine as apocryphal, and fitted only to gratify and flatter licentiates and doctors in physic; though it may be of use to make people cautious and wary, how they meddle too much in so dangerous an employment. In order also | determination. In order also

〈30〉 [ed. 8] peace or protection | peace and protection 〈31〉 [ed. 7] it is murder in such as administered or gave them. | it seems, by the

better opinion, to be murder in such as administered or gave them [Footnote: 3 Inst. 50. 1 Hawk. P. C. 80. but see 1 Hal. P. C. 433.].

〈32〉 [ed. 5] deliberately with a horse used to strike, or discharging a gun | deliber­

ately, and with an intent to do mischief [Footnote: [R. v Keite] Lord Raym. 143.], upon a horse used to strike, or coolly discharging a gun

〈33〉 [ed. 7] this is likewise murder. It were endless | this is likewise murder. So also,

if one gives a woman with child a medicine to procure abortion, and it oper­ ates so violently as to kill the woman, this is murder in the person who gave it [Footnote: Hal. P. C. 429.]. It were endless

〈34〉 [ed. 8] on a principle of accident | on the account of accident 〈35〉 [ed. 5] be proved | are proved 〈36〉 [ed. 5] But now, by statute 23 Hen. VIII. c. 1. and 1 Edw. VI. c. 12. the benefit of

clergy is taken away from murder though malice prepense. In atrocious cases | But now by several statutes [Footnote: 23 Hen. VIII. c. 1. 1 Edw. VI. c. 12. 4 & 5 P. & M. c. 4.], the benefit of clergy is taken away from murderers through malice prepense, their abetters, procurers, and counsellors. In atrocious cases

〈37〉 [ed. 5] the judge, before whom a murderer is convicted, shall | the judge,

before whom any person is found guilty of wilful murder, shall pronounce sentence immediately after conviction, unless he sees cause to postpone it; and shall

〈38〉 [ed. 5] William III, and also except in its punishment. | William III. But a

person indicted of petit treason may be acquitted thereof, and found guilty of manslaughter or murder [Footnote: [Swann and Jefferies] Foster 106. 1 Hal. P. C. 378. 2 Hal. P C 184.]; and in such case it should seem that two witnesses are not necessary, as in case of petit treason they are. Which crime is also distinguished from murder in its punishment.

〈39〉 [ed. 8] from the laws | by the laws 〈40〉 [ed. 5] by statute 12 Hen. VII. c. 7. | by statute 12 Hen. VII. c. 7 which has since

been [ed. 8: been since] extended to their aiders, abettors, and counsellors, by

varia: chapter 15 319





Chapter 15


〈1〉 [ed. 8] fine | fines

〈2〉 [ed. 8] any person, which may endanger either killing or maiming | any per­

son, in any dwelling­house or other place; an offence, of which the probable consequence may be either killing or maiming

〈3〉 [ed. 4] any woman, maid, widow, or wife, having substance | any woman,

being maid, widow, or wife, and having substance

〈4〉 [ed. 5] consent to others, or defiled; such person, and all his accessories, shall

be deemed principal felons: and by statute 39 Eliz. c. 9. the benefit of clergy is taken away from all such felons, except accessories after the offence. | consent to another, or defiled; such person, his procurers and abetters, and such as knowingly receive such woman, shall be deemed principal felons: and by stat­ ute 39 Eliz. c. 9. the benefit of clergy is taken away from all such felons, who shall be principals, procurers, or accessories before the fact.

〈5〉 [ed. 9] the Roman laws suppose | the Roman law supposes 〈6〉 [ed. 8] Barrington. 107 | Barrington. 142 〈7〉 [ed. 5] the offence itself being reduced to a trespass, if not prosecuted by the

woman within forty days | the offence itself, of ravishing a damsel within age, (that is, twelve years old) either with her consent or without, or of any other woman against her will; being reduced to a trespass, if not prosecuted by appeal within forty days

〈8〉 [ed. 5] offence of rape felony | offence of forcible rape felony 〈9〉 [ed. 9] knowing or abusing | knowing and abusing 〈10〉 [ed. 5] the law has in general been held only to extend to infants under ten. A

male infant | that law has in general been held only to extend to infants, under ten, though it should seem that damsels between ten and twelve are still under the protection of the statute Westm. I. the law with respect to their seduction not having been altered by either of the subsequent statutes. A male infant

〈11〉 [ed. 4] stands | stand

〈12〉 [ed. 5] oath; and, even if she hath not, it is thought by sir Matthew Hale that

she ought to be heard without oath, to give the court information; though that alone will not be sufficient to convict the offender. And he is of this opinion, first, because the nature of the offence being secret, there may be no other possible proof of the actual fact; though afterwards there may be concurrent circumstances to corroborate it, proved by other witnesses: and, secondly, because the law allows what the child told her mother, or other relations, to be given in evidence, since the nature of the case admits frequently of no better proof; and there is much more reason for the court to hear the narration of the child herself, than to receive it at second hand from those who swear they heard her say so. And indeed it is now settled, that infants of any age are to be 320 varia: chapter 15

by experience that infants of very tender years often give the clearest and tru­ est testimony. But in any of these cases, whether the child be sworn or not, it is to be wished, in order to render her evidence credible, that there should be some concurrent testimony | oath; and, even if she hath not [ … ] say so. And indeed it seems now to be settled, that in these cases infants of any age are to be heard [ … ] concurrent testimony

[ed. 9] oath, or even to be sensible of the wickedness of telling a deliberate lye. Nay, though she hath not, it is thought by sir Matthew Hale that she ought to be heard without oath, to give the court information; and others have held, that what the child told her mother, or other relations, may be given in evi­ dence, since the nature of the case admits frequently of no better proof. But it is now settled, [Brazier’s case, before the twelve judges, P. 19 Geo. III.] that no hearsay evidence can be given of the declarations of a child who hath not capacity to be sworn, nor can such child be examined in court without oath: and that there is no determinate age, at which the oath of a child ought either to be admitted or rejected. Yet, where the evidence of children is admitted, it is much to be wished, in order to render their evidence credible, that there should be some concurrent testimony

〈13〉 [ed. 4] prosecutions | prosecution 〈14〉 [ed. 5] so disagreeable part | so disagreeable a part 〈15〉 [ed. 4] non nominandum | non nominandum [Footnote: See in Rot. Parl. 50

Edw. III. n. 58. a complaint, that a Lombard did commit the sin “that was not to be named” ([Buggary] 12 Rep. 37 [recte 36]).]

〈 16〉 [ed. 4] made single felony by the statute 25 Hen. VIII. c. 6. and felony without

benefit of clergy by statute 5 Eliz. c. 17. | made felony without benefit of clergy by statute 25 Hen. VIII. c. 6. revised and confirmed by 5 Eliz. c. 17

〈 17〉 [ed. 8] with fine | with fines

〈 18〉 [ed. 9] proof: and herein, besides heavy fine and imprisonment | proof: or

when both parties are consenting to an unnatural attempt, it is usual not to charge any assault, but that one of them laid hands on the other with intent to commit, and that the other permitted the same with intent to suffer, the com­ mission of the abominable crime aforementioned. And in all these cases, besides heavy fine and imprisonment

〈19〉 [ed. 5] without any possibility of pardon. Inferior degrees | without any possibility

of pardon. And we may also add, that by statute 43 Eliz. c. 13 to carry any one by force out of the four northern counties or imprison him within the same, in order to ransom him or make spoil of his person or goods, is felony without bene­ fit of clergy in the principals and all accessories before the fact. Inferior degrees

〈20〉 [ed. 5] of man, woman, or child from their own country, and selling them | of

man, woman, or child from their own country, and sending them [ed. 8] of a man, woman, or child from their own country, and sending them

varia: chapter 16 321





Chapter 16


〈1〉 [ed. 5] outhouses | outhouse

〈2〉 [ed. 5] Cro. Car. 377.| Cro. Car. 377. [Holmes’s case] 1 Jon. 351. 〈3〉 [ed 8] suspension | hanging

〈4〉 [ed. 5] expressly denied it to the accessory; though now it is expressly denied

to the principal also, by statute 9 Geo. I. c. 22. | expressly denied it to the acces­ sory before the fact; though now it is expressly denied to the principal in all cases within the statute 9 Geo. I. c. 22.

〈5〉 [ed. 5] no doors | no outward doors 〈6〉 [ed. 8] of the mansion­house, though not under the same roof | of the man­

sion­house and within the same common fence [Footnote: K. v. Garland. P. 16 Geo. III. by all the judges], though not under the same roof

〈7〉 [ed. 5] of the lodger. The house | of the lodger; if the owner doth not himself

dwell in the house, or if he and the lodger enter by different outward doors. But if the owner himself lies in the house, and hath but one outward door at which he and his lodgers enter, such lodgers seem only to be inmates, and all their apartments to be parcel of the one dwelling­house of the owner [Footnote: Kel. 84. 1 Hal. P. C. 556.]. Thus too the house

〈8〉 [ed. 8] and it is the folly of the owner to lodge in so fragile a tenement: but his

lodging | and though it may be the choice of the owner to lodge in so fragile a tenement, yet but his lodging

〈9〉 [ed. 8] must be | must in general be 〈10〉 [ed. 5] 1 Hal. P. C. 553. 1 Hawk. P. C. 103. | [Joshua Cornwall’s case] Stra. 881.

1 Hal. P. C. 553. 1 Hawk. P. C. 103

〈11〉 [ed. 5] enters into, or is within, the dwelling house of another, without break­

ing in, either by day or by night, with intent to commit felony, and shall in the night | enters into the dwelling house, without breaking in, either by day or by night, with intent to commit felony, or, being in such house shall commit any felony; and shall in the night

〈12〉 [ed. 8] which is, as has been said, a felony | which is a felony 〈13〉 [ed. 5] The statute however of 18 Eliz. c. 7. takes away clergy from the princi­

pals, and that of 3 & 4 W. & M. c. 9. from all accessories before the fact. | The statutes however of 1 Edw. VI. c. 12. and 18 Eliz. c. 7. take away clergy from the principals, and that of 3 & 4 W. & M. c. 9. from all abettors and accessories before the fact [ed. 7: Footnote: Burglary in any house belonging to the plate glass company, with intent to steal the stock or utensils, is by the statute 13 Geo. III declared to be single felony, and punished with transportation for seven years.]. [The Company of British Plate Glass Manufacturers was incor­ porated in 1773 by act of parliament (13 Geo. III. c. 38).]

322 varia: chapter 17





Chapter 17


〈1〉 [ed. 4] to steal, or sever with intent to steal, any lead or iron fixed to a house,

or in any court or garden thereunto belonging, is made felony, liable to trans­ portation for seven years: and to steal underwood or hedges, and the like, to rob orchards or gardens of fruit growing therein, to steal or otherwise destroy any turnips or the roots of madder when growing, are by the statutes 43 Eliz. c. 7. 15 Car. II. c. 2. 23 Geo. II. c. 26. and 31 Geo. II. c. 35. punishable criminally, by whipping, small fines, imprisonment, and satisfaction to the party wronged, according to the nature of the offence. Moreover, the stealing by night of any trees, or of any roots, shrubs, or plants to the value of 5s., is by statute 6 Geo. III. c. 36. made felony in the principals, aiders, and abettors, and in the pur­ chasers thereof knowing the same to be stolen: and by statute 6 Geo. III. c. 48. the stealing of any timber trees therein specified, and of any root | to steal, or sever with intent to steal, any lead or iron fixed to a house, or in any court or garden thereunto belonging, is made felony, liable to transportation for seven years: and to steal, damage or destroy underwood or hedges, and the like, to rob orchards or gardens of fruit growing therein, to steal or otherwise destroy any turnips or the roots of madder when growing, are [Footnote: 43 Eliz. c. 7. 15 Car. II. c. 2. 23 Geo. II. c. 26. 31 Geo. II. c. 35. 6 Geo. III. c. 48. 9 Geo. III. c. 41.] punishable criminally, by whipping, small fines, imprisonment, and satis­ faction to the party wronged, according to the nature of the offence. Moreover, the stealing by night of any trees, or of any roots, shrubs, or plants to the value of 5s., is by statute 6 Geo. III. c. 36. made felony in the principals, aiders, and abettors, and in the purchasers thereof knowing the same to be stolen: and by statute 6 Geo. III. c. 48. the stealing of any timber trees therein specified, and of any root

[ed. 5] to steal, or sever with intent to steal, any lead or iron bar, rail, gate, or palisado, fixed to a house, or in any court or garden thereunto belonging, is made felony, liable to transportation for seven years: and to steal, damage or destroy underwood or hedges, and the like, to rob orchards or gardens of fruit growing therein, to steal or otherwise destroy any turnips or the roots of mad­ der when growing, are punishable criminally, by whipping, small fines, imprisonment, and satisfaction to the party wronged, according to the nature of the offence. Moreover, the stealing by night of any trees, or of any roots, shrubs, or plants to the value of 5s., is by statute 6 Geo. III. c. 36. made felony in the principals, aiders, and abettors, and in the purchasers thereof knowing the same to be stolen: and by statute 6 Geo. III. c. 48. the stealing of any tim­ ber trees therein specified, and of any root

[ed. 7] to steal, or rip, cut, or break, sever with intent to steal, any lead or iron bar, rail, gate, or palisado, fixed to a dwelling­house or outhouse, or in any court or garden thereunto belonging, or to any other buildings, is made fel­ ony, liable to transportation for seven years: and to steal, damage or destroy

varia: chapter 17 323

therein, to steal or otherwise destroy any turnips, potatoes, cabbages, parsnips, pease, or carrots, or the roots of madder when growing, are [Footnote: 43 Eliz. c. 7. 15 Car. II. c. 2. 23 Geo. II. c. 26. 31 Geo. II. c. 35. 6 Geo. III. c. 48. 9 Geo. III. c. 41. 13 Geo. III. c. 32.] punishable criminally, by whipping, small fines, impris­ onment, and satisfaction to the party wronged, according to the nature of the offence. Moreover, the stealing by night of any trees, or of any roots, shrubs, or plants to the value of 5s., is by statute 6 Geo. III. c. 36. made felony in the prin­ cipals, aiders, and abettors, and in the purchasers thereof knowing the same to be stolen: and by statutes 6 Geo. III. c. 48. and 13 Geo. III. c. 33. the stealing of any timber trees therein specified, and of any root

[ed. 8] to steal, or rip, cut, or break, with intent to steal, any lead or iron bar, rail, gate, or palisado, fixed to a dwelling­house or outhouse, or in any court or garden thereunto belonging, or to any other building, is made felony, liable to transportation for seven years: and to steal, damage or destroy underwood or hedges, and the like, to rob orchards or gardens of fruit growing therein, to steal or otherwise destroy any turnips, potatoes, cabbages, parsnips, pease, or carrots, or the roots of madder when growing, are [Footnote: 43 Eliz. c. 7. 15 Car. II. c. 2. 31 Geo. II. c. 35. 6 Geo. III. c. 48. 9 Geo. III. c. 41.] punishable criminally, … . Moreover, the stealing by night of any trees, or of any roots, shrubs, or plants to the value of 5s., is by statute 6 Geo. III. c. 36. made felony in the principals, aiders, and abettors, and in the purchasers thereof knowing the same to be stolen: and by statutes 6 Geo. III. c. 48. and 13 Geo. III. c. 33. the stealing of any timber trees therein specified, and of any root

〈2〉 [ed. 7] Oak, beech, chesnut, walnut, ash, elm, cedar, fir, asp, lime, sycamore,

and birch.| Oak, beech, walnut, ash, elm, cedar, fir, asp, lime, sycamore, and birch, poplar, alder, larch, maple, and hornbeam.

〈3〉 [ed. 5] out of which is felony | out of which, or entering the same with intent

to steal, is felony, punishable with imprisonment and whipping, or transpor­ tation not exceeding seven years; and escape from such imprisonment, or return from such transportation, is felony

〈4〉 [ed. 5] property in the possession | property in possession 〈 5〉 [ed. 5] to secure. And, by statute 7 Geo. III. | to secure. By statute 15 Geo. II.

c. 13. officers or servants of the bank of England, secreting or embezzling any note, bill, warrant, bond, deed, security, money, or effects, intrusted with them or with the company, are guilty of felony without benefit of clergy. The same is enacted by statute 24 Geo. II. c. 11. with respect to officers and servants of the south­sea­company. And, by statute 7 Geo. III.

〈 6〉 [ed. 4] this inhumanity is also punished | this inhumanity is punished 〈 7〉 [ed. 5] to kill or steal any deer in a forest, or other place, enclosed; to rob a

warren; or to steal fish from a river or pond, being in this last case armed and disguised; these are felonies without benefit of clergy. And by statute 13 Car. II. c. 10. to steal deer in any forest, though uninclosed, is a forfeiture of 20l. for 324 varia: chapter 17

the second offence: which punishment is also inflicted for the first offence upon such as come to hunt there armed with offensive weapons. Also by stat­ ute 5 Geo. III. c. 14. | to hunt, wound, kill, or steal any deer; to rob a warren; or to steal fish from a river or pond, being in these last cases armed and dis­ guised; to hunt, wound, kill, or steal any deer, in the king’s forests or chases inclosed, or in any other inclosed place where deer have been usually kept; or by gift or promise of reward to procure any person to join them in such unlawful act; all these are felonies without benefit of clergy. And by statute 13 Car. II. c. 10. to steal deer in any forest, though uninclosed, is a forfeiture of 20l. for the first offence, and by statute 10 Geo. II. c. 32. seven years transpor­ tation for the second offence: which punishment is also inflicted for the first offence upon such as come to hunt there armed with offensive weapons. Also by statute 5 Geo. III. c. 14.

[ed. 8] to hunt, wound, kill, or steal any deer; to rob a warren; or to steal fish from a river or pond (being in these cases armed and disguised) also to hunt, wound, kill, or steal any deer, in the king’s forests or chases inclosed, or in any other inclosed place where deer have been usually kept; or by gift or promise of reward to procure any person to join them in such unlawful act; all these are felonies without benefit of clergy. And the statute 16 Geo. III. c. 30. enacts, that every unauthorized person, his aiders and abettors, who shall course, hunt, shoot at, or otherwise attempt to kill, wound, or destroy any red or fal­ low deer in any forest, chase, purlieu, or antient walk, or in any inclosed park, paddock, wood or other ground, where deer are usually kept, shall forfeit the sum of 20l. or for every deer actually killed, wounded, destroyed, taken in any toyl or snare, or carried away, the sum of 30l. or double those sums, in case the offender be a keeper: and, upon a second offence (whether of the same or a different species) shall be guilty of felony, and transportable for seven years. Which latter punishment is likewise inflicted on all persons armed with offen­ sive weapons, who shall come into such places with an intent to commit any of the said offences, and shall there unlawfully beat or wound any of the keep­ ers in the execution of their offices, or shall attempt to rescue any person from their custody. Also by statute 5 Geo. III. c. 14.

〈8〉 [ed. 4] park, paddock, orchard, or yard | park, paddock, garden, orchard, or

yard

〈9〉 [ed. 7.] killing of conies in open warrens | killing of conies by night in open

warrens

〈10〉 [ed. 8] as horses, and of all animals domitae naturae, which serve for food, as

swine, sheep, poultry, and the like, larciny may be committed; and also of the flesh of such as are ferae naturae, when killed. | as horses, and other beasts of draught, and of all animals domitae naturae, which serve for food, as neat or other cattle, swine, poultry, and the like, and their fruit [ed. 9: of their fruit] or produce, taken from them while living, as milk or wool [Footnote: [Coron., 1556–7], Dal. 21. Crompt. 36. 1 Hawk. P.C. 93. 1 Hal. P. C. 507. The King v.

varia: chapter 17 325

Martin, by all the judges, P. 17 Geo. III.] [ed. 9: footnote deleted] larciny may be committed; and also of the flesh of such as are either domitae or ferae nat-urae, when killed.

〈11〉 [ed. 5] larciny. | larciny. But by statute 10 Geo. III. c. 18 very high pecuniary pen­

alties, or a long imprisonment in their stead, may be inflicted by two justices of the peace, (with a very peculiar mode of appeal to the quarter sessions) on such as steal, or knowingly harbour a stolen dog, or have in their custody the skin of a dog that has been stolen [Footnote: See the remarks in pag. 4 [IV. 2–3].]. [ed. 8] | larciny. But by statute 10 Geo. III. c. 18 very high pecuniary penalties, or a long imprisonment and whipping in their stead, may be inflicted by two justices of the peace, (with a very extraordinary mode of appeal to the quarter sessions) on such as steal, or knowingly harbour a stolen dog, or have in their custody the skin of a dog that has been stolen. [Footnote: See the remarks in pag. 4. This statute hath now continued seven [ed. 9: nine] sessions of parlia­ ment unrepealed!]

〈12〉 [ed. 9] more than two centuries, have very sensibly | more than two centuries

from each other, have very sensibly

〈13〉 [ed. 9] by whipping at common law | by imprisonment or whipping at com­

mon law

〈14〉 [ed. 4] may be extended | may perhaps be extended 〈15〉 [ed. 7] for seven years, yet the punishment | for seven years, as is also expressly

directed in the case of the plate­glass company, yet the punishment

〈16〉 [ed. 5] intermediate alteration | intermediate alteration [Footnote: In the

reign of king Henry I, the stated value at the exchequer of a pasture­fed ox was one shilling: (Dial de Scacc. 1. 1. §. 7.) which if we should even suppose to mean the solidus legalis [lawful shilling] mentioned by Lyndewode (Prov. 1. 3. c. 13. See Vol. II. pag. 509 [II. 344].) or the 72d part of a pound of gold is only equal to 13s. 4d. of the present standard]

〈17〉 [ed. 5] but this is a kind of pious perjury, | but this, though evidently justifiable

and proper, when it only reduces the present nominal value of money to the antient standard [Footnote: 2 Inst. 189.], is otherwise a kind of pious perjury,

〈18〉 [ed. 5] horsestealing; taking woollen cloth from off the tenters, or linen from

the place of manufacture; stealing sheep or other cattle specified in the acts; thefts on navigable rivers above the value of forty shillings; plundering | hors­ estealing in the principals, and accessories both before and after the fact; theft by great and notorious thieves in Northumberland and Cumberland [Footnote: Stat. 18 Car. II, c. 3.]; taking woollen cloth from off the tenters [Footnote: Stat. 22 Car. II. c. 5]. But, as it sometimes is difficult to prove the identity of the goods so stolen, the onus probandi [burden of proof] with respect to innocence is now by statute 15 Geo. II. c. 27. thrown on the persons in whose custody such goods are found. The failure whereof is, for the first time, a misdemesnor punishable by forfeiture of the treble value; for the 326 varia: chapter 17

second, by imprisonment also; and the third time it becomes a felony, pun­ ished with transportation for seven years.], or linens, &c, from the place of manufacture [Footnote: Stat. 13 Geo. II, c. 27. Note, in the three last cases an option is given to the judge to transport the offender; for life in the first case, for seven years in the second, and for fourteen years in the third;—in the first and third cases instead of sentence of death, in the second af ter sentence is given.]; (which extends, in the last case, to aiders, assisters, procurers, buyers, and receivers) stealing sheep or other cattle specified in the acts [Footnote: Stat. 14 Geo. II, c. 6. 15 Geo, II. c. 34.], or aiding or assisting therein; thefts on navigable rivers above the value of forty shillings [Footnote: Stat. 24 Geo. II. c. 45.], or being present, aiding, and assisting thereat; plundering [ed. 7] horsestealing in the principals, and accessories both before and after the fact; theft by great and notorious thieves in Northumberland and Cumberland; taking woollen cloth from off the tenters, or linens, fustians, callicoes, or cotton goods &c, from the place of manufacture; (which extends, in the last case, to aiders, assisters, procurers, buyers, and receivers) feloni­ ously driving away, or otherwise stealing one or more sheep or other cattle specified in the acts, or killing them with intent to steal, the whole or any part of the carcase [Footnote: Stat. 14 Geo. II, c. 6. 15 Geo. II. c. 34. See vol. I, pag. 88. [I. 64–5]], or aiding or assisting therein; thefts on navigable rivers above the value of forty shillings, or being present, aiding, and assisting thereat; plundering

〈19〉 [ed. 8] also stealing deer, hares, | also stealing deer, fish, hares, 〈20〉 [ed. 8] or of corn | or corn

〈21〉 [ed. 5] with one of, or both, the aggravations | with either one of, or both, of

the aggravations

〈22〉 [ed. 4] in almost every instance. The multiplicity of which acts are apt | in

almost every instance. The multiplicity of which acts is apt [ed. 7] in almost every instance: except that larciny of the stock or utensils of the plate­glass company from any of their houses, &c. is made only a single felony, and liable to transportation for seven years [Footnote: Stat. 13 Geo. III. c. 38.]. The multiplicity of the general acts is apt

〈23〉 [ed. 4] viz. 1. In all larcinies above the value of twelvepence, from a church, or

from a dwelling­house, or booth, any person being therein. 2. In all larcinies to the value of 5s. committed by breaking the dwelling­house, though no per­ son be therein. 3. In all larcinies to the value of 40s. from a dwelling­house, or its outhouses, without breaking in, and whether any person be therein or no. 4. In all larcinies to the value of 5s. from any shop, warehouse, coachhouse, or stable; whether the same be broken open or not, and whether any person be therein or no. In all these cases, whether happening by day or by night, the benefit of clergy is taken away from the offenders. | viz. First, in all larcinies above the value of twelvepence, committed, 1. In a church or chapel, with or

varia: chapter 17 327

1 Edw. VI. c. 12.]: 2. In a booth or tent in a market or fair, in the day time or in the night, by violence or breaking the same; the owner or some of his family being therein [Footnote: 5 & 6 Edw. VI. c. 9.]: 3. In a dwellinghouse by day, by breaking the same, any person being therein [Footnote: 3 & 4 W. & M. c. 9.]: 4. In a dwellinghouse by day, without breaking the same, any person being therein and put in fear [Footnote: Ibid]: 5. In a dwellinghouse by night, with­ out breaking the same, the owner or some of his family being therein, and put in fear [Footnote: 23 Hen. VIII. c. 1.]. Secondly, in all larcinies to the value of five shillings, committed, 1. By breaking any dwelling house, or any outhouse, shop, or warehouse thereunto belonging, in the day time although no person be therein [Footnote: 39 Eliz. c. 15.]. 2. By privately stealing in any shop, ware­ house [Footnote: See Foster. 79. Barr. 379.], coachhouse, or stable, by day or by night; though the same be not broken open and though no person be therein [Footnote: Stat. 10 & 11 W. III. c. 23.]. Lastly, in all larcinies to the value of forty shillings from a dwellinghouse or its outhouses, without breaking in, and whether any person be therein or no [Footnote: Stat. 12 Ann. c. 7.]. [ed. 5] First, in larcinies above the value of twelvepence, committed, 1. In a church or chapel, with or without violence, or breaking the same [Footnote: Stat. 23 Hen. VIII. c. 1. 1 Edw. VI. c. 12. 1 Hal. P. C. 518.]: 2. In a booth or tent in a market or fair, in the day time or in the night, by violence or breaking the same; the owner or some of his family being therein [Footnote: 5 & 6 Edw. VI. c. 9. 1 Hal. P. C. 522.]: 3. By robbing a dwelling house in the day time (which robbing implies a breaking) any person being therein [Footnote as above]. 4. In a dwelling house by day or by night, without breaking the same, any person being therein and put in fear [Footnote as above]; which amounts in law to a robbery; and in both these last cases the accessory before the fact is also excluded from his clergy [Footnote as above]. Secondly, in larcinies to the value of five shillings, committed, 1. By breaking any dwelling house, or any outhouse, shop, or warehouse thereunto belonging, in the day time, although no person be therein [Footnote as above]; which also now extends to aiders, abettors, and accessories before the fact [Footnote: 39 Eliz. c. 15]: 2. By pri­ vately stealing goods, wares, or merchandize in any shop, warehouse [Footnote: See Foster 78. Barr. 379.], coachhouse, or stable by day or by night; though the same be not broken open and though no person be therein [Footnote: Stat. 10 & 11 W. III. c. 23]: which likewise extends to such as assist, hire, or command the offence to be committed. Lastly, in larcinies to the value of forty shillings from [ed. 7: in] a dwelling house, or its outhouses, without breaking in [ed. 7: although the same be not broken], and whether any person be therein or no; unless committed against their masters by apprentices under the age of fifteen [Footnote: Stat. 12 Ann. stat. 1. c. 7.]. This also extends to those, who aid or assist in the commission of any such offence.

〈24〉 [ed. 5] or the like, without his knowlege, was debarred of the benefit of clergy,

so early as by the statute 8 Eliz. c. 14 | or the like, privily without his knowlege, 328 varia: chapter 17

〈25〉 [ed. 8] but only takes away the benefit of clergy, which was a matter of grace,

and leaves the thief to the regular judgment of the antient law. This | but only prevents the prisoner from praying the benefit of clergy, and leaves him to the regular judgment of the ancient law [Footnote: 1 Hawk. P. C. 98. The like observation will certainly hold in the cases of horsestealing (1 Hal. P. C. 531) thefts in Northumberland and Cumberland, and stealing woollen cloth from the tenters; and possibly in such other cases where it is provided by any statute that simple larceny, under certain circumstances, shall be felony without benefit of clergy.]. This

〈26〉 [ed. 5] committed, and the difficulty of guarding against them: besides | com­

mitted, and difficulty of guarding against them, and the boldness with which they were practised (even in the queen’s court and presence) at the time when this statute was made: besides

〈27〉 [ed. 5] by putting him in fear | by violence or putting him in fear 〈28〉 [ed. 5] a felony transportable for seven years. If the thief | a felony (transport­

able for seven years) unlawfully and maliciously to assault another, with any offensive weapon or instrument;—or by menaces, or by other forcible or vio­ lent manner, to demand any money or goods;—with a felonious intent to rob. If the thief

〈29〉 [ed. 8] before his face. 2. It is immaterial | before his face. But if the taking be

not either directly from his person, or in his presence, it is no robbery [Footnote: Comyns, 478. Stra. 1015.]. 2. It is immaterial

〈30〉 [ed. 5] This previous putting in fear | This previous violence, or putting in fear 〈31〉 [ed. 5] under the value of twelvepence. Yet this putting in fear does not imply,

that any great degree of terror or affright in the party robbed is necessary to con­ stitute a robbery: it is sufficient that so much force, or threatening by word or gesture, be used, as might create an apprehension of danger, or oblige a man to part with his property | under the value of twelvepence. Not that it is indeed necessary, though usual, to lay in the indictment that the robbery was committed by putting in fear: it is sufficient, if laid to be done by violence [Footnote: Trin. 3 Ann. by all the judges.]. And when it is laid to be done by putting in fear, this does not imply any great degree of terror or affright in the party robbed; it is enough that so much force, or threatening by word or gesture, be used, as might create an apprehension of danger, or induce a man to part with his property

〈32〉 [ed. 5] committed in or near the king’s highway | committed in a dwelling

house or in or near the king’s highway

〈33〉 [ed. 5] from robbery wheresoever committed | from both principals and

accessories before the fact, in robbery, wheresoever committed

〈34〉 [ed. 5] is felony. By statute 43 Eliz. c. 13. | is felony. And in like manner it is by

many special statutes, enacted upon the occasions, made felony to destroy the several sea­banks, river­banks, public navigations, and bridges, erected by

varia: chapter 17 329

〈35〉 [ed. 5] or grain; or to prey, or make spoil, of the persons or goods of the subject

upon deadly feud, in the four northern counties of Northumberland, West­ morland, Cumberland, and Durham; or to give | or grain; or to imprison, or carry away any subject, in order to ransom him, or to make prey or spoil, of his person or goods upon deadly feud, or otherwise, in the four northern counties of Northumberland, Westmorland, Cumberland, and Durham, or being acces­ sory before the fact to such carrying away or imprisonment; or to give

〈36〉 [ed. 5] By statute 22 & 23 Car. II. c. 7. to burn any ricks or stacks of corn, hay,

or grain, barns, houses, buildings, or kilns; or maliciously, unlawfully, and willingly to kill any horses, sheep, or other cattle, in the night time, is felony; but the offender may make his election to be transported for seven years: and to maim or hurt such cattle is a trespass, for which treble damages shall be recovered. By statute 1 Ann. | By statute 22 & 23 Car. II. c. 7. maliciously, unlawfully, and willingly, in the night time, to burn or cause to be burnt or destroyed, any ricks or stacks of corn, hay, or grain, barns, houses, buildings, or kilns; or to kill any horses, sheep, or other cattle, is felony; but the offender may make his election to be transported for seven years: and to maim or hurt such horses, sheep, or other cattle is a trespass for which treble damages shall be recovered. By statute 4 & 5 W. & M. c. 23. to burn on any waste, between Candlemas [2 February] and Midsummer [24 June], any grig, ling, heath, furze, goss, or fern, is punishable with whipping and confinement in the house of correction. By statute 1 Ann.

〈37〉 [ed. 5] stealing her pumps, or wilfully | stealing her pumps, or aiding or abet­

ting such offence, or wilfully

〈38〉 [ed. 5] in the streets or highways, is felony. | in the streets or highways, with

intent so to do, is felony.

〈39〉 [ed. 4] their practice to cast aqua fortis in the streets upon such as wore them.

By statute 9 Geo. I. c. 22. commonly called the Waltham black act, occasioned by the devastations committed in Epping forest, near Waltham in Essex | their practice to cast aqua fortis in the streets upon such as wore them. By statute 9 Geo. I. c. 22. commonly called the Waltham black­act, occasioned by the dev­ astations committed near Waltham in Hampshire

[ed. 5] their practice to deface them either by open outrage, or by privily cut­ ting or casting aqua fortis in the streets upon such as wore them. By statute 9 Geo. I. c. 22. commonly called the Waltham black act, occasioned by the dev­ astations committed near Waltham in Hampshire

〈40〉 [ed. 4] riots, mayhem, and larciny, it is farther enacted, that unlawfully and

maliciously to set fire to any house, barn, or outhouse, or to any hovel, cock, mow, or stack of corn, straw, hay, or wood; or to break down the head of any fishpond, whereby the fish shall be lost; or to kill, maim, or wound any cattle; or to cut down, or destroy, any trees planted in an avenue, or growing in a garden, orchard, or plantation, for ornament, shelter, or profit; all these mali­

330 varia: chapter 17

unlawfully, riotously, tumultuously, and forcibly to demolish or to pull down, or to begin to demolish or pull down, any church, chapel, or meetinghouse; or any dwellinghouse, barn, stable, or outhouse; or unlawfully and maliciously to set fire to any house, barn, or outhouse, (which in both cases is extended by statute 9 Geo. III. c. 29. to all kinds of mills) or to any hovel, cock, mow, or stack of corn, straw, hay, or wood; or to break down the head of any fishpond, whereby the fish shall be lost; or to kill, maim, or wound any cattle; or to cut down, or destroy, any trees planted in an avenue, or growing in a garden, orchard, or plantation, for ornament, shelter, or profit; all these malicious acts are felonies [ed. 5] riots, menaces, mayhem, and larciny [Footnote: See pag. 144. 208. 235. 240 [IV. 94–5, 137–8, 155–6, 159–60].], it is farther enacted, that to set fire to any house, barn, or outhouse (which is extended by statute 9 Geo. III. c. 29. to the malicious and wilful burning or setting fire to all kinds of mills), or to any hovel, cock, mow, or stack of corn, straw, hay, or wood; or unlawfully and mali­ ciously to break down the head of any fishpond, whereby the fish shall be lost or destroyed; or in like manner to kill, maim, or wound any cattle; or to cut down, or destroy, any trees planted in an avenue, or growing in a garden, orchard, or plantation, for ornament, shelter, or profit; all these malicious acts, or procur­ ing by gift or promise of reward any person to join them therein, are felonies

〈41〉 [ed. 4] overflowed; or to cut any hop­binds growing in a plantation of hops, or

wilfully and maliciously to set fire to any mine or delph of coal. By statute 28 Geo. II. c. 19. to set fire to any goss, furze, or fern, growing in any forest or chase, is subject to a fine of five pounds. And by statute 6 Geo. III. c. 36 & 48. wilfully to spoil or destroy any timber or other trees, roots, shrubs, or plants, is for the two first offences liable to pecuniary penalties; and for the third if in the day time, and even for the first if at night, the offender shall be guilty of felony, and liable to transportation for seven years. And these are the punish­ ments of malicious mischief. | overflowed; or to cut any hop­binds growing in a plantation of hops, or wilfully and maliciously to set fire to any mine or delph of coal. By statute 28 Geo. II. c. 19. to set fire to any goss, furze, or fern, growing in any forest or chase, is subject to a fine of five pounds. By statute 6 Geo. III. c. 36 & 48. wilfully to spoil or destroy any timber or other trees, roots, shrubs, or plants, is for the two first offences liable to pecuniary penal­ ties; and for the third if in the day time, and even for the first if at night, the offender shall be guilty of felony, and liable to transportation for seven years. And these are the punishments

[ed. 5] overflowed; or to cut any hop­binds growing in a plantation of hops, or wilfully and maliciously to set on fire, or cause to be set on fire, any mine, pit, or delph of coal. By statute 11 Geo. II. c. 22. to use any violence in order to deter any person from buying corn or grain; to seize any carriage or horse carrying grain or meal to or from any market or seaport; or to use any outrage with such intent; or to scatter, take away, spoil, or damage such grain or meal; is punished for the first offence with imprisonment and public whipping: and

varia: chapter 17 331

the second offence, or destroying any granary where corn is kept for exporta­ tion, or taking away or spoiling any grain or meal in such granary, or in any ship, boat or vessel intended for exportation, is felony, subject to transporta­ tion for seven years. By statute 28 Geo. II. c. 19. to set fire to any goss, furze, or fern, growing in any forest or chase, is subject to a fine of five pounds. By statute 6 Geo. III. c. 36 & 48. wilfully to spoil or destroy any timber or other trees, roots, shrubs, or plants, is for the two first offences liable to pecuniary penalties; and for the third if in the day time, and even for the first if at night, the offender shall be guilty of felony, and liable to transportation for seven years. And by statute 9 Geo. III. c. 29. wilfully and maliciously to burn or destroy any engine or other machines, therein specified, belonging to any mine; or any fences for inclosures pursuant to any act of parliament, is made single felony, and punishable with transportation for seven years, in the offender, his advisers, and procurers. And these are the principal punishments [ed. 7] overflowed [ … ] for seven years. By statute 6 Geo. III c. 36 & 48. and 13 Geo. III c. 33 wilfully [ … ] his advisers, and procurers. And by statute 13 Geo. III c. 38, the like punishment is inflicted on such as break into any house, &c. belonging to the plate­glass company with intent to steal, cut, or destroy, any of their stock or utensils, or shall wilfully and maliciously cut or destroy the same. And these are the principal punishments

[ed. 8] overflowed or damaged; or to cut [ … ] principal punishments

〈42〉 [ed. 9] his ears, and half a year’s imprisonment | his ears, and a year’s

imprisonment

〈43〉 [ed. 4] the forging or altering of bank bills or notes, or other securities; of bills

of credit issued from the exchequer; of south sea bonds, &c; of lottery orders; of army or navy debentures; of East India bonds; of writings under seal of the London, or royal exchange, assurance; of a letter of attorney or other power to receive or transfer stock or annuities, or for the personating a proprietor thereof, to receive or transfer such annuities, stock, or dividends: to which may be added, though not strictly reducible to this head, the counterfeiting of mediterranean passes, under the hands of the lords of the admiralty, to pro­ tect one from the piratical states of Barbary; the forging or imitating any stamps to defraud the stamp office; and the forging any marriage register or licence: all which are by distinct acts of parliament made felonies without benefit of clergy. And by statute 31 Geo. II. c. 32. forging or counterfeiting any stamp or mark to denote the standard of gold and silver plate, and certain other offences of the like tendency, are made felony, but not without benefit of clergy. | the forging or altering of bank bills or notes, or other securities; of bills of credit issued from the exchequer; of south sea bonds, &c; of lottery orders; of army or navy debentures; of East India bonds; of writings under seal of the London, or royal exchange, assurance; of a letter of attorney or other power to receive or transfer stock or annuities, and on the personating a proprietor thereof, to receive or transfer such annuities, stock, or dividends:

332 varia: chapter 17

also on the uttering or publishing, as true, any counterfeited seaman’s will or powers [Footnote: Stat. 9 Geo. III. c. 30.]: to which may be added, though not strictly reducible to this head, the counterfeiting of mediterranean passes, under the hands of the lords of the admiralty, to protect one from the piratical states of Barbary; the forging or imitating any stamps to defraud the stamp office; and the forging any marriage register or licence: all which are by dis­ tinct acts of parliament made felonies without benefit of clergy. And by statute 31 Geo. II. c. 32. forging or counterfeiting any stamp or mark to denote the standard of gold and silver plate, and certain other offences of the like ten­ dency, are made felony, but not without benefit of clergy. [ed. 5] the forging, altering, or uttering as true, when forged, of any bank bills or notes, or other securities: of bills of credit issued from the exchequer; of south sea bonds, &c; of lottery tickets or orders; of army or navy debentures; of East India bonds; of writings under seal of the London, or royal exchange, assurance; of the hand of the receiver of the pre­fines [Footnote: 32 Geo. II. c. 14.], or of the accountant general and certain other officers of the court of chancery [Footnote: 12 Geo. I. c. 32.]; of a letter of attorney or other power to receive or transfer stock or annuities; and on the personating a proprietor thereof, to receive or transfer such annuities, stock, or dividends [Footnote: Stat. 8 Geo. I. c. 22. 9 Geo. I. c. 12. 31 Geo. II. c. 22. §. 77.]: also on the uttering or publishing, as true, of any counterfeited seaman’s will or power: to which may be added, though not strictly reducible to this head, the counterfeiting of mediterranean passes, under the hands of the lords of the admiralty, to pro­ tect one from the piratical states of Barbary; the forging or imitating of any stamps to defraud the public revenue; and the forging of any marriage register or licence: all which are by distinct acts of parliament made felonies without benefit of clergy. By statute 31 Geo. II. c. 32. forging or counterfeiting any stamp or mark to denote the standard of gold and silver plate, and certain other offences of the like tendency, are also made felony, but not without benefit of clergy. And by statute 12 Geo. III. c. 48. certain frauds on the stamp­duties, therein described, principally by using the same stamps more than once, are made single felony, and liable to transportation for seven years. [ed. 7] the forging, altering, or uttering as true, when forged, of any bank bills or notes, or other securities [Footnote: 8 & 9 W. III. c. 20. §. 36. 11 Geo. I. c. 9. 12 Geo. I. c. 32. 15 Geo. II. c. 13. 13 Geo. III. c. 79.]: of bills of credit issued from the exchequer; of south sea bonds, &c; of lottery tickets or orders; of army or navy debentures; of East India bonds; of writings under seal of the London, or royal exchange, assurance; of the hand of the receiver of the pre­fines, or of the accountant general and certain other officers of the court of chancery; of a letter of attorney or other power to receive or transfer stock or annuities; and on the personating a proprietor thereof, to receive or transfer such annu­ ities, stock, or dividends: also on the personating or procuring to be person­ ated, any seaman or other person, entitled to wages or other naval emoluments,

varia: chapter 18 333

or any of his personal representatives; and the taking, or procuring to be taken, any false oath in order to obtain a probate, or letters of administration, in order to receive such payments; and the forging, or procuring to be forged, and likewise the uttering or publishing, as true, of any counterfeited seaman’s will or power: to which may be added, though not strictly reducible to this head, the counterfeiting of mediterranean passes, under the hands of the lords of the admiralty, to protect one from the piratical states of Barbary; the forg­ ing or imitating of any stamps to defraud the public revenue; and the forging of any marriage register or licence: all which are by distinct acts of parliament made felonies without benefit of clergy. By statutes 13 Geo. III. c. 52 & 59. forging or counterfeiting any stamp or mark to denote the standard of gold and silver plate, and certain other offences of the like tendency, are punished with transportation for fourteen years. By statute 12 Geo. III. c. 48. certain frauds on the stamp­duties, therein described, principally by using the same stamps more than once, are made single felony, and liable to transportation for seven years. And the same punishment is inflicted by statute 13 Geo. III. c. 38. on such as counterfeit the common seal of the corporation for manufac­ turing plate­glass (thereby erected) or knowingly demand money of the com­ pany by virtue of any writing under such counterfeit seal.

〈44〉 [ed. 5] There are also two other [ed. 9: certain other] general laws, with regard

to forgery; the one [ed. 9: of which the first is] 2 Geo. II. c. 35. whereby the first offence in forging or publishing any forged deed, will, writing obligatory, bill of exchange, promissory note, indorsement or assignment thereof, or any acquittance or receipt for money or goods, with intention to defraud any per­ son, is made felony without benefit of clergy. And by statute 7 Geo. II. c. 22. it is equally penal to forge or utter a counterfeit acceptance of a bill of exchange, or the number of any accountable receipt | There are also two other general laws, with regard to forgery; the one 2 Geo. II. c. 25. whereby the first offence in forging or procuring to be forged, acting or assisting therein, or uttering or publishing as true any forged deed, will, bond, writing obligatory, bill of exchange, promissory note, indorsement or assignment thereof, or any acquit­ tance or receipt for money or goods, with intention to defraud any person, (or corporation [Footnote: Stat. 31 Geo. II. c. 22. §. 78.]) is made felony without benefit of clergy. And by statute 7 Geo. II. c. 22. [ed. 9: and 18 Geo. III. c. 18.] it is equally penal to forge or cause to be forged or utter as true a counterfeit acceptance of a bill of exchange, or the number [ed. 8: number or principal sum] of any accountable receipt





Chapter 18


〈1〉 [ed. 7] there is probable ground | there is a probable ground 〈2〉 [ed. 8] it hath been | it has been 334 varia: chapter 19

〈3〉 [ed. 4] or if he | or in case he 〈4〉 [ed. 4] effect of heat | effect of unmeaning heat





Chapter 19


〈1〉 [ed. 8] 4 Inst. 58. 2 Hawk. P. C. 5. 421. | 4 Inst. 58. 2 Hawk. P. C. 5. 421. [Case

of Lord C[ornwallis]] 2 Jon. 54.

〈2〉 [ed. 8] indicted of treason | indicted for treason 〈3〉 [ed. 5] sole judge in matters | sole judge of matters 〈4〉 [ed. 5] It is certain that, in the eleventh chapter of the constitutions of

Clarendon, made in parliament 11 Hen. II. they are expressly excluded from sitting and voting in trials of life or limb | It is observable that, in the eleventh chapter of the constitutions of Clarendon, made in parliament 11 Hen. II. they are expressly excused, rather than excluded, from sitting and voting in trials, when they come to concern life or limb

〈5〉 [ed. 4] (Lamb. 148.) was full of windows | (Lamb. 148) which is now converted

into the lottery office, and forms the eastern side of new palace­yard, was full of windows

〈6〉 [ed. 5] no stars are said to have remained in the roof so late as the reign | no stars

are now in the roof, nor are any said to have remained there as late as the reign

〈7〉 [ed. 5] repositaries. (Madox hist. exch. | repositories. (Memorand. In Scacc’ P.

6 Edw. I prefixed to Maynard’s year­book of Edw. II. fol. 8. Madox. hist. exch.

〈8〉 [ed. 5] mentioned in any record (Rot. claus. 41. Edw. III. m. 13.) it is said to

have been situated near the receipt of the exchequer: that the king’s council, his chancellor, treasurer, justices, and other sages were assembled en la chaumbre des esteilles pres la resceipt al Westminster. | mentioned in any record it is said to have been situated near the receipt of the exchequer: the king’s council, his chancellor, treasurer, justices, and other sages were assembled en la chaumbre des esteilles pres la resceipt al Westminster (claus. 41 Edw. III. m. 13).

〈9〉 [ed. 5] proceedings in manuscript; of which the author hath one, for the first

three years of king Charles: and there is in the British Museum (Harl. MSS. Vol. I. no. 1226.) a very full, methodical, and accurate account of the constitu­ tion and course of this court, compiled by William Hudson of Gray’s Inn, an eminent practitioner therein. | proceedings in Dyer, Croke, Coke, and other reporters of that age, and some in manuscript; of which the author hath two; one from 40 Eliz. to 13 Jac. I the other for the first three years of king Charles: and there is in the British Museum (Harl. MSS. Vol. I. no. 1226.) a very full, methodical, and accurate account of the constitution and course of this court, compiled by William Hudson of Gray’s Inn, an eminent practitioner therein; and a short account of the same, with copies of all its process, may also be

varia: chapter 19 335

〈10〉 [ed. 8] jurisdiction therein | jurisdiction there 〈11〉 [ed. 5] Henry VI a remedy was endeavoured to be applied in parliament; but

it miscarried | Henry VI it was endeavoured to apply a remedy in parliament; which then miscarried

〈12〉 [ed. 9] commissioners, nominated by the lord chancellor; namely, the admiral,

or his deputy, and three or four more; (among whom two common law judges are constantly appointed, who in effect try all the prisoners) the indictment being first found by a grand jury of twelve men, and afterwards tried by another jury, as at common law: and that | commissioners of oyer and ter-miner, under the king’s great seal; namely, the admiral, or his deputy, and three or four more; (among whom two common law judges are usually appointed, who in effect try all the prisoners) the indictment being first found by a grand jury of twelve men, and afterwards tried by a petty jury, as at com­ mon law: and that

〈13〉 [ed. 8] therein, just as the lord mayor presides at the sessions in London. |

therein, as the lord mayor is the president of the sessions of oyer and terminer in London.

〈14〉 [ed. 8] species is | species are

〈15〉 [ed. 8] court of oyer and terminer, and general gaol delivery: which is held

before the king’s commissioners, among whom are usually two judges of the courts at Westminster, twice in every year in every county of the kingdom; except the four northern ones, where it is held only once, and London and Middlesex, wherein it is held eight times. This was slightly mentioned | courts of oyer and terminer, and general gaol delivery: which are held before the king’s commissioners, among whom are usually two judges of the courts at Westminster, twice in every year in every county of the kingdom; except the four northern ones, where they are held only once, and London and Middlesex, wherein they are held eight times. These were slightly mentioned

〈16〉 [ed. 8] several others; but the judges only are of the quorum, so that the rest

cannot act without them | several others or any two of them; but the judges or serjeants at law only are of the quorum, so that the rest cannot act without the presence of one of them

〈17〉 [ed. 8] whenever indicted | whenever or before whomsoever indicted 〈18〉 [ed. 7] the gaols are cleared | the gaols are in general cleared 〈19〉 [ed. 5] is the same | is much the same 〈20〉 [ed. 4] Thomas a Becket | Thomas the martyr 〈21〉 [ed. 8] of parish officers | of the parish officers 〈22〉 [ed. 9] the coroner | the coroners 〈23〉 [ed. 9] shed in any of the palaces | shed in, or within the limits, (that is, within

two hundred feet from the gate) of any of the palaces 336 varia: chapter 21

〈25〉 [ed. 5] several offices | several officers 〈26〉 [ed. 8] a century past; though | a century past; nor will it perhaps ever be

thought advisable to revive them: though





Chapter 20


〈1〉 [ed. 5] frequent prosecutions by indictment | frequent prosecutions by action

or indictment

〈2〉 [ed. 8] punished | punishable 〈3〉 [ed. 5] determination. 7. Those committed | determination. Indeed the attach­

ment for most of this species of contempts, and especially for non­payment of costs and non­performance of awards, is to be looked upon rather as a civil execution for the benefit of the injured party; though carried on in the shape of a criminal process for a contempt of the authority of the court. And there­ fore it hath been held that such contempts, and the process thereon, being properly the civil remedy of individuals for a private injury, are not released or affected by a general act of pardon. And, upon a similar principle, obedi­ ence to any rule of court may also by statute 10 Geo. III. c. 50. be enforced against any person having privilege of parliament by the process of distress infinite. 7. Those committed

〈4〉 [ed. 5] Styl. 277. 2 Hawk. P. C. 152. | Styl. 277. 2 Hawk. P. C. 152, [May v Proby

and Lumley] Cro. Jac. 419. [R. v Belt, and Anon. 1700] Salk. 586.

〈5〉 [ed. 5] the court | the courts

〈6〉 [ed. 7] judges | judges [Footnote: Staundf. P. C. 73.b. §. 5.] 〈7〉 [ed. 4.] Stra. 185. | Stra. 185. [R. v the chancellor, masters and scholars of the

university of Cambridge] 564.

〈8〉 [ed 5] antient [Footnote: Yearb. 22 Edw. IV. 29.], and has since the restoration

been confirmed by an express act of parliament [Footnote: Stat. 13 Car. II. st. 2. c. 2. §. 4.] | antient, [Footnote: Yearb. 20 Hen. VI. 37. 22 Edw. IV. 29.] and has in more modern times been recognized, approved, and confirmed by sev­ eral express acts of parliament [Footnote: Stat. 13 Car. II. st. 2. c. 2. §. 4. 9 & 10. W. III. c. 15. [ed. 8: 43 Eliz. c. 6. §. 3. Stat. 13 Car. II. st. 2. c. 2. §. 4. 9 & 10. W. III. c. 15. 12 Ann. Stat. 2. c. 15. [recte c. 14] §. 5.]]





Chapter 21


〈1〉 [ed. 5] liable to all | liable in all 〈2〉 [ed. 5] peace officer, requiring | peace officer, (or, it may be to any private per­

son by name [Footnote: [Case of Chorley Village] Salk. 176.]) requiring

varia: chapter 22 337

〈3〉 [ed. 4] a lawful warrant will at all events indemnify the officer, who executes

the same ministerially. When | a warrant, properly penned, (even though the magistrate who issues it should exceed his jurisdiction) will, by statute at all events indemnify the officer, who executes the same ministerially. And, when

〈4〉 [ed. 7] and 24 Geo. II. c. 55. | and 24 Geo. II. c. 55. And now, by statute 13 Geo.

III. c. 31. any warrant for apprehending an English offender, who may have escaped into Scotland, and vice versa, may be endorsed and executed by the local magistrates, and the offender conveyed back to that part of the united kingdoms, in which such offence was committed.

〈5〉 [ed. 5] peace, and carry | peace, committed in his view, and carry 〈6〉 [ed. 7] so suspected, but he cannot | so suspected. But he cannot 〈7〉 [ed. 5] sheriff of the county: to which | sheriff of the county; besides the horse,

furniture, arms, money, and other goods taken upon the person of such rob­ ber; with a reservation of the right of any person from whom the same may have been stolen: to which

〈 8〉 [ed. 5] such taking. By statute 10 & 11 W. III. c. 23. | such taking. By statutes

6 & 7 W. III. c. 17. and 15 Geo. II. c. 28. persons apprehending and convicting any offender against those statutes, respecting the coinage, shall (in case the offence be treason or felony) receive a reward of forty pounds, or ten pounds, if it only amounts to counterfeiting the copper coin. By statute 10 & 11 W. III. c. 23.

〈9〉 [ed. 7] burglary or private larciny | burglary, housebreaking, horsestealing, or

private larciny

〈10〉 [ed. 5] a reward of 40l. | a reward of 40l. [ed. 7: Footnote: The statutes 4 & 5

W. & M. c. 8. 6 & 7 W. III. c. 17. and 5 Ann. c. 31. (together with 3 Geo. I. c. 15. §. 4. which directs the method of re­imbursing the sheriffs) are extended to the county palatine of Durham, by stat. 14 Geo. III. c. 46.]. By statute 6 Geo. I. c. 23. persons discovering, apprehending, and prosecuting to conviction, any person taking reward for helping others to their stolen goods, shall be intitled to forty pounds. By statute 14 Geo. II. c. 6. explained by 15 Geo. II. c. 34. any person apprehending and prosecuting to conviction such as steal, or kill with intent to steal, any sheep or other cattle specified in the latter of the said acts, shall for every such conviction receive a reward of ten pounds. Lastly, by statute 16 Geo. II. c. 15. and 8 Geo. III. c. 15. persons discovering, apprehending, and convict­ ing, felons and others being found at large during the term for which they are ordered to be transported, shall receive a reward of twenty pounds.





Chapter 22


〈1〉 [ed. 7] The statute 1 & 2 Ph. & Mar. c. 13. gives farther regulations in this mat­

ter: and upon the whole we may collect, that no justices of the peace | The 338 varia: chapter 23

statutes 23 Hen. VI. c. 9. and statute 1 & 2 Ph. & Mar. c. 13. give farther regu­ lations in this matter: and upon the whole we may collect, that no justices [ed. 8: justice] of the peace

〈2〉 [ed. 4] to bail. Others | to bail by the justices. Others 〈3〉 [ed. 5] court of king’s bench (or any judge thereof in time of vacation) | court

[Footnote: 2 Inst. 189. [Herbert and Vaughan’s case] Latch. 12. [Bushell’s case] Vaugh. 157. [Witham and Dutton] Comb. 111. [R. v Pepper] 298. 1 Comyns Dig. 495.] of king’s bench (or any judge [Footnote: [R. v Lord Mohun ] Skin. 683. [R. v Davidson] Salk. 105. [R. v Dalton] Stra. 911. 1 Comyns Dig. 497.] thereof in time of vacation)

〈4〉 [ed. 7] justice. | justice [Footnote: Staundf. P. C. 73. b.]. 〈5〉 [ed. 5] the law will not justify them in fettering a prisoner, unless where he is

unruly, or has attempted | the law (as formerly held) would not justify them in fettering a prisoner, unless where he was unruly, or had attempted

〈6〉 [ed. 7] attempted an escape | attempted to escape





Chapter 23


〈1〉 [ed. 5] indictment, before the party presented as the author can be put | indict­

ment [Footnote: 2 Inst. 739.], before the party presented can be put

〈2〉 [ed. 5] died. And so | died. And, by statute 2 Geo. II. c. 21, if the stroke or poi­

soning be in England, and the death upon the sea or out of England; or vice versa; the offenders and their accessories may be indicted in the county where either the death, poisoning, or stroke shall happen. And so

〈3〉 [ed. 5] statutes 26 Hen. VIII. c. 13. 35 Hen. VIII. c. 2. and 5 & 6 Edw. VI. c. 11.

But, in general, all offences must be enquired into as well as tried in the county where the fact is committed. When the grand jury | statutes 26 Hen.VIII. c. 13. 33 Hen. VIII. c. 23. 35 Hen. VIII. c. 2. and 5 & 6 Edw. VI. c. 11. Murders also, whether committed in England or in foreign parts, [Footnote: Ely’s case, at the old Bailey, Dec. sess. 1720.] may by virtue of the statute 33 Hen. VIII. c. 23. be inquired of and tried by the king’s special commission in any shire or place in the kingdom. By statute 10 & 11 W. III. c. 25. all robberies and other capital crimes, committed in Newfoundland, may be inquired of and tried in any county in England. Offences against the black act, 9 Geo. I. c. 22. may be inquired of and tried in any county of England, at the option of the prosecutor [Footnote: So held by all the judges, H. 11 Geo. III. in the case of Richard Mortis on a case referred from the old bailey.]. So felonies in destroying turn­ pikes, or works upon navigable rivers, erected by authority of parliament, may by statutes 8 Geo. II. c. 20. and 7 Geo. III. c. 40. be inquired of and tried in any adjacent county. And felonies committed out of the realm, in burning or destroying the king’s ships, magazines, or stores, may by statute 12 Geo. III.

varia: chapter 23 339

c. 24 be inquired of and tried in any county of England, or in the place where the offence is committed. But, in general, all offences must be enquired into as well as tried in the county where the fact is committed. Yet if larciny be com­ mitted in one county, and the goods carried into another, the offender may be indicted in either; for the offence is complete in both [Footnote: 1 Hal. P. C. 507.]. But for robbery, burglary, and the like, he can only be indicted where the fact was actually committed: for though the carrying away and keeping of the goods is a continuation of the original taking, and is therefore larciny in the second county, yet it is not a robbery or burglary in that jurisdiction. And if a person be indicted in one county for larciny of goods originally taken in another, and be thereof convicted or stands mute, he shall not be admitted to his clergy; provided the original taking be attended with such circumstances, as would have ousted him of his clergy by virtue of any statute made previous to the year 1691 [Footnote: Stat. 25 Hen. VIII. c. 3. 3 W. & M. c. 9.]. When the grand jury

[ed. 7] statutes 26 Hen. VIII. c. 13. 33 Hen. VIII. c. 23. 35 Hen. VIII. c. 2. and 5 & 6 Edw. VI. c. 11. And counterfeiters, washers, or minishers of the current coin, together with all manner of felons and their accessories, may by statute 26 Hen. VIII. c. 6. (confirmed and explained by 34 & 35 Hen. VIII. c. 26. §. 75, 76.) be indicted and tried for those offences, if committed in any part [Footnote: [R. v Atho senior and junior] Stra. 533. [R. v Athos father and son] 8 Mod. 134 [recte 136]] of Wales, before the justices of gaol delivery and of the peace in the next adjoining county of England, where the king’s writ runneth: that is, at present in the county of Hereford or Salop; and not, as it should seem, in the county of Chester or Monmouth: the one being a county palatine where the king’s writ did not run, and the other a part of Wales, in 26 Hen. VIII [Footnote: See [Morgan v Morgan] Hardr. 66.]. Murders also, whether committed in England or in foreign parts [Ed. 8: Footnote: Ely’s case, at the old bailey. Dec. 1720. Roache’s case. Dec. 1775.], may by virtue of the statute 33 Hen. VIII. c. 23. be inquired of and tried by the king’s special commission in any shire or place in the kingdom. By statute 10 & 11 W. III. c. 25. all robberies and other capital crimes, committed in Newfoundland, may be inquired of and tried in any county in England. Offences against the black act, 9 Geo. I. c. 22. may be inquired of and tried in any county of England, at the option of the prosecutor. So felonies in destroying turnpikes, or works upon navigable rivers, erected by authority of parliament, may by statutes 8 Geo. II. c. 20. and 13 Geo. III. c. 84. be inquired of and tried in any adjacent county. By statute 26 Geo. II. c. 19. plundering or stealing, from any vessel in distress or wrecked, or breaking any ship contrary to 12 Ann. st. 2. c. 18. [Footnote: See pag. 246 [IV. 162].] may be prosecuted either in the county where the fact is committed, or in any county next adjoining; and, if committed in Wales, then in the next adjoining English county: by which is understood, to be meant such English county as, by the statute, 26 Hen. VIII, above­mentioned, had before a concurrent jurisdiction 340 varia: chapter 23

1774, Parry and Roberts were convicted of plundering a vessel which was wrecked on the coast of Anglesey. It was moved in arrest of judgment, that Chester and not Salop was the next adjoining English county. But all the judges (in Mich. 15 Geo. III) held the prosecution to be regular.]. Felonies committed out of the realm, in burning or destroying the king’s ships, maga­ zines, or stores, may by statute 12 Geo. III. c. 24 be inquired of and tried in any county of England, or in the place where the offence is committed. By statute 13 Geo. III. c. 63. misdemesnors committed in India may be tried upon infor­ mation or indictment in the court of king’s bench in England; and a mode is marked out for examining witnesses by commission, and transmitting their depositions to the court. But, in general, all offences must be enquired into as well as tried in the county where the fact is committed. Yet if larciny be com­ mitted in one county, and the goods carried into another, the offender may be indicted in either; for the offence is complete in both [Ed. 8: Footnote: 1 Hal. P. C. 507]. Or, he may be indicted in England for larciny in Scotland, and carry­ ing the goods with him into England, or vice versa; or for receiving in one part of the united kingdoms goods that have been stolen in another. [Footnote: Stat. 13 Geo. III. c. 31.] But for robbery, burglary, and the like, he can only be indicted where the fact was actually committed: for though the carrying away and taking of the goods is a continuation of the original taking, [ … ] When the grand jury

〈4〉 [ed. 5] “not a true bill;” and then | “not a true bill;” or (which is the better way)

“not found;” and then

〈5〉 [ed. 5] court. But sometimes | court; unless where the place is laid, not merely

as a venue, but as part of the description of the fact [Footnote: 2 Hawk. P. C. 435.]. But sometimes

〈6〉 [ed. 5] tribunal. A power, so necessary, | tribunal: which power, thus neces­

sary,

〈7〉 [ed. 8] found guilty, he must resort to the court for his punishment. | found

guilty, the court must be resorted to for his punishment.

〈8〉 [ed. 5] other voluminous | other more voluminous 〈9〉 [ed. 5] but the first was virtually abolished by the statutes 5 Edw. III. c. 9. and

25 Edw. III. c. 24. and the second expressly | but that in the first was virtually abolished by the statutes 5 Edw. III. c. 9. and 25 Edw. III. c. 24. and in the sec­ ond expressly

〈10〉 [ed. 5] still he may, by virtue of statute 3 Hen. VII. c. 1. be prosecuted by appeal

| still he ought not (in strictness) to go at large, but be imprisoned or let to bail till the year and day be past, by virtue of the statute 3 Hen. VII. c. 1. in order to be forthcoming to answer any appeal

〈11〉 [ed. 5] delicto.” If the appellee be found guilty | delicto.” Before this statute was

made, it was not unusual to indict a man for homicide within the time limited for appeals; which produced very great inconvenience, of which more hereaf­ ter [Footnote: See pag. 335. [IV. 220]].

varia: chapter 25 341

If the appellee be acquitted, the appellor (by virtue of the statute of Westm. 2, 13 Edw. I. c. 12.) shall suffer one year’s imprisonment, and pay a fine to the king, besides restitution of damages to the party for the imprisonment and infamy which he has sustained: and, if the appellor be incapable to make res­ titution, his abettors shall do it for him, and also be liable to imprisonment. This provision, as was foreseen, by the author of Fleta [Footnote: l. 1. c. 34. §. 48.], proved a great discouragement to appeals; so that thenceforward they ceased to be in common use.

If the appellee be found guilty

〈12〉 [ed. 4] state. | state [Footnote: Robertson Cha. V. i. 43 [ed. 5: i. 45]].





Chapter 24


〈1〉 [ed. 8] immediately to be arraigned | immediately (or as soon as convenience

permits) to be arraigned

〈2〉 [ed. 5] in all, and the express provision of statute 28 Edw. III. c. 3. in capital,

cases; | in all cases, and the express provision of statute 28 Edw. III. c. 3. in capital ones;

〈3〉 [ed. 5] as if he had been found guilty | as if the offender had been found guilty

〈4〉 [ed. 7] observed: and though | observed: that [ed. 8: so that] though





Chapter 25


〈1〉 [ed. 5] attainted; and therefore, if the principal had never been indicted |

attainted; unless he chose it, for he might waive the benefit of the law: and therefore principal and accessory might, and may still, be arraigned, and plead, and also be tried together. But otherwise, if the principal had never been indicted

〈2〉 [ed. 5] it is clearly settled | it hath long been clearly settled 〈3〉 [ed. 5] standing mute is equivalent to conviction. But upon appeals or indict­

ments for other felonies, or petit treason, he shall not be looked upon as con­ victed, so as to receive judgment for the felony; but shall, for his obstinacy, receive the terrible sentence | standing mute hath always been equivalent to conviction. But upon appeals or indictments for other felonies, or petit trea­ son, the prisoner was not, by the antient law looked upon as convicted, so as to receive judgment for the felony; but should, for his obstinacy, have received the terrible sentence

〈 4〉 [ed. 8] or peine forte et dure | or peine (which, as will appear presently, was

probably nothing more than a corrupted abbreviation of prisone) fort et dure

342 varia: chapter 25

〈5〉 [ed. 5] Before this is pronounced the prisoner ought to have not only trina

admonitio, but also a convenient respite of a few hours, and the sentence should be distinctly read to him, that he may know his danger: and, after all, if he continues obstinate, and his offence is clergyable, he shall have the bene­ fit of his clergy allowed him; even though he is too stubborn to pray it. Thus tender has the modern law been of inflicting this dreadful punishment: but if no other means will prevail, and the prisoner (when charged with a capital felony) continues stubbornly mute, the judgment is then given against him, without any distinction of sex or degree. A judgment, which the law has pur­ posely ordained to be exquisitely severe, | Before this was pronounced the prisoner had not only trina admonitio, but also a respite of a few hours, and the sentence was distinctly read to him, that he might know his danger: and, after all, if he continued obstinate, and his offence was clergyable, he had the benefit of his clergy allowed him; even though he was too stubborn to pray it. Thus tender was the law of inflicting this dreadful punishment: but if no other means could prevail, and the prisoner (when charged with a capital felony) continued stubbornly mute, the judgment was then given against him, with­ out any distinction of sex or degree. A judgment, which was purposely ordained to be exquisitely severe,

〈6〉 [ed. 5] this being only used | this having been only used 〈7〉 [ed. 8] Barr. 69. 385. | Barr. 92, 496. 〈8〉 [ed. 5] is as follows: that the prisoner shall be remanded to the prison from

whence he came; and put into a low, dark chamber; and there be laid on his back, on the bare floor, naked, unless where decency forbids; that there be placed upon his body as great a weight of iron as he can bear, and more; that he shall have no sustenance, save only, on the first day, three morsels of the worst bread; and, on the second day, three draughts of standing water, that shall be nearest to the prison door; and in this situation this shall be alter­ nately his daily diet, till he dies, as the judgment now runs, though formerly it was, till he answered. | was as follows: that the prisoner be remanded to the prison from whence he came; and put into a low, dark chamber; and there be laid on his back, on the bare floor, naked, unless where decency forbids; that there be placed upon his body as a great [ed. 6: as great] a weight of iron as he could bear, and more; that he shall have no sustenance, save only, on the first day, three morsels of the worst bread; and, on the second day, three draughts of standing water, that should be nearest to the prison door; and in this situa­ tion this should be alternately his daily diet, till he died, or as antiently the judgment ran, till he answered.

〈9〉 [ed. 8] Barr. 65. | Barr. 82.

〈10〉 [ed. 5] homicide: to which we may add, that the record of 35 Edw. I. (cited by

a learned author [Footnote: Barr. 62.]) most clearly proves, that the prisoner | homicide. It also clearly appears, by a record of 31 Edw. III. (cited by a learned

varia: chapter 25 343

author [Footnote: 6 Rym. [ed. 9: Raym.] 13.]), that the prisoner [ … ] being intended as a species of mercy

〈 11〉 [ed. 5] was intended as | being intended as 〈 12〉 [ed. 5] that may be conceived of its legality, and the repugnance of its theory

(for it rarely is carried into practice) to the humanity of the laws of England, all seem to require | that were conceived of its legality, and the repugnance of its theory (for it rarely was carried into practice) to the humanity of the laws of England, all concurred to require

〈 13〉 [ed. 5] were removed, the peine forte et dure might still remain, as a monu­

ment of the savage rapacity, with which the lordly tyrants of feodal antiquity hunted after escheats and forfeitures; but no man would ever be tempted to undergo such a horrid alternative. For the law is, that by standing mute, and suffering this heavy penance, the judgment, and of course the corruption of the blood and escheat of the lands, are saved | had been removed, the peine forte et dure might perhaps have still innocently remained, as a monument of the savage rapacity, with which the lordly tyrants of feodal antiquity hunted after escheats and forfeitures; since no man [ed. 8: no one] would ever have been tempted to undergo such a horrid alternative. For the law was, that by standing mute, and suffering this heavy penance, the judgment, and of course the corruption of the blood and escheat of the lands, were saved

〈14〉 [ed. 5] forfeitures attend it, as in other cases of conviction. And thus much for

the demesnor of a prisoner upon his arraignment, by standing mute. | forfei­ tures always attended it, as in other cases of conviction. And very lately, to the honour of our laws, it hath been enacted by statute 12 Geo. III. c. 20. that every person who, being arraigned for felony or piracy, shall stand mute or not answer directly to the offence, shall be convicted of the same; and the same judgment and execution (with all their consequences in every respect) shall be thereupon awarded, as if the person had been convicted by verdict or con­ fession of the crime. And thus much for the demesnor of a prisoner upon his arraignment, by standing mute; which now, in all cases, amounts to a con­ structive confession.

〈15〉 [ed. 5] the prisoner’s confession | the prisoner’s actual confession 〈16〉 [ed. 5] in the cases of robbery, burglary, housebreaking, and larciny to the

value of five shillings from shops, warehouses, stables, and coachhouses, by statutes 4 & 5 W. & M. c. 8. 10 & 11 W. III. c. 23. and 5 Ann. c. 31. which enact, that, if any such felon, being out of prison, shall discover two or more persons, who have committed the like felonies, so as they may be convicted thereof; he shall in most cases receive a reward of 40l., and in general be entitled a pardon of all capital offences, excepting only murder and treason. And if any | in the cases of coining, robbery, burglary, housebreaking, horse­stealing and larciny to the value of five shillings from shops, warehouses, stables, and coachhouses, 344 varia: chapter 26

by statutes 4 & 5 W. & M. c. 8. 6 & 7 W. III c. 17. 10 & 11 W. III. c. 23. and 5 Ann. c. 31. which enact, that, if any such offender, being out of prison, shall discover two or more persons, who have committed the like offences, so as they may be convicted thereof; he shall in many cases [ed. 7: in case of burglary or housebreaking] receive a reward of 40l., and in general be entitled to a par­ don of all capital offences, excepting only murder and treason; and of them also in the case of coining [Footnote: The pardon, for discovering offences against the coinage act of 15 Geo. II. c. 28. extends only to all such offences.]. And if any

〈 17〉 [ed. 8] before such discovery. | before such discovery. It hath also been

usual for the justices of the peace, by whom any persons charged with felony are committed to gaol, to admit some one of their accomplices to become a witness (or, as it is generally termed, king’s evidence) against his fellows; upon an implied confidence, which the judges of gaol delivery have usually countenanced and adopted, that if such accomplice makes a full and complete discovery of that and of all other felonies to which he is examined by the magistrate, and afterwards gives his evidence without prevarication or fraud, he shall not himself be prosecuted for that or any other previous offence of the same degree [Footnote: The King v Rudd; Mich. 16 Geo. III; on a case reserved from the old bailey, Oct. 1775. [1 Cowp. 333]].





Chapter 26


〈1〉 [ed. 5] prosecution, he may plead such acquittal in bar of any subsequent

accusation for the same crime. Therefore an acquittal on an appeal is a good bar to an indictment of the same offence. | prosecution, before any court hav­ ing competent jurisdiction of the offence [Footnote: [Beak v Thyrwhit] 3 Mod. 194.], he may plead such acquittal in bar of any subsequent accusation for the same crime. Therefore an acquittal on an appeal is a good bar to an indictment on the same offence.

〈2〉 [ed. 5] on an appeal, is a bar | on an appeal or on an indictment, is a bar 〈3〉 [ed. 5] of one felony, as robbery, is afterwards indicted as principal in another,

as murder, to which | of one felony, is afterwards indicted as principal in another, to which

〈4〉 [ed. 5] of the principal. And | of the principal [Footnote: [Everet’s case] Poph.

107.]. And

〈5〉 [ed. 5] quite superfluous. | quite superfluous [Footnote: Staund. P. C. 107.].

〈6〉 [ed. 5] shall be condemned to the peine fort et dure. | shall now [Footnote:

Stat. 12 Geo. III. c. 20.] be convicted of the felony.

varia: chapter 27 345





Chapter 27


〈1〉 [ed. 5] antient species | antient [Footnote: LL. Inae. c. 77.] species 〈2〉 [ed. 5] capitally indicted. Of this | capitally indicted: for in case of an appeal, a

peer shall be tried by jury [Footnote: [Case of the Abbot of Strata Mercella] 9 Rep. 30. 2 Inst. 49.]. Of this

〈3〉 [ed. 5] except that the peers need not all agree in their verdict; but the greater

number | except that the peers need not all agree in their verdict; and except also that no special verdict can be given in the trial of a peer [Footnote: [Lord Audley’s case] Hutt. 116] because the lords of parliament, or the lord high steward (if the trial be had in his court) are judges sufficiently competent of the law that may arise from the fact: but the greater number [ed. 9] except that no special verdict can be given in the trial of a peer: because the lords of parliament, or the lord high steward (if the trial be had in his court) are judges sufficiently competent of the law that may arise from the fact: and except also that the peers need not all agree in their verdict; but the greater number

〈4〉 [ed. 8] proceedings, unless by consent of parties, to try | proceedings, (unless

by consent of parties or where the defendant is actually in gaol) to try

〈5〉 [ed. 5] may ensue, or misprision | may ensue, (except treason in counterfeit­

ing the king’s coin or seals) or misprision

〈6〉 [ed. 5] the indictment, but not | the indictment, (which includes the caption

[Footnote: Fost. 229. Append. i.]) but not

〈7〉 [ed. 5] half foreigners; (which does not indeed hold in treasons, aliens being

very improper judges of the breach of allegiance to the king) that on every panel | half foreigners, if so many are found in the place; (which does not indeed hold in treasons, aliens being very improper judges of the breach of allegiance; nor yet in the case of Egyptians under the statute 22 Hen. VIII. c. 10.) that on every panel

〈8〉 [ed. 5] a judgment shall not be imposed | a judgment (nor that of conviction

which succeeds it) shall not be imposed

〈9〉 [ed. 5] See Vol. III. pag. 364 [III. 240] | See Vol. III. pag. 364. But, in mere com­

missions of gaol­delivery, no tales can be awarded; though the court may ore tenus [orally] order a new panel to be returned instanter (4 Inst. 68. 4 St. Tr. 728. Cooke’s Case.)

〈10〉 [ed. 5] contradicted.” It was therefore thought too dangerous an experiment, to

let an advocate try, whether it could be contradicted or no. | contradicted.” Which lord Nottingham (when high steward) declared ([Trial of Lord Cornwallis, 1678] 3 St. Tr. 726) was the only good reason that could be given for it.

〈11〉 [ed. 8] And, to say the truth, the judges themselves are so sensible of this

defect in our modern practice, that they seldom scruple to allow a prisoner 346 varia: chapter 27

counsel to stand by him at the bar, and instruct him | And, the judges them­ selves are so sensible of this defect, that they never scruple to allow a prisoner counsel to instruct him

〈12〉 [ed. 8] But still this is a matter of too much importance to be left to the good

pleasure of any judge, and is worthy the interposition of the legislature; which has shewn its inclination to indulge prisoners with this reasonable assistance, by enacting in statute | But, lest this indulgence should be intercepted by superior influence, in the case of state­criminals, the legislature has directed by statute

〈13〉 [ed. 5] misprision thereof, may make | misprision thereof, (except treason in

counterfeiting the king’s coin or seals) may make

〈14〉 [ed. 8] and this indulgence | and the same indulgence 〈15〉 [ed. 5] by statutes 1 Edw. VI. c. 12. 5 & 6 Edw. VI. c. 11. and 1 & 2 Ph. & Mar. c. 10.

two lawful witnesses are required to convict a prisoner; except in cases of coining, and counterfeiting the seals; or unless the party shall willingly and without violence confess the same. By statute 7 W. III. c. 3. in prosecutions for those treasons to which that act extends, the same rule is again enforced, with this addition, that the confession of the prisoner, which shall countervail the necessity of such proof, must be in open court; and it is declared | by statutes 1 Edw. VI. c. 12. and 5 & 6 Edw. VI. c. 11. two lawful witnesses are required to convict a prisoner; unless he shall willingly and without violence confess the same. By statute 1 & 2 Ph. & Mar. c. 10. a farther exception is made as to trea­ sons in counterfeiting the king’s seals or signatures, and treasons concerning coin current within this realm; and more particularly by c. 11. the offences of importing counterfeit foreign money current in this kingdom, and impairing, counterfeiting, or forging any current coin. The statutes 8 & 9 W. III. c. 25. & 15 & 16 Geo. II. c. 28. in their subsequent extensions of this species of treason do also provide, that the offenders may be indicted, arraigned, tried, con­ victed, and attainted, by the like evidence and in such manner and form, as may be had and used against offenders for counterfeiting the king’s money. But by statute 7 W. III. c. 3. in prosecutions for those treasons to which that act extends, the same rule (of requiring two witnesses) is again enforced; with this addition, that the confession of the prisoner, which shall countervail the necessity of such proof, must be in open court; and it is declared [ed. 8: in open court. In the construction of which act it hath been holden [Footnote: Foster, 240–44.], that a confession of the prisoner, taken out of court, before a magistrate or person having competent authority to take it, and proved by two witnesses, is sufficient to convict him of treason. But hasty unguarded confessions, made to persons having no such authority, ought not to be admit­ ted as evidence under this statute. And indeed, even in cases of felony at the common law, they are the weakest and most suspicious of all testimony; ever liable to be obtained by artifice, false hopes, promises of favour, or men­ aces; seldom remembered accurately, or reported with due precision; and

varia: chapter 27 347

incapable in their nature of being disproved by other negative evidence. By the same statute 7 W. III. it is declared]

〈16〉 [ed. 4] makes | make

〈17〉 [ed. 5] closed, the jury cannot be discharged till they have given in their ver­

dict; but are to consider of it, and deliver it in, with the same forms, as upon civil causes: only they cannot, in a criminal case, give a privy verdict. But an open verdict may | closed, the jury cannot be discharged till they have given in their verdict; but are to consider of it, and deliver it in, with the same forms, as upon civil causes: only they cannot, in a criminal case which touches life or member, give a privy verdict. But an open verdict may [ed. 9] closed, and indeed when any evidence hath been given, the jury can­ not be discharged (unless in cases of evident necessity) till they have given in their verdict; but are to consider of it, and deliver it in, with the same forms, as upon civil causes: only they cannot, in a criminal case which touches life or member, give a privy verdict. But the judges may adjourn, while the jury are withdrawn to confer, and return to receive the verdict in open court [Footnote: [Trial of William, Lord Russell, 1683] 3 St. Tr. 731. [Trial of Lord Delamere] 4 St. Tr. 231. [Trial of Sir Richard Grahme and others [Lord Preston’s case]] 455 [Trial of John Ashton] 485.]. And such public or open verdict may

〈18〉 [ed. 7] by law. But if | by law. And upon such his acquittal, or discharge for

want of prosecution, he shall be immediately set at large, without payment of any fee to the gaoler [Footnote: Stat. 14 Geo. III. c. 20.]. But if

〈19〉 [ed. 8] 1. On a conviction, in general, for any felony, the reasonable expenses

of prosecution are by statute 25 Geo. II. c. 36. to be allowed to the prosecutor out of the county stock, if he petitions the judge for that purpose; and by stat­ ute 27 Geo. II. c. 3. poor persons, bound over to give evidence, are likewise entitled to be paid their charges, as well without conviction as with it. 2. On a conviction | 1. On a conviction, in general, for any felony, the reasonable expenses of prosecution are by statute 25 Geo. II. c. 36. to be allowed to the prosecutor out of the county stock, if he petitions the judge for that purpose; and by statute 27 Geo. II. c. 3. poor persons, bound over to give evidence (except in Middlesex) are likewise entitled to be paid their charges, as well without conviction as with it. 2. On a conviction

[ed. 9] 1. On a conviction, (or even upon an acquittal where there was a rea­ sonable ground to prosecute, and in fact a bona fide prosecution) for any grand or petit larciny or other felony, the reasonable expenses of prosecution, and also, if the prosecutor be poor, a compensation for his trouble and loss of time, are by statutes 25 Geo. II. c. 36. and 18 Geo. III. c. 19. to be allowed him out of the county stock, if he petitions the judge for that purpose; and by stat­ ute 27 Geo. II. c. 3. explained by the same statute 18 Geo. III. c. 19. all persons, appearing upon recognizance or subpoena to give evidence, whether any 348 varia: chapter 28

indictment be preferred or no, and as well without conviction as with it, are entitled to be paid their charges, with a farther allowance (if poor) for their trouble and loss of time. 2. On a conviction

〈 20〉 [ed. 5] justices. And this writ of restitution shall reach | justices. And the

construction of this act having been in great measure conformable to the law of appeals, it has therefore in practice superseded the use of appeals of larciny. For instance: as formerly upon appeals [Footnote: Bracton de coron. c. 32.], so now upon indictments of larciny, this writ of restitution shall reach

〈21〉 [ed. 5] no unfair transaction. Or else, secondly, | no unfair transaction. And it

is now usual for the court, upon the conviction of a felon, to order (without any writ) immediate restitution of such goods, as are brought into court, to be made to the several prosecutors. Or else, secondly,





Chapter 28


〈1〉 [ed. 5] also as it is | also it is

〈2〉 [ed. 8] Hob. 294. | Hob. 294. 2 Hal. P. C. 375. 〈3〉 [ed. 8] peers of the realm, may have | peers of the realm, having place and

voice in parliament, may have

〈4〉 [ed. 4] allowed to claim | allowed once to claim 〈5〉 [ed. 5] a year. All women, all peers, and all commoners who could read, were

therefore discharged in such felonies; absolutely, if clerks in orders; and for the first offence, upon burning in the hand, if lay: yet all liable (excepting peers) if the judge | a year. All women, all peers, [ed. 8: all peers of parliament and peeresses] and all male commoners who could read, were therefore dis­ charged in such felonies; absolutely, if clerks in orders; and for the first offence, upon burning in the hand, if lay: yet all liable (excepting peers) if the judge [ed. 9] a year. The punishment of burning in the hand being found ineffectual, was also changed by statue 10 & 11 W. III. c. 23. into burning in the most visible part of the left cheek, nearest the nose: but, such an indelible stigma being found by experience to render offenders desperate, this provision was repealed about seven years afterwards, by statute 5 Ann. c. 6. and, till that period all women, all peers of parliament and peeresses, and all male commoners who could read, were discharged in all clergyable felonies; the males absolutely, if clerks in orders; and other commoners, both male and female, upon brand­ ing, and peers and peeresses without branding, for the first offence: yet all liable, (excepting peers and peeresses) if the judge

〈6〉 [ed. 9] thereupon by statute 5 Ann. c. 6. | thereupon by the same statute 5

Ann. c. 6.

varia: chapter 28 349

〈7〉 [ed. 4] But a few years experience having shewn, that this universal lenity was

frequently inconvenient, and an encouragement to commit the lower degrees of felony; and that, though capital punishments were too rigorous for these inferior offences, yet no punishment at all (or next to none, as branding or whipping) was as much too gentle; it was enacted by statutes 4 Geo. I. c. 11. and 6 Geo. I. c. 23. that when any persons shall be convicted of any larciny, either grand or petit, and shall be entitled to the benefit of clergy, or liable only to the penalties of burning in the hand or whipping, the court in their discretion, instead of such burning in the hand or whipping, may direct such offenders to be transported to America for seven years: and, if they return within that time, it shall be felony without benefit of clergy. | And experience having shewn, that so very universal a lenity was frequently inconvenient, and an encouragement to commit the lower degrees of felony; and that, though capital punishments were too rigorous for these inferior offences, yet no pun­ ishment at all (or next to none, as branding or whipping) was as much too gentle; it was enacted by the same statute, 5 Ann. c. 6. that when any person is convicted of any theft or larciny, and burnt in the hand for the same, he shall also [ed. 5: at the discretion of the judge] be committed to the house of cor­ rection or public workhouse, to be there kept to hard labour for any time not less than six months, and not exceeding two years; with a power of inflicting a double confinement in case of the party’s escape from the first. And it is also enacted by the statutes 4 Geo. I. c. 11. and 6 Geo. I. c. 23. that when any per­ sons shall be convicted of any larciny, either grand or petit, or any felonious stealing or taking of money or goods and chattels, either from the person or the house of any other, or in any other manner, and who by the law shall be entitled to the benefit of clergy, and liable only to the penalties of burning in the hand or whipping, the court in their discretion, instead of such burning in the hand or whipping, may direct such offenders to be transported to America for seven years: and, if they return or are seen at large in this kingdom within that time, it shall be felony without benefit of clergy. [ed. 8] And experience having shewn [ … ] felony without benefit of clergy. And now, by the statute 16 Geo. III. c. 43. all offenders liable to transportation may in lieu thereof at the discretion of the court, if males, be employ’d in hard labour for the benefit of the navigation of the river Thames; or, whether males or females, be confined to hard labour in the house of correction; for any term not less than three years, nor more than that for which they are liable to be transported, nor in any case exceeding ten years; with a power of subsequent mitigation, in case of their good behaviour. In case of escapes, for the first time the term of their confinement is doubled; and a second escape is felony without benefit of clergy.

[ed. 9] And experience having shewn, [ … ] (or next to none) was as much too gentle; it was farther enacted by the same statute, that when any person is convicted of any theft or larciny, and burnt in the hand for the same according 350 varia: chapter 28

to the antient law, he shall also, at the discretion of the judge, be committed to the house of correction or public workhouse, to be there kept to hard labour for any time not less than six months, and not exceeding two years; with a power of inflicting a double confinement in case of the party’s escape from the first. And it is also enacted by the statutes 4 Geo. I. c. 11. and 6 Geo. I. c. 23. [ … ] America (or, by statute 19 Geo. III c. 74 to any other parts beyond the seas) for seven years: and, if they return or are seen at large in this kingdom within that time, it shall be felony without benefit of clergy. And by the subse­ quent statutes 16 Geo. II. c. 15. and 8 Geo. III. c. 15. many wise provisions are made for the more speedy and effectual execution of the laws relating to transportation, and the conviction of such as transgress them. But now, by statute 19 Geo. III. c. 74. all offenders liable to transportation may in lieu thereof at the discretion of the judges, be employed, if males (except in the case of petty larceny) in hard labour for the benefit of some public navigation; or, whether males or females, may in all cases be confined to hard labour in certain penitentiary houses, to be erected by virtue of the said act, for the several terms therein specified, but in no case exceeding seven years; with a power of subsequent mitigation, and even of reward, in case of their good behaviour. But if they escape and are re­taken, for the first time an addition of three years is made to the term of their confinement and a second escape is felony without benefit of clergy.

In forming the plan of these penitentiary houses, the principal objects have been, by sobriety, cleanliness, and medical assistance, by a regular series of labour, by solitary confinement during the intervals of work, and by due reli­ gious instruction, to preserve and amend the health of the unhappy offenders, to inure them to habits of industry, to guard them from pernicious company, to accustom them to serious reflection, and to teach them both the principles and practice of every christian and moral duty. And if the whole of this plan be properly executed, and its defects be timely supplied, there is reason to hope that such a reformation may be effected in the lower classes of mankind, and such a gradual scale of punishment be affixed to all gradations of guilt, as may in time supersede the necessity of capital punishment, except for very atrocious crimes.

It is also enacted by the same statute, 19 Geo. III. c. 74. that instead of burning in the hand (which was sometimes too slight and sometimes too disgraceful a punishment) the court in all clergyable felonies may impose a pecuniary fine; or (except in the case of manslaughter) may order the offender to be once or oftener, but not more than thrice, either publickly or privately whipped; such private whipping (to prevent collusion of abuse) to be inflicted in the presence of two witnesses, and in case of female offenders in the presence of females only. Which fine or whipping shall have the same consequences as burning in the hand; and the offender, so fined or whipped, shall be equally liable to a subsequent detainer or imprisonment.

varia: chapter 28 351

〈8〉 [ed. 8] transportation, (for that is only substituted in lieu of the other) to be

admitted to this privilege, and immediately discharged, or at most only con­ fined for one year: and this as often as they offend. Again, all lords of parlia­ ment and peers of the realm, by the statute 1 Edw. VI. c. 12. shall be discharged in all clergyable and other felonies, provided for by the act, without any burn­ ing in the hand, in the same manner | transportation (for that is only substi­ tuted in lieu of the other) to be admitted to this privilege, and immediately discharged; and this as often as they offend. Again, all lords of parliament and peers of the realm, having place and voice in parliament, by the statute 1 Edw. VI. c. 12. (which is likewise held to extend to peeresses [Footnote: Duchess of Kingston’s case, 22 Apr. 1776.]) shall be discharged in all clergyable and other felonies, provided for by the act, without any burning in the hand or impris­ onment, in the same manner

[ed. 9] transportation, fine, or whipping, (for those are only substituted in lieu of the other) to be admitted to this privilege, and immediately discharged; and this as often as they offend. Again, all lords of parliament and peers of the realm, having place and voice in parliament, by the statute 1 Edw. VI. c. 12. (which is likewise held to extend to peeresses) shall be discharged in all cler­ gyable and other felonies, provided for by the act, without any burning in the hand or imprisonment, or other punishment substituted in its stead, in the same manner

〈9〉 [ed. 4] or female, shall for the first offence be discharged of the punishment

of felonies, within the benefit of clergy; upon being burnt in the hand, imprisoned for a year, or less; or, in case | or female, shall for the first offence be discharged of the punishment of felonies, within the benefit of clergy; upon being burnt in the hand, and suffering a discretionary imprisonment; or, in case

[ed. 9] or female, shall for the first offence be discharged of the capital punish­ ment of felonies, within the benefit of clergy; upon being burnt in the hand, whipped or fined, or suffering a discretionary imprisonment in the common gaol, the house of correction, one of the penitentiary houses, or in the places of labour for the benefit of some navigation; or, in case

〈10〉 [ed. 4] But, with deference to such respectable authorities, I much question |

But I much question

〈11〉 [ed. 5] and felonies | and capital felonies 〈12〉 [ed. 9] recapitulated. Of all | recapitulated. Upon all 〈13〉 [ed. 9] orders. We may also remark, that by the marine law, as declared in

statute 28 Hen. VIII. c. 15. the benefit of clergy is not allowed in any case what­ soever. And therefore when offences | orders. But so tender is the law of inflicting capital punishment in the first instance for any inferior felony, that notwithstanding by the marine law, as declared in statute 28 Hen. VIII. c. 15. the benefit of clergy is not allowed in any case whatsoever, yet when offences 352 varia: chapter 29

〈14〉 [ed. 9] And lastly, under this | And, to conclude this 〈15〉 [ed. 5] degree, aiding | degree, being present, aiding 〈16〉 [ed. 5] 1 Hal. P. C. 529. Foster. 356. | 1 Hal. P. C. 529. Foster. 356, 357. 〈17〉 [ed. 9] branding, imprisonment, | branding, fines, whipping, imprisonment, 〈18〉 [ed. 9] branding or the like, or else | branding or some of its substitutes, or else 〈19〉 [ed. 9] That by the burning, or pardon | That by the burning, or its substitute,

or the pardon

〈20〉 [ed. 9] to all peers and clergymen, although never branded at all. For they

have the same privileges, without any burning, which others | to all peers and clergymen, although never branded at all or subjected to other punishment in its stead. For they have the same privileges, without any burning, or any sub­ stitute for it, which others





Chapter 29


〈1〉 [ed. 9] transportation to the American colonies: others in loss | transporta­

tion: others in loss

〈2〉 [ed. 9] or face. Some | or cheek. Some 〈3〉 [ed. 8] correction, the pillory | correction or otherwise, the pillory 〈4〉 [ed. 8] the nature, though not | the species, though not 〈5〉 [ed. 8] whomever | whomsoever 〈6〉 [ed. 9] declaratory, throughout, of the old constitutional law of the land: and

accordingly | declaratory of the old constitutional law: and accordingly

〈7〉 [ed. 9] magna carta [Footnote: cap. 14.], concerning amercements for misbe­

haviour in matters | magna carta c. 14. concerning amercements for misbe­ haviour by the suiters in matters

〈8〉 [ed. 9] the oath of a jury. This method, of liquidating the amercement to a

precise sum, is usually done in the court­leet and court­baron by affeerors, or jurors sworn to affeere, that is, tax and moderate, the general amercement according to the particular circumstances of the offence and the offender. In imitation of which, in courts superior to these, the antient practice was to enquire by a jury, when a fine was imposed upon any man, “quantum | the oath of good and lawful men of the neighbourhood. Which method, of liqui­ dating the amercement to a precise sum, was usually performed in the supe­ rior courts by the assessment or affeerment of the coroner, a sworn officer chosen by the neighbourhood, under the equity of the statute Westm. 1. c. 18; and then the judges estreated them into the exchequer [Footnote: F. N. B. 76.]. But in the court leet and court baron it is still performed by affeerors, or suit­ ers sworn to affeere, that is, tax and moderate the general amercement accord­ ing to the particular circumstances of the offence and the offender [Footnote:

varia: chapter 30 353

The affeerors’ oath is conceived in the very terms of magna carta. Fitzh. Survey. ch. 11.]. Amercements imposed by the superior courts on their own officers and ministers were affeered by the judges themselves; but when a pecuniary mulct was inflicted by them on a stranger (not being party to any suit) it was then denominated a fine [Footnote: [Griesley’s case] 8 Rep. 40.]; and the antient practice was, when any such fine was imposed, to inquire by a jury “quantum

〈9〉 [ed. 9] or a stated imprisonment, which is better than an excessive fine, for

that amounts to imprisonment | or a limited imprisonment, instead of such fine as might amount to imprisonment

〈10〉 [ed. 4] he held at | he had at

〈11〉 [ed. 4] of the husband | of her husband 〈12〉 [ed. 5] attainted of treason. | attainted of treason. But if the chief justice of the

king’s bench (the supreme coroner of all England) in person, upon the view of the body of him [ed. 8: one] killed in open rebellion, records it and returns the record into his own court, both lands and goods shall be forfeited. [Footnote: [The Warden and Commonalty of Sadlers’ case] 4 Rep. 57.]

〈13〉 [ed. 5] in some treasons relating to the coin, (which, as we formerly observed,

seem rather a species of the crimen falsi, than the crimen laesae majestatis) it is provided by the several modern statutes which constitute the offence, that it shall work no forfeiture of lands. And, in order | in certain treasons relating to the coin, (which, as we formerly observed, seem rather a species of the crimen falsi, than the crimen laesae majestatis) it is provided by some of the modern statutes [Footnote: Stat. 5 Eliz. c. 11. 18 Eliz. c. 1.] which constitute the offence, that it shall work no forfeiture of lands, save only for the life of the offender; and by all, that it shall not deprive the wife of her dower [Footnote: Ibid. 8 & 9 W. III. c. 26. 15 & 16 Geo. II. c. 28.]. And, in order

〈14〉 [ed. 9] mention, under this division of real estates | mention, as a part of the

forfeiture of real estates

〈15〉 [ed. 5] offence of striking in Westminster­hall. For flight | offences of striking

in Westminster­hall etc. For flight

〈16〉 [ed. 5] the flight: forfeiture being looked upon, since the vast increase of per­

sonal property of late years, as rather too large | the flight [ed. 7: Footnote: Staundf. P. C. 183b.]: forfeiture being looked upon, since the vast increase of personal property of late years, as too large

〈17〉 [ed. 5] in treasons respecting the papal supremacy and counterfeiting the

public | in certain treasons respecting the papal supremacy and the public





Chapter 30


〈1〉 [ed. 4] voided | avoided

〈2〉 [ed. 8] perhaps the zeal | perhaps from the zeal 354 varia: chapter 33





Chapter 31


〈1〉 [ed. 4] Or, he may plead | Or, the party may plead 〈2〉 [ed. 5] 1 Sid. 72. | 1 Sid. 72. See appendix § 3 [IV. 290]. 〈3〉 [ed. 5] realm. | realm [Footnote: And this power belongs only to a king de

facto [in fact], and not to a king de jure [by right] during the time of usurpa­ tion. (Bro. Abr. t. charter de pardon. 22.)].

〈4〉 [ed. 5] therefore resolved | thereupon resolved 〈5〉 [ed. 5] pardoning: it is a general rule, | pardoning. 1. First, it must be under the

great seal. A warrant under the privy seal, or sign manual, though it may be a sufficient authority to admit the party to bail, in order to plead the king’s par­ don, when obtained in proper form, yet is not of itself a complete irrevocable pardon [Footnote: [Trial of Edward, earl of Warwick] 5 St. Tr. 166. 175.]. 2. Next, it is a general rule,

〈6〉 [ed. 9] on condition of transportation to some foreign country (usually to

some of his majesty’s colonies and plantations in America) for life, or for a term of years; such transportation or banishment being allowable and war­ ranted by the habeas corpus act, 31 Car. II. c. 2. §. 14. and rendered more easy and effectual by statute 8 Geo. III. c. 15. | on condition of being confined to hard labour for a stated time, or of transportation to some foreign country for life, or for a term of years; such transportation or banishment being allowable and warranted by the habeas corpus act, 31 Car. II. c. 2. §. 14. and both the imprisonment and transportation rendered more easy and effectual by stat­ utes 8 Geo. III. c. 15. and 19 Geo. III. c. 74.





Chapter 32


〈1〉 [ed. 4] name, “hanged by the neck;” | name, “let him be hanged by the neck;”

〈2〉 [ed. 4] sentence passed. It has been | sentence passed. But, otherwise, the time

and place of execution are by law no part of the judgment [Footnote: [Case of Doyle and Valline, 1 Leach 67] So held by the twelve judges, Mich. 10 Geo. III.]. It has been

〈3〉 [ed. 5] Fost. 270. | Fost. 270. F. N. B. 244. h. 19 Rym. Foed. 284.





Chapter 33


〈1〉 [ed. 8] make it an impossible thing to search | make it impossible to search

〈2〉 [ed. 8] Angles, proper Saxons | Angles, Anglo­Saxons 〈3〉 [ed. 5] appears to me the best | appears to be the best

varia: chapter 33 355

〈4〉 [ed. 5] their lands was to all | their lands to all 〈5〉 [ed. 4] king’s courts held | king’s court held 〈6〉 [ed. 4] considerable share out of the present profits | considerable share of the

present profits

〈7〉 [ed. 5] infringements of the prerogative | infringements on the prerogative

〈8〉 [ed. 8] who may justly be stiled | who hath justly been stiled 〈9〉 [ed. 5] treasure into the king’s coffers | treasure in the king’s coffers 〈10〉 [ed. 8] civil right in the courts | civil rights in the courts 〈11〉 [ed. 8] the example of former ages | the examples of former ages 〈12〉 [ed. 4] and, joining with a set of military hypocrites and enthusiasts, they

overturned | and despair at length forced them to join with a set of military hypocrites and enthusiasts, who overturned

〈13〉 [ed. 8] mortmain: the extension | mortmain: the annihilation of the terrible

judgment of peine fort et dure: the extension

〈14〉 [ed. 8] shewn the possibility (so long doubted) | shewn the legal possibility

and convenience (which our ancestors so long doubted)





Table of Cases




a. Yearbook Cases

(Seipp numbers from www.bu.edu/law/seipp)

Case name Page

27 Edw. III, Lib. Ass. pl. 44; Seipp 1353.169ass 84

30 Edw. III, Lib. Ass. pl. 19; Seipp. 1356.134ass 73

33 Edw. III, Lib. Ass. pl. 7; Seipp 1359.007ass 302

Mich. 40 Edw. III, f. 42, pl. 23; Seipp 1366.105 313

Mich. 8 Hen. IV, ff. 1–2, pl. 2; Seipp 1406.101 212, 213

Mich. 11 Hen. IV, ff. 11–12, pl. 24; Seipp 1409.035 205, 313

Hil. 11 Hen. IV, f. 48, pl. 23; Seipp 1410.023 313

Mich. 13 Hen. IV, f. 6, pl. 14; Seipp 1411.063 313

Trin 20 Hen. VI, f. 37, pl. 6; Seipp. 1422. 058 336

Mich 22 Edw. IV, f. 29, pl. 9; Seipp 1482.126 188, 336

Mich. 2 Ric. III, f. 10, pl. 22; Seipp 1484.022 79, 306

Pas. 13 Hen. VIII, f. 11, pl. 1; Seipp 1521.001ss 171



b. Other Cases

Case name Source reference Page Anon. (1556) 123 ER 241 314 Anon. (1684) 87 ER 33 81 Anon. (1700) 91 ER 492 336 Anon. (1705) 88 ER 921 99 Anon. (1711) 91 ER 79 187 Attorney General v Love (1651) 2 ST 83 230 Attorney General v Messenger et al. (1668) 84 ER 1087 306 Audley’s (Lord) Case (1631) 123 ER 1141 345 Barker’s (Dr) Case (1623) 81 ER 867 144 Beak v Thyrwhit (1688) 87 ER 124 344 Brett v Rigden (1568) 75 ER 520 xii, 17 Burdett’s Case (1474) 79 ER 706 53 Bushell’s Case (1670) 124 ER 338 Calye’s Case (1584) 77 ER 523 155 Case de libellis famosis (R. v L. P.) (1605) 77 ER 250 99 Caudrey’s Case (1591) 77 ER 84 32 Chorley village, Case of (1700) 91 ER 161 336 Clark’s (Sir Simon) Case (1625) 82 ER 244 300, 301 Clavering’s Case (1723) 24 ER 700 166 Clement v Blunt (1624) 81 ER 916 131 Cook’s Case (1539) 79 ER 1064 17 Cooke’s Case (1696) 4 ST 728 345 Cornwall’s Case (1730) 93 ER 914 321 C[ornwallis]’s (Lord) Case (1676) 84 ER 1144, 2 ST 721 334 Crawle v Crawle (1683) 23 ER 393 253 Dacres’s (Lord) Case (1534) 84 ER 1080, 1081 220–5 Davis v Ockham (1650) 82 ER 681 201 358 table of cases

Case name Source reference Page Designy’s Case (1682) 83 ER 247 145 Doyle and Valline’s Case (1769) 168 ER 136 354 Dudly’s Case (1658) 82 ER 1263 201 Edwards (Dr) v Dr Wooton (1607) 77 ER 1316 99 Ely’s Case (1720) OBOt17201207–37 339 Evans’s Case (1749) 168 ER 37 294 Everet’s Case (1596) 79 ER 1215 344 Fenwick (Sir John), Attainder of (1696) 5 ST 40 230 Fountain’s Case (1658) 82 ER 1027 201 Foxley’s Case (1601) 77 ER 226 241 Fulwood’s Case (1637) 79 ER 1021 138 Gibbons’s Case (1752) 168 ER 53 150 Gray’s (Lord) Case (Rioters’ Case) (1683) 23 ER 396 253 Griesley’s Case (1588) 77 ER 534 353 Harrison’s Case (1638) 79 ER 1034 83 Herbert and Vaughan’s Case (1625) 82 ER 249 338 Hickes’s (Sir Baptist) Case (1618) 79 ER 1240; 80 ER 362 99 Holmes’s Case (1634) 82 ER 184; 79 ER 928 147 Holwood v Pascall, Wants et al. (1591) 72 ER 802 99 Howard’s Case (1751) 168 ER 39 160 Hulle and Ascelina his wife, Case of (1230) Cal. Close Rolls Hen. III, i. 336a 137 Hurst’s Case (1658) 82 ER 1027 201 Johnson’s Case (1728) 168 ER 24 255 Lambe’s Case (1561) 73 ER 445 314 Lambe’s Case (1610) 72 ER 922 99 Leak’s Case (1607) 77 ER 1297 55 Lewis’s Case (1752) 168 ER 57 147, 164 Long’s Case (1604) 77 ER 246 199 Macdaniel et al., Case of (1755) 168 ER 62, 65 24, 129, 153 May v Proby and Lumley (1615) 79 ER 358 336 Money v Leach (1764) 97 ER 1075 190 Morgan v Morgan (1656) 145 ER 383 339 Norton’s Case (1564) 73 ER 512 252 Parker’s Case (1560) 73 ER 410–11 23 Peacham’s Case (1628) 79 ER 711 53 Peacock v Reynal (1612) 123 ER 868 99 Pine, Case of (1628) 79 ER 703 53 Powlter’s Case (1609) 77 ER 1190 147 Prynn’s Case (1690) 87 ER 764, 767 201 R. v Abraham et al. (1689) 90 ER 392, 1099 201 R. v Arnold (1724) 8 ST 285 137–8 R. v Ashley and Simons the Jew (1751) 10 ST 416, 96 ER 794 233 R. v Ashton et al. (1691) 4 ST 406 347 R. v Athoe (Athos) (1723) 88 ER 104, 93 ER 694 339 R. v Baily (1686) 90 ER 312 145 R. v Barber (1721) 93 ER 624 187 R. v Belt (1696) 91 ER 492 336 R. v Berchet et al. (1690) 89 ER 480 200 R. v Bethell (1695) 87 ER 495 260 R. v Brasier (1779) 168 ER 202 142 R. v Brown (1673) 84 ER 671 138 R. v Buggs (1694) 87 ER 454 177 R. v Burridge (1735) 24 ER 1136, 1150 238, 241 R. v Cambridge University (1723) 93 ER 702 336 R. v Cook, Snatt and Collier (1696) 87 ER 707 81 R. v Corbet, Okey and Barkstead (1662 ) 82 ER 976, 83 ER 297 255

table of cases 359

Case name Source reference Page R. v Cornwallis (Lord) (1678) 2 ST 721 334, 345 R. v Dalton (1731) 93 ER 936 338 R. v Davidson (1700) 91 ER 97 338 R. v Delamere (Lord) (1686) 4 ST 210 172, 347 R. v Dyer (1703) 91 ER 165 184 R. v Elkins (1767) 98 ER 110 187 R. v Ferrers (Earl) (1758) 98 ER 483, 168 ER 69 186 R. v Foxby (1704) 87 ER 965 111 R. v Garland (1776) 168 ER 174 321 R. v Grahme et al. (Lord Preston’s Case) (1691) 4 ST 406 231, 347 R. v Gwynne et al. (1759) 97 ER 547 208 R. v Hensey (1758) 97 ER 490 231 R. v Jones (1719) 93 ER 462 187 R. v Keite (1697) 91 ER 989, 992 127, 318 R. v Kendal and Row (1695) 91 ER 939 189 R. v Lalor (1607) 80 ER 567 73 R. v Layer (1722) 6 ST 229 209, 231 R. v Manning (1672) 83 ER 112 126 R. v Martin (1777) 168 ER 188 325 R. v Mawgridge (1707) 84 ER 1114 126 R. v Maynard (1631) 79 ER 802 312 R. v Middleton (1662) 84 ER 1066 314 R. v Mohun (Lord) (1697) 90 ER 304 338 R. v Mortis (1771) 96 ER 430; 168 ER 139 338 R. v Muscot (1713) 88 ER 690 231 R. v Ocullean (1680) 83 ER 197 300, 301 R. v Opie and Dodge (1670) 85 ER 419 201 R. v Parry and Roberts (1774) 168 ER 156 340 R. v Parsons (1692) 91 ER 428 258, 259 R. v Pepper (1694) 90 ER 489 338 R. v Read (1661) 83 ER 271 233 R. v Roche (Capt.) (1775) 168 ER 169 339 R. v Rudd (1776) 98 ER 1116 344 R. v Russell (Lord) (1683) 3 ST 629 347 R. v Sidley (1663) 82 ER 1036 32 R. v Sidney (1683) 3 ST 710 231 R. v Smith (1681) 84 ER 1197 233 R. v Smith (1705) 92 ER 257 177 R. v Starling (1664) 82 ER 1039 201 R. v Swendsen (1702) 5 ST 449 138 R. v Thomas (1613) 80 ER 1022 232 R. v Throckmorton (1554) 1 ST 63 232 R. v Vaux (1591) 76 ER 994 242 R. v Vaux (Lord) (1612) 80 ER 885, 886 78, 171 R. v Venables (1725) 92 ER 415 184 R. v Warwick (Earl of) (1699) 5 ST 137 354 R. v Westbeer (1739) 93 ER 1085 155 R. v Wigg (1705) 91 ER 397 110 R. v Wilmore (1682) 90 ER 23 145 R. v Woodburne and Coke (1722) 6 ST 212 137 R. v Woolston (1729) 93 ER 881 39 R. v Yarrington (1710) 91 ER 353 177 Ratcliffe’s Case (1746) 168 ER 22 255, 259, 260 Regicides’ Case (1660) 84 ER 1048 209 Reniger v Fogossa (1550) 75 ER 31 17 Roach’s Case (1775) OBOt17751206–25 339 360 table of cases

Case name Source reference Page Rutland (Seigneur de) v Gie (1658) 82 ER 1026 201 Sadlers’ (Warden and Commonalty), Case of (1588) 76 ER 1018–19 353 Saunders v Melhuish (1703) 87 ER 832 187 Searle v Williams (1618) 80 ER 435, 438 237, 238 Sims’s Case (1743) 93 ER 1131 167 Smith v Earl of Dorset (1651) 82 ER 708 186, 187 Snigge (Baron) v Shirton (1607) 79 ER 173 310 Stafford’s (Lord) Case (1680) 83 ER 213 209 Strata Mercella (Abbot), Case of (1591) 77 ER 776, 779 223, 345 Swann and Jefferies (1751), Case of 168 ER 52 134, 318 Taylor’s Case (1676) 86 ER 189 39 Turbet v Dassigney (1682) 89 ER 902 145 Tyndal’s Case (1633) 79 ER 856 232 Viccarye v Barnes (1650) 82 ER 658 201 Waller’s (Sir William) Case (1634) 79 ER 926 83 Wedderburn’s (Sir John) Case (1746) 168 ER 20 149 Wheelhorse’s Case (1627) 79 ER 1297 42 Witham v Dutton (1689) 90 ER 374 338 York’s Case (1748) 168 ER 35–6 xiv, xxvi, 15





Table of Statutes




While the 1225 confirmation of Magna Carta traditionally ranks as the first statute, this Table includes some earlier enactments, notably King John’s ‘Great Charter’ of 1215. Blackstone’s citations of statutes by regnal year and chapter number are not invariably accurate or consistent, but broadly follow The Statutes at Large, ed. O. Ruffhead, 8 vols (1763). Where they differ from Statutes of the Realm, 9 vols (1810–28) [henceforth SR] or the Chronological Table and Index of the Statutes, Part I (1988) [CT], the modern citation is supplied in parentheses; dates generally follow CT from 1235 onwards.

Statute Page Constitutions of Clarendon (1164) 173, 272, 334 Magna Carta, 17 John (1215) x, 45, 186, 273 Charter of the Forest, 2 Hen. III (1217) 273 Magna Carta, 9 Hen. III (1225) [SR: 25 Edw. I]

c. 14 244

c. 22 249

c. 29 244–5

c. 30 45 51 Hen. III, st. 6. & c. 7 [SR: Assizes of Bread and Ale and

Judgment of the Pillory, uncertain date] 103, 106 Statute of Marlbridge [SR: Marlborough], 52 Hen. III (1267) 128, 179 Statute of Westminster I, 3 Edw. I (1275)

c. 9 80, 191

c. 12 212

c. 13 140

c. 15 193

c. 34 98 De officio coronatoris [SR: Office of the Coroner], 4 Edw. I (1276) 191 De bigamis, 4 Edw. I st. 3. c. 5 (1276) 313 〈4〉 Statute of Gloucester, 6 Edw. I c. 9 (1278) 204 Statute of Mortmain, 7 Edw. I (1279) 73, 275, 276 Statute of Westminster II, 13 Edw. I (1285)

c. 1 (de donis) 191, 278

c. 12 341

c. 34 140

c. 39 186 Statute of Winchester, 13 Edw. I (1285) 153, 191, 275 Stat. Civ. Lond. 13 Edw. I (1285) 271 Statute of Mortmain, 18 Edw. I (1290) 275 Quia emptores terrarum, 18 Edw. I (1290) 275 De malefactoribus in parcis, 21 Edw. I st. 2 (1293) 118 De finibus, 27 Edw. 1 c. 3 (1299) 65 Ordinance for inquisitions, 33 Edw. I st. 4 (1305) 228 Stat. of conspirat. [SR: Ordin. de Consp.] 33 Edw. I (1305) 89 De frangentibus prisonam (1295) 1 Edw. II [SR: 23 Edw. I] 87 Articuli cleri, 9 Edw. II c. 3. (1315) 144 De praerogativa regis, 17 Edw. II [SR: uncertain date] 249 2 Edw. III c. 2 (1328) 258 Statute of Northampton, 2 Edw. III c. 3 (1328) 98 5 Edw. III c. 9 (1331) 203 9 Edw. III st. 2 (1335) 65 10 Edw. III [SR: st. 1] c. 2 (1336) 259 10 Edw. III st. 3 (1336) 112

362 table of statutes

Statute Page 14 Edw. III [SR: st. 1] (1340)

c. 4 129

c. 10 86

c. 15 258

17 Edw. III (1343) 303 18 Edw. III st. 3. c. 2 (1344) 314 de clero, 25 Edw. III st. 3. c. 4 (1351) [SR: 25 Edw. III st. 6 c. 4] 73, 240 25 Edw. III [SR: st. 5] (1351)

c. 2 47, 50–7, 58, 59, 60, 62, 94, 134

c. 14 206

c. 22 78

c. 24 [SR: c. 4] 204, 340

25 Edw. III st. 6 [SR: st. 5 c. 22] (1351) 73 27 Edw. III st. 1. c. 1 (1353) 73 28 Edw. III c. 3 (1354) 206, 341 34 Edw. III c. 1 (1361) 168, 177 37 Edw. III (1363)

c. 18 9

c. 19 156

38 Edw. III st. 1. c. 4 (1363) 73 38 Edw. III [SR: st. 1] c. 9 (1363) 9 38 Edw. III st. 2. cc. 1–4 (1363) 73 2 Ric. II st. 1. c. 5 (1378) 98 3 Ric. II c. 3 (1379) 74 5 Ric. II st. 1. c. 8 [SR: c. 7] (1381) 97 7 Ric. II c. 12 (1383) 74 8 Ric. II c. 2 (1384) 177 12 Ric. II (1388)

c. 11 98

c. 15 74

13 Ric. II st. 2 (1389)

c. 1 258

cc. 2 & 3 74

15 Ric. II (1391)

c. 2 98

c. 3 175

16 Ric. II c. 5 (1393) 74–5 21 Ric. II c. 3 (1397) 57 1 Hen. IV (1399)

c. 10 57

c. 14 203

2 Hen. IV (1400)

c. 3 74

c. 15 29, 31

5 Hen. IV c. 5 (1403) 137 11 Hen. IV (1409) 93 13 Hen. IV c. 7 (1411) 97 1 Hen. V c. 5 (1413) 198 2 Hen. V st. 1 (1414)

c. 4 177

c. 6 46

c. 7 31

c. 8 81

3 Hen. V st. 1 (1415) 303 8 Hen. V c. 6 see 8 Hen. VI c. 6

2 Hen. VI c. 9 (1423) 303, 306

table of statutes 363

Statute Page 8 Hen. VI (1429)

c. 6 95, 147

c. 9 98

c. 12 85 14 Hen. VI c. 8 (1435) 46 18 Hen. VI c. 19 (1439) 67 20 Hen. VI c. 11 (1442) 46 23 Hen. VI c. 9 (1444) 338 27 Hen. VI c. 5 (1448) 42 29 Hen. VI c. 2 (1450) 46 31 Hen. VI c. 4 (1452) 46 33 Hen. VI c. 1 (1455) 153 1 Edw. IV c. 2 (1461) 179 14 Edw. IV c. 4 (1474) 46 1 Hen. VII c. 7 (1485) 95 3 Hen.VII (1487)

c. 1 166, 174, 201, 204, 217

c. 2 138

c. 14 66, 180 4 Hen. VII c. 13 (1488) 237 11 Hen. VII (1495)

c. 1 51

c. 3 201 12 Hen. VII c. 7 (1496) 135, 318 1 Hen. VIII c. 6 (1509) 201 21 Hen. VIII (1529)

c. 1 [SR: 23 Hen. VIII c. 1 (1531)] 147

c. 7 153

c. 11 233

c. 20 174 22 Hen. VIII (1530)

c. 9 129

c. 10 109, 345

c. 11 163

c. 14 228 23 Hen. VIII c. 1 (1531) 133, 160, 161, 318, 327 24 Hen. VIII (1532)

c. 5 119, 121

c. 12 76 25 Hen. VIII (1533)

c. 3 160, 339

c. 14 31

c. 19 76

c. 20 76

c. 21 76 26 Hen.VIII (1534)

c. 6 339

c. 13 197, 338 27 Hen. VIII (1535)

c. 10 277

c. 19 215

c. 24 255 28 Hen. VIII (1536)

c. 1 237

c. 15 47, 175, 241, 351 364 table of statutes

Statute Page 31 Hen. VIII (1539)

c. 8 278

c. 14 31

32 Hen. VIII (1540)

c. 1 277

c. 3 237

c. 9 89, 90

c. 12 216

33 Hen. VIII (1541)

c. 1 103

c. 4 [SR: c. 24] 177

c. 8 40

c. 9 112

c. 12 83, 180

c. 20 16

33 Hen. VIII c. 23 (1541) 338, 339 34 & 35 Hen. VIII c. 26 (1542) 339 35 Hen. VIII c. 2 (1543) 197, 338, 339 37 Hen. VIII (1545)

c. 1 178

c. 6 137

c. 9 102

1 Edw. VI (1547)

c. 1 33

c. 12 98 , 129, 133, 147, 159, 160,

230, 237, 240, 314,

318, 321, 327, 346

2 & 3 Edw. VI (1548)

c. 2 67

c. 15 104

c. 24 197

c. 33 159

3 & 4 Edw. VI c. 5 (1549–50) 94 5 & 6 Edw. VI (1551–2)

c. 4 96

c. 9 160, 327

c. 11 197, 230, 246, 338, 339, 346

c. 14 103

1 Mar. st. 1. c. 1 (1553) 11, 57, 59, 94 1 Mar. st. 2 (1553)

c. 6 59

c. 12 94

1 & 2 Ph. & M. (1554)

c. 4 109

c. 8 77

c. 10 16, 80, 228, 230

c. 11 59

c. 13 194, 337–8, 346

2 & 3 Ph. & M. c. 10 (1555) 193 4 & 5 Ph. & M. (1557)

c. 4 147, 318

c. 8 138

1 Eliz. (1558)

c. 1 32, 33

c. 2 33, 34

c. 16 94

5 Eliz. (1562)

table of statutes 365

Statute Page

c. 4 105

c. 5 67

c. 9 91

c. 11 59, 251

c. 14 163

c. 15 98

c. 17 143, 320, 353

c. 18 301

c. 20 3, 109 8 Eliz. (1566)

c. 2 89

c. 3 101

c. 4 160, 241, 327

c. 14 [recte c. 4] 160 13 Eliz. (1571)

c. 1 60, 82

c. 2 76, 80

c. 5 250

c. 8 102

c. 10 [SR: c. 8] 77, 279

c. 12 298

c. 20 279

c. 29 181 14 Eliz. c. 3 (1572) 65, 303 18 Eliz. (1575)

c. 1 59, 251, 302, 353

c. 3 43

c. 5 90

c. 7 140, 151, 238, 241, 321 23 Eliz. c. 1 (1580) 34, 297, 299 27 Eliz. (1584)

c. 2 37, 58, 76, 299

c. 13 192 29 Eliz. c. 6 (1586) 297, 299 31 Eliz. (1588)

c. 1 35

c. 4 66, 232, 297, 314

c. 5 199

c. 6 41

c. 7 110

c. 11 98

c. 12 159, 294 35 Eliz. (1592)

c. 1 297, 299

c. 2 299 39 Eliz. (1597)

c. 4 259

c. 9 138, 319

c. 15 160, 327

c. 17 108 43 Eliz. (1601)

c. 2 279

c. 6 336

c. 7 154, 322

c. 13 162, 320, 328 1 Jac. I (1603)

c. 4 299

366 table of statutes

Statute Page

c. 8 127

c. 11 107

c. 12 40

c. 25 112

c. 31 106

3 Jac. I (1605)

c. 4 34, 58, 66, 298, 299

c. 5 76, 299

c. 21 39

4 Jac. I (1606)

c. 1 232

c. 5 42

7 Jac. I (1609)

c. 2 38

c. 4 43

21 Jac. I (1623)

c. 2 281

c. 3 104, 281

c. 6 238

c. 8 166

c. 15 98

c. 17 102

c. 19 312

c. 26 85, 306

c. 27 131, 231

c. 28 215

1 Car. I c. 1 (1625) 42 3 Car. I c. 3 (1627) 299 16 Car. I (1640)

c. 7 113

c. 10 175, 201

c. 19 179

c. 21 77

12 Car. II (1660)

c. 13 102

c. 24 32, 77

c. 25 106

c. 32 101

13 Car. II [SR: st. 1] (1661)

c. 1 77

c. 5 97

c. 10 156, 323, 234

13 Car. II st. 2. (1661)

c. 1 38

c. 2 188, 336

13 & 14 [SR: 14] Car. II (1662)

c. 4 298, 299

c. 31 65

c. 33 100

15 Car. II c. 2 (1663) 154, 299, 322, 323

16 Car. II c. 7 (1664) 113 17 Car. II c. 2 (1665) 35, 297, 298, 299

18 Car. II c. 3 (1666) 325 22 Car. II (1670)

c. 1 35, 297, 298, 299

c. 5 66, 159, 325

c. 8 179

table of statutes 367

Statute Page

c. 1 137

c. 7 162, 329

c. 10 264

c. 25 156, 268 23 [SR: 22 & 23] Car. II c. 12 (1670) 179 25 Car. II c. 2 (1672) 38, 299, 300 29 Car. II (1677)

c. 7 42

c. 9 32 30 Car. II st. 2 [SR: c. 1] (1678) 37, 299 31 Car. II c. 2 (1679) 77, 78, 193, 256, 259, 282, 283

1 Jac. II (1685)

c. 8 77

c. 17 100 1 W. & M. st. 1 (1688)

c. 8 77

c. 9 299

c. 15 299

c. 21 178, 301

c. 26 299 1 W. & M. st. 2. c. 1 (recte 2) 2 [SR: sess. 2. c. 2] (1688) 194, 244 1 W. & M. st. 2. c. 18 [SR: 1 W. & M. c. 18] (1688) 35, 297, 298 3 & 4 [SR: 3] W. & M.

c. 9 (1691) 88, 151, 153, 160, 161, 238, 239,

321, 327

c. 10 118 4 & 5 [SR: 4] W. & M.

c. 4 85

c. 8 (1692) 92, 214, 337, 343, 344

c. 18 202

c. 23 329

c. 24 100, 238 5 & 6 W. & M. c. 13 (1694) 259 6 & 7 W. III (1694)

c. 6 107

c. 17 65, 337, 344 7 [SR: 7 & 8] W. III c. 3 (1695) 172 , 198, 225, 227, 230, 232,

346, 347

7 & 8 W. III (1695)

c. 24 77

c. 28 101

c. 31 163

c. 35 107 8 W. III c. 4 (1696) 230 8 & 9 W. III (1696)

c. 20 163, 332

c. 25 346

c. 26 59, 65, 251, 353

c. 27 86

c. 30 178 9 & 10 [SR: 9] W. III (1697)

c. 7 111

c. 15 336

c. 21 303, 304

c. 32 [SR: c. 35] 29, 33

c. 41 304

368 table of statutes

Statute Page 10 & 11 W. III c. 17 [SR: 10 Will. III c. 23] (1698) 110, 114, 343, 344 10 & 11 W. III c. 23 [SR: 10 Will. III c. 12] 160, 192, 214, 327, 337, 348 10 & 11 W. III c. 25 [SR 10 Will. III c. 14] 338, 339 11 & 12 [SR: 11] W. III (1698)

c. 4 37, 299, 300

c. 7 47, 145

12 & 13 W. III c. 2 (1700) 171, 257 13 & 14 W. III c. 3 (1701) 60 1 Ann. c. 9 (1702) 88, 210 1 Ann. st. 2 (1702)

c. 9 88, 162, 210, 232, 329

c. 17 60

5 Ann. c. 6 [SR: 6 Ann. c. 9] (1706) 239, 240, 348, 349 5 Ann. c. 14 [SR: 6 Ann. c. 16] (1706) xi, 115 5 Ann. c. 31 [SR: 6 Ann. c. 31] (1706) 24, 88, 214, 337, 344, 343 6 Ann. c. 7 [SR: 6 Ann. c. 41] (1707) 60, 77 6 Ann. c. 31 [SR: 6 Ann. c. 58] (1707) 147 6 Ann. c. 23 [SR: 6 Ann. c. 78] (1707) 77 7 Ann. (1708)

c. 12 46

c. 21 227, 247, 251, 302

c. 25 59

9 Ann. (1710)

c. 6 114

c. 14 [SR: c. 19] 99, 113–14

c. 16 [SR: c. 21] 66

c. 20 [SR: c. 25] 202

c. 21 [SR: c. 15] 163

10 Ann. (1711)

c. 2 [SR: c. 6] 298

c. 19 [SR: c. 18] 107

c. 26 [SR: c. 19] 114

12 Ann. c. 7 (1712) 150, 160, 327, 336 12 Ann. st. 2. c. 14 [SR: 13 Ann. c. 13] (1713) 300, 336 12 Ann. st. 2. c. 16 [SR: 13 Ann. c. 15] (1713) 102 12 Ann. st. 2. c. 18 [SR: 13 Ann. c. 21] (1713) 159, 162 1 Geo. I [CT: st. 2] c. 5 (1714) 94, 118, 148 1 Geo. I st. 2 (1714)

c. 13 82

c. 25 66, 304

1 Geo. I [CT: st. 2] c. 48 (1715) 162 1 Geo. I st. 2 c. 55 (1715) 300 3 Geo. I (1716)

c. 15 337

c. 18 300

c. 19 258

4 Geo. I (1717)

c. 11 24 , 87, 88, 101, 158, 239, 301, 307,

349, 350

c. 12 162

5 Geo. I (1718)

c. 4 35, 163

c. 14 163

c. 27 105

6 Geo. I (1719)

c. 4 163

c. 11 163

table of statutes 369

Statute Page

c. 23 239, 307, 308, 337, 349, 350 8 Geo. I (1721)

c. 2 114

c. 6 298

c. 22 164, 332

c. 24 48, 301 9 Geo. I (1722)

c. 5 163

c. 8 304

c. 12 164, 332, 338, 339

c. 19 114

c. 22 3, 87, 95, 137, 147, 156, 159, 162,

164, 307, 321, 329, 338

c. 28 86

c. 41 332, 333 11 Geo. I (1724)

c. 9 163, 332

c. 22 86 12 Geo. I (1725)

c. 29 308

c. 32 163, 332 1 Geo. II [CT: st. 2] c. 19 (1728) 95, 309 2 Geo. II (1729)

c. 21 338

c. 25 91, 155, 333

c. 35 164, 333 4 Geo. II (1731)

c. 18 164

c. 32 154 5 Geo. II (1732)

c. 30 311

c. 33 95, 309 6 Geo. II (1733)

c. 35 114

c. 37 163 7 Geo. II (1734)

c. 21 160

c. 22 164, 333 8 Geo. II (1735)

c. 16 192

c. 20 95, 307, 309, 338, 339 9 Geo. II (1736)

c. 5 40

c. 26 300

c. 30 66 10 Geo II (1737)

c. 31 317

c. 32 156, 163, 324 11 Geo. II (1738)

c. 17 300

c. 22 330

c. 26 307 12 Geo. II (1739)

c. 21 101

c. 27 177

c. 28 113

370 table of statutes

Statute Page 13 Geo. II (1740)

c. 19 113, 114

c. 27 326

14 Geo. II c. 6 (1741) 159, 326, 337 15 Geo. II (1742)

c. 13 163, 323, 332

c. 27 325

c. 28 337, 344

c. 34 159, 326, 337

15 & 16 [CT: 15] Geo. II c. 28 (1742) 60, 65, 251, 346, 350 353

16 Geo. II (1743)

c. 15 87, 308, 337

c. 31 87, 307

17 Geo. II (1744)

c. 4 304

c. 5 16, 111

c. 39 60, 248, 251

18 Geo. II (1745)

c. 27 159, 294

c. 30 301

c. 34 113, 114

19 Geo. II (1746)

c. 21 39, 315

c. 34 101, 307, 310

20 Geo. II c. 30 (1747) 230 23 Geo. II (1750)

c. 13 105

c. 26 154, 190, 322, 323

24 Geo. II (1751)

c. 11 323

c. 40 307

c. 45 159, 326

c. 55 190, 337

25 Geo. II (1752)

c. 10 155

c. 36 89, 233, 347

c. 37 87, 118, 133, 260, 307

26 Geo. II (1753)

c. 6 106

c. 19 155, 159, 339

c. 32 102

c. 33 107, 139, 164

27 Geo. II (1754)

c. 3 233, 347

c. 15 87, 95, 307

28 Geo. II (1755)

c. 12 115

c. 19 163, 330, 331

29 Geo. II (1756)

c. 8 106

c. 17 66

c. 30 88, 93, 214

30 Geo. II c. 24 (1757) 91, 103, 113, 191 31 Geo. II (1757)

c. 22 332, 333

c. 29 103, 312

table of statutes 371

Statute Page

c. 32 164, 331, 332

c. 35 154–5, 322, 323

c. 42 3 32 Geo. II (1758)

c. 14 332

c. 18 102

c. 28 102 2 Geo. III c. 28 (1762) 88 3 Geo. III c. 11 (1763) 103, 312 4 Geo. III c. 12 (1764) 102, 309 5 Geo. III c. 14 (1765) 156, 324 6 Geo. III (1766)

c. 36 155, 163, 322, 323, 330, 331

c. 48 155, 163, 322, 323, 330, 331

c. 53 227 7 Geo. III (1767)

c. 40 309, 310, 323, 338

c. 42 314

c. 50 155, 159 8 Geo. III c. 15 (1768) 8 7, 259, 307, 308, 337, 350, 354

9 Geo. III (1769)

c. 29 330, 331, 332

c. 30 331

c. 41 322, 323 10 Geo. III (1770)

c. 18 325

c. 19 315

c. 48 308

c. 50 336 11 Geo. III c. 40 (1771) 304 12 Geo. III (1772)

c. 11 305

c. 20 343, 344

c. 24 304, 338–9, 340

c. 48 332, 333

c. 61 315

c. 71 312 13 Geo. III (1773)

c. 31 337, 340

c. 32 323

c. 33 323, 331

c. 38 321, 326, 331, 333

c. 52 333

c. 59 333

c. 62 312

c. 63 340

c. 71 303, 304

c. 79 332

c. 84 310, 339 14 Geo. III (1774)

c. 20 347

c. 42 304

c. 46 337

c. 70 303, 304

c. 71 313

372 table of statutes

Statute Page 15 Geo. III c. 5 (1775) 313

16 Geo. III (1776)

c. 30 324

c. 43 349

17 Geo. III c. 26 (1777) 312

18 Geo. III (1778)

c. 18 333

c. 19 347

c. 60 300

19 Geo. III (1779)

c. 21 315

c. 44 299

c. 69 310

c. 74 350, 354

21 Geo. III (1781)

c. 37 313

c. 68 308

c. 69 308

22 Geo. III (1782)

c. 58 308

c. 60 313





Index of Persons and Places




Abel, brother of Cain (OT) 5 Barrington, Daines (1727–1800), Cain, brother of Abel (OT) 5 Achilles, Greek hero 124 jurist 160 Calvinus, Johannes (d. 1614), Addison, Joseph (1672–1719), Beaufort, Henry (c. 1375–1447), lexicographer 62

essayist 40 chancellor 75 Canute (c. 985–1035), king of

Africa 30 Beccaria, Cesare (1738–94), Denmark, England and

Barbary coast 164 jurist xiv, 2, 158, 212 Norway 129, 178

Malabar Coast 222 Becket, Thomas (c. 1118–70), Carnwath, see Dalzell

Monomopata or Mutapa archbishop of Catherine II (1729–96),

(Zimbabwe and Canterbury 173, 177, empress of Russia 6 Mozambique) 223 272, 335 Catherine of Aragon

see also Morocco Bereford, Simon de (d. 1330), (1485–1536), queen of Alexander II (d. 1073), pope regicide 170 England 60

69 Berry, John (fl. 1754), Cauchés, Catherine,

Alfonso (Alonso) VII (1311–50), thieftaker 129 Guillemine, and

king of Castile 267 Bithan (OT) 61 Perotine (d. 1556),

Alfred the Great (849–99), Bohun, Humphrey de (c. 1249– protestant martyrs

king of Wessex 165, 98), earl of Hereford 254 178, 192, 265–6, 275 and Essex 54 Charles I (1600–49), king

Alwyn ( Ǣlfwine) (d. 1047), Boleyn, Anne (c. 1500–36), of England 53, 211,

bishop 221 queen of England 54, 60 281–2

America 205, 313 Boniface VIII (1235–1303), execution of 34, 51

transportation to 239, 243, pope 73 reign of 38, 100, 175, 182,

259, 349, 350, 352, Bracton, Henry de (c. 1210–68), 334 354 treatise attributed to 19, Charles II (1630–85), king of

Anne of Cleve(s) (1515–57), 119, 140, 141, 212, 274 England 53, 137, 261–2

queen of England 57 Britain, Great 55, 60, 66, 87, 225, reign of 171, 257, 282–3

Anne (1665–1714), queen of 248, 263, 275, 285, 304 restoration of 42, 51, 285

England 50, 94, 190 parliament of 170, 171, Charles of Anjou (1226–85),

Arcadius, Flavius (378–408), 181, 208, 225; see also king of Sicily 30

Roman emperor 50, 247 England; Scotland; Chichele, Henry (c. 1362–

Aristotle (364–322 BC), Wales 1443), archbishop of

philosopher 269 Britton (Breton), John le Canterbury 75–6

Arnold, Edward (d. c. 1754), (d. 1275), justice and China 11–12, 111

convict 237 bishop 213, 275 Cicero (106–43 BC), Roman

Athelstan (c. 893–939), king of Buckingham, see Stafford; author x, 7, 10, 20, 92,

England 41, 140, 158, Villiers 148, 376 203 Burdett, Thomas (fl. 1474), Circassia (north-west

Augustine (d. 604), archbishop of conspirator 53 Caucasus) 314

Canterbury 69, 270 Burma/Mayanmar, Pegu Clare, Gilbert de (1243–1295),

Augustus (63 BC– 14 AD), (Bago) 223 earl of Gloucester 54

Roman emperor 50, 99 Burn, Rev. Richard (1709–85), Clarendon, see Hyde

Aulus Cascellius (fl. c. 82 bc), legal writer 184 Cluentius (Aulus Cluentius

jurist 246 interventions by 308, 309, Habitus) (fl. 74–66 BC),

Aulus Gellius (c. 125–80), 310, 312, 313 criminal defendant 7

author 244 Coke, Arundell (fl. 1721),

Cade, Jack (d. 1450), rebel 280 criminal defendant 53,

Bacon, Sir Francis (1561–1626), Caesar, Julius (100–44 BC), 137, 211, 281–2

philosopher and Roman emperor 50, execution of 34, 51 374 index of persons and places

Coke, Sir Edward (1552–1634), Dalzell, Robert (1687–1737), Egerton, Thomas, Baron

chief justice earl of Carnwath 257 Ellesmere (1540–1617),

dispute with Ellesmere 281 Danby, see Osborne lord chancellor 281

etymologies of 62, 149, 174 Dean, John (c. 1621–9), child Egypt 108, 109, 314

indignation of 55 murderer 15 Elizabeth I (1533–1603),

justifies refusal of Demosthenes (384–322 BC), queen of England 18,

counsel 229 Greek orator 10 50, 278–9, 280

on burglary 148–9 Denmark 128, 129, 223 reign of 31, 32, 37, 101, 104,

on criminal capacity 16 Derwentwater, see Radcliffe 174, 182, 195

on felony 62, 64 Devereux, Robert, earl of Essex Elizaveta (Elizabeth) Petrovna

on gaolors 86 (1565–1601) 79 (1709–62), empress of

on manslaughter and Diodorus Siculus Russia 6

mayhem 124, 137 (fl. 60–30 BC), Greek Ellesmere, see Cambridge;

on monopolies 104 historian 8 Egerton

on murder 129 Dionysius I (c. 432–367 BC), Emma (d. 1052), queen of

on ordeal, trial by 223 ruler of Syracuse 52 England 221

on perjury 91 Draco (fl. 7th cent. BC), Empson, Sir Richard

on pardons 258 Athenian lawgiver (c. 1450–1510), lawyer

on pirates 47 157 and politician 201

on praemunire 73, 78 Dudley, Edmund England and Wales

on punishments 16, 81, (c. 1462–1510), Berks(hire) 190

249, 261 administrator 201 Windsor 15, 317

on warrants 189 Cambridgeshire

on witnesses 232 Edgar (c. 943–75), king of Cambridge, university

College, Stephen (c. 1635–81), England 266, 270 of 82, 181, 336

‘the protestant Edward I (1239–1307), king of Ely 162

joiner’ 81 England Chester, county of Collier, Jeremy (1650– legal reforms of 274, 278, (Cheshire) 339, 340

1726), nonjuring 285 Chester, city of 103

clergyman 81 reign of 73, 147, 174, 213, Cumberland 162, 325, 326, Constantine I (c. 272–337), 263, 272 328, 329

Roman emperor 58, Edward II (1284–1327), king of Durham 162, 329, 337

120 England 73, 276 Essex Constans (c. 323–50), Roman Edward III (1312–77), king of Epping Forest

emperor 143 England 162, 329 Constantius II (317–61), and papacy 73 Hampshire

Roman emperor 28, reign of 15, 93, 112, 199, Waltham 329

143 276 Hertfordshire Cook(e), Shadrach (fl. statute of treason 6, 53, 56, Rye House 53

1696), non-juring 57, 59 Herefordshire 339

clergyman xi, 81 victories of 269 Kent Cooper, Anthony Ashley, earl Edward IV (1442–83), king of Gravesend 317

of Shaftesbury England 51, 112, 276 Greenwich 48

(1621–83), lord Edward VI (1537–53), king of Middlesex 190, 335,

chancellor 197 England 46, 147, 278 347 Coventry, Sir John (c. 1636–85), Edward the Confessor Norfolk 162

politician 137 (c. 1003–66), king of Northampton 142 Crispe, Edward (fl. 1721), England 103, 166, 221, Northumberland 162, 325,

victim of crime 137 223, 266, 271 326, 328, 329 Cromwell, Oliver (1599–1658), Edwin, Sir Humphrey Oxfordshire,

lord protector 42, 51, (1642–1707), lord Oxford, city of 174, 182

117, 240 mayor of London 35 university of 76, 82, Cyrus II (c. 600 or 576–530 BC), Egbert (d. 839), king of 174, 181

king of Persia 248 Wessex 265 All Souls College 76

index of persons and places 375

River Thames 88, 349 Geneva 33 Henry I (1068–1135), king of

Shropshire (Salop) 339, 340 Germany 17, 69, 108, 247, 263 England

Suffolk 109, 137 Nuremberg 73 laws of 203, 204, 229, 271–2

Bury St Edmunds 15 Glanvil(e), Ranulf de reign of 71, 248, 272–3, 325

Surrey (c. 1120–c. 1190), treatise Henry II (1133–89), king of

Runnymede attributed to 49, 56, England 244, 272

(Runing-Mede) 283 212, 272 Henry III (1207–72), king of

Southwark 86 Gloucester, see Clare England 140, 212,

Sussex 290 Godwyn (Godwine) 273–4

Westmoreland 162 (1001–53) 223 Henry IV (1367–1413), king of

Wiltshire Gordon, William, viscount of England 31, 75

Clarendon 173, 272 Kenmure (c. 1672–1716), Henry V (1387–1422), king of

see also London; Westminster Jacobite 257 England 74, 75 Essex, see Devereux Greece 17 Henry VI (1421–71), king of Eugenius IV (1383–1447), Athens 119 England 51, 74, 211,

pope 75 laws of 25, 58, 92, 120, 236

Europe 70, 72, 132, 205, 223, 268 151, 157, 159 Henry VII (1457–1509), king

customs and laws of 2, 38, Areopagus, Acropolis of England 2, 51, 201,

131, 158, 205, 243 111, 224 276–7

gypsies in 108–9, 314; see Locris 8 Henry VIII (1491–1547), king

also individual countries Grotius, Hugo (1583–1645), of England 77, 112, 175,

Exeter, see Holland Dutch jurist 20, 222 201, 275, 277–9

Guernsey 254 bloody reign of 16, 57

Felton, John (c. 1595–1628), Guiscard, Antoine de (1658– and reformation 76, 236

assassin 211 1711), failed assassin 66 wives of 54, 60

Fenwick, Sir John (c. 1644–97), Hereford, see Bohun

Jacobite 230 Hadrian (76–138), Roman Herodotus (c. 484–c. 425 BC),

Ferrers, see Shirley emperor 119 Greek historian 134 Fielding, Sir John (1721–80), Hale, Sir Matthew Holland 112, 256

magistrate 59 (1609–76), chief Holland, Henry (1430–61)

Finch, Heneage, earl of justice 117, 201, 242 and John (1395–1447),

Nottingham (1621–82), on approvers’ appeals dukes of Exeter and lord chancellor 284, 345 214 constables of the

Fineux, Sir John (c. 1441–1526), on arson 147 Tower 211

chief justice 175 on Edward I 274 Holt, Sir John (1642–1714),

Foster, Sir Michael (1689– on evidence 23, 138, chief justice 201

1763), judge 129, 287 319–20 Homer 124

France 79, 109, 112, 269, 276, 292 on gypsies 109 Honorius (384–423), Roman

laws of 11, 24, 40, 69, 91, on heresy emperor 50, 247

124, 225, 231 32, 295 Hood, Robert (i.e. Robin

Normandy 229, 269, 279 on homicide 130 Hood) 162

Oléron isle d’ 273 on indictments 242 Hoveden (Howden), Roger

Rouen 75 on juries 233 of (fl. 1174– 1201),

see also Gaul on rape 140, 141–2, chronicler 174, 197 Frederic(k) II (1194–1230), 319–20 Howard, Catherine (1523–42),

Holy Roman on treason 46, 52–3 queen of England 54 Emperor 30 Harley, Robert, earl of Hudson, William (c. 1577–

Frederick I Barbarossa Oxford (1661–1724), 1635), legal author 79,

(1122–90), Holy Roman politician 66 175, 334 Emperor 82 Hengham, Ralph de Hungary 314

(1235–1311) chief Hyde, Edward, earl of

Gaul 98, 263 justice 275 Clarendon (1609–74), George III (1738–1820), king of Henrietta Maria (1609–69), chancellor and

England 190 queen of England 37 historian 172, 174 376 index of persons and places

India 109, 222, 340 London, city of 18, 54, 86, 97, Mercia 266 Innocent III (1161–1216), 127, 175, 224 Midias (fl. 348/9 BC), enemy of

pope 71 Cheapside, The Demosthenes 10 Ireland 60, 90, 203, 292, 304 Crown 53 Milton, John (1608–74), Israel (Holy Land) 273 liberties and poet 280 Italy 17, 70, 79, 263; see also sanctuaries 274 Monmouth, see Scott

Rome; Sicily Newgate 291, 311 Montesquieu, Charles-

officeholders 35, 260, Louis de Sécondat

James I (1566–1625), 261, 291, 292, 311 (1689–1755), French

king of England 37, Old Bailey 260, 291, 338, philosopher x, 2

79, 281 339, 344 cited 11, 37, 50, 112, 230, 256

reign of 42, 94, 127, 182 resident catholics 36, 27 More, Sir Thomas (1475–1535),

James II (1633–1701), king of Royal/London lord chancellor 157

England 52, 54, 68, Exchange 163, 331, Morgan, Sir Richard ( d. 1556),

81, 244 332 chief justice 231 James III, see Stuart Tower of London 211, Morocco 51 Jeffreys, George, Baron 257, 328 Mortimer, Roger de, earl of

Jeffreys (1645–89), Whitefriars 86 March (1287–1330)

chief justice and lord Louis XIV (1638–1715), king of 170

chancellor 244 France 40, 60 Murray, William, Lord Jewish republic 6, 119 Loyola, Ignatius (1491–1556), Nairne (1664–1726), Joab (OT) 61 jesuit 69 Jacobite 257 John (1166–1216), king of Luxembourg, Louis de

England 7 (d. 1443), archibishop Nebuchadnezzar ( c. 634–562 John the Monk (fl. temp. of Rouen 75 BC), Assyrian

Henry III) 137 Lyndewode (Lyndwood), king 248 Josephus (c. 37–100 ad), William (c. 1375–1446), Newfoundland 338, 339

historian 8 canonist 29, 30, 325 Nimrod, king of Shinar (OT) Judas (NT) 61 268 Julian (332–63), Roman McDaniel, Stephen (fl. 1754), Nithsdale, see Maxwell

emperor 28 thieftaker 130 Noah (OT) 5 Justinian I (483–565), Man, Isle of 10 Norway 16, 110

Byzantine emperor Manes (c. 215–75), founder of Nottingham, see Finch

30, 247 Manichaeism 30

Manners, Roger, fifth earl of Osborne, Thomas, earl of

Kenmure, see Gordon Rutland (1576–1612), Danby (1632–1712)

rebel 79 xi, 171, 257

Lambard(e), William (1536– Markham, Sir John (d. 1479),

1601), legal antiquary chief justice 53 Palestine 269

178, 293 Martin V (1369–1431), pope 75 Paris, Matthew (c. 1200–59), Latimer, Hugh (c. 1485–1555), Mary I (1516–58), queen of chronicler 237, 273

bishop and martyr 18 England 18, 57, 94, 98, Parsons, Fr. Robert SJ (1546– Layer, Christopher (1683–1723), 147, 231, 254, 278 1610) 229

Jacobite 209 Mary II (1662–94), queen of Patroclus, Homeric hero Leak, George (fl. 1607), England 52, 81 124

Chancery clerk 59 Mary, Queen of Scots Peacham, Rev. Edmund Legate, Bartholomew (d. 1612), (1542–87) 37 (1554–1616), traitor 53

religious martyr 32 Massey, Perotine ( d. 1556), Peckham, John (c. 1230–92), Lisle, Alice (1617–85), regicide’s protestant martyr 254 archbishop of

widow 244 Matthews, John (fl. 1701–19), Canterbury 73 Locke, John (1632–1704), printer 61 Persia 134

philosopher 119, 280 Maxwell, William, earl of Pietersz, Jan (d. 1575), Lolhard (Lollard), Walter Nithsdale (1676–1744), Anabaptist martyr 32

(d. 1322), reformer 31 Jacobite 257 Pius II (1405–64), pope 314

index of persons and places 377

Pius V (1504–72), pope 60 Selden, John (1584–1654), jurist Swift, Jonathan (1667–1745), Plato (423–348 BC), and historian 119 author 35

philosopher 92, 120 Selim I (c. 1470–1520), Sydney (Sidney), Algernon

Poland 51 sultan 108, 109 (1623–83), Whig Pole, William de la (1396–1450), Seton, George, earl of Winton martyr 3, 231, 280

duke of Suffolk 211 (c. 1678–1749),

Porcius, Publius (fl. 195), Jacobite 257 Tacitus (c. 56–c. 120), Roman

Roman lawgiver 11 Sextus Roscius (fl. 80 BC), historian

Pratejus (Prateus), defendant 10, 134 107, 113, 116, 202, 221

Pardulphus (fl. 1571), Shaftesbury, see Cooper Terwoort, Hendrick ( d. 1675), lexicographer 62 Shirley, Laurence, earl Ferrers Anabaptist martyr 32

Puf(f)endorf, Samuel von (1720–60), executed Theodore II Laskaris

(1632–94), German murderer 118, 292–3 (1222–58), emperor of jurist 20, 21, 128, 158 Siam 222 Nicaea 222

Pym, John (1584–1643), Sicily 30 Theodosius I (347–95), Roman

parliamentarian 97 Smith, Sir Thomas emperor 28, 30, 265

Pyne (Pine), Hugh (1513–77), scholar and Thorp(e), Sir William de

(1570–1628), lawyer diplomat 233 ( d. 1361), chief and alleged traitor 53 Snatt, William (1645– justice 93

1721), nonjuring Turkey 203, 225

Radcliffe (Radclyffe), James, clergyman 81 Tyler, Watt (d. 1381), rebel 280

earl of Derwentwater Solomon (fl. 10th cent. BC), Tyrrel (Tirel), Sir Walter ( d. by (1689–1716), king of Judah 20 1130), courtier 52 Jacobite 257 Solon (c. 630–c. 560 BC),

Richard I (1157–99), king of Athenian lawmaker Urban V (1310–70), pope 73

England 162, 174, 197, 8, 98, 126, 134, 157 272 Sophocles, Greek Valentinian I (321–75), Roman

Richard II (1367–1400), king dramatist 222 emperor 28, 99, 295

of England 57, 74, 75, Spain 17, 69, 109, 269, 280 Villiers, George (1592–1628), 258 Spelman, Sir Henry duke of Buckingham,

Richard III (1452–85), king of (1564–1641), royal favourite 211

England 51 antiquary 63, 108, 149, Vouglans, Pierre-François

Ridley, Nicholas (1500–55), 158, 314 Muyart de (1713–91),

bishop and martyr 18 Stafford, Edward, duke of jurist 40

Rome, bishop and church Buckingham

of 31, 33, 36, 58, 66, (1478–1521), traitor Wales 20, 263, 264, 266, 275, 69–76, 264, 270, 272, 175 278, 279, 339 300 Stafford-Howard, William, Anglesey 340

Russia/Russian Empire 6 Viscount Stafford Monmouthshire 339

see also Circassia (1614–80), catholic Walker, William (temp. Rutland, see Manners martyr 261 Edward IV), adjudged

Stanford (Staunforde), Sir traitor 53

Scandinavia 140, 247 William (1509–58), Westminster 176, 273, 300, Scotland 60, 337, 340 judge 129 334, 335

covenanters in 69 Stephen of Blois (c. 1097–1154), Palace of, Star

hostilities with 73, 232, 275 king of England 271 Chamber 174

laws of 140, 148, 199, 232, Stuart, Charles Edward Stuart Savoy 86

248 (1720–80), the Young Westminster Hall 83, 85,

peers of 77, 173 Pretender 248, 300 249, 353

Scottish borders 162 Stuart, James Edward Francis Wightman, Edward (d. 1612),

union with 248, 283 (1688–1766), the Old religious martyr 32 Scott, James, duke of Pretender 37, 38, 60, Widdrington, William, Baron

Monmouth (1649–85), 61, 227, 247, 248, 251 Widdrington rebel 137, 244 Sweden 107, 128, 136, 222 (1678–1743), Jacobite 257 378 index of persons and places

Wild, Jonathan (1683–1725), William III (1650–1702), king Woodburn, John (fl. 1721),

thieftaker 88, 308 of England 38, 52, 81, criminal defendant 137 William I, the Conqueror 135, 318

(c. 1028–87), king Wilkes, John (1725–97), York, William (fl. 1748), child

of England 69, 129, politician 190 murderer 15

140 Winchelsey, Robert William (Rufus) II (c. 1240–1313), Zeno, Flavius Zeno Augustus

(c. 1060–1100), king of archbishop of (c. 425–91), Byzantine

England 52, 271 Canterbury 73 Emperor (425–91) 104





Index




Blackstone’s own index to all four books of the Commentaries appeared for the first time at the end of Book IV. An index of terms rather than concepts or subjects, it is reproduced here without alteration, other than converting page references to those of the present edition and correcting obvious typographical and other errors. A lack of cross-references means that the same topics frequently appear under different headwords, while citations are often far from inclusive; thus although each book of the Commentaries includes numerous mentions of Magna Carta, it receives only five indexed page references (one duplicate). Nevertheless the index does show what information Blackstone himself thought important or necessary for his contem poraries to access; modern readers may supplement it by consulting the indexes of persons and places, and tables of cases and statutes provided for each volume by its editor.

Abatement of freehold III. 113 Accessories IV. 22 - - - - ex contractu III. 79- - - - - - indictment IV. 216 - - - - - - after the fact IV. 24 - - - - - - delicto III. 79- - - - - - nusance III. 3 - - - - - - before the fact IV. 23 - - - - feodal III. 79–80- - - - - - - - - - writ, count, or Accessories, when to be tried - - - - mixed III. 80

suit III. 200 IV. 210 - - - - personal III. 79- - - - - - - plea in III. 199–200, Accidents, where relieved - - - - plea to III. 200

IV. 216 against III. 283 - - - - property in II. 268 Abbey-lands II. 20, IV. 77 Accomplices, discovery of - - - - real III. 79- - - - - - molesting their IV. 214 Actual right of possession

possessors IV. 77 Accord III. 10 II. 132 Abbots I. 104 Account books, when evidence Additions I. 261, III. 199, Abbreviations III. 214 III. 243 IV. 198, 216 Abdication I. 137, IV. 52 - - - - cognizable in equity Adherence to the king’s Abduction of child III. 95 III. 287 enemies IV. 55- - - - - - - heiress IV. 138 - - - - writ of III. 109 Adjoining county, trial in - - - - - - - ward III. 95 Accroaching royal power III. 252- - - - - - - wife III. 94 IV. 50 Adjournment of parliament - - - - - - - women I. 286 Ac etiam III. 190, 313 I. 121–2- - - - - - or kidnapping IV. 145 Act of bankruptcy II. 322 Admeasurement of pasture Abearance, good, security for - - - grace, how passed I. 120–1 III. 159

IV. 165, 168 - - - - - - when pleaded IV. 255 Administration II. 330 Abeyance II. 71 - - - parliament I. 62–3 - - - - - - - - cum testamento Abigei IV. 159 - - - - - - - - disobedience to annexo II. 340 Abjuration, oath of I. 236 IV. 81 - - - - - - - - de bonis non II. 342- - - - - - of the realm IV. 37, 82, - - - - - - - - how made I. 119 - - - - - - - - durante absentia

215, 243 - - - - - - - - its antient form II. 340 Absolute power of the crown I. 119 - - - - - - - - - - - - minore aetate

I. 162 - - - - - - - - - - power I. 121 II. 340- - - - property II. 263 - - - - - - - - private I. 63, II. 234 - - - - - - - - limited or special - - - - rights and duties I. 84 - - - - - - - - public I. 63 II. 342 Abstract of a fine II. 238, 365 - - - - - - - - when binding on Administrator II. 334, IV. 276 Accedas ad curiam III. 22 the crown I. 169 Admiralty causes III. 71 Acceptance of bills II. 316 Action at law III. 379 - - - - - court of III. 46, IV. 175 Accession, property by II. 274 - - - - chose in II. 268 Admission of a clerk I. 251 380 index

Admittance to copyholds - - - - duty I. 204, 239–40 - - - - - mayhem IV. 203

II. 251 Alimony I. 284, III. 63 - - - - - rape IV. 203

Admittendum clericum, writ ad Allegation III. 67 - - - - - treason IV. 203

III. 166 Allegiance I. 235, IV. 49 - - - - prosecution by

Ad quod damnum, writ of - - - - - - local I. 237 IV. 202, 273

II. 179 - - - - - - natural I. 237 - - - - to parliament III. 298

Advertising for stolen goods - - - - - - oath of I. 236, IV. 179 - - - - - Rome IV. 76, 272

IV. 89 - - - - - - - - - - refusing it IV. 77 Appearance to actions III. 192

Adultery I. 284, III. 94, - - - - - - withdrawing from Appellee on approvement

IV. 42–3, 126 IV. 58 IV. 214

Advocate III. 18 Allodial property II. 30, 39 Appendant, advowson II. 13 Advocatus fisci III. 18 Allodium II. 270 Appendant, common II. 20 Advowson II. 12, IV. 274 Allowance of franchise III. 175 Appointment to charitable Aequitas sequitur legem II. 225, - - - - - - - pardons IV. 259 uses II. 254

III. 290 - - - - - - to bankrupts II. 325–6 Appraisement, commission of

Affectum, challenge propter Alluvion II. 177 III. 174

III. 239, IV. 227 Almanac, its authority III. 220 Apprentices I. 274–5, IV. 104

Affeerors of amercements Alteration of deeds II. 211 Apprenticii ad legem III. 18

IV. 245 Amended bill in equity III. 294 Appropriations I. 247–8

Affidavit III. 201 Amendments at law III. 266, Approvement in felony and Affinity I. 279–80 IV. 283 treason IV. 214 Affirmance of judgments Amercement II. 368, III. 248, - - - - - - - of commons II. 21,

III. 270 III. 302, 303, 318, 320, III. 161

Affray IV. 95 IV. 244, 273 Approvers IV. 214 Age, action suspended by - - - - - - action for III. 107 - - - - - compelling prisoners to

III. 198 American colonies I. 75, 326–8 become IV. 86

- - - of consent to marriage Ancestor II. 140–1 Appurtenant, common II. 20–1

I. 281–2 Ancestors, how numerous Arbitrary consecrations of

- - - - persons, how reckoned II. 137 tithes I. 78, II. 16

I. 300, IV. 14 Ancestrel actions III. 125 Arbitration III. 10

Aggregate corporation I. 304–5 Animals, larciny of IV. 155 Archbishop I. 104, 243- - - - - fund I. 211 - - - - property in II. 3 Archdeacon I. 247 Agistment II. 306 Animus furandi IV. 153 - - - - - - his court III. 43 Agnati II. 157 - - - - revertendi II. 265 Archdeaconry I. 77 Agnus Dei, &c IV. 76 Annual parliaments I. 102 Arches court III. 43 Agriculture, its original II. 5 Annuities II. 25 - - - - dean of III. 43 Aid-prayer III. 198 Annulum et baculum, Areopagus, court of III. 241, Aids, feodal II. 41–2, 58, 87, investiture per I. 243 IV. 111, 224

IV. 270 Annus luctus I. 295 Aristocracy I. 40

- - - parliamentary I. 198 Answer in chancery III. 293 Armed, being unusually Air, right to II. 9 - - - - upon oath III. 67 IV. 97 Albinatus, jus I. 239, 240 Antient demesne I. 184, II. 66 Armies I. 170 Alderman I. 80 Apostacy IV. 28 - - - - standing I. 265–6, Alderney, island of I. 75 Apparel, excess in IV. 112 IV. 270, 283, 284 Alehouses IV. 42, 110 Apparent, heir II. 140 Armorial ensigns II. 290, Alfred, his dome-book I. 49, - - - - - right of possession III. 70

IV. 265 II. 131 Armour, &c. embezzling the

Alias writ III. 187, 310, IV. 206 Appeal by approvers IV. 214 king’s IV. 66 Alienation II. 196 - - - - how differing from writ - - - - statutes of I. 264- - - - - - fine for II. 47, IV. 270 of error III. 37 Arms and ammunition, - - - - - - forfeiture by II. 182 - - - - of arson IV. 203 exporting them I. 170–1 Alien-priories I. 249, IV. 74 - - - - - death IV. 203–4, 273 - - - right of having I. 97 Aliens I. 235, 238–9, II. 169, - - - - - felony IV. 203 Arraignment IV. 209, 288

186–7, 200, IV. 74 - - - - - larciny IV. 203 - - - - - - incidents to IV. 210 index 381

Array, challenge to III. 237, - - - - - covenant for farther - - in criminal cases IV. 193

IV. 227 II. 362 - - - error III. 269- - - commission of I. 264 Attachment against witnesses - - refusing IV. 193 Arrest of judgment III. 258, III. 243 - - special III. 190, 214

307, IV. 242 - - - - - - for contempts IV. 185 - - taking insufficient IV. 194- - - - persons III. 191, IV. 189 - - - - - - in chancery III. 291–2 - - to the action III. 192- - - - seamen and soldiers - - - - - - - - - - - - with - - - - - sheriff III. 192

I. 271 proclamations III. 291 Arson IV. 146, 240 - - - - - - writ of III. 185, 309 Bailable or not, who IV. 193–4- - - appeal of IV. 203 Attachments, court of III. 48 Bail-bond III. 192, 214, Articles of the navy I. 270 Attainder II. 171, IV. 245 Bailiffs I. 221–2, 275- - - - - war I. 267 - - - - - act of IV. 169 - - - - of hundreds I. 80, 221–2 Artificers I. 261 Attaint, grand jury in III. 232 Bailiwick I. 221, II. 23- - - - - residing abroad IV. 105 - - - - writ of III, 264, IV. 233 Bailment II. 267, 306- - - - - transporting them Attainted persons II. 198, Bail-piece III. 192, 315

IV. 105 IV. 245 Ballot for jurors III. 236 As, Roman, divisions of II. 312 Attempt to rob IV. 160 Balnearii IV. 159 Ascendants excluded from - - - - - - steal fish IV. 156 Banishment I. 93, IV. 243, 259

inheriting II. 141 Attestation of deeds II. 210, Bank I. 210 Asportation IV. 153 353–4, 355, 363, 364 Bankrupt II. 318, IV. 278, 281 Assault III. 81, IV. 95, 143 - - - - - - devises II. 255 Bankruptcy II. 194, 318- - - - costs in actions for Attorney at law III. 17 - - - - - - cognizance of III. 281

III. 262–3 - - - - - - - action against - - - - - - fraudulent IV. 102 Assembly of estates I. 98 III. 110 Banneret, knight I. 260- - - - - riotous or unlawful Attorney general III. 18 Banns I. 281

IV. 96 - - - - - - - - information by Bar of dower II. 92 Assensu patris, dower ex II. 89 III. 173–4, 281, IV. 200 - - plea in III. 202, IV. 216, 255 Assessments I. 201 Attornment II. 47, 167–8 - - trial at III. 233 Assets II. 345 Aubaine, droit de I. 239 Bargain and sale of lands - - - by descent, or real II. 166, Audita querela, writ of III. 265 II. 230, 354

206 Auditors in account III. 110 Baron I. 256- - - personal II. 344 Averium II. 287 - - - and feme I. 279 Assignees of bankrupt II. 324 Averment III. 204, 206, IV. 219 Baronet I. 260 Assignment of bankrupts’ Augmentation of vicarages and Baronies II. 41, 60

effects II. 327 curacies I. 250 - - - - of bishops I. 104- - - - - - - dower II. 91 Aula regia, or regis III. 25, Barretry IV. 89- - - - - - - errors III. 319 IV. 268, 272 Barristers I. 22, III. 18- - - - - - - estate II. 222 Aulnager I. 177 Base fees II. 73 Assigns II. 197 Avowry III. 101 - - - services II. 40 Assise, commission of III. 39, Aurum reginae I. 143 - - - tenants II. 100

IV. 176 273 Auter droit II. 199 Bastard I. 293- - - court of III. 38 Auterfoits acquit IV. 217 - - - - administration to II. 341- - - general I. 99 - - - - - attaint IV. 217 - - - - concealment of its death - - - grand III. 225, 232, 302, - - - - - convict IV. 217 IV. 131, 231

IV. 272 Auter vie, tenant pur II. 81 - - - - eignè II. 168–9- - - justices of III. 48 Authorities in law I. 54 - - - - incapacity of I. 296–7- - - - - - - - killing them IV. 55 Award III. 10 - - - - maintenance of I. 296- - - of arms II. 43 Ayle, writ of III. 125 - - - - punishment for having - - - - - bread, breaking IV. 103 Bachelor, knight I. 260 IV. 42- - - rent of II. 27 Backing warrants IV. 190 Bath, knight of the I. 260- - - writ of III. 124, IV. 272 Bail above III. 192 Battel, trial by III. 222, 300, Assumpsit, express III. 106 - - below III. 192 IV. 224, 270, 272, 273- - - - implied III. 108–9 - - common III. 190 Battery III. 81, IV. 143 Assurances, common II. 201 - - excessive I. 92, IV. 193 - - - - inspection of III. 219–20 382 index

- - - - of a clergyman IV. 144 Body corporate I. 303 Burgage, tenure in II. 54, - - - - - servant III. 96 - - - how protected I. 91 IV. 271 Bawdy-houses IV. 19, 42, 110 - - - politic I. 303 Burgesses in parliament, their Beaconage, suit for III. 73 Boiling to death IV. 129 election I. 114 Beacons I. 350 Bona notabilia II. 343 Burglary IV. 148 Behaviour, good, security for - - - vacantia I. 192 Burial charges II. 343

IV. 165, 166–7, 259 Bond II. 231, 363, III. 314, - - - of felo de se IV. 125

Beheading IV. 61, 243 IV. 285 Burning in the hand IV. 237, Benefices IV. 70 - - - of arbitration III. 10 243, 290 Benefit of clergy IV. 236, 267, - - - tenants II. 100 - - - - - malicious IV. 162–3

277, 284 Bono et malo, writ de IV. 177 - - - - - to death IV. 61, 135,

Benevolence, compulsive I. 95, Book of rates I. 204 143, 147, 243, 264

IV. 281 Book-land II. 60 Butlerage I. 203

Berwick I. 71 Books and papers, production By-laws I. 308- - - - part of England I. 71 of III. 251–2 - - - - action on III. 106 Besayle, writ of III. 125 - - - popish, importing or Bigamy IV. 107 selling them IV. 76 Calais, captain of, his Bill for patents, &c II. 235–6 Borough I. 79, II. 54–5 certificate III. 220- - in equity III. 290 - - - - - courts III. 54 Calendar of prisoners IV. 260- - - parliament I. 1119 - - - - - English I. 56, II. 55 Calling the plaintiff III. 248- - - - - - - - - how passed Borrowing II. 307 Cancelling deeds II. 211

I. 119–20 Borsholder I. 79, 228, IV. 266 - - - - - wills II. 339

- - of exceptions III. 245 Botes II. 21–2 Canonical obedience IV. 71, - - - exchange II. 315 Bottomry II. 310 74, 135- - - indictment IV. 196 Bound bailiffs I. 221–2, - - - - - purgation III. 226, - - - Middlesex III. 188, 313 Bounties on exportation I. 203 IV. 237- - - privilege III. 191 Bourdeaux, mayor of, his Canon law I. 59, 60–1, IV. 272- - - rights I. 87 IV. 283 certificate III. 220 Canons of a church I. 246- - or note, forging IV. 163 Bracton I. 54, IV. 274 - - - - - inheritance II. 140- - - - - - stealing IV. 155 Branding, in the hand or face - - - - -1603 I. 61 Billa vera IV. 198 IV. 237, 243 Capacity of guilt IV. 13 Bishop I. 104, 243, 258 Breach of close III. 140 - - - - - to purchase or convey - - - certificate of III. 221 - - - - - covenant III. 105 II. 198- - - not electing or - - - - - duty, action for III. 110 Capias ad audiendum judicium

consecrating IV. 76 - - - - - peace IV. 94 IV. 242

- - - right of, to try or be tried, - - - - - pound III. 99 - - - - respondendum III. 186,

as a peer IV. 172–3 - - - - - prison IV. 86 309–10, IV. 206–7, 277, 288

Bishopricks, nomination to Brehon law in Ireland I. 71 - - - - satisfaciendum III. 272,

I. 243, IV. 71, 268, 277, Brevia testata II. 210 320

Bissextile year II. 95 Bribery in elections I. 117–18 - - - in withernam III. 87, Black act IV. 95, 131, 239, 244 - - - - - magistrates IV. 92–3 101, 271- - - lead, stealing of IV. 155 Bridges I. 229, IV. 273 - - - pro fine III. 261 Black maile II, 27, IV. 162 - - - - annoyances in IV. 110 - - - utlagatum III. 188, 312, Blanch rent II. 27 British constitution I. 40 IV. 207 Blasphemy IV. 39 - - - - islands I. 75 Capiatur, judgment quod Blench-holding II. 27 Britons, antient, their laws III. 261, 308 Blood corrupted II. 171, I. 63, IV. 263 Capita, distribution per II. 349

IV. 250 Britton I. 54, III. 267, IV. 275 - - - succession per II. 146

- - - inheritable II. 167 Brothels, frequenting IV. 42 Capital punishment, IV. 5–6, - - - of the first purchasor Brothels, keeping IV. 19 42, 121 11–12, 157–8, 243, 267, 284

II. 148 Bubbles IV. 77 Capite, tenants in II. 39

- - - royal I. 146 Buggery IV. 142 Captives II. 272- - - whole and half II. 153 Bulles, papal IV. 72–3 Captures at sea II. 272 index 383

Caput lupinum IV. 207 - - - - - - killing him IV. 56 - - - - - - - - its jurisdiction Carnal knowlege of infants - - - - - - lord III. 30 III. 69, IV. 175

IV. 140 - - - - - - of a diocese I. 246 - - - - guardian in I. 299 Carrier, action against III. 110 - - - - - - - - the duchy of - - - - tenure in II. 41 Cart-bote II. 22 Lancaster III. 53 Chose in action II. 269 Case, action on III. 33, 83, - - - - - - - - - - exchequer III. 29 - - - - - - - how assigned II. 299,

IV. 285 - - - - - - - - - - university, his IV. 284 Case reserved at nisi prius court III. 56–7 - - - - possession II. 263

III. 249 Chance-medley IV. 121 Christian, courts III. 43- - - stated out of chancery Chancery, court of III. 30, Christianity, offences against

III. 297 IV. 281 IV. 28–9 Castigatory for scolds IV. 111 Chapters I. 246 - - - - - - part of the law of Castration IV. 136 Charge to grand jury IV. 197 England IV. 39 Casu consimili, writ in III. 33 Charitable uses II. 186, 254–5 Church, marriage in I. 283- - - proviso, writ of entry in - - - - - - - commission of - - - - offences against IV. 33

III. 123 III. 281 - - - - or churchyard, affrays in Casual ejector III. 135, 304 Charities, cognizance of III. 281 IV. 96 Cattle, malicious killing or - - - - - informations for - - - - rate I. 254, III. 62

maiming IV. 162 III. 281 - - - - repairs of III. 62- - - - owner answerable for Charter II. 202 Churchwardens I. 254

III. 103, 141, IV. 130 Charter of the king II. 235 Cinque ports, courts of III. 53 Caveat III. 66, 164 Charter-governments in Circuits III. 38, IV. 272–3 Causa matrimonii praelocuti, America I. 327 Circumstantial evidence

writ of entry III. 123 Charter-land II. 60 III. 244–5 Cause, challenge for IV. 227 Chase II. 24, 282, IV. 268 Citation III. 67 Causes of demurrer III. 208, 318 - - - beasts of II. 24, 282 Citizens in parliament, their Centenarius I. 80 Chastity, homicide in defence electors I. 114 Centumviri III. 209 of IV. 119 City I. 79 Cepi corpus III. 191, 310, Chattels II. 261 Civil corporations I. 305

312, 313 - - - - - personal II. 262 - - - death II. 82 Certificate for costs III. 143 - - - - - real II. 261 - - - injuries III. 1- - - - - into chancery III. 297 Chaud-medley IV. 121 - - - law I. 16, 17, 19–20, 58–60, - - - - - of bankrupt II. 325 Cheat, action against III. 111 62, IV. 271–2- - - - - - poor I. 234 Cheating IV. 103 Civil law, its study forbidden - - - - - trial by III. 220 - - - - - at play IV. 113–14 I. 19 Certiorari facias IV. 171, 173, Chester, county palatine of - - - liberty I. 19, 85, 163

178, 264 I. 81 - - - list I. 212, IV. 284 Cessavit, writ of III. 155 - - - - courts of III. 53 - - - state I. 255 Cessio bonorum II. 319, 325 Chevisance II. 320 - - - subjection IV. 18 Cession of a benefice I. 252 Chichele, archbishop, Clarendon, constitutions of Cestuy que trust II. 223 vindicated IV. 74–5 IV. 272- - - - - vie II. 82 Chief baron of the exchequer Clausum fregit III. 140- - - - - use II. 223 III. 29 Clearing contempts in Chains, hanging in IV. 133 - - - justices III. 26–7 chancery III. 292 Challenge of jury III. 237, - - - justiciary of England Clementine constitutions

IV. 227 III. 25, IV. 268–9 I. 61- - - - - to fight IV. 98 - - - rents II. 26 Clergy I. 242 Champerty IV. 89 - - - tenants in II. 39 - - - - averse to the common Champions in trial by battel Children, their duties I. 292–3 law I. 19–20

III. 223–4, 301 Chirograph II. 202 - - - - benefit of IV. 236, 267, Chance IV. 17 - - - - - - of a fine II. 365 277, 284 Chancellor, his name and office Chivalry, court of III. 45, - - - - plea of IV. 215

III. 31 IV. 175 - - - - prayer of IV. 290 384 index

Clergymen, beating them Collation to a benefice I. 251 - - - - - nusance IV. 109–10

IV. 144 Collative advowsons II. 13 - - - - - of estovers II. 21

Clerical habit and tonsure Collecting the goods of the - - - - - - pasture II. 20

IV. 237 deceased II. 344 - - - - - - piscary II. 21

Clerico admittendo, writ de Colleges I. 308 - - - - - - turbary II. 21

III. 271 - - - - their visitor I. 312–13 - - - - - pleas III. 26

Clerk in office I. 18 Collegia in the civil law I. 304 - - - - - - - - court of III. 24–7- - - - orders I. 250 Colligendum bona defuncti, Common pleas, court of, fixed at - - - of the market, his court letters ad II. 341 Westminster I. 21–2, IV. 273

IV. 179 Colonies I. 75, II. 4 - - - - - prayer book, reviling of

Clients III. 19 Colour in pleading III. 204 IV. 33 Clipping the coin IV. 59 Combinations IV. 104 - - - - - recovery III. 122, 130, Cloaths, malicious destroying Combustio domorum IV. 240 IV. 276

of IV. 162 Commenda I. 253, IV. 71 - - - - - right of II. 20

Close, breach of III. 140 Commerce, king the arbiter of - - - - - sans nombre III. 160- - - rolls II. 235 I. 176 - - - - - scold IV. 111- - - writs II. 235 Commission of bankrupt - - - - - seal I. 308 Coalmines, setting fire to II. 323 - - - - - surcharge of III. 159

IV. 162 - - - - - - lunacy I. 196 - - - - - tenant in, of lands

Coat-armour II. 209, III. 71 - - - - - - the peace I. 225 II. 128, 358 Code of Justinian I. 60 - - - - - to examine witnesses - - - - - - - - - - - - chattels - - - - Theodosius I. 60 III. 288, 294–5 personal II. 269 Codicil II. 337–8 - - - - - - take answers in equity - - - - - vouchee II. 243, 367–8 Cognati II. 157 III. 294 - - - - - ways II. 22 Cognizance, claim of III. 198, Commitment of bankrupt - - - - - without stint II. 21

IV. 181 II. 324 Commonalty I. 259

- - - - - - de droit, come ceo, &c, - - - - - - - persons accused Commons, house of I. 105–6

fine sur II. 239 IV. 193 Commonwealth, offences

- - - - - - - - - tantum, fine sur Committee of council I. 149 against IV. 85

II. 239 - - - - - - - parliament I. 120 Commorancy IV. 178

- - - - - - in replevin III. 101 - - - - - - - lunatic I. 196 Communem legem, writ of - - - - - - of pleas II. 23 Common appendant II. 20 entry ad III. 123- - - - - - - wrongs III. 58 - - - - - appurtenant II. 20 Communion of goods II. 2 Cognizee of a fine II. 238 - - - - - bail III. 190 Commutation of penance - - - - - - - recognizance II. 232 - - - - - barretor IV. 89 IV. 70, 144, 180 Cognizor of a fine II. 238 - - - - - because of vicinage Compact I. 37- - - - - - - recognizance II. 232 II. 21 Compassing the death of the Cognovit actionem III. 201, 261 - - - - - bench, court of king, &c IV. 50 Coin, falsifying, &c IV. 56, 58, III. 24–6 Compensatio III. 201

59, 65, 80 - - - - - - - - justices of, killing Competent witnesses III. 244

- - - felonies and them IV. 56 Composition real for tithes

misdemesnors relating to - - - - - disturbance of III. 159 II. 17

IV. 64–5 - - - - - estate in II. 128, 270 - - - - - - with creditors II. 326

- - - treasons relating to IV. 56, - - - - - farrier, & c, action Compound larciny IV. 159

58, 59–60 against III. 110 Compounding felony IV. 88

Coinage, instruments of, - - - - - form, proof of will in - - - - - - - other prosecutions

treason relative to IV. 59 II. 343 IV. 90

- - - - - right of I. 178 - - - - - in gross II. 21 Compulsion IV. 18 Coke, sir Edward I. 54 - - - - - informer III. 108 Compurgators III. 226, IV. 237, Collateral consanguinity II. 138 - - - - - jury III. 236 267- - - - - descent II. 148 - - - - - law I. 48, 50, IV. 265, 266 Concealment from the crown - - - - - issue IV. 255, 290 - - - - - - - corporation by I. 306 IV. 281 Collateral warranty II. 206 - - - - - - - dower by II. 89 - - - - - - - of bastard’s death Collatio bonorum II. 349 - - - - - - - guardian by I. 298 IV. 131, 251 index 385

Concessit, fine sur II. 239 - - - - - - - - deeds II. 203, 354, Convention of estates I. 101–2 Conclusion of deeds II. 208, 355–6 - - - - - - parliaments I. 101–2

353, 355, 363 Consideratum est per curiam Conventional estates for life - - - - - - pleas III. 200 III. 260 II. 81 Concord in a fine II. 238, 365 Consilium, or imparlance Conversion III. 103 Condition II. 200, 359 IV. 229 Conveyances II. 4, 6, 200, 211, - - - - - breach of II. 191 Consimili casu, writ of entry in IV. 277- - - - - estate on II. 103 III. 123 Conviction IV. 233- - - - - in deed II. 105 Consistory court III. 43 - - - - - summary IV. 183- - - - - - - law II. 104–5 Consort, queen I. 212 Convocation I. 180- - - - - of a bond II. 231, 363, Conspiracy IV. 90 - - - - - - court of bishops in

III. 314 - - - - - action of III. 86 III. 45 Conditional fees II. 73 Constable I. 227, IV. 190 Coparceners II. 125- - - - - - pardon IV. 258 - - - - - high I. 80 Copper coin, counterfeiting Confess and avoid III. 204 - - - - - lord high I. 228, IV. 175 IV. 66 Confession of action - - - - - - - - - - his court III. 45, Copy of indictment IV. 227

III. 200, 261 IV. 175 - - - - record of indictment Confession of indictment Construction of deeds and III. 86

IV. 213–4 wills II. 257 Copyhold II. 63, 99, IV. 283 Confesso, bill taken pro - - - - - - - - statutes I. 64 - - - - - for life II. 65

III. 291–2 Constructive treason IV. 50, 56 - - - - - not liable to elegit Confinement to the realm Consuetudinibus et servitiis, III. 275

I. 171 writ de III. 155 - - - - - of frank tenure Confirmation of bishops Consultation, writ of III. 77 II. 67, 100

I. 243–4, IV. 76 Consummate, tenant by - - - - - - inheritance II. 65- - - - - - - - lands II. 222 curtesy II. 86 Copyrights II. 276 Confiscation I. 193, IV. 243 Contempt against the king Corn rents II. 219 Confusion, property by IV. 80 Cornage, tenure by II. 49

II. 274 - - - - - in courts of equity Corody I. 182 II. 25 Conge d’ eslire I. 244, 246, III. 291 Coronation oath, antient

IV. 271 - - - - - - - - - - - law IV. 185 I. 152–3 Conjugal rights, restitution of Contentious jurisdiction III. 44 - - - - - - - - modern I. 152

III. 63 Contestatio litis III. 196 Coronatore eligendo, writ de- - - - - - - subtraction of III. 63 Contingent legacy II. 346 I. 222 Conjuration IV. 39, 281 - - - - - - remainder II. 114 - - - - - exonerando, writ de Conquest, Norman I. 129, - - - - - - - - - - - trustees to I. 223

IV. 267, 268 support II. 115, 357 Coroner I. 222 IV. 190, 266- - - - - or acquisition II. 31, 165 - - - - - - uses II. 227 - - - - his court IV. 179- - - - - - victory I. 273, 275 Continual claim II. 216, III. 118 Corporate counties I. 82 Consanguineus frater II. 156 Continuances III. 209, 301, - - - - - name I. 307 Consanguinity I. 279, II. 135 307, 317, 318, 319 Corporation I. 303, II. 292- - - - - - - table of II. 136 Continuando in trespass - - - - - - act IV. 38, 283 Conscience, courts of III. 55, III. 141 - - - - - - courts of III. 54

IV. 284 Contract II. 299 - - - - - - its dissolution I. 314 Consecration of bishops I. 244, - - - - action on III. 79 - - - - - - - - duties I. 311

IV. 76 - - - - express III. 104 - - - - - - - - incidents and Consequential damages, action - - - - implied III. 107 powers I. 309

for III. 102 - - - - of marriage I. 283 - - - - - - - - lands, if dissolved Conservators of the peace - - - - - - - - - - suit for III. 62 II. 174

I. 224, IV. 266, 278 - - - - original, between king - - - - - - - - privileges and - - - - - - - truce and safe- and people I. 151 disabilities I. 308

conducts IV. 45 - - - - simple II. 314 Corporeal hereditaments II. 10 Consideration of contracts - - - - special II. 314 Corpse, stealing of II. 291,

II. 300 Contractu, action ex III. 79 IV. 157 386 index

Corpus juris canonici I. 60–1 - - - baron II. 60, III. 22, IV. 265 Damage to things personal Corpus juris civilis I. 60 - - - christian III. 43 III. 103 Correction, house of IV. 243 - - - hand III. 214 Damage-feasant III. 4- - - - - - of apprentices I. 276 - - - leet IV. 178, 265, 274 Damages II. 297- - - - - - - children I. 291–2, - - - martial I. 266–7 Dane-lage I. 49, IV. 266

IV. 120 - - - power to erect I. 172, Darrein presentment, assise of

- - - - - - - scholars I. 292, III. 16 III. 163

IV. 120 Courts, profits of I. 186 Date of a deed II. 208, 354,

- - - - - - - servants I. 276, Craven III. 225, IV. 225 355, 363, 364

IV. 120 Credible witness III. 244 Day in bank III. 183

- - - - - - - wife I. 286–7 Crimes IV. 1, 3 - - - - court III. 209 Corruption of blood II. 171, Criminal conversation III. 94 - - of grace III. 184

IV. 250, 267, 282, 284 - - - - - law IV. 1 De bene esse III. 252

Corsepresent II. 288 Cross bill III. 294 De la plus belle, dower II. 89 Corsned, trial by IV. 223, 267 Cross causes III. 296 Deacon I. 250 Cosinage, writ of III. 125 - - - remainder II. 258 Dead man’s part II. 350 Costs II. 297, III. 262, 308, 320 - - - sign of, in deeds II. 208 Deadly feud IV. 162- - - in equity III. 296 Crown, descent of the I. 183, Deaf, dumb, and blind I. 196, - - - no more than damages IV. 266–7 II. 335

III. 263 - - - - office IV. 173, 200 Dean and chapter I. 246

- - - on not going to trial - - - - pleas of the IV. 1 Dean, rural I. 247

III. 236 Cucking-stool IV. 111 Deanry, rural I. 77

Cottages IV. 110 Cui ante divortium, writ of Death, appeal of IV. 204 Covenant III. 105 III. 123 - - - civil I. 90- - - - - in a deed II. 207–8, Cui in vita, writ of III. 123 - - - judgment of IV. 289

360, 361 Cul. prît IV. 219 Debet et detinet, action in

- - - - - real III. 105 Curate I. 253 III. 105- - - - - to stand seised to uses - - - - his salary III. 61 Debt II. 313, III. 104

II. 230 Curator of infants, &c I. 298 - - - action of III. 104–5, 308

- - - - - writ of II. 237, 364, Curatores viarum I. 230 - - - - - - - - on amercement

III. 105 Curfeu IV. 270, 271 III. 107

Covert-baron I. 285 Curialitas II. 85 - - - - - - - - - - by-law III. 107 Coverture I. 285 Cursing IV. 39 - - - - - - - - - - judgment Councils of the king I. 147 Curtesy, tenant by II. 85 III. 107, 276 Counsel III. 18 Custody of idiots and lunatics - - - - - - - - - - penal statutes - - - - action against III. 110 I. 195, III. 280–1 III. 107- - - - for prisoners IV. 229–30 - - - - - temporalties I. 181, - - - information of III. 173- - - - king’s III. 18 IV. 271 - - - public I. 209–10, IV. 284- - - - when silenced III. 19 Custom II. 178, 286 Debtee executor III. 12 Count I. 80, 256 - - - - assurances by II. 248 Debtor, refusing to discover his - - - in declaration III. 194–5 - - - - dower by II. 89 effects IV. 102 Counterfeiting the king’s coin - - - - general I. 51, 55 Debts, priority of II. 345

IV. 56, 58 - - - - heriot II. 286 Deceit, action of III. 111

- - - - - - - - - - - seals IV. 55, 59 - - - - of London, how tried - - - - - - - on the case, in Counterpart II. 202 III. 220 nature of III. 112 Country, trial by the III. 231, - - - - particular I. 55 Decennary I. 79, IV. 165

IV. 225 - - - - - - - - - how allowed I. 58 Deception of the king in his

County I. 80, IV. 265 - - - - - - - - -when legal I. 56–7 grants I. 159–60- - - - court I. 117, III. 23, IV. Customary freehold II. 66, 101 Decisive oath III. 226

265, 267, 268, 271, 272, 284 - - - - - tenant II. 99–100 Declaration III. 195, 304,

- - - - - - - of Middlesex Customs on merchandize 306, 316

III. 56 I. 202 Declaratory part of a law I. 42

- - - - palatine I. 81, IV. 278 Custos rotulorum I. 224, IV. 178 - - - - - - statute I. 63 Court I. 172, III. 16, IV. 169, 267 Cutpurses IV. 160 Declinatory plea IV. 215, 236–7

index 387

Decree in equity III. 296 Deodand I. 193 Discontinuance of action Decretals I. 60–1 Departure in pleading III. 205 III. 196 Decretum Gratiani I. 61 Depopulatio agrorum IV. 240 - - - - - - - estate III. 116 Dedimus potestatem II. 238, Depositions III. 252 Discovery by bankrupt II. 325

III. 294 - - - - - - in chancery III. 294 - - - - - of accomplices IV. 214 Deed II. 202 - - - - - - - ecclesiastical courts - - - - - on oath III. 251, 287 Deed-poll II. 202 III. 67 Disfiguring IV. 137 Deeds, stealing of IV. 155 Deprivation I. 253 Disguise IV. 95 Deerstealing IV. 156 Derelict lands II. 177 Dismembring, punishment by - - - - - - in disguise IV. 95 Dereliction of property II. 6 IV. 243 Default, judgment by Derivative conveyances Dismission of bill in equity

III. 196, 260 II. 221 III. 296 Defeazance, deed of II. 222, 232 Descender, writ of formedon in Disorderly houses IV. 110 Defectum, challenge propter III. 129 - - - - - persons IV. 111

III. 239, IV. 227 Descent of lands II. 134, Disparagement II. 46 Defence II. 367, III. 196, 301, IV. 267, 271 Dispensation from the king

302, 306, 316 - - - - - - the crown I. 126, II. 46 Defendant III. 17 IV. 266 - - - - - - - - - - pope IV. 76 Defensive allegation III. 67 - - - - - - - - - - - collateral Dispensing power of the king Deforcement III. 116 I. 126–7 I. 96, 121, 219, IV. 281, 284 Deforciant II. 238, 365, III. 117 - - - - - - - - - - - lineal I. 126 Dispossession III. 113, 133 Definitive sentence III. 68 - - - - rules of II. 140 Dissection of murderers Degradation of peers I. 259 - - - - table of II. 162–3 IV. 134, 243, 289 Degrees, conferred by the Desertion IV. 66–7 Disseisin II. 114, 131

archbishop I. 245 Detainer, forcible III. 121, - - - - at the party’s election - - - - in writs of entry III. 122 IV. 97 III. 114–15- - - - of consanguinity II. 139 - - - - - unlawful III. 101 - - - - warranty commencing - - - - - - - - - - - - how Determinable freehold II. 82 by II. 206

reckoned II. 139–40, 151 Determination of will II. 98 - - - - writ of entry sur III. 123- - - - of guilt IV. 22 Detinue, action of III. 102 Dissenters, protestant IV. 35 Dehors, matter III. 254, IV. 252 Devastation II. 343 Dissolution of parliament Delay of the law III. 278 Devise II. 253, IV. 277 I. 122 Delegates, court of III. 44, 46 Devisee, liable to debts of Distress III. 4- - - - - - - - - in academical devisor II. 256 - - - - excessive III. 7

causes III. 57 Die, eat sine III. 209, 262 - - - - illegal, for crown debts Delictum, challenge propter Diet, excess in IV. 112 IV. 273

III. 240, IV. 227 Diets I. 99 - - - - infinite III. 155, 186, Delivery of a deed II. 209, 355, Digests I. 60 IV. 206

363–4 Dignity of the king I. 156 - - - - sale of III. 9 Demand of lands II. 367 Dignities II. 23 - - - - second III. 7 Demandant and tenant II. 367 Dilapidations III. 61 Distribution of intestate’s Demesne lands II. 60 Dilatory pleas III. 199 effects II. 348, IV. 264, 283 Demesnes of the crown I. 184 Diminishing the coin IV. 59 Distringas in chancery III. 292 Demi-mark, tender of III. 302 Diminution of record IV. 252 - - - - - - detinue III. 271 Demise of the crown I. 123, 161 Diocese I. 77 - - - - - juratores III. 234 Demi-vills I. 79 Direct prerogatives I. 155–6 - - - - - to compel appearance Democracy I. 40 Directory part of a law I. 43 III. 186, 309 Demurrer III. 208, 317 Disabilities IV. 243 Disturbance III. 158- - - - - book III. 208 Disability, plea to III. 199 - - - - - - of common III. 158–9- - - - - in equity III. 292 Disabling a man’s limbs or - - - - - - - franchises III. 158- - - - - to evidence III. 245 members IV. 136, 137 - - - - - - - patronage III. 162- - - - - - indictment IV. 216 - - - - - statutes of leases II. 218, Disturbance of tenure III. 161 Denial of rent III. 115 IV. 279 - - - - - - - ways III. 161 Denizen I. 240, II. 169 Disclaimer of tenure II. 187 Disturber II. 189 388 index

Diversity of person, plea of Druids, their customs I. 48, Egyptians IV. 108

IV. 255 IV. 263 Ejectione firmae, writ of

Dividend of bankrupts effects Drunkenness IV. 16, 42 III. 133

II. 328 Duchy court of Lancaster III. 53 Ejectment, action of III. 133,

Divine law I. 35 Ducking-stool IV. 111, 243 303, IV. 284- - - - right of kings I. 124, Duel IV. 96, 122, 131 Election of bishops I. 243,

IV. 281 Dues, ecclesiastical, non- IV. 76, 271

- - - - - - - - tithes II. 15 payment of III. 60 - - - - - - magistrates I. 218, - - - - service, tenure by II. 68 Dukes I. 255, 395 IV. 266, 276 Divorce I. 283–4, III. 63 Dum fuit infra aetatem, writ of - - - - - - members of Do, ut des II. 300 III. 123 parliament I. 112, 115–16- - - facias II. 301 - - - - - non compos mentis, writ - - - - - - Scots peers I. 11, Docket of judgment II. 345 of III. 123 IV. 77 Doctrines illegal, asserting or Duodecima manus III. 227 Elective monarchy I. 125,

publishing I. 107, 135, 141, Duplex querela III. 165 IV. 266

IV. 60, 77, 81 Duplicatio III. 205 Eleemosynary corporations

Dog, carrying IV. 82 Duplicity in pleading I. 305 Dogs, &c, owner answerable III. 203, 205 Elegit, estate by II. 108

for III. 103 Durante absentia, - - - writ of III. 274–5, IV. 275

Domebook of Alfred I. 49, administration II. 340 Elisors III. 234

IV. 265 - - - - minore aetate, Eloignment III. 87, 100

Domesday-book II. 31, 66, administration II. 340 Elopement I. 285

III. 218 Duress II. 199–200 Ely, courts of III. 53

Dominion II. 1 - - - - of imprisonment I. 89, 92 - - isle of I. 82 Domitae naturae, animals - - - - per minas I. 89, IV. 19 Embargo I. 174

II. 263–4 Durham, county palatine of Embassadors I. 164

Donatio mortis causa II. 347 I. 81 - - - - - - killing them IV. 57 Donative advowsons II. 13 - - - - courts of III. 53 Embassadors, violation of their Done, grant, et render, fine sur Duties of persons I. 117–18 privileges IV. 46, 284

II. 239–40 - - - - - the king I. 151 Emblements II. 82, 98, 273

Donis, statute de II. 75 Dwelling-house IV. 149 Embowelling alive IV. 61, 243 Double fine II. 240 Embracery IV. 93- - - - plea III. 203 Ealdormen I. 256 Emperor, his authority I. 157- - - - voucher II. 366 Ear, loss of IV. 96, 104, 136, Emphyteusis III. 155 Dowager, princess IV. 54 137, 163, 243 Enabling statute of leases - - - - - queen I. 145, IV. 54 Earl I. 80, 256 II. 217 Dower II. 87, IV. 273 Earl marshall, his court III. 45, Enclosure, disseisin by III. 115- - - - ad ostium ecclesiae IV. 175 Endowment of vicarages I. 249

II. 89 Earnest II. 303 - - - - - - - widows II. 91

- - - - assignment of II. 91 Eat sine die III. 209, 262 Enemies I. 166–7, IV. 55- - - - bar of II. 92 Eaves-droppers IV. 111 - - - - goods II. 271- - - - by common law II. 89 Ecclesiastical corporations England I. 77- - - - - - custom II. 89 I. 305 Englescherie IV. 129- - - - de la plus belle II. 89 - - - - - - courts III. 41 English, law proceedings in - - - - ex assensu patris II. 89 - - - - - - - - - their cognizance III. 219, IV. 284- - - - unde nihil habet, writ of III. 58, IV. 274 Engrossing IV. 104

III. 123 - - - - - - - - - when separated Enlarger l’estate II. 221

- - - - writ of right of from the civil III. 42, Enlarging statute I. 64

III. 123, 130 IV. 268, 272 Enquiry, writ of III. 261

Draught for money II. 315 Education of children I. 290–1 Enseint II. 114 Drawbacks I. 203 Edgar, king, his laws I. 50, Entails II. 75, IV. 275, 277–8 Drawing to the gallows IV. 266 Entries, books of III. 180

IV. 61, 243 Edward the confessor, his laws Entry III. 3, 118

Droit droit II. 133 I. 50, IV. 266, 271 - - - forcible III. 120, IV. 97

index 389

- - - on lands II. 213 - - - - - - - - witnesses III. 245 - - - - - estate II. 110- - - tolled by descent - - - - - - - trial by III. 218–19 - - - - - remainder II. 113

III. 118–19 Exceptio III. 205 Exemplification II. 366- - - writ of II. 366, III. 121 Exceptions, bill of III. 243 Exemptions from tithes II. 17 Equity I. 47, 66, III. 32, 281–2 - - - - - - to answer in chancery Exigent, writ of III. 187, IV. 206- - - - and law, courts of, how III. 294 Exigi facias, writ of III. 187,

distinguished III. 281, 287, Exchange, bill of II. 315 311, IV. 207

IV. 284–5 - - - - - deed of II. 220 Exile I. 93, IV. 243- - - - courts, history of III. 32, - - - - - of goods and chattels Expectancy, estates in II. 110

IV. 277 II. 302 Expenses of prosecution - - - - - - - practice of III. 290 - - - - - - - lands II. 220 IV. 233- - - - of redemption II. 107 Exchequer chamber, court of - - - - - - witnesses III. 243, - - - - - statutes III. 283 III. 37 IV. 233- - - - reserved III. 297 - - - - - - court of III. 29 Exportation of wool, &c. - - - - side of the chancery - - - - - - receipt of III. 29 IV. 101, 276

III. 32 Excise I. 205 Express condition II. 104- - - - - - - - - exchequer III. 30 - - - - hereditary I. 185 - - - - contract II. 291, III. 104 Eriach IV. 203 - - - - offences against, how - - - - malice IV. 131 Error, costs in III. 262, 269 tried IV. 183 - - - - warranty II. 206- - - writ of III. 266, 315, Exclusion bill I. 137 Extendi facias III. 276

IV. 252–3 Excommunication III. 68 Extent, writ of III. 276- - - - - - - where prosecuted Excommunicato capiendo, writ Extinguishment of estates

III. 269, IV. 253 de III. 69 II. 221 Escape III. 192, 273, IV. 86 - - - - - - - deliberando, writ de Extortion IV. 93- - - - action for III. 110 III. 69 Extraparochial places I. 78- - - - assisting in IV. 87 Excusable homicide IV. 120 - - - - - - - tithes I. 182 Escheat I. 195, II. 7, 48, 60, Executed contract II. 300 Extravagants I. 61

IV. 267, 270 - - - - - estate II. 110 Eye, putting out IV. 136, 137- - - - writ of III. 131 - - - - - fine II. 239 Eyre, chief justice in III. 49 Escrow II. 210 - - - - - remainder II. 113 - - - justices in III. 38, IV. 272, Escuage II. 49, IV. 272 Execution, civil III. 271, 320 273 Esplees II. 367, III. 301 - - - - - criminal IV. 260 - - - - - - - - killing them IV. 56 Esquire I. 261 - - - - - - - - - - award of IV. 291 Essoign III. 184 - - - - - - - - - - plea in bar of Facio, ut des II. 301- - - - day of the term III. 184 IV. 255 - - - - facias II. 301 Estate in lands II. 69 - - - - - - - - - - precept of Facto, king de I. 133, 238, Estates of the kingdom I. 104 IV. 261 IV. 51 Estoppel II. 202, 210 - - - - - - - - - - rule for IV. 260 Factor I. 275 Estoveriis habendis, writ de - - - - - - - - - - varying from Factorship, cognizable in

I. 284 judgment IV. 117, 261 equity III. 287 Estovers of a wife I. 284 - - - - - - - - - - warrant of Fair I. 176, III. 145- - - - common of II. 21 IV. 260, 291 False imprisonment III. 86, Estrays I. 191, II. 9 - - - - - - - - - - writ of IV. 256, IV. 144 Estreat of recognizance, &c. 292

IV. 166 - - - - - of devises II. 255 - - - - - - - - - - action of III. 93 Estrepement, writ of III. 150 - - - - - - - uses II. 226–7 - - - judgment, writ of III. 22, Evidence III. 249, IV. 230 - - - - - process of III. 185, 271 206 Ex officio informations Executive power I. 124 - - - news IV. 98

IV. 199–200 Executor II. 340 - - - return, action for III. 75, Ex post facto laws I. 38 - - - - - de son tort II. 342 110 Examination in chancery Executor of executor II. 342 - - - verdict III. 264, IV. 93

III. 294 - - - - - - his own wrong II. 342 - - - weights and measures - - - - - - - of bankrupt II. 324 Executory contract II. 300 IV. 103- - - - - - - - prisoners IV. 193 - - - - - devise II. 116, 227 Falsi, crimen IV. 58, 89, 102, 163 390 index

Falsifying attainder IV. 252 Fidejussors III. 73, 193 - - - when repellable by death - - - - - coin IV. 56, 58, 59, 65 Fief II. 28 IV. 119- - - - - judgment IV. 252 - - - d’haubert II. 41 Forcible abduction and Fame, good or ill IV. 168 Fieri facias, writ of III. 274, 320 marriage IV. 138 Farm II. 217 - - - feci III. 321 - - - - entry and detainer Favour, challenge to III. 239 Fifteenths I. 198 III. 121, IV. 97 Fealty I. 235 Filial portion II. 351 Foreclosure II. 107 Fealty, oath of II. 29, 34, 57 Final decree III. 296 Foreign bill of exchange II. 315 Fear, putting in IV. 161 - - - judgment III. 261 - - - - coin, forging it IV. 59, Fee II. 29, 70–1 Finding of indictments IV. 198 65, 80- - - after a fee II. 227–8 - - - - - things personal II. 6 - - - - dominions I. 76- - - ecclesiastical III. 60 Fine for alienation II. 47, 59 - - - - prince, pension from - - - farm rent II. 27 Fine for endowment II. 91 IV. 81- - - simple II. 70, 353, 357 - - - - - misdemesnors IV. 243 - - - - service IV. 66- - - tail II. 75, 357 - - - in copyhold II. 65 Forest I. 185–6, II. 9, 24, 281 Fees to counsel III. 19 - - - of lands, II. 79, 236, III. - - - courts III. 48 Feigned issue III. 297 105, IV. 275, 277 - - - laws II. 282, II. 49, IV. 268, Felo de se II. 337, IV. 125 - - - - - - - - executed II. 239 271, 272, 273, 278, 281 Felon II. 337 - - - sur done, grant, et render Foresta, carta de IV. 273, 274 Felonious homicide IV. 124 II. 239–40 Forestaller, disseisin by II. 114 Felony II. 193, IV. 62 - - - - - cognizance de droit, Forestalling IV. 103- - - - appeal of IV. 203 come ceo &c II. 239, 364 Foretooth, striking out IV. 136- - - - compounding of IV. 88 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - tantum Forfeiture I. 193, II. 103, 182- - - - misprision of IV. 80 II. 239 - - - - - for crimes IV. 243, - - - - punishment of IV. 64–5, - - - - - concessit II. 239 246, 273

143, 147 Fines and forfeitures, when Forfeiture of copyholds II. 193

Feme-covert I. 285, II. 200, 336 grantable III. 172, IV. 244 - - - - - - - goods and chattels Feodal actions III. 80 Finger, disabling IV. 136 II. 284–5, IV. 249- - - - tenures II. 28, 288, 292 Fire, negligence of I. 277, - - - - - - - lands II. 182, IV. 246- - - - - - - - among the Saxons IV. 147 Forgery IV. 163

IV. 267 Fire-bote II. 22 Forgiveness by the prosecutor

- - - - - - - - when received Fire-ordcal IV. 221 IV. 234

in England II. 30–1, Fire-works IV. 111 Forma pauperis III. 262–3

IV. 267, 269 First-fruits I. 183, II. 44, Formedon, writ of III. 129

Feoffment II. 211, 353 IV. 71 Forms of law, unalterable I. 96 Feorm II. 217 Fish, royal I. 186 Fornication IV. 42 Ferae naturae, animals II. 263 - - - stealing, in disguise Forts and castles I. 170 Fetters IV. 195, 209 IV. 95, 156 Fortune-tellers IV. 40 Feud II. 28 - - - - - - - - or attempting to Forty days court III. 48 Feudatory II. 34 steal IV. 156 Founder of a corporation I. 311 Feudum antiquum II. 142, 149 Fishery, common of II. 21 Foundling hospitals I. 89- - - - apertum II. 167 - - - - free II. 242, 283, IV. 273 Franchise II. 23- - - - honorarium II. 37, 145 - - - - several II. 25 - - - - - allowance of III. 174–5- - - - improprium II. 38 Fishpond, destroying IV. 162 - - - - - disturbance of III. 158- - - - individuum II. 145 Fitzherbert I. 54, III. 123 - - - - - royal I. 194- - - - maternum II. 142, 165 Fleets I. 170, IV. 270 Frankalmoign II. 67- - - - novum II. 142, 148 Fleta I. 54, IV. 213 Franked letters I. 207–8- - - - - - - held ut antiquum Flight IV. 249 Frankmarriage II. 77

II. 143, 149 Flotsam I. 188, III. 71 Frankpledge I. 79, IV. 165

- - - - paternum II. 165 Foenus nauticum II. 310 - - - - - - - view of IV. 178- - - - proprium II. 38 Folk land II. 60–1 Frank-tenement II. 69 Fiction in law III. 28, 72 Foot of a fine II, 238, 365 - - - tenure II. 40 Fictitious plaintiff IV. 89 Force, injuries with and Frater consanguineus II. 156 Fidei-commissum II. 223 without III. 80 - - - uterinus II. 156 index 391

Fraud, civil, where cognizable Glanvil I. 54, IV. 272 - - - - - - - act I. 87, III. 91,

III. 283, 287, 288 Gleaning III. 142 IV. 282–3- - - criminal IV. 103 God and religion, offences - - - - - - - ad deliberandum Frauds and perjuries, statute of against IV. 28 III. 88

III. 106, IV. 283 Good behaviour, security for - - - - - - - - - faciendum et Fraudulent devises II. 256 IV. 165, 168 recipiendum III. 88 Fraunk-ferme II. 53 - - - consideration II. 203 - - - - - - - - - prosequendum Free-bench II. 89 Government, contempts III. 88- - - fishery II. 24, 283 against IV. 81 - - - - - - - - - respondendum- - - services II. 40 - - - - - - - its original I. 39 III. 88- - - socage II. 53 Grand assise III. 225, 232, 302, - - - - - - - - - satisfaciendum- - - warren II. 24, 283, IV. 268 IV. 272 III. 88 Freehold II. 69 - - - - Coustumier of Normandy - - - - - - - - - subjiciendum- - - - - leases II. 81, 217 I. 75 III. 89 Fresh suit I. 191 - - - - juror, disclosing evidence - - - - - - - - - testificandum Fruit, stealing of IV. 154 IV. 84 III. 88 Full age I. 300 - - - - jury IV. 197, 287–8 - - - - - - - cum causa III. 52 Fumage I. 208 - - - - - - - in attaint III. 232, 264 Habendum of a deed II. 204, Funds, public I. 211 - - - - larciny IV. 152 353, 354, 357 Funeral expenses, II. 343 - - - - serjeanty II. 48 Habere facias possessionem Furandi, animus IV. 153 Grants II. 6 III. 271 Futuro, freehold in II. 97, 111 - - - - of chattels personal II. 298 - - - - - - seisinam III. 271

- - - - - - - - - real II. 298 Habitation, offences against

Gage III. 185, 301 - - - - - lands and tenements IV. 146- - - estates in II. 106 II. 216 - - - - - property in II. 2 Game II. 9, 273, 278, IV. 268 - - - - - the king II. 235 Hackney coaches and chairs - - - destroying of IV. 114 Great council I. 99 I. 209- - - laws IV. 114, 268 - - - seal of the king II. 235, Haereditas jacens II. 175- - - selling of IV. 115 III. 31 Haeretico comburendo, writ de Gaming IV. 112 - - - - - - - - - - - counterfeiting IV. 30, 283 Gaminghouses IV. 110, 113 it IV. 55 Half blood I. 127, II. 153 Gaol-delivery IV. 176, 288 - - - tithes I. 249 Hame-secken IV. 148 Gaolers, I. 222, IV. 195 Gregorian code I. 60 Hamlet I. 79- - - - compelling prisoners to Gross, advowson in II. 13 Hanaper office III. 32

be approvers, &c IV. 86 - - - common in II. 21 Hand, disabling IV. 136 Gardens, robbing of IV. 154–5 Gross, villein in II. 62 - - - holding up IV. 209 Garter, knight of I. 260 Guardian ad litem III. 280 - - - loss of IV. 83, 101, 180, 243 Gavelkind I. 56, II. 56, IV. 263–4 - - - - - and ward I. 298 - - - sale II. 303 General demurrer III. 208 - - - - - at common law I. 298 - - - writing, similitude of - - - - fund I. 211 - - - - - by custom I. 299 IV. 231- - - - issue III. 201, IV. 219 - - - - - - - nature I. 298 Hanging IV. 243- - - - legacy II. 346 - - - - - - - statute I. 299 Hanover I. 76- - - - occupancy II. 175 - - - - - for nurture I. 298 Havens I. 350- - - - sessions IV. 178 - - - - - in chivalry I. 299, II. 44 Hawks, stealing of IV. 156- - - - statute I. 62 - - - - - - socage II. 58 Hay-bote II. 22- - - - tail II. 76, 357 - - - - - testamentary I. 299 Head of the church I. 179, - - - - verdict III. 249, IV. 233 Guernsey, island of I. 75 IV. 277- - - - warrant IV. 190 Gunpowder, hindering its Headborough I. 79 Gentlemen I. 261 importation IV. 77 Health I. 91 Gift of chattels personal II. 298 Gypsies IV. 108 - - - - injuries to III. 82- - - - - - - - real II. 298 - - - - offences against public

- - - - lands and tenements Habeas corpora juratorum IV. 106

II. 216 III. 234 Hearing in equity III. 295–6 Gilda mercatoria I. 307 - - - - corpus I. 91–2 Hearsay evidence III. 243 392 index

Hearth-money I. 209 - - - - simple I. 235 Jetsam I. 188, III. 71 Hedge-bote II. 22 Homicide IV. 116 Jews I. 241, IV. 240 Hedge-stealing IV. 154 Homine replegiando, writ de - - - children of I. 290 Heir II. 134 III. 87 Ignominious punishments - - - apparent and presumptive Honorary feuds II. 37, 145 IV. 243

II. 140 Honoris respectum, challenge Ignoramus IV. 198

Heiress, stealing of IV. 138 propter III. 239, IV. 227 Ignorance IV. 17 Heir-looms II. 289 Honour, court of III. 70 Illegal conditions II. 106 Helping to stolen goods for - - - - of a peer I. 258–9 Imagining the king’s death

reward IV. 88 - - - - or dignity I. 175 IV. 50

Hengham III. 268, IV. 275 - - - - - - seignory II. 61 Imbezzling king’s armour or Henry I, his laws IV. 271 Hop-binds, destroying IV. 163 stores IV. 66 Heptarchy, Saxon IV. 265 Horse-races IV. 114 - - - - - - public money IV. 80 Heraldry III. 70 Horses, sale of II. 305 - - - - - - records IV. 85 Heralds III. 70 Hospitals I. 305, 307 Immediate descent II. 152- - - - books III. 70 - - - - their visitors I. 312–13 - - - - - - states of the empire Hereditaments II. 10 Hotchpot II. 127, 349 II. 59 Hereditary right I. 124 House, immunities of IV. 148 Imparlance II. 197, 317, Heresy IV. 29 - - - larciny from IV. 159 III. 197 Heretable jurisdictions II. 51 House-bote II. 22 Impeachment in parliament Heretochs I. 255, 262, IV. 266 House-tax I. 208 IV. 169–70 Heriots II. 65, 286 Hue and cry IV. 191 - - - - - - - of waste II. 193, 357- - - - seising of III. 9 Hundred I. 80, IV. 265 Imperial chamber III. 26 Hermogenian code I. 60 - - - - action against, for - - - - constitutions I. 60 High commission court III. 45, robbery, &c III. 108, IV. - - - - crown and dignity I. 157

IV. 279, 281 162, 191 Impediments of marriage I. 279

- - - constable I. 228 Hundred-court III. 22, IV. 265 Implication II. 258- - - - - - - - of England I. 228, Hundredors, challenge for Implied condition II. 103

IV. 175 defect of III. 237, IV. 227 - - - - contract II. 299–300,

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - his court Hunger IV. 20 III. 107

III. 45, IV. 175 Hunting III. 142 - - - - malice IV. 132

- - - misdemesnors IV. 80 - - - - - by inferior tradesmen - - - - warranty II. 205- - - steward of Great Britain, III. 143, 263 Importing agnus dei, crosses,

his court IV. 171 - - - - - - - night or in disguise &c IV. 76

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - in IV. 95 - - - - - counterfeit money

parliament IV. 170, 172 Hurdle IV. 61, 243 IV. 56, 59

- - - - - - - - Oxford, his court Husband and wife I. 279, IV. 18 Impossible condition II. 106

IV. 181 - - - - injuries to III. 94 Impostures, religious IV. 40

- - - treason IV. 49 Hustings, court of, in London Impotency I. 279- - - - - - - trials in IV. 227, 284 III. 54 Impotentiae, property ratione Highways I. 229–30, II. 22 Hydage I. 200 II. 266- - - - - annoyances in IV. 110 Hypotheca II. 107 Impressing seamen I. 269- - - - - robbery in or near Imprisonment I. 91–3,

IV. 161 Jactitation of marriage III. 82 IV. 243, 281

Hiring II. 307 Identity of person IV. 255 - - - - - - - beyond sea I. 93, History of the law IV. 263 Idiot I. 195, II. 199, IV. 15 IV. 77 Hogs, keeping them in towns - - - cognizance of III. 281 - - - - - - - false III. 86, IV. 144

IV. 110 - - - inspection of III. 219 Improper feuds II. 38

Holding over II. 102, 141–2 - - - marriage of I. 282 Impropriations I. 248–9 Homage II. 34 Idiota inquirendo, writ de I. 195 Incapacities IV. 243- - - - auncestrel II. 205 Idleness IV. 111 Incendiaries IV. 146- - - - by bishops I. 244, IV. 271 Incest IV. 42- - - - liege I. 235 Jeofails III. 266, IV. 242, 283 Inchantment IV. 39- - - - of a court baron II. 61 Jersey, island of I. 75 Incidental prerogatives I. 156 index 393

Incomplete judgments III. 260 - - - - - - - - - - rem III. 174 - - - - - - - - - - - - - chancery Incorporation, power of - - - - - - - - of superstitious III. 296

I. 306–7 uses III. 281 - - - - - - - - judgment III. 294 Incorporeal hereditaments Informer, common, II. 296, III. Interpleader, bill of III. 294

II. 12 108, IV. 200 Interpretation of laws I. 45 Incorrigible roguery IV. 111 Infortunium, homicide per Interregnum I. 128, 161 Incumbent I. 252 IV. 120 Interrogatories, examination Incumbrances, covenant Inheritable blood II. 167 on III. 252, 287–8, IV. 187

against II. 362 Inheritance II. 7, 134 - - - - - - - - - in chancery Indebitatus assumpsit III. 104 - - - - - - - canons of II. 140 III. 294 Indefeasible right to the throne - - - - - - - estates of II. 69 Intestacy II. 333

I. 127 Initiate, tenant by curtesy II. 85 Intestates, their debts and Indentures II. 202 Injunction in equity III. 291 effects IV. 274, 276- - - - - - of a fine II. 238, 365 Injuries, civil III. 1 Intrusion, information of Indicavit, writ of III. - - - - - with and without force III. 174 Indictable, what IV. 144 III. 80 - - - - - - on freehold III. 114 Indictment IV. 96, 288 Inland bill of exchange II. 315 - - - - - - writ of III. 123- - - - - - copy of III. 86, IV. 227 Inmates IV. 110 Inventory of deceased’s effects Individuals, offences against Inn of court and chancery II. 344

IV. 116 I. 22–3 Investiture II. 141 Indorsement of bills and notes Innkeeper, action against - - - - - - - of benefices II. 14

II. 316, IV. 284 III. 110 - - - - - - - - feuds II. 34 Induction to a benefice I. 251, Inns, disorderly IV. 110 - - - - - - - - lands II. 212

II. 213, IV. 70 Innuendo III. 85 Involuntary manslaughter Industriam, property per Inofficious testament I. 289, IV. 126–7

II. 264 II. 339

Infamous witness III. 244 Inquest of office III. 171, John, king, his resignation of Infant I. 300, II. 199, 335, IV. 196, 274 the crown to the pope

IV. 14 Inquisitio post mortem II. 45, IV. 71, 73- - - carnal knowlege of IV. 140 III. 172 Joinder in demurrer III. 208, - - - cognizance of III. 280 Insidiatio viarum IV. 240 318- - - evidence by IV. 141 Insimul computassent III. 109 - - - - of battel III. 301- - - inspection of III. 219 Insolvency, act of II. 326 - - - - - issue III. 208, 306, - - - in ventre sa mere I. 88 Insolvent debtors II. 326, IV. 220, 289- - - privileges and disabilities III. 273 Joint-tenancy in lands II. 120

of I. 300–1 Inspection, trial by III. 218–19 - - - - - - - - - - things personal Infeodations of tithes II. 17 Installment II. 213 II. 269–70 Influence on elections to Instanter, trial IV. 255, 290 Joint-tenant, king cannot be

parliament I. 117 Institutes of Justinian I. 60 II. 277 Information, compounding of Institution to a benefice I. 251, Jointure II. 92, 120, 357

IV. 90 II. 13–14, IV. 70 Ireland I. 71- - - - - - - - criminal IV. 199, Insurance II. 311, III. 50, Iron, stealing IV. 155

277, 281 IV. 284 Irons to secure prisoners - - - - - - - - ex officio III. 280, Interdictum III. 290 IV. 195, 209

IV. 199–200 Interesse Termini II. 97 Islands II. 177- - - - - - - - for charities III. 281 Interest of money II. 308 Issuable terms III. 233- - - - - - - - in crown office - - - - on bankrupt’s debts II. 329 Issue at law III. 206, 208

IV. 200 - - - - - legacies II. 347 - - - collateral IV. 255, 290- - - - - - - - - - ecclesiastical - - - - or no interest, insurance - - - feigned III. 296

courts III. 68 II. 312 - - - in criminal cases IV. 219, - - - - - - - - - - exchequer Interested witness III. 244 289, 290

III. 173 Interlineation in a deed II. 211 - - - - equity III. 294- - - - - - - - - - nature of quo Interlocutory decree in - - - joinder of III. 208, 306,

warranto IV. 199, 284 ecclesiastical courts III. 68 IV. 220, 289 394 index

- - - tender of III. 206 - - - - neglect or refusal of - - - - - silver II. 238 Itinerant courts IV. 266, 272 III. 74 - - - - - sovereignty I. 156- - - - justices III. 38, IV. 266 - - - - offences against IV. 85 - - - - - title I. 124 Judges I. 172, III. 17, IV. 284 Justice-seat, court of III. 49 - - - - - - - - contempts against - - - - assaulting them IV. 83 Justicies, writ of III. 24 IV. 81 Judges, how counsel for Justifiable homicide IV. 117 - - - - - ubiquity I. 174

prisoners IV. 229–30 Justification, special III. 202 - - - injuries to or by III. 169

- - - - killing them IV. 56 Justifying bail III. 192–3 - - - levying war against IV. 54- - - - their commissions - - - refusal to advise or assist

I. 172 Keeper, lord III. 31 him IV. 81

- - - - threatening or Kidnapping IV. 145 King’s bench, court of III. 27,

reproaching them IV. 83 Kindred, how numerous II. 138 IV. 173

Judgment II. 368, III. 259, 302, King I. 124 - - - - - - -- justices of, killing

303, 308, 318, 320 - - - can do no wrong I. 159, them IV. 56

- - - - action on III. 106–7, III. 169, IV. 21 Knight bachelor I. 260

276–7 King, compassing or imagining - - - - banneret I. 260

- - - - in criminal cases IV. 242, his death IV. 50 - - - - of the bath I. 260

289 - - - his councils I. 147 - - - - - - - garter I. 260

- - - - property by II. 296 - - - - - counsel III. 18 - - - - - - - shire, his electors - - - - relieved against in equity - - - - - courts, contempts I. 113–14

III. 287 against IV. 82 - - - - to be returned on a lord’s

Judices ordinarii III. 208–9 - - - - - dignity I. 156 jury III. 237 Judicial power I. 172–3 - - - - - duties I. 151 Knight’s-fee I. 260, 263, II. 41- - - - writs III. 187 - - - - - enemies, adhering to Knighthood II. 45, IV. 282 Judicium Dei IV. 221 IV. 54 Knight-service II. 41- - - - - parium III. 232 - - - - - government, contempts Jure divino right to the throne against IV. 82 Labour, foundation of property

I. 124 - - - - - grants II. 235 II. 3

- - - - - - - - - - - tithes II. 15 - - - - - money, counterfeiting - - - - hard IV. 243 Jure, king de I. 133, IV. 51 IV. 56 Labourers I. 261, 275 Juris utrum, writ of III. 168 - - - - - palaces, contempts Laches I. 160 Jurisdiction, encroachment of against IV. 82 - - - - of infant I. 301

III. 75 - - - - - perfection I. 159 Laesae majestatis, crimen

- - - - - - of courts, settled by - - - - - perpetuity I. 161 IV. 49, 59

Edw. I IV. 274, 275 - - - - - person, contempts Laesione fidei, suit pro III. 34

- - - - - - plea to III. 199, IV. against IV. 81 Laity I. 255

215–16 - - - - - pleasure, how Lancaster, county palatine of

Jurors, fining or imprisoning understood IV. 80 I. 81

IV. 233 - - - - - power I. 162 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - its courts

Jury, trial by III. 231, IV. 225, - - - - - prerogative I. 154 III. 53

267, 284 - - - - - - - - - - contempts - - - - - duchy of, its courts

Jus accrescendi II. 123, 357 against IV. 81 III. 53- - ad rem II. 213 - - - - - - - - - - felonies against Lands II. 10- - duplicatum II. 133 IV. 65 - - - - property in II. 4–5- - fiduciarium II. 223 - - - - - - - - - - in debts, Land-tax I. 198, IV. 272- - in re II. 213 judgments, and executions Lapse II. 188, IV. 70–1- - legitimum II. 223 III. 276 Lapsed legacy II. 346- - patronatus III. 164 - - - - - revenue, extraordinary Larciny IV. 152- - precarium II. 223 I. 198 - - - - appeal of IV. 203 Justice, free course of I. 95 - - - - - - - - - ordinary I. 181 - - - - compound IV. 159- - - - homicide in - - - - - royal family I. 142 - - - - from the house IV. 159

advancement of IV. 118 - - - - - seals II. 235–6, III. 31 - - - - - - - - person IV. 160

- - - - king the fountain of - - - - - - - - counterfeiting - - - - grand IV. 152

I. 171 IV. 55, 59 - - - - mixed IV. 159 index 395

- - - - only of things personal Legacies II. 346 Liege I. 235

IV. 154 - - - - - subtraction of III. 66 Lieutenant, lord I. 264- - - - petit IV. 152 Legal estates for life II. 84, 87 Life I. 88- - - - simple IV. 152 Legatine constitutions I. 61 - - - crimes against IV. 116 Lathes I. 80 Legislative power I. 98 - - - estate for II. 81, 357 Latitat, writ of III. 189, 313 Legislature, how far Ligan I. 188, III. 71 Law I. 33 controllable I. 108 Ligeance I. 235- - - amendment of, statute for Legitimate child I. 288 Light II. 9

IV. 284 Lending II. 307 - - - houses I. 350- - - and equity, courts of, how Letter, demanding money, &c - - - presumption III. 245

distinguished III. 281–2 IV. 95 Limbs I. 88- - - canon I. 15, 19, 58–61 - - - - missive, for electing a Limitation of entries and - - - civil I. 59 bishop I. 244 actions III. 120, 127, 130, - - - - - - and canon, authority - - - - - - - - in chancery III. 292 132, 167, IV. 281

of I. 15, 59, 61, IV. 271, 272 - - - - threatening IV. 95 - - - - - - - estate II. 105- - - - - - - - - - - rejected by the Letters patent II. 235 - - - - - statutes of III. 202

English nobility I. 19 Levant and couchant III. 5, 159 Limited administration II. 342- - - common I. 48, 50 Levari facias, writ of III. 274 - - - - fee II. 73- - - divine or revealed I. 35 Levitical degrees I. 280 - - - - property II. 264- - - - - - - - - - - - - offences Levying money without Lineal consanguinity II. 137

against IV. 28 consent of parliament - - - - descent II. 141- - - feodal II. 28, IV. 270 I. 94–5 - - - - - - - - of the crown I. 126- - - french III. 210, IV. 268, 276 - - - - - war against the king - - - - warranty II. 205–6- - - greek III. 212 IV. 54 Lip, cutting of IV. 137- - - history of IV. 263 Lewdness IV. 42 Literary property II. 274- - - latin III. 211, IV. 276 Lex manifesta III. 227 Litigious church III. 163, 164- - - martial I. 265, IV. 281 - - talionis IV. 8 Littleton I. 54- - - merchant I. 176, IV. 44 Libel, immoral or illegal IV. 99 Liturgy, reviling of IV. 33 Law, municipal I. 36 - - - in ecclesiastical courts Livery in chivalry II. 45- - - of nations I. 36 III. 67 - - - - - deed II. 215- - - - - - - - offences against - - - malicious III. 85, IV. 99 - - - - - law II. 216

IV. 44 Liberam legem, losing III. 225, - - - - of seisin II. 212, 353- - - - nature I. 33 IV. 225 Loans, compulsive I. 95, - - - - parliament I. 108–9 Liberties or franchises II. 23 IV. 281- - - side of the chancery III. 31 Liberty, civil I. 11, 85 Local actions III. 194- - - - - - - - exchequer III. 30 - - - - natural I. 85 Locality of trial III. 253- - - statute I. 62 - - - - of the press IV. 100 Locks on rivers, destroying - - - unwritten I. 48, IV. 263 - - - - personal I. 91 IV. 95- - - wager of III. 225, IV. 267, - - - - - - - - - crimes against, Logic, its effects upon law and

273 IV. 144 theology I. 29, II. 38, IV. 269- - - written I. 62 Liberty, personal, injuries to Lollardy IV. 31 Lawing of mastiffs III. 48 III. 86 London, courts of III. 54 Lay corporations I. 305 - - - - political I. 85 - - - - customs of I. 56–7, - - - investiture of bishops Licence for marriage I. 283 II. 349

I. 243 - - - - from the pope IV. 76 - - - - franchises of, not Lazarets, escaping from IV. 106 - - - - of alienation II. 47–8 forfeitable III. 175, IV. 237 Lead, stealing IV. 154 - - - - - mortmain II. 183 - - - - mayor and aldermen of, Leading interrogatories III. 294 - - - - to agree, in a fine II. 238, their certificate III. 220 Leap-year II. 95 364 Lord and vasal II. 34 Lease II. 217, 354 Licensed curate I. 253 - - - feodal II. 34- - - - and release II. 230, 354 Licensing of books IV. 100, 283 Lords committees for courts of - - - - entry, and ouster, rule to Licentia concordandi II. 238, justice III. 37

confess III. 136, 305 350 - - - house of, its attendants Leet IV. 178, 265, 274 - - - - loquendi III. 195 I. 111 396 index

- - - may kill the king’s deer Manor II. 60 - - - - of the rolls III. 291

I. 111 Mansion-house IV. 149 - - - - - - - - - - his judicial

- - - spiritual I. 104 Manslaughter IV. 126 authority III. 295- - - temporal I. 104–5 - - - - - - - conviction of IV. 290 Materia prima III. 213- - - triors IV. 171, 172, 284 Manstealing IV. 145 Materna maternis II. 158 Lotteries IV. 110 Manufacturers, seducing them Matrimonial causes III. 62 Lunatics I. 196, II. 199, IV. 15, abroad IV. 105 Matrons, jury of III. 239,

255 Manufactures, encouragement IV. 254

- - - - - cognizance of of IV. 276 Maxims I. 51

III. 280–1 Manumission of villeins II. 63 Mayhem I. 88, III. 82, IV. 136

- - - - - marriage of I. 282 Marchers, lords I. 256 Mayhem, appeal of IV. 203 Luxury IV. 112 Marches I. 256 - - - - - inspection of III. 219

Mariners, wandring IV. 108 Mayors IV. 266

Madder roots, stealing them Maritime causes III. 71 Measures I. 176, IV. 179, 273

IV. 154 - - - - - courts III. 46 - - - - - false IV. 103

Magistrates I. 98 - - - - - state I. 268 Mediate states of the empire - - - - - - oppression of IV. 93 Mark, subscribed to deeds II. 39- - - - - - subordinate I. 216 II. 208 Medietate linguae, jury de- - - - - - supreme I. 216 Market I. 176, III. 145 III. 238, IV. 109, 227 Magna assisa eligenda, writ de - - - - clerk of, his court IV. 179 Mediterranean passes,

III. 232 - - - - overt II. 304 counterfeiting of IV. 164

- - - - carta I. 86–7, IV. 273, 274 - - - - towns I. 79 Members of parliament I. 102- - - - - - - its contents IV. 273 Marque and reprisal I. 167 Memory, time of II. 19 Mainour III. 48, IV. 199 Marquesses I. 256 Menaces III. 81 Mainpernors III. 87 Marriage I. 279 Menial servants I. 274 Mainprize, writ of III. 87 - - - - - clandestine or irregular Mensa et thoro, divorce a Maintenance of bastards I. 295 I. 283, IV. 107 I. 283, III. 63- - - - - - - - children I. 288 - - - - - contract, suit for III. 63 Mercen-lage I. 49, IV. 266- - - - - - - - parents I. 293 - - - - - forcible IV. 139 Merchants, custom of I. 56- - - - - - - - suits I. 290, IV. 89 - - - - - in chivalry II. 46, - - - - - foreign I. 168, IV. 273- - - - - - - - wife I. 285 IV. 270, 271, 272 Mercheta II. 55 Making law III. 226 - - - - - - socage II. 59 Mere right II. 132 Mala in se I. 43 - - - - - licences and registers, - - - - - - not assignable II. 198- - - prohibita I. 45 forging or destroying Merger II. 119 Mal-administration of IV. 107, 164 Mesne lords II. 39

government IV. 80 - - - - - property by II. 293–4 - - - - process III. 185, 273

Male preferred to female in - - - - - settlement II. 247 - - - - writ of III. 156–7

descents I. 126, II. 143 - - - - - - - - - - its antiquity Metaphysics, their effects upon

- - - line preferred to female II. 93 law and theology II. 39,

I. 126 Marriages, when good I. 283 IV. 269

- - - stock preferred to female Marshall of the king’s bench Michel-gemote I. 99

II. 157 III. 28 Michel-synoth I. 99

Malice express IV. 131 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - custody of Middlesex, bill of III. 188–9, - - - - implied IV. 132 III. 189 313- - - - prepense IV. 131, 137 - - - - - - - - - - - host, certificate Migration II. 4 Malicious mischief IV. 161 of III. 220 Military causes III. 69- - - - - prosecution III. 85 Marshalsea, court of III. 51, - - - - - courts III. 45 Malt-tax I. 201 IV. 180 - - - - - feuds II. 36 Man, island of I. 74–5 Martial, courts I. 267 - - - - - offences I. 266, IV. 66 Mandamus, writ of III. 74, 176, - - - - law I. 265, IV. 281 - - - - - power of the crown

IV. 284 Mass books IV. 76 I. 166

Mandates royal to the judges in Master and servant I. 272 - - - - - state I. 262

private causes I. 96, IV. 274 - - - - in chancery III. 291 - - - - - tenures I. 184

Manhood II. 35 - - - - injuries to III. 96 - - - - - testament I. 268

index 397

Mines I. 189 Motion in court III. 201 Negro I. 86, 274, II. 272- - - - stealing ore out of IV. 155 Moveables II. 260 Neife II. 62 Minority, none in the king - - - - - - property in II. 3 Nembda III. 230

I. 161 Mount, or bank I. 210 New assignment III. 205 Minors not to sit in parliament Mountebanks IV. 110 - - - trial III. 255, IV. 233, 282

I. 108 Mulier puisnè II. 168–9 News, false IV. 98 Minstrells II. 64 Multiplicity of laws, its original Next of kin II. 151 Mis-adventure, homicide by III. 215 Night, in burglary, what

IV. 120 Municipal law I. 36 IV. 148–9 Mischief, malicious IV. 161 Murder IV. 128 Nightwalkers IV. 191 Misdemesnor IV. 1, 3 - - - - - by perjury IV. 91–2, Nihil dicit, judgment by Mise III. 302 129–30 III. 196, 260 Misfortune IV. 17 - - - - - conviction of IV. 287 - - - return of, to writs III. 186, Misnosmer III. 199, IV. 216 - - - - - indictment of IV. 288 309 Mis-pleading, when cured by - - - - - when pardonable Nil debet, plea of III. 202

verdict III. 258–9 IV. 128, 258 Nisi prius, courts of III. Misprision IV. 79 Murdrum III. 212, IV. 128 - - - - - justices of III. 39, - - - - - - of felony IV. 80 Muta canum II. 289 IV. 176- - - - - - - treason IV. 80 Mute, standing IV. 210 - - - - - trial at III. 233 Mistake IV. 17 - - - - - - - - advising it IV. 83–4 - - - - - writ of III. 233–4, 306 Mis-user II. 103 Mutilation I. 88–90, III. 82, Nobility I. 255 Mitter le droit II. 221 IV. 137 - - - - - its uses I. 105- - - - l’estate II. 221 - - - - - - punishment by Nocturnal crimes, how Mittimus IV. 184 IV. 243 prevented or resisted Mixed actions III. 80 Mutiny-act I. 266 IV. 119- - - - larciny IV. 159 Mutual debts III. 201 Non assumpsit III. 202- - - - tithes II. 14 - - - - - - infra sex annos Modus decimandi II. 18 National debt I. 209, IV. 284 III. 203 Moërda IV. 128 Nations, law of I. 36, IV. 44 - - compos mentis I. 196, Molliter manus imposuit III. 82 Nativi II. 62 II. 335, III. 123, IV. 16, 225 Monarchy I. 40 Natural liberty I. 85 - - cul IV. 219 Money I. 178 - - - - - life I. 90, II. 82 - - culpabilis, plea of III. 202, - - - - bills I. 112, 341 - - - - - persons I. 84 IV. 219- - - - counterfeiting IV. 56, 58 Naturalborn subjects I. 235, - - decimando, prescription de- - - - received to another’s use, 237–8 II. 19

action for III. 109 Naturalization I. 240, II. 170 - - est factum, plea of III. 202 Monk I. 89 Nature, crime against IV. 142 - - est inventus, return of Monopolies IV. 104, 281 - - - - guardian by I. 298 III. 187, 310, 311- - - - - - - stay of suits therein - - - - law of I. 34 Non obstante I. 219, II. 183,

IV. 77 Navigation acts I. 269, IV. 283 IV. 258 Monsters II. 167 Navy, articles of I. 270 - - prosequitur III. 195 Monstrans de droit III. 170 Ne admittas, writ of III. 165 - - sum informatus, judgment Month II. 95 - - exeat regnum I. 93, 171, by III. 261 Monuments II. 290 IV. 81 Non-claim in fines II. 240 Mort d’ancestor, assise of III. - - injuste vexes, writ of III. 156 - - - - - - of infants I. 301

125 Necessity IV. 18 Nonconformity IV. 34, 278 Mortgage II. 106, IV. 285 - - - - - homicide by IV. 117 Nonjuror IV. 82- - - - - - how considered in Negative in corporations I. 320 Non-payment of ecclesiastical

equity III. 286 - - - - - of the king I. 103 dues III. 60 Mortmain I. 311, II. 182, Neglect of duty, action for Non-residence II. 220

IV. 72, 273, 275, 284 III. 110 Nonsuit III. 195, 209, 248, 302 Mortuaries II. 287–8 Negligence of officers IV. 93 - - - - judgment as in case of Mortuo vadio, estate in II. 106 Negligent escape III. 273, III. 236 Mother-church I. 78 IV. 86 Non-user II. 103 398 index

Northern borders, rapine on - - - - killing them in executing - - - trial per III. 231, IV. 225

IV. 162 their office IV. 132 Palace court III. 51

Norman conquest I. 71, - - - - of courts, their Palatine counties I. 81, IV. 278

IV. 267, 268 certificates III. 222 - - - - - - - - their courts III. 53

- - - - - isles I. 76 - - - - refusal to admit III. 176 Pandects I. 60 Nose, cutting off or slitting - - - - removal of III. 176 - - - - - discovered I. 18, 60

IV. 137, 163 Offices I. 175, II. 23 Panel of jurors III. 234, IV. 196,

Nostrils, slitting, punishment - - - - and pensions, duty on 226

by IV. 243 I. 209 Papal encroachments IV. 69

Not guilty, plea of III. 202, 306, Officio, oath ex III. 68, 293 - - - process, obedience to

IV. 212, 289 Oleron, laws of I. 268, IV. 76

Note of a fine II. 238, 365 IV. 273 Paper book III. 210- - - - - hand II. 315 Opening counsel III. 242 - - - credit II. 315, IV. 284 Notice in ejectment III. 136, Oppression of crown, how Papirian code I. 60

305 remedied I. 157–8 Papists, children of I. 290–1

- - - - of trial III. 236 - - - - - - - magistrates IV. 93 - - - - incapacities of II. 174, Novel disseisin, assise of Option of the archbishop I. 245 200

III. 126 Optional writs III. 181 - - - - laws against IV. 35, 57–8,

Novels, in the civil law I. 60 Orchards, robbing of IV. 154 278 Nudum pactum II. 301 Ordeal, trial by IV. 221, 267, Paramount, lord II. 39, 61 Nul disseisin, plea of II. 368, 274 Paraphernalia II. 295

III. 202 Order of sessions IV. 178 Paravail, tenant II. 39

- - tiel record III. 218 Orders, holy I. 250 Parcels in a conveyance II. 353, - - tort, plea of III. 202 Original contract of king and 354, 356 Nuncupative wills II. 337 people I. 151 Parceners II. 125 Nurture, guardian for I. 298 - - - - - - - - - - society I. 38 Parco f[r]acto, writ de III. 99 Nusance, abatement of III. 3 - - - - - conveyances II. 211 Pardon IV. 218, 242, 255- - - - - assise of III. 147 - - - - - of a deed II. 202 - - - - not pleadable to - - - - - common IV. 109 - - - - - process III. 185 impeachment I. 214, IV. 170, - - - - - private III. 144 - - - - - writ III. 180, 303, 308 257, 284

Orphanage II. 351 Pardoning, prerogative of

Oath ex officio III. 68, 293 Ostium ecclesiae, dower ad I. 173, IV. 255–6- - - of the party III. 251, 287 II. 89 Parent and child I. 288 Oaths to the government, Overseers of the poor I. 230 - - - - injuries to III. 94–5

refusal or neglect to take Overt act of treason IV. 52, Parental power I. 291

them I. 230, IV. 76, 77, 82 57, 230 Parents, &c, their consent to

- - - - voluntary and - - - market II. 304 marriage I. 281

extrajudicial IV. 91 - - - pound III. 8 Pares curtis II. 35

Obedience to parents I. 292 Ouster of chattels real III. 133 - - - trial per III. 231 Objects of the laws of England - - - - - freehold III. 113 Parish I. 77

I. 83 Ousterlemain II. 45 Parish-clerk I. 254

Obligation of human laws Outlawry I. 96, III. 188, 311, Park II. 24, 282

I. 44 IV. 206–7 Parliament I. 95, 98–9, IV. 266,

- - - - - or bond II. 231, 363, Owling IV. 101 274, 276

III. 314 Oyer III. 197, 316 - - - - - - court of the king in

Obstructing of process IV. 86 - - - and terminer, commission IV. 169, 172 Occupancy II. 2, 5, 175, 271 of IV. 176, 287 - - - - - - disuse of IV. 281 Odhal right II. 29 - - - - - - - - - - justices of, - - - - - - of France I. 98 Odio et atia, writ de III. 87 killing them IV. 56 - - - - - - power of I. 107 Oeconomy, public, offences Oyez IV. 220 - - - - - - summons of I. 100

against IV. 106–7 Parliamentum indoctum I. 116

Office found III. 172 Pains and penalties, act to Parol conveyances II. 203- - - - inquest of III. 171 inflict IV. 169 - - - demur of III. 198 Officers, arrests by IV. 190 Pais, matter in II. 201 - - - evidence III. 243

index 399

- - - or pleadings III. 194 Peerage, benefit of, in offences Person, injuries to III. 81 Parricide IV. 134 IV. 237 - - - - larciny from IV. 160 Parson I. 247 Peeresses I. 258 - - - - offences against - - - - imparsonee I. 252 Peers, great council of I. 147–8 IV. 116–17 Particular estate II. 111 - - - hereditary counsellors of Personal actions III. 79- - - - - tenants, alienation by the crown I. 147 - - - - - - - - where they die

II. 187 - - - house of III. 37 with the person III. 200 Parties to a deed II. 203, - - - pedigrees of III. 71 - - - - assets II. 345

354, 355 - - - privileges of I. 258, III. - - - - chattels II. 262- - - - - - fine II. 241 237, IV. 166, 237 - - - - security I. 88 Partition II. 126 - - - protests of I. 111 - - - - things II. 260- - - - - deed of II. 220 - - - proxies of I. 111 - - - - tithes II. 14- - - - - writ of II. 127 - - - trial by I. 258, IV.170, 225 Personating others in courts, Partnership, cognizable in Peine forte et dure IV. 211 & c IV. 85–6

equity III. 287 Penal statutes I. 64–5, IV. 277 - - - - - proprietors of stock Pass-ports I. 350 Penalty of a bond III. 286 IV. 164- - - - - violation of IV. 45 Penance, commutation of Persons artificial I. 84, 303 Pasture, common of II. 20 IV. 70, 144, 180 - - - - natural I. 84 Patents II. 235 - - - - - for standing mute - - - - rights of I. 83- - - - for new inventions IV. 211 Peter-pence IV. 71

IV. 104 - - - - - in ecclesiastical courts Petit jury III. 232- - - - of peerage I. 257 IV. 70, 180, 237 - - - larciny IV. 152- - - - - precedence III. 18–19 Pendente lite, administration - - - serjeanty II. 54 Patent-rolls II. 235 II. 340 - - - session IV. 178- - - writs II. 235 Pension, ecclesiastical I. 182, - - - treason IV. 49, 134 Paterna paternis II. 138 II. 25 Petition of appeal III. 298 Patriam, trial per III. 231, - - - - from the crown I. 116 - - - - - bankruptcy II. 323

IV. 225 Pension from foreign princes - - - - - right I. 87, III. 170, Patronage II. 12 IV. 81 IV. 281- - - - - disturbance of III. 162 Pensioners excluded from the Petitioning, right of I. 96, Pauper-causes III. 262 house of commons I. 116 IV. 97 Pawns II. 306 People I. 235 - - - - - tumultuous I. 97, IV. 97 Payment of deceased’s debts Per et cui, writ of entry in Petty bag office III. 32

II. 345 III. 122 - - - constables I. 228- - - - - - money into court - - my et per tout, seisin II. 122 Pews II. 290

III. 201 - - quod III. 84 Physicians, &c III. 82, IV. 130 Peace and war, right of making - - writ of entry in III. 122 Piepoudre, court of III. 21

I. 166 Peremptory challenge IV. 227, Pignus II. 107- - - breach of IV. 94 261 Pillory IV. 243- - - commission of I. 225, - - - - - - mandamus III. 74–5, Piracy IV. 47

IV. 176 176 Piscary, common of II. 21, 24- - - conservation of I. 224 - - - - - - writ III. 181 Placemen, excluded from the - - - justices of I. 225, IV. 176, Perfection of the king I. 159 house of commons I. 116,

184, 190, 276 Perjury IV. 91 IV. 284- - - - - - - - conviction by - - - - in capital cases IV. 91–2, Plagiarii IV. 145

IV. 183 129 Plague, irregularity during - - - offences against IV. 94 Permissive waste II. 191 IV. 106- - - security for IV. 165, 167 Pernancy of profits II. 112 Plaint III. 181- - - the king’s I. 81, 173, 224 Perpetual curate I. 253 Plaintiff III. 17 Peculatus IV. 80 Perpetuating the testimony of Plantations I. 75 Peculiars, court of III. 43 witnesses III. 295 - - - - - destroying of IV. 163 Pecuniary causes, in Perpetuity of the king I. 161 Plants, stealing of IV. 154

ecclesiastical courts III. 59 Persecution, religious IV. 30, Plea, at law II. 368, III. 199, - - - - - legacies II. 346 276, 278 306, 317 400 index

- - - in bar of execution IV. 255, - - - priests IV. 37, 58, 76 Precedence II. 151, 185, III. 70

290 - - - recusants IV. 36, 82 - - - - - - patent of III. 19

- - - - equity III. 293 - - - seminaries, education in Precedent conditions II. 104- - - to indictment IV. 215, 289 I. 291, IV, 36, 76 Precept of election to Pleadings III. 194, IV. 275 - - - - - - - maintaining IV. 76 parliament I. 116 Pleas of the crown III. 26, IV. 1, Popular actions II. 296, III. 108 Pre-contract I. 279

273 Portions, method of raising Predial tithes II. 14

Pleasure of the king, how II. 358 Pre-emption I. 184, IV. 77, 273,

understood IV. 80 Port-reeve IV. 266 283

Plebiscita I. 60 Ports and havens I. 350 Pregnancy, plea of IV. 254 Pledge II. 306 Positive proof III. 244 Pregnancy, trial of I. 294, IV. - - - estates in II. 106 Posse comitatus I. 220 254 Pledges of appearance III. 185, - - - - - - neglecting to join Premier serjeant III. 19

304, 309 IV. 81 Premises of a deed II 204,

- - - - - battel III. 301 Possession, actual right of 353–5- - - - - prosecution II. 364, III. 121 Prerogative I. 95, 154, 163,

367, III. 182, 299, 300, - - - - - apparent right of IV. 278

304, 309 III. 119–20 - - - - - - causes of its increase

Plegii de prosequendo in - - - - - estates in II. 112 and decline IV. 279

replevin III. 100 - - - - - naked II. 131, III. 119 - - - - - - comparative review of

- - - - retorno habendo III. 100 - - - - - property in II. 263 I. 214, IV. 283 Plena probatio III. 244 - - - - - right of II. 131 - - - - - - contempts against Plenarty III. 162 - - - - - writ of III. 135, 270, 308 IV. 81 Plenum dominium II. 212 Possessory action II. 133 - - - - - - copyrights II. 278 Plough-bote II. 22 III. 121 - - - - - - court II. 344, III. 44 Pluries habeas corpus III. 92 Possibilities not assignable - - - - - - felonies against IV. 65- - - writ III. 187, 310, IV. 206 II. 198 - - - - - - property by II. 277 Pocket-sheriffs I. 362 Post, writ of entry in III. 122 Prescription II. 179 Poisoning IV. 129 Post-disseisin, writ of III. 126 - - - - - - - corporations by Police, offences against IV. 106 Postea III. 254, 307 I. 307 Policies of insurance II. 311, Post-fine II. 238 - - - - - - - time of II. 19

IV. 284 Posthumous children II. 114 Presentation to benefices

- - - - - - - - - court of III. 50 Post-man, in the exchequer I. 250, II. 14 Political liberty I. 85 III. 19 Presentative advowsons II. 13 Poll, deed II. 202 Post-office I. 207 Presentment of copyhold Polls, challenge to III. 238, - - - - - misbehaviour of its surrenders II. 250

IV. 227 officers IV. 155 - - - - - - - offences IV. 196

Polygamy I. 281, IV. 107 Pound III. 8 President of the council I. 149 Pone, writ of III. 22, 132, 185, Poundage I. 203, IV 281 Press, liberty of IV. 100

300, 309 Pound-breach III. 99 Pressing of seamen I. 269

Poor I. 230 Pow-dike, cutting IV. 162 - - - - to death IV. 213 Poor-laws I. 89, IV. 279 Power of the crown I. 162 Presumptions III. 245 Poors-settlements I. 232 - - - - - - - parent I. 291 Presumptive evidence of felony Pope, his authority, how Poyning’s law I. 72–3 IV. 213

demolished IV. 69, 271, 276, Praecipe, writ of III. 181 - - - - - - - heir II. 140

277 - - - - in capite, writ of III. 131 Pretended titles, selling or

- - - - - - encroachments IV. 69, - - - - - common recoveries buying IV. 90

270, 273, 274 II. 243, 366 Pretender and his sons,

- - - - - - jurisdiction, - - - - - fines II. 237–8, 364 treasons relating to IV. 61

defending it IV. 57–8, 76 - - - - tenant to III. 123 Prevention of crimes IV. 165

- - - reconciliation to IV. 57–8 Praemunire IV. 68, 276 - - - - - - - - - - - - homicide for Popery IV. 35 Praetor’s edicts I. 60 IV. 118 Popish books, importing or Pre-audience III. 19 Price II. 302, 307

selling IV. 76 Prebendary I. 246 Priest I. 250

index 401

Primae preces I. 245 Process, civil III. 185, 308 - - - - - writ of III. 191 Primary conveyances II. 211 - - - - criminal IV. 206 Protector I. 161 Primer fine II. 237 - - - - obstructing its execution Protest of bills and notes - - - - seisin II. 43, 58, IV. 270 IV. 86 II. 316 Primogeniture I. 126, II. 144, Prochein amy I. 300 - - - - - lords in parliament

IV. 271 Proclamations by the king I. 111 Prince of Wales I. 146 I. 174, IV. 278 Protestant dissenters IV. 35 Princes of the blood royal - - - - - - - of a fine II. 239, 366 - - - - - succession I. 140

I. 146 - - - - - - - on attachment in - - - - - - - - - - treason against Princess of Wales, violating her chancery III. 291 IV. 60

IV. 54 - - - - - - - - - exigent III. 188, Protestation III. 205, 317- - - - royal I. 146 311, IV. 207 Province I. 77- - - - - - - violating her IV. 54 - - - - - - - - - the riot-act IV. 94 Provincial constitutions I. 61 Principal and accessory IV. 22 - - - - - - - writ of III. 188, 311 - - - - - governments in - - - - - challenge III. 239 Proctor III. 17 America I. 75–6, 327–8 Prior I. 104 Procuration-money IV. 102 Proving will in chancery Priority of debts II. 345 Prodigals I. 197 III. 295 Prisage I. 202 Profaneness IV. 39 Provisions, papal I. 46, IV. 71 Prison, breach of IV. 86 Profert in curia III. 316 - - - - - selling unwholsome Prit IV. 219 Profession religious I. 90 IV. 106 Private act of parliament I. 63, Professor of the laws, his duty Proviso, trial by III. 235

II. 234 I. 30 Provisors, statutes against - - - - nusance III. 144 Profits of courts I. 186 IV. 73, &c- - - - persons, arrest by IV. 191 Progress, royal IV. 266 Proxies in the house of lords - - - - wrongs III. 1 Prohibition, declaration in I. 111 Privately stealing from the III. 76 Puberty, age of IV. 14

person IV. 160 - - - - - - writ of III. 75 Public act of parliament I. 63 Privies to a fine II. 241 Promises III. 106 - - - - verdict III. 248, IV. 232 Privilege I. 175 Promissory note II. 315 - - - - wrongs IV. 1- - - - - bill of III. 191 Promulgation of laws I. 37 Publication of depositions - - - - - from arrests III. 191 Proofs III. 242 III. 295- - - - - of parliament I. 109 - - - - in ecclesiastical courts Pueritia IV. 14- - - - - writ of I. 336 III. 67 Puis darrein continuance, plea Privileged places IV. 86 Proper feuds II. 38 III. 209- - - - - - villenage II. 66 Property I. 93, II. 1 Puisnè barons of the exchequer Privilegia I. 38 Property, crimes against III. 29 Privilegium clericale IV. 236 IV. 152 - - - justices III. 27- - - - - - property propter - - - - - injuries to personal Pulling down churches,

II. 267 III. 98 houses, &c IV. 95 Privy council I. 148 - - - - - - - - - - real III. 113 Pulsation III. 81- - - counsellor, killing or - - - - - right of II. 132, III. 128 Punishment IV. 4

attempt to kill I. 150, IV. 66 Prophecies, pretended IV. 98 - - - - - - capital IV. 5, 11, - - - seal II. 235 Proprietary governments in 157, 225- - - signet II. 235 America I. 76 - - - - - - certainty of IV. 243- - - - - - forging them IV. 59 Proprietate probanda, writ de - - - - - - end of IV. 7, 165- - - tithes I. 249 III. 100 - - - - - - infliction of IV. 169- - - verdict III. 248, IV. 232 Prorogation of parliament - - - - - - measure of IV. 8 Prize causes III. 73 I. 122 - - - - - - power of IV. 5- - - - - - - commission of Prosecution by the king I. 173 - - - - - - severity of IV. 10

III. 46 - - - - - - expenses of IV. 233 Pur auter vie, tenant II. 81 Probable presumption III. 245 - - - - - - malicious III. 85 Purchase I. 139, II. 164 Probate of will II. 343 - - - - - - of offenders IV. 196 - - - - - of writs III. 180–1 Procedendo, writ of I. 226, Protection of children I. 290 Purchasor, first II. 148

III. 74 - - - - - - embassadors I. 164 Pure villenage II. 60 402 index

Purgatio vulgaris IV. 221 - - - - regnant I. 142 - - - things II. 10 Purgation, canonical III. 226, - - - - - - - - her husband I. 145 Reason of the law I. 52

IV. 237 - - - - violating her IV. 54 Reasonable part II. 332, 349,

- - - - - oath of III. 67, 293 Question, or torture IV. 211 IV. 263, 273 Purpresture IV. 110 Qui tam actions III. 108, IV. 199 Rebellion, commission of Pursuit of remedies III. 179 Quia dominus remisit curiam, III. 291 Purveyance I. 184, IV. 77, writ of right III. 131 Rebutter III. 205–6

273, 283 Quia emptores, statute of II. 61, Recall of subjects from abroad

Putting in fear IV. 161 IV. 275 I. 171, IV. 81, 105

Quick with child IV. 254 Recaption III. 2, IV. 234

Quadruplicatio III. 205 Quiet enjoyment, covenant for - - - - - writ of III. 102 Qualification for killing game II. 362 Receiving stolen goods IV. 88

II. 283, IV. 115 Quinto exactus III. 188, 311, Recitals in a deed II. 204, 355

- - - - - - of electors to IV. 206 Reclaimed animals II. 264

parliament I. 113 Quit-claim II. 365 Recognizance II. 232

- - - - - - - - jurors III. 239 Quit-rents II. 27 - - - - - - for the peace or good - - - - - - - - justices of the Quo minus, writ of III. 30, behaviour IV. 166

peace I. 226 189, 313 - - - - - - in nature of statute

- - - - - - - - members of Quo warranto, information in staple II. 108, 232, IV. 278

parliament I. 115 nature of I. 314, III. 175, - - - - - - of bail III. 192, 314

Qualified fees II. 73 IV. 202, 284 - - - - - - - fine II. 365, 366- - - - - property II. 264 - - - - - - - writ of III. 174 Recompense in value II. 243 Quantum meruit III. 109 Quod ei deforciat, writ of Reconciliation to the pope, &c- - - - valebat III. 109 III. 130 IV. 58 Quare clausum fregit III. 186 - - - permittat, writ of III. 160 Record I. 69, III. 16, IV. 52- - - ejecit infra terminum, writ - - - - - - - prosternere, writ of - - - - assurance by II. 234

of III. 138 III. 147 - - - court of III. 16

- - - impedit III. 164 Quorum clause, in - - - - debt of II. 314- - - incumbravit III. 166 commissions I. 225 - - - - imbezzling of IV. 85- - - non admisit, writ of - - - - of actions II. 367,

III. 167 Rack IV. 211 III. 210, 300, 305, 315

Quarentine II. 91 Rack-rent II. 27 - - - - - - forcible entry or - - - - - irregularity in IV. 106 Rank modus II. 18 detainer IV. 98 Quarrelling in church or Ransom IV. 244 - - - - - - riot IV. 96

church-yard IV. 96 Rape, appeal of IV. 203 - - - - trial by III. 218

Quartering of soldiers I. 265, - - - in counties I. 80 - - - - vacating of IV. 85

266 - - - of women IV. 139 Recordari facias loquelam

- - - - - - traitors IV. 61, 242 Rapina IV. 160 III. 22, 132 Quarter-sessions, court of Rasure in a deed II. 211 Recovery, common II. 78, 184,

IV. 177 Rationabili parte bonorum, 242, 366, IV. 276

Quarto die post III. 184 writ de II. 332 - - - - - in value II. 243, 368 Quashing III. 200, IV. 207 - - - - - - - writ of right de - - - - - roll II. 243, 366 Quays I. 350 III. 131 Recreant III. 225, IV. 225 Que estate II. 179 Rationabilis dos II. 90 Rector of a church I. 247 Queen I. 142 Ravishment of children III. 95 Rectorial tithes I. 249- - - - Anne’s bounty I. 184 - - - - - - - ward III. 95 Recusants, popish IV. 36, 82- - - - compassing or imagining - - - - - - - wife III. 94 Recusatio judicis III. 238

her death IV. 50 Reading of deeds II. 208 Reddendum of a deed II. 204,

- - - - consort I. 142 - - - - on claim of clergy 353, 355- - - - dowager I. 145 IV. 237, 284 Re-disseisin, writ of III. 126- - - - gold I. 143 Real actions III. 79 Redress of injuries III. 1- - - - her attorney and solicitor - - - assets II. 166, 206 Reference to masters in

I. 142, III. 19 - - - chattels II. 261 chancery III. 297

- - - - - - revenue I. 143–4 - - - composition for tithes II. 17 Reformation of religion IV. 277

index 403

Refusal of a clerk I. 250 Replicatio III. 205 - - - - - - - - - - - of leases Regalia, majora et minora Replication at law III. 204, II. 218, IV. 279

I. 156 301, 317 Resulting use II. 228 Regard, court of III. 48 - - - - - - in criminal cases Retainer of debts II. 345, III. 12 Regardant, villeins II. 62 IV. 219, 290 - - - - - - - servant by another Regent I. 161 - - - - - - - equity III. 294 III. 96 Register of deeds II. 233 Reports by the master in Retaliation IV. 8- - - - - marriages IV. 107 chancery III. 297 Retorno habendo, plegii de- - - - - seamen I. 270 - - - - of adjudged cases I. 53 III. 100 Registrum omnium brevium Representation in descents - - - - - - - - writ de III. 101, 271

III. 123 II. 146 Retraxit III. 195, 260 Regnant, queen I. 142 - - - - - - - - - of the crown Return, false or double I. 118 Regrating IV. 103 I. 126, 131–2 - - - - - - action for III. 75, 245 Rejoinder III. 204 - - - - - - - - - distribution - - - - of writs III. 180–1- - - - - in error III. 319 II. 349 - - - - - - - - form of II. xiv, xvii, Rehearing III. 297 - - - - - - - - - parliament I. 106 xix, III. 300, 302, 304, 308, Relation back in bankruptcy Reprieve IV. 254 309, 310, 311, 312, 313, 314,

II. 327 Reprisal of goods III. 3 315, 319, 320, 321- - - - - - - - forfeiture IV. 266, Reprisals on foreigners I. 167 Return-day of writs III. 182

249 Republication of will II. 257, Returns of the term III. 183- - - - - - - - judgments III. 276 338 Revealed law I. 35 Relations private I. 272 Repugnant conditions II. 106 Revenue causes, cognizance of - - - - - public I. 98 Reputation I. 91 III. 281 Relative rights and duties I. 84, - - - - - - injuries to III. 83 - - - - extraordinary I. 197

98 Requests, court of I. 149, - - - - ordinary I. 181 Relator, in informations III. III. 33 Reversal of attainder IV. 252

175–6, 281, IV. 200 - - - - - - - - - for small debts - - - - - - judgment III. 270, Release of lands II. 221, 355 III. 55 320, IV. 252 Relief II. 36, 43, 58, IV. 270, Rere-fiefs II. 37 - - - - - - outlawry III. 188,

271, 272 Rescripts of the emperor I. 45 IV. 207, 252 Religion, offences against Rescous, writ of III. 99 Reversion II. 117

IV. 28 Rescue III. 81, 115, IV. 83, 87 - - - - - its incidents II. 118 Religious impostures IV. 41 Residence I. 251–2 Revertendi animus II. 265 Rem, information in III. 174 Residuum of intestates’ effects Reverter, writ of formedon in Remainder in chattels personal II. 347 III. 129

II. 269 Resignation I. 246, 253 Review, bill of III. 298- - - - - - of lands II. 112 Resistance I. 162–3, IV. 281, - - - - - commission of III. 45- - - - - - writ of formedon in 283 Reviling church ordinances

III. 129 Respite of jury III. 234, 306 IV. 33 Remedial part of laws I. 43 Respondeat ouster III. 200, 260, Revival of persons hanged - - - - - statute I. 63 IV. 218 IV. 262 Remise II. 365 Respondentia II. 310 Reviver, bill of III. 294 Remitter III. 12, 127 Responsa prudentum I. 60 Revocation of devises II. 255 Removal of poor I. 234 Restitution in blood, & c - - - - - - - uses II. 228, 321, 363 Rent II. 25, 37, 204 IV. 253 - - - - - - - will II. 389- - - charge II. 27 - - - - - - of conjugal rights Revolution, a.d. 1688 I. 137, - - - remedy for III. 4, 138, 154, III. 63 IV. 283

IV. 284 - - - - - - - stolen goods IV. 233 Rewards for apprehending - - - seck II. 26 - - - - - - - temporalties I. 244, offenders IV. 192- - - service II. 26 IV. 271 - - - - - - - discovering - - - subtraction of III. 154 - - - - - - writ of IV. 124, 234 accomplices IV. 214 Repleader, III. 259 Restoration, a.d. 1660 I. 136, Ridings I. 81 Replevin III. 8, 115 IV. 282 Right close, writ of II. 66, - - - - - action of III. 99 Restraining statute I. 64 III. 131 404 index

- - - - - - secundum - - - - - - - violation of IV. 45 - - - - - destroying I. 189

consuetudinem manerii, writ Saint Martin le grand, court of Seamen I. 269

of III. 131 III. 54 Seamens’ wages III. 72

Right de rationabili parte, writ Sale II. 6, 302 Second surcharge, writ of

of III. 131 - - - of distress III. 9 III. 160

- - - mere writ of III. 130 Salt-duty I. 206 Secondary conveyances II. 221- - - of advowson, writ of Salvage I. 189 - - - - - use II. 228

III. 162, 167 Sanction of laws I. 44 Secretaries of state I. 217

- - - - dower, writ of III. 123 Sanctuary IV. 215, 236, 281 Secta III. 195, 227- - - - possession II. 131 Sark, island of I. 75 - - - ad molendinum, &c, writ - - - - property II. 132 Satisdatio III. 193 de III. 157- - - - ward, writ of III. 95 Satisfaction, entry of, on Secunda superoneratione, writ - - - patent, writ of III. 131, 299 record IV. 276 de III. 160- - - petition of I. 87, III. 170, Saxon Laws IV. 265, 266 Securities for money, their true

IV. 282 Scale of crimes and construction III. 288

- - - quia dominus remisit punishments IV. 11 Security for good behaviour

curiam, writ of III. 131, 299, Scandal or impertinence in IV. 165, 168

300, bills in equity III. 290 - - - - - - - - peace IV. 165, 167

- - - sur disclaimer, writ of Scandalum magnatum I. 259, - - - - of person I. 88

III. 156 III. 84 Seduction of women-children

Rights I. 83 Schire-men I. 256 IV. 138- - - - bill of I. 87, IV. 283 Schism IV. 34 Seisin II. 140- - - - of persons I. 83 Schoolmaster I. 292 - - - for an instant II. 88- - - - - things II. 1 Sciences auxiliary to the study - - - livery of II. 212, 353 Riot IV. 83, 94, 96 of the law I. 29 - - - writ of II. 241, 368, III. 271 Riot-act IV. 94, 95, 289 Scire facias against bail III. 274 Seising of heriots, &c III. 9 Riotous assemblies, felonious - - - - - - in detinue III. 272 Selecti judices III. 241

IV. 94 - - - - - - to hear errors III. 319 Self-defence III. 2

Rivers, annoyances in IV. 110 - - - - - - - remove an usurper’s - - - - - - homicide in I. 88, - - - - banks of, destroying clerk III. 166 IV. 121

IV. 163 - - - - - - - repeal letters patent Self-murder IV. 124

- - - - sluices on, destroying III. 173 Semi-plena probatio III. 244

IV. 95 - - - - - - - revive a judgment Senatus-consulta I. 60, 63

Robbery IV. 160 III. 277 Senatus-decreta I. 63 Roberds-men IV. 162 - - - feci III. 319 Septennial elections I. 107, Roguery, incorrigible IV. 111 Scold, common IV. 111 123, 214 Rogues IV. 111 Scotland I. 69, IV. 275 Sequestration in chancery Romney-marsh, laws of III. 50 Scots, or assessments III. 50 III. 292 Roots, destroying of IV. 163 - - - peers, their election I. 111, - - - - - - - of a benefice - - - - stealing of IV. 154 IV. 77 III. 275 Rope-dancers IV. 110 Scripture, scoffing at IV. 39 Serjeant, antient III. 19 Routs IV. 96 Scutage I. 198, II. 49 - - - - at arms, in chancery Royal assent I. 103, 120 Se defendendo, homicide I. 88, III. 292- - - - family I. 142 IV. 121 - - - - - law I. 22, III. 18 Rule of court III. 201, 305 Sea banks, destroying IV. 163 - - - - premier III. 19 Rural dean I. 247 Seal, counterfeiting the king’s Serjeanty, grand II. 49- - - deanry I. 77 IV. 55, 59 - - - - - petit II. 54 Ryder to a bill I. 120 - - - great II. 235, III. 31 Servants I. 272

- - - of a corporation I. 308 - - - - - battery of III. 96

Sabbath-breaking IV. 41 - - - privy II. 235 - - - - - embezzling their Saccularii IV. 160 Sealing of deeds II. 208, 355, master’s goods IV. 153 Sacrament, reviling of IV. 33 363, 364 - - - - - firing houses by Sacramentum decisionis III. 226 Seals, their antiquity II. 208 negligence I. 277, IV. 147 Safe-conducts I. 168 Sea-marks I. 350 - - - - - larciny by IV. 152

index 405

- - - - - master when - - - - larciny IV. 152 - - - - property II. 264

answerable for III. 103 Sine-cure I. 248 - - - - session IV. 178- - - - - retainer of I. 274 Single bond II. 231 - - - - statute I. 63 Service, feodal II. 35 - - - voucher II. 366 - - - - tail II. 76- - - - heriot II. 286 Sinking-fund I. 212 - - - - verdict III. 249, IV. 232 Session, great, of Wales III. 52 Six clerks in chancery III. 291 - - - - warrant IV. 190- - - - of gaol-delivery IV. 288 Slander III. 83 Specialty, debt by II. 314- - - - - oyer and terminer Slavery I. 272 Specific legacies II. 346

IV. 287 Slaves I. 86 - - - - relief in equity III. 288- - - - - parliament I. 121–2 Sledge IV. 61, 243 Spiriting away men and - - - - quarter IV. 177 Sluices on rivers, destroying children IV. 145 Set-off III. 201, IV. 285 IV. 95 Spiritual corporations I. 305 Settlement, act of I. 87, 140, Small debts, courts for III. 55, - - - - courts III. 41

IV. 283 IV. 284 Spiritualties, guardian of I. 245 Settlements of the poor I. 232 - - - tithes I. 249 Spoliation III. 61 Several fishery II. 25 Smuggling I. 204, IV. 101 Sponsio judicialis III. 297 Severalty, estates in II. 190 Socage II. 52, IV. 270 Springing uses II. 227 Severance of jointure II. 194 - - - - free and common II. 52 Squibs IV. 111 Severity of punishment IV. 10 - - - - guardian in I. 298 Stabbing IV. 127 Sewers, commissioners of - - - - villein II. 66 Stage-plays IV. 110

III. 49 Society, its nature I. 38 Stake driven through the body Sextons I. 254 Sodomy IV. 142 IV. 125 Shepway, court of III. 53 Sodor and Man, bishopric of Stamp duties I. 208 Sheriff I. 80, 218, IV. 190, 266, I. 75, 77 Stamping of deeds II. 203,

276 Sokemans II. 67 355, 364 Sheriff’s court, in London Soldiers I. 262 Stamps, forging of IV. 164

III. 54 - - - - wandering IV. 107 Standard of weights and - - - - - tourn IV. 178, 265, 274 Sole corporations I. 304 measures I. 176–7, IV. 179 Shifting use II. 228 Solicitor III. 17 Stannary courts III. 54 Shipmoney IV. 281 - - - - - general III. 18 Staple commodities I. 202 Ships in distress, plundering Son assault demesne III. 81, Starchamber, court of I. 149,

them I. 189, IV. 155 202 IV. 174, 277, 279, 281- - - maliciously destroying Sophia, princess, heirs of her Starrs II. 233, IV. 174

I. 188, IV. 162 body I. 140 Stated damages III. 286 Shire I. 80 Sorcery IV. 39 Statute I. 62 Shooting at another IV. 137 Sovereignty I. 39 - - - - guardian by I. 299 Shop-books III. 242–3 - - - - - - of the king I. 157 - - - - merchant II. 108, IV. 275 Shrubs, destroying of IV. 154 Soulscot II. 288 - - - - staple II. 108, IV. 276- - - - stealing of IV. 155 South-sea fund I. 211 - - - - - - - recognizance in Shrowd, stealing of II. 291, Speaker of each house of nature of II. 108, 232,

IV. 157 parliament I. 119 IV. 278 Si fecerit te securum III. 181, Speaking with prosecutor Statutes of a corporation I. 308

303 IV. 234 Stealing an heiress IV. 138 Signet, privy II. 235 Special administration II. 342 Sterling I. 179 Significavit, writ of III. 69 - - - - bail III. 190, 314 Steward I. 275 Signing of deeds II. 208, 355, - - - - bailiff I. 221 - - - - high, his court IV. 171

363, 364 - - - - bastardy I. 293 - - - - - - - in parliament Sign-manual II. 235 - - - - case III. 249 IV. 170, 172- - - - - - forging it IV. 59 Special demurrer III. 208 - - - - of the houshold, his Similitude of handwriting - - - - jury III. 236 court III. 51–2, IV. 180

IV. 231 - - - - matter in evidence - - - - - - - university, his court Simony I. 250, 253, II. 189, III. 202 IV. 181

IV. 41 - - - - occupant II. 176 Stint, common without II. 21, Simple contract, debt by II. 314 - - - - plea III. 201–2 III. 159–60 406 index

Stipulatio III. 193 Suffrage, who intitled to II. 115 Sycophants IV. 157 Stipulation in the admiralty Suggestion for prohibition Syngrapha II. 202

court III. 73 III. 76 Synods I. 180

Stirpes, distribution per II. 349 - - - - - prosecution by IV. 200- - - - succession in II. 146 Suicide IV. 124 Tail after possibility of issue Stocks for punishment IV. 243 Suit and service II. 35 extinct II. 84- - - - of descent, male and - - at law III. 78–9 - - - female II. 76

female II. 157 - - in equity III. 290 - - - general II. 76, 358

Stolen goods, receiving, &c - - or witnesses II. 367, III. 195 - - - male II. 76

IV. 88 Summary convictions IV. 183 - - - special II. 76

- - - marriages IV. 139 Summoners II. 364, 367, III. - - - tenant in II. 75 Stoppage III. 201 185, 300, 308 Taking, felonious IV. 152, 153 Stores, imbezzling the king’s Summons III. 185, 302 - - - - unlawful III. 98

IV. 66 - - - - - before conviction Tale, or count III. 194

Strangers to a fine II. 241 IV. 184 Tales de circumstantibus Striking in the king’s palace, or - - - - - to parliament I. 100 III. 241, 307, IV. 229

courts of justice IV. 83, 180 Sumptuary laws IV. 112 - - - - - - - - - - - writ of III. 240

Study of the law, its Sunday, no juridical day Talionis lex IV. 8

discouragements I. 27 III. 184, 192 Talliage I. 198, IV. 270, 274

- - - - - - - - - - uses I. 10 Supersedeas, writ of I. 226 Tariff I. 202- - - - - - - - restrained in Superseding commissions of Taxation by the house of

London I. 23 bankrupt II. 329 commons I. 111

- - - - - - - - why neglected in Superstitious uses, information Taxes I. 94, 198, IV. 274, 283

the universities I. 17 of III. 281 - - - their annual amount I. 213

Stultifying one’s self II. 199 Supplemental bill in equity Technical words in Subjection, civil IV. 18 III. 294 indictments IV. 198 Subinfeudation II. 61 Suppletory oath III. 244 Temporalties of bishops, their Subornation of perjury IV. 91 Supplicavit IV. 166 custody I. 181, IV. 271 Subpoena ad testificandum Supplies I. 198 - - - - - - - - - - - - - restitution

III. 243 Supremacy IV. 277 I. 244, IV. 271

- - - - duces tecum III. 252 - - - - - - oath of I. 236 Tenant II. 39- - - - in equity III. 292 - - - - - - - - - - refusing it IV. 76 - - - - to the praecipe II. 245, - - - - - - - - - its original III. 34 Supreme magistrates I. 98 360, Subscription of witnesses - - - - power I. 40, 98 Tender of amends III. 10

II. 256 Surcharge of common III. 159 - - - - - issue III. 206

Subscriptions, unlawful IV. 77 Surplus of intestates’ effects - - - - - money III. 201 Subsequent conditions II. 104 II. 347 - - - - - oaths I. 236, IV. 82- - - - - - evidence III. 264, Sur-rebutter III. 205 - - - - plea of III. 201

297–8 Sur-rejoinder III. 205 Tenement II. 10, 39

Subsidies, ecclesiastical I. 200 Surrender, deed of II. 222 - - - - - entailable II. 75- - - - - lay I. 198, 200, IV. 273 - - - - - of bankrupt II. 324 Tenemental lands II. 60- - - - - on exports and imports - - - - - - copyholds II. 248, Tenendum of a deed II. 204,

I. 202 249–50 353

Subtraction of conjugal rights Surveyors of highways I. 229 Tenths, ecclesiastical I. 183,

III. 63 Survivorship II. 123, 359 IV. 71

- - - - - - - legacies III. 66 - - - - - - of things personal - - - - temporal I. 198- - - - - - - rents and services II. 269–70 Tenure, disturbance of III. 161

III. 154 Suspension of habeas corpus Tenures, antient II. 39

- - - - - - - tithes III. 59, 69 act I. 92 - - - - modern II. 52 Succession ab intestato II. 348 Sus. per coll IV. 260 Term in law, essoign day of - - - - - to goods and chattels Swans, stealing of IV. 156 III. 184

II. 292 Swearing, profane IV. 39 - - - - - - - first day of III. 184

- - - - - - the crown I. 128, IV. 283 - - - - - the peace IV. 167 - - - - - - - original of III. 182 Sufferance, estate at II. 101 Sweinmote, court of III. 48 - - - - - - - returns of III. 183

index 407

- - - of years II. 97, 355, 359, Tolt, writ of III. 22, 131, 299 Trial III. 218, IV. 221, 267

IV. 277 Tongue, cutting out or - - - new III. 255, IV. 233, 282 Terminum qui praeteriit, writ disabling IV. 136, 137 Triennial elections I. 123, 214

of entry ad III. 123 Tonnage I. 203, IV. 281 - - - - - parliaments I. 102, 123, Termor II. 96 Tonsura clericalis IV. 237 Trinity, denial of IV. 33 Terre-tenant II. 61, 223 Torts, actions on III. 79 Trinoda necessitas I. 170, 229, Test-act IV, 38, 283 Torture I. 91, IV. 211 II. 68 Testament II. 7, 8, 253, 330, Tourn of the sheriff IV. 178, Triors, lords IV. 171–2

336–7, IV. 273, 277 265, 274 - - - of jurors III. 240 Testamentary causes III. 63 Tout temps prist III. 201 Triplicatio III. 205- - - - - - - guardian I. 299, II. 59 Town I. 79 Trithing I. 80- - - - - - - jurisdiction in equity Trade, its progress in England Triverbial days III. 279

III. 287 IV. 270, 274, 276, 278, 280, Trover and conversion, action - - - - - - - - - - - - - - spiritual 283 of III. 102, IV. 234

courts III. 65, IV. 271 - - - offences against IV. 101 Truce, breakers of IV. 45 Testamento annexo, - - - offensive IV. 110 - - - conservators of IV. 46

administration cum II. 340 - - - unlawful exercise of I. 275, Trusts II. 241, 357, 358 Testatum capias III. 187, 310 IV. 105 - - - where cognizable III. 283, Teste of writs III. 181, 299–300, Tradesmen I. 261 289

304–5, 309–15, 320–1 - - - - - - actions against Tub-man, in the exchequer Testes, proof of will per II. 343 III. 110 III. 19- - - trial per III. 222 Traitors II. 337, IV. 49 Tumultuous petitioning I. 96, Theft IV. 152 Transitory actions III. 194 IV. 97- - - its punishment IV. 157, Transportation I. 93, IV. 239, Turbary, common of II. 21

271 243, 259 Turnips. stealing IV. 154 Theft-bote IV. 88 - - - - - - - - returning from Turnpikes, destroying of IV. 95 Theodosian code I. 60 IV. 87 Tutor I. 292, 298 Things personal II. 260 Traverse of indictment IV. 226 Twelve tables, laws of I. 59- - - - real II. 10 - - - - - offices III. 173 Two witnesses, when necessary - - - - right of II. 1 - - - - - plea III. 206 III. 244, IV. 230 Threatening letters IV. 95 Treason, appeal of IV. 203 Tyranny I. 85, 90 Threats III. 81 - - - - high IV. 49, 276,- - - - of accusation, to extort - - - - misprision of IV. 79 Vacancy of the throne I. 137

money IV. 91 - - - - petit IV. 49, 134 Vacarius, Roger I. 19 Timber II. 191 - - - - trials in IV. 227, 284 Vacating records IV. 85- - - - trees, stealing IV. 155 Treasurer, lord high III. 29, 56 Vacations III. 182–3 Tippling IV. 42 - - - - - - - - - - killing him Vadium mortuum II. 106 Tithes I. 249, II. 14 IV. 56 - - - - vivum II. 106- - - - cognizable in equity Treasure-trove I. 190 Vagabonds IV. 111

III. 287 - - - - - - - - concealment of Vagrants IV. 111- - - - of forest land III. 32 I. 191, IV. 80 - - - - - harbouring them - - - - original distribution of Treaties, leagues, and alliances IV. 112

I. 247 I. 166 Valor beneficiorum I. 183- - - - subtraction of III. 59, 69 Trebucket IV. 111 - - - maritagii II. 46 Tithing I. 78, IV. 265 Trees, destroying IV. 162, 163 Valuable consideration II. 203 Tithingman I. 79, 228 - - - stealing IV. 155 Valvasors I. 259 Title of acts of parliament Tresayle III. 125 Vasal II. 34

I. 340 Trespass, costs in III. 263 Ubiquity of the king I. 174- - - to lands II. 131 - - - - - on lands III. 139 Udal right II. 29- - - - - - - pretended, selling or - - - - - - the case, action of Venary, beasts of II. 282

buying IV. 90 III. 83 Venire facias, writ of III. 232, - - - - the crown I. 124 - - - - - vi et armis, action of 303, 306, IV. 206, 226, 289- - - - things personal II. 271 III. 81–3 Venire inspiciendo, writ de Toleration IV. 34, 35, 283 Trespassers ab initio III. 9 I. 294 408 index

Venue III. 194 Visnè III. 194, IV. 226 Uterinus frater II. 156- - - when changed III. 194, Vivo vadio, estate in II. 106 Uttering false money IV, 59, 65

252 Vulgaris purgatio IV. 221

Verberation III. 81 Umpire III. 10 Verderors III. 48 Unanimity of juries III. 248, Wager of battel III. 222–3, 301, Verdict III. 248, 303, 307, IV. 267 IV. 224, 270, 273

IV. 232, 289, 291 Uncertainty of the law III. 215 - - - - - law III. 225, IV. 267,

- - - - false III. 264, IV. 93 Uncore prist III. 201 273 Verge of the court III. 51–2 Undersheriff I. 221 Wagering policies II. 312 Vert, venison, and covert, Underwood, stealing IV. 154 Wages of members of

injuries to III. 48 Union, articles of I. 70 parliament I. 115

Vested legacy II. 347 - - - - of Great Britain I. 68, - - - - - servants I. 276- - - - remainder II. 113 IV. 275, 283, Waifs I. 191 Vetitum namium III. 101 Unities of joint estates Wales I. 68, IV. 275, 278 Vicar I. 249 II. 120 - - - - courts of III. 52 Vicarages, when established Universitates I. 304 - - - - part of England I. 69

I. 249, IV. 276 University I. 307 - - - - prince of I. 146

Vicarial tithes I. 249 - - - - - burgesses of I. 115 - - - - - - - - - - compassing and Vice-admiralty courts III. 46 - - - - - chancellor of, his imagining his death IV. 50 Vicinage, common because of certificate III. 221 Wales, princess of I. 146

II. 21 - - - - - courts of III. 56, IV. 181 - - - - - - - - - violating her

Vicineto, jury de III. 252 - - - - - right of, to popish IV. 54 Vicontiel writs III. 159 advowsons III. 167 Wandering soldiers and Vidames I. 259 - - - - - study of the law in I. 24 mariners IV. 108 View by jurors III. 197, 236 Unknown persons, larciny Want IV. 20- - - of frankpledge IV. 178 from IV. 156 Wapentakes I. 80 Vill I. 79 Voir dire, oath of III. 219 War and peace, right of Villein II. 61 IV. 271 Voluntary escape III. 273, making I. 166- - - - in gross II. 62 IV. 86 - - - articles of I. 267- - - - regardant II. 62 - - - - - jurisdiction III. 44 - - - levying, against the king - - - - services II. 40 - - - - - manslaughter IV. 126 IV. 54- - - - socage II. 66 - - - - - oaths IV. 91 Ward by constables, &c I. 229, Villenage II. 60, 61 - - - - - waste II. 191 IV. 275- - - - - privileged II. 66 Vouchee, in recoveries II. 243, Wards and liveries, court of - - - - - pure II. 65 367 III. 172 Villenous judgment IV. 90 Voucher, III. 198 Wardship in chivalry II. 44, Vinculo matrimonii, divorce a - - - - - in recoveries II. 243, IV. 270, 271, 272

III. 63 367 - - - - - - copyholds II. 65

Viner, Mr, his institution I. 25 Uses II. 92, 184, 223, IV. 275, - - - - - - socage II. 58 Violating the queen, &c IV. 24 276, 277 Warrant I. 92, IV. 189 Violent presumption III. 245 - - - covenant to stand seised to Warrantia chartae III. 198 Virge, tenant by II. 100 II. 230 Warranty of chattels personal Virgin Mary, a civilian and - - - deeds to lead or declare II. 306

canonist I. 20 II. 231, 246, 360, 361 - - - - - - goods sold III. 111

Viscount I. 256 - - - statute of II. 226, IV. 277 - - - - - - lands II. 205, 353, Visitation books of heralds Usurpation of advowson 365, 367

III. 71 III. 163 Warren, beasts and fowls of

Visitor I. 311 - - - - - - - franchises or offices II. 24- - - - of civil corporations III. 174 - - - - robbery of IV. 155

I. 312 Usura maritima II. 310 - - - - - - - - - - in disguise

- - - - - colleges I. 313 Usury II. 308, IV. 77, 102 IV. 95- - - - - hospitals I. 312 Usus-fructus II. 223 Waste II. 191, III 149

index 409

- - - how prevented in equity Wine, adulteration of IV. 106 Writ III. 180

III. 288 - - - licences I. 185 - - - close II. 235- - - impeachment of II. 193 Witchcraft IV. 39, 281 - - - of election to parliament - - - lands II. 9, 60 Withdrawing from allegiance I. 116- - - writ of III. 152 IV. 58 - - - - - peerage I. 257 Watch I. 229, IV. 191, 275 Withernam III. 87, 101, 271 - - - patent II. 235 Water II. 9, 11 Witnesses III. 243 Writs, forms of III. 33–4, Water-ordeal IV. 221 - - - - - for prisoners IV. 231, 123–4, 180, IV. 275 Ways II. 22 284 Writing of a deed II. 203- - - and means, committee of - - - - - tampering with IV. 83 - - - - treason by IV. 53

I. 198 - - - - - their expenses III. 243, Writings, stealing of IV. 155- - - disturbance of III. 161 IV. 233 Written conveyances II. 203 Weights and measures I. 176, - - - - - to deeds II. 210 - - - - evidence III. 242–3

IV. 179, 273 - - - - - - wills II. 338 Wrongs I. 83- - - - - - - - - - - - false IV. 103 - - - - - trial by III. 222 - - - - private III. 1 Weregild IV. 124, 202, 267 - - - - - two, where necessary - - - - public IV. 1 Wells, property in II. 3 III. 244, IV. 230 West-Saxon-lage I. 49, IV. 266 Wittena-gemote I. 99, IV. 266 Year II. 95 Whales, property of I. 144 Women, appeals by IV. 273 - - - and day, in appeals of Wharfs I. 350 - - - - children, stealing or death IV. 204, 217 Whipping IV. 243 seduction of IV. 138 Year and day, in continual White rents II. 27 - - - - guilty of clergyable claim III. 118 Whole blood II. 153 felonies IV. 238 - - - - - - - - - copyhold Widow’s chamber II. 350 - - - - jury of III. 239, IV. 254 forfeiture II. 194 Wife I. 279 Woodmote, court of III. 48 - - - - - - - - - estrays I. 191- - - battery of III. 94 Wood-stealing IV. 154 - - - - - - - - - fines II. 240 Will, defect of IV. 13 Wool, &c, transporting IV. 101, - - - - - - - - - murder IV. 130- - - estates at II. 98 276 - - - - - - - - - in wrecks I. 188- - - of the lord II. 63, 99 Words, action for III. 83 Year, day, and waste II. 171, - - - vitious IV. 13 - - - - costs in actions for III. 263 IV. 248 Wills and testaments II. 6, 8 - - - - treasonable IV. 52 Yearbooks I. 54

253, 330, 337, IV. 273, 277 Worthiest of blood II. 143 Years, estate for II. 95 Winchester measure, I. 177 Wounding III. 82, IV. 143 Yeomen I. 261 Window tax I. 209 Wreck I. 186, II. 9, III. 71 York, custom of II. 349





