Prolonged Occupation and International Law





International Humanitarian


Law Series



Editors- in- Chief

Professor Timothy L.H. McCormack



Editorial Advisory Board

Professor Georges Abi- Saab – H.E. Judge George H. Aldrich

Madame Justice Louise Arbour – Professor Ove Bring

Professor John Dugard – Professor Dr. Horst Fischer

Dr. Hans- Peter Gasser – Professor Christopher Greenwood

Professor Ruth Lapidoth – Professor Gabrielle Krik McDonald

H.E. Judge Theodor Meron – Captain J. Ashley Roach

Professor Michael Schmitt



volume 66

The International Humanitarian Law Series is a series of monograhs and edited volumes which aims to promote scholarly analysis and discussion of both the theory and practice of the inter-national legal regulation of armed conflict.

The series explores substantive issues of International Humanitarian Law, including:

– Protection for victims of armed conflict and regulation of the means and method of warfare – Questions of application of the various legal regimes for the conduct of armed conflict – Issues relating to the implementation of International Humanitarian Law obligations – National and international approaches to the enforcement of the law and – The interactions between International Humanitarian Law and other related areas of inter-

national law such as Human Rights, Refugee Law, Arms Control and Disarmament Law, and

Intenational Criminal Law.



The titles published in this series are listed at brill.com/ ihul





Prolonged Occupation


and International Law

Israel and Palestine



Edited by

Nada Kiswanson and Susan Power



LEIDEN | BOSTON

Cover illustration: Israeli soldiers take cover behind shields, during the demonstration against Israeli settlements in the village of Kafr Qaddoum near the West Bank city of Nablus. Palestinian- Israeli conflict in Nablus, Palestine – 19 Aug 2022. Photo by Nasser Ishtayeh/ sopa Images/ Shutterstock (13134395j).

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Names: Kiswanson, Nada, editor. | Power, Susan editor.

Title: Prolonged occupation and international law : Israel and Palestine /

edited by Nada Kiswanson and Susan Power.

Description: Leiden ; Boston : Brill Nijhoff, [2023] | Series:

International humanitarian law series, 1389-6776 ; volume 66 | Includes bibliographical references and index.

Identifiers: LCCN 2022054281 (print) | LCCN 2022054282 (ebook) |

ISBN 9789004503922 (hardback) | ISBN 9789004503939 (ebook) Subjects: LCSH: Palestine–International status–Congresses. | Arab-Israeli

conflict–Law and legislation–Congresses. | Military

occupation–Congresses.

Classification: LCC KZ4282 .T47 2018 (print) | LCC KZ4282 (ebook) | DDC

341.4/2095694–dc23/eng/20230206

LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022054281

LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022054282



Typeface for the Latin, Greek, and Cyrillic scripts: “Brill”. See and download: brill.com/ brill- typeface.

issn 1389- 6776

isbn 978- 90- 04- 50392- 2 (hardback)

isbn 978- 90- 04- 50393- 9 (e- book)

Copyright 2023 by Nada Kiswanson and Susan Power. Published by Koninklijke Brill nv, Leiden, The Netherlands.

Koninklijke Brill nv incorporates the imprints Brill, Brill Nijhoff, Brill Hotei, Brill Schöningh, Brill Fink, Brill mentis, Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, Böhlau, V&R unipress and Wageningen Academic. Koninklijke Brill nv reserves the right to protect this publication against unauthorized use. Requests for re- use and/ or translations must be addressed to Koninklijke Brill nv via brill.com or copyright.com.

This book is printed on acid- free paper and produced in a sustainable manner.





This book is dedicated to


sito Fatme and sito Aziza, and all other grandparents

that fled Palestine, key in hands, never to return

It is also dedicated to Joe Power who energetically

supported the liberation of Palestine

And to Suha Jarrar, a powerful advocate for Palestinian

rights, whose legacy continues to inspire



∵





Contents




Foreword ix

Emma Playfair

Acknowledgements xii

Abbreviations xiv

Notes on Contributors xviii

Introduction 1

Nada Kiswanson



Part 1

Legal Frameworks and Characterisations

1 Israel’s Unlawful 1967 Invasion of Palestine 13

John Quigley

2 Out of Time: On the (Il)legality of Israel’s Prolonged Occupation of the

West Bank 31

Vito Todeschini

3 The Occupation of Palestine from a twail Lens 52

Ray Murphy, Anita Ferrara and Susan Power

4 Reducing the Friction: A Functional Analysis of the Transformed

Occupation of the Gaza Strip 69

Aeyal Gross

5 Apartheid and International Law in Palestine 104

John Reynolds

6 The Occupation– Colonialism Continuum: Impact on Transitional

Justice in Palestine/ Israel 133

Rimona Afana

7 Israel’s Military Justice System as an Annexationist Tool 159

Sahar Francis

8 Adaptation under Occupation: Climate Change Vulnerability 176

Suha Jarrar †

viii Contents





Part 2


Legal Responsibilities and Accountability

9 Israel’s Impunity from Peremptory Norms 199

John Dugard

10 Third State Responsibility versus Sanctions in Regulating Trade with

Illegal Settlements at the EU 223

Manuel Devers and Tom Moerenhout

11 Palestine, Israel, and the International Criminal Court 253

Nada Kiswanson

12 Private Sector Responsibility for the Treatment of Palestinian Prisoners

and Detainees in Light of the Law and Policy of the International

Criminal Court 289

Shane Darcy

13 Prosecuting Systematic Economic Exploitation of Occupied Territory as

Pillage 310

Susan Power

14 Criminal Jurisdiction under Occupation: The Oslo Accords and the

icc 330

Halla Shoaibi and Asem Khalil

15 Domination, Transformation, and Annexation via Utilities 348

Marya Farah and Maha Abdallah

16 Palestinian Refugees and International Law 371

Thomas Hammarberg

Bibliography 393

Index 398



Foreword



I am honoured to write the foreword for this book which aims to focus inter-national attention on the extraordinary length of the belligerent occupation of the Palestinian territory by Israel. Inherently only a temporary status, this occupation has now lasted more than half a century.

Over thirty years ago, in December 1987, Al- Haq organised its first interna-

tional conference on “International Law and the Administration of Occupied Territories”. Our aim was to seek international expertise on the question of how an occupier should administer occupied territory under a prolonged occupation, a question which had been largely unexplored since after World War ii. Working with Al- Haq at the time, I helped to organise that conference

and subsequently edited the collection of papers.1

Humanitarian law was a backwater at that time, so we were asking experts

to draw on precedents from decades earlier to consider how Israel should be administering the Palestinian territory it occupied. At that time the prolonged nature of the occupation, already in place for twenty years, preoccupied many of our contributors, but who then could have imagined that it would still be continuing for over 55 years, until today?

Yet soon after publication of that book, humanitarian law became all too

topical in a number of ways: the Gulf War, the occupation of Kuwait by Iraq, the establishment and developing jurisprudence of the UN International Criminal Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, the International Criminal Court, and the International Court of Justice’s advisory opinion of 2004 on the Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory.

Al- Haq’s book, published under my name in 1992, provided persuasive evi-

dence of the violations of international law in Israel’s administration of the territories it occupied. We had hoped that by making the international com-munity aware of the maladministration and exploitation by Israel of the ter-ritories it occupied and of its violation of international humanitarian and human rights law, we could contribute to the pressure on Israel to change. Regrettably this did not happen and the opportunities for such change now seem ever more remote. Rather the occupation deepened and as explored in the current volume, came closer in many ways to de facto annexation, with



1 Emma Playfair (ed), International law and the Administration of Occupied Territories

(oup 1992).

x Foreword

expansion of settlements, the building of the Wall, restrictions on movement, and seizure of Palestinian land and resources, as well as the continued system-atic repression of the Palestinian civilian population.

I was therefore glad to know that Al- Haq had again taken the initiative, in

partnership with the Palestinian Centre for Human Rights, Birzeit University’s Institute of Law, and the International Federation for Human Rights to bring together international legal and practitioner expertise in an international con-ference in 2018 on “The Threshold from Occupation to Annexation”. That con-ference and the passing of half a century of occupation gave momentum to the present volume, edited by Nada Kiswanson and Dr Susan Power focusing on the critical issue of prolonged occupation and international law.

I was privileged to work with Al- Haq in its early formative years and to

have known the Palestinian Centre for Human Rights since its establishment in Gaza. I observed both organisations over the years as they faced seemingly insurmountable challenges and admired their steadfastness in overcoming these and in sustaining the extraordinary quality of their work in document-ing, defending, and promoting human rights in Palestine. At the time of writ-ing, there is a concerted effort to stifle Palestinian human rights organisations and silence Palestinian civil society at large, including by criminalising, arrest-

ing, and threatening human rights defenders.2 The vibrant international law discourse and human rights movement is, however, resilient. Since the con-ference held by Al- Haq in 1987, not only has international humanitarian law developed rapidly, but documents have come into the public domain which have enabled researchers to review key aspects of the events surrounding the establishment of the State of Palestine and the occupation of Palestine. While many of these remain “classified”, enough has been made accessible for Palestinian, Israeli and international historians to add considerably to earlier understandings of what really happened in 1948 and 1967 to the Palestinian people. Some of these findings are drawn on by the distinguished contributors to the present volume, including some who also contributed to our conference in 1987.

Chapters in this book cover an array of topics and aspects of the prolonged

occupation and Israel’s control, ranging from colonialism and apartheid to the



2 See for example ‘UN Special Rapporteurs Condemn Israel’s Designation of Palestinian

Human Rights Defenders as Terrorist Organisations – Press Release’, UN News, 25 October

2021; ‘Israel Must Safeguard Human Rights Defenders in Occupied Palestinian Territory

and Within Its Borders – UN Expert’, UN News, 11 August 2021; unhrc, Report of the Special

Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights in the Palestinian Territories Occupied Since 1967,

Michael Lynk, a/ hrc/ 34/ 70, 13 April 2017, pages 8– 17.

Foreword xi

illegality of occupation. Nada Kiswanson, in her excellent introduction, sum-marises and groups the chapters. Importantly, many of the chapters in this book propose specific actions which can and should be taken by States, col-lectively and individually. Such actions include asking the United Nations to organise the necessary steps towards a fair solution for Palestinian refugees, including financial resources to cover compensation. They also include calls for the direct involvement of the international community in bringing an end to settlement activities in the West Bank and the lifting of the blockade of the Gaza Strip. In agreeing that Israel’s exercise of control over Palestinians is unac-ceptable, chapters examine Third States’ responsibilities under international law and underline their duties not to recognise as lawful a situation created by serious breaches arising under a peremptory norm of general international law, nor to render aid or assistance in maintaining that situation. Notably, the European Commission should be pressed to propose a law to stop trade with illegal settlements, but if the Commission fails to do so, then Member States should act unilaterally in compliance with its legal obligations. Considering the potential role of the International Criminal Court, contributors stress the importance of realistic expectations of what can be achieved through the icc while anticipating that it can expose some crimes committed by Israeli offi-cials and in turn bring much needed justice to some victims.

I applaud Al- Haq and their co- convenors of the conference and Nada

Kiswanson and Dr Susan Power for their efforts in bringing new analyses and, importantly, recommendations for urgent action to the international commu-nity. I sincerely hope that drawing on the recommendations put forward by the contributors to this book, action will be taken to bring justice to Palestinians and Israelis so badly affected by the long years of conflict.

Emma Playfair



Acknowledgements



This book began a fledgling idea, caught in a moment in The Hague in 2017, as the editors working together and grappling with the extent and implications of Israel’s de facto annexation of the occupied Palestinian territory, discussed the need to create space for advanced academic discourse and reflection on the broader subject of prolonged occupation. At the time, twenty- five years had followed since the publication of Emma Playfair’s seminal edited book International Law and the Administration of Occupied Territories. As the military administration hurtled past the half century mark, it was time to look deeper, past the administration of the territory and at the very nature of the occupa-tion itself, its prolonged and permanent character, and resulting implications.

The editors would like to extend their gratitude to all the contributors to

this book for their thought- provoking, stimulating chapters, written during an exceptional time- period.

The editors are also grateful to Al- Haq, Birzeit University – Institute of Law,

the Palestinian Centre for Human Rights, and the International Federation for Human Rights for organising the international conference on “The Threshold from Occupation to Annexation”, which took place on 3– 4 October 2018 in Palestine, that encouraged us to pursue our longer- term aspiration to develop this book.

In particular, the editors wish to thank Rania Muhareb for her drive and

commitment in spearheading the organisation of the joint academic confer-ence hosted in Birzeit and Professors Jamil Salem and Mustafa Mari for con-vening and leading the initial selection committee and setting the seeds for the book which followed. Also, many thanks to the team at Al- Haq, who worked tirelessly behind the scenes including Lillian Zanairi, Laura Thomas, Samer Khalifah, and Tahseen Ellayyan.

The editors are also grateful to Emma Playfair, Shawan Jabarin, John Dugard,

and John Quigley for their invaluable and kind support. Emma’s book served as a model of excellence throughout the process.

The editors are especially indebted to the wonderful team at brill, who

have provided their guidance and expertise, in particular Lindy Melman and Thalien Colenbrander, and the Editors of the International Humanitarian Law Series.

Susan wishes to thank the inspirational and dynamic Legal Research and

Advocacy Team at Al- Haq, Seamus Cox, Teresa Power, and family for their con-tinuous encouragement.

Acknowledgements xiii

Last, but certainly not least, Nada wishes to thank her mother, husband, and

children, without whom this book would not have been possible.

Nada Kiswanson

Dr Susan Power



Abbreviations



acri Association for Civil Rights in Israel Additional Protocol i Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12

August 1949 and Relating to the Protection of Victims of International Armed Conflicts (8 June 1977)

Additional Protocol ii Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12

August 1949 and Relating to the Protection of Victims of Non- International Armed Conflicts (8 June 1977)

bds Boycott, Divestment, and Sanctions cat Convention against Torture ccp Common Commercial Policy cerd United Nations Committee on the Elimination of Racial

Discrimination

cescr United Nations Committee on Economic, Social and

Cultural Rights

cfsp Common Security Foreign Policy cia Central Intelligence Agency crc Convention on the Rights of the Child cup Cambridge University Press ec European Commission eci European Citizens’ Initiative ecj European Court of Justice ECtHR European Court of Human Rights ejil European Journal of International Law Elements of Crimes International Criminal Court, Elements of Crimes (2011)

escwa United Nations Economic and Social Commission for

Western Asia

EU European Union fidh International Federation for Human Rights Fourth Geneva Convention Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian

Persons in Time of War (12 August 1949)

frus Foreign Relations of the United States gdp Gross domestic product Geneva Conventions Geneva Convention for the Amelioration of the

Condition of the Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field (12 August 1949); Geneva Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition of Wounded, Sick and Abbreviations xv

Shipwrecked Members of Armed Forces at Sea (12 August 1949); Geneva Convention Relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War (12 August 1949); Geneva Convention Relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War (12 August 1949).

Guiding Principles United Nations Guiding Principles on Business and

Human Rights

Hague Regulations The Hague Convention (iv) Respecting the Laws and

Customs of War on Land and its annex: Regulations con-cerning Laws and Customs of War on Land (1907)

hcj Israeli High Court of Justice hl Deb United Kingdom, House of Lords, Debates icc International Criminal Court iccpr International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights icerd International Convention for the Elimination of All

Forms of Racial Discrimination

icescr International Covenant on Economic, Social and

Cultural Rights

icj International Court of Justice icrc International Committee of the Red Cross icty un International Criminal Tribunal for the former

Yugoslavia

idf Israel Defence Forces iec Israel Electric Corporation ihl International Humanitarian Law ilc International Law Commission jec Jerusalem Electric Company jsc Judicial Selection Committee jwc Joint Water Committee law law - The Palestinian Society for the Protection of

Human Rights and the Environment

mag Military Advocate General New York Declaration New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrant (16

November 2016)

ngo Non- governmental Organisation ocha United Nations Office for the Coordination of

Humanitarian Affairs

oecd Organisation for Economic Co- operation and

Development xvi Abbreviations

ohchr United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for

Human Rights

opt Occupied Palestinian Territory (1967) oup Oxford University Press pa Palestinian Authority pcati Public Committee Against Torture in Israel plc Palestinian Legislative Council plo Palestine Liberation Organization Rome Statute Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (17

July 1998)

soas School of Oriental and African Studies scsl Special Court for Sierra Leone sup Stanford University Press teu Treaty of the European Union tfeu Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union Third Geneva Convention Geneva Convention Relative to the Treatment of

Prisoners of War (12 August 1949)

twail Third World Approaches to International Law uar United Arab Republic (Syria and Egypt political alliance)

UK United Kingdom ukhl United Kingdom House of Lords UN United Nations UN Charter Charter of the United Nations (24 October 1945) unctad United Nations Conference on Trade and Development

unesco United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural

Organization

unga United Nations General Assembly unhcr United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees unhrc United Nations Human Rights Council unicef United Nations Children’s Fund UN Independent United Nations Independent Commission of Inquiry on

Commission of Inquiry the 2014 Gaza Conflict on the 2014 Gaza Conflict

UN Independent United Nations Independent International Fact- Finding

International Fact- Mission to Investigate the Implication of the Israeli

Finding Mission on the Settlements on the Civil, Political, Economic, Social and

Implications of Israeli Cultural Rights of the Palestinian People throughout the

Settlements Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem

Abbreviations xvii

unsc United Nations Security Council unrwa United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine

Refugees in the Near East

unts United Nations Treaty Series US United States of America



Notes on Contributors



Maha Abdallah

is a legal researcher and human rights advocate. She holds an ll.m. in interna-tional human rights law from the Irish Centre for Human Rights.

Rimona Afana

is Assistant Professor of Peace Studies at Kennesaw State University and Visiting Scholar at the Emory University School of Law, Vulnerability Initiative.

Shane Darcy

is Professor and Deputy Director, Irish Centre for Human Rights, School of Law, National University of Ireland Galway.

Manuel Devers

is a lawyer specialised in international law and EU law. He holds a Master of Laws in EU law and international law from the Riga Graduate School of Law and a Master of Laws in international law from University Paris i Panthéon- Sorbonne.

John Dugard

is Professor of Law and ad hoc Judge at the International Court of Justice. He served as the Special Rapporteur on the Human Rights Situation in the Occupied Palestinian Territory between 2001 and 2008.

Marya Farah

is a lawyer focusing on international human rights law and advocacy. She holds a Juris Doctor, Master of Public Policy, and Bachelor of Arts in Political Science and Organisational Studies.

Anita Ferrara

is a postdoctoral lecturer at the Irish Centre for Human Rights, National University of Ireland, Galway.

Sahar Francis

is General Director of Ramallah- based Addameer Prisoner Support and Human Rights Association, a Palestinian NGO providing legal and advocacy support to Notes on Contributors xix

Palestinian political prisoners in Israeli and Palestinian prisons. An attorney by training, she joined the Association in 1998, first as a human rights lawyer, then as Head of the Legal Unit.

Aeyal Gross

is Professor of International and Constitutional Law at the Tel- Aviv University. He is also a Visiting Professor of Law at soas, University of London.

Thomas Hammarberg

is a Swedish diplomat and human rights expert. He has been a member of the Swedish Parliament. He represented Sweden in the Refugee Working Group established through the Madrid Peace Process in 1991. He was also Sweden’s Ambassador on Humanitarian Issues and Secretary- General of the Olof Palme International Center. He previously served as Secretary- General of Amnesty International and Secretary- General of Save the Children (Sweden). He was Council of Europe Commissioner for Human Rights from 2006 to 2012.

Suha Jarrar

was a Senior Legal Researcher with Al- Haq. She specialised in environmental law under occupation.

Asem Khalil

is Dean of the Faculty of Graduate Studies and Professor at the Birzeit University. He obtained a PhD from the University of Fribourg.

Nada Kiswanson

is Legal Counsel practicing international criminal and human rights law. She has an ll.b and ll.m from Uppsala University and an ll.m from Leiden University. She has appeared before the International Criminal Court on behalf of hundreds of individual Palestinian victims. She has also worked with and represented Palestinian human rights organisations, primarily Al- Haq, before inter- governmental organisations and judicial institutions.

Tom Moerenhout

is a legal scholar specialised in international economic and humanitarian law. He has attained two Master degrees and a PhD in international relations and international law at the Graduate Institute of International and Development Studies in Geneva.

newgenprepdf



xx Notes on Contributors

Ray Murphy

is Professor at the Irish Centre for Human Rights, National University of Ireland Galway.

Emma Playfair

is a British lawyer, former Al- Haq volunteer and Representative of the Ford Foundation’s Middle East and North Africa Office.

Susan Power

is Head of Legal Research and Advocacy at Al- Haq, a Palestinian NGO, based in Ramallah, Palestine. She has a PhD from Trinity College, Dublin and she lectured for seven years at Griffith College Cork and Dublin.

John Quigley

is Professor Emeritus at the Moritz College of Law at the Ohio State University.

John Reynolds

is Associate Professor at the School of Law and Criminology, Maynooth University, National University of Ireland.

Halla Shoaibi

is Assistant Professor at Birzeit University and Master Program Director of the Birzeit Master Program in Israeli Studies. She obtained a PhD from the American University.

Vito Todeschini

is a legal expert in the areas of human rights, international humanitarian law and accountability, with a particular focus on Palestine/Israel and the wider MENA region. He has a PhD from Aarhus University.



Introduction

Nada Kiswanson



“[N] o matter how long the road has been, ‘never- ending’ cannot be an accept-able description for any situation in which human rights are violated and abused”, said United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Michelle Bachelet, in her address to the UN Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable

Rights of the Palestinian People in 2021.1 Although the situation in Palestine is untenable, “never- ending” accurately describes the current state of affairs. There is today no prospect of Israel either retreating from Palestine or allowing Palestinians to return to their homes. In a deepening environment of political inertia, Israel is instead tightening its grip over Palestine.

Palestine and Israel did not arrive at this point coincidentally. Historical

accounts and analyses of the events that resulted in the establishment of the State of Israel and the 1967 invasion and occupation of Palestinian territory support the reading that Israel intends to take control over at least the entirety

of mandate Palestine.2 Moreover, Israel’s policies and practices in the occupied Palestinian territory, its conduct towards Palestinians, and statements issued by its elected officials disclose a design to subjugate or expel Palestinians for

the benefit of a Jewish homeland in Palestine.3 For example, in 2018, the Israeli Parliament enacted the Jewish Nation- State Basic Law declaring the “Land of Israel” the “historic national home of the Jewish people” and the “State of

Israel” the “national state of the Jewish people”.4 The quasi- constitutional law proclaims that self- determination in the State of Israel is “unique to the Jewish people” and enshrines the “development of Jewish settlement as a national



1 ‘Bachelet Describes “Disastrous” Human Rights Situation Across Occupied Palestinian

Territory’, UN News, 7 December 2021.

2 See for example Chapters 1, Quigley, 5, Reynolds, and 16, Hammarberg.

3 unhrc, Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights in the Palestinian

Territories Occupied Since 1967, a/ hrc/ 49/ 87, 21 March 2022, paras 12– 22.

4 Israel, Basic Law: Israel – The Nation State of the Jewish People, 25 July 2018. See for translation

and commentary Adalah, Israel’s Jewish Nation- State Law, 20 December 2020. On 8 July 2021,

Israel’s Supreme Court rejected fifteen petitions about the validity of the law as part of the future

constitution due to its content. The Supreme Court opined that the content of the law does not

detract from the value and principle of equality and the “difficulties” pointed to by the petition-

ers could be addressed by way of interpretation. According to its interpretation, the provision

on self- determination being unique to the Jewish people does not deny self- determination

by other groups at the “sub- national” level. hcj 5555/ 18, Hassoun v The Knesset (8 July 2021).



© Nada Kiswanson, 2023 | DOI:10.1163/9789004503

2 Kiswanson

value”.5 It also commits the State to “act to encourage [Jewish settlement] and

to promote and to consolidate its establishment”.6 According to astute inter-pretations of these provisions, the law’s scope transcends the 1967 borders and subordinates both Palestinian citizens of Israel, occupied Palestinians,

and Palestinian refugees, to Jewish supremacy.7 Another indication of Israel’s intentions towards the opt is the Parliamentary Subcommittee for Judea and

Samaria8 proposal of November 2020 to renew the settlement of titles in the

West Bank.9 The UN Secretary- General described the proposed renewal as “an irreversible act of sovereignty by a permanent regime, and so subverts the

principle that occupation is inherently temporary”.10

The international community has implicitly and explicitly acknowledged

Israel’s intention to exercise perpetual control over Palestine. As early as 1979, the UN Security Council called on Israel to “desist from taking any action which would result in changing the legal status and geographical nature and materi-ally affecting the demographic composition of the Arab territories occupied

since 1967, including Jerusalem”.11 In 1980, the UN Security Council deplored the “persistence of Israel in changing the physical character, demographic

composition, institutional structure and status of the Holy City of Jerusalem”.12 And in 2016, the UN Security Council condemned “all measures aimed at alter-ing the demographic composition, character and status of the Palestinian Territory occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem, including, inter alia,



5 Israel, Basic Law: Israel – The Nation State of the Jewish People, 25 July 2018, Articles

1(c) and 7.

6 Ibid., Article 7.

7 Adalah, Written Statement Submitted by adalah – Legal Center for Arab Minority Rights

in Israel, A Non- Governmental Organization in Special Consultative Status, 17 March 2021.

Adalah, Adalah’s Position Paper: Proposed Basic Law: Israel – The Nation State of the Jewish

People, Update 16 July 2018, 18 July 2018. See also Al- Haq, Factsheet: Israel’s “Jewish Nation-

State Law” and the Occupied Palestinian Territory, 23 January 2019.

8 Israel refers to the West Bank as Judea and Samaria.

9 Yesh Din, Renewing Settlement of Title in Area C in the West Bank; A Breach of International

Law and Violation of Palestinian’s Rights, April 2021.

10 UN Secretary- General, Israeli Settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, Including

East Jerusalem, and the Occupied Golan, Report of the Secretary- General, a/ 76336, 23

September 2021, para 13.

11 unsc Resolution 446 (22 March 1979).

12 unsc Resolution 476 (30 June 1980). Note the International Court of Justice’s finding that

“the route chosen for the wall gives expression in loco to the illegal measures taken by

Israel with regard to Jerusalem and the settlements, as deplored by the Security Council”

and “risk further alterations to the demographic composition of the territory”. icj, Legal

Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory (Advisory

Opinion) icj Reports 136 (2004), para 122.

Introduction 3

the construction and expansion of settlements, transfer of Israeli settlers, con-fiscation of land, demolition of homes and displacement of Palestinian civil-

ians, in violation of international humanitarian law and relevant resolutions”.13

US Secretary of State, John Kerry, spoke to the same effect in his speech on

the US vote on the 2016 resolution. In what he described as an “honest, clear- eyed conversation about the uncomfortable truths and difficult choices”, he warned that “[t] he status quo is leaning towards one state and perpetual occu-

pation” and that “Israel can be either Jewish or Democratic, it cannot be both”.14

What Kerry brushed over with his “uncomfortable truths” remark are the

magnitude and impact of Israel’s control over Palestine and Palestinians. Since the beginning of the occupation 55 years ago and the Nakba 74 years ago, gen-erations of Palestinians are born into, live, and die under Israeli racialised sub-jugation. Israel dictates who Palestinians in the opt may reside with and visit, the education and medical treatment they can access, whether their property rights will be respected and restored, the roads they are permitted to travel on, and who passes judgement on them. Israel’s hold over the Palestinian people and territory is invasive and coercive, and it affects Palestinians everywhere. Israeli laws and policies exclude Palestinian refugees from the scope of persons allowed to settle in what is now the State of Israel and deny them entry to and

residency in the opt.15 These measures of control are products of a system engineered to fracture Palestinians into demographically controllable sub- groups, with each group allowed to exist only within assigned disconnected

and delineated pockets in Palestine, or outside.16 The effects hereof are pro-found: not only does Israel risk fraying the Palestinian social and national fab-ric, but it has turned “home”– a basic human need and an intimately personal, ancestral, and innate experience and place of belonging – into the central focus of Palestinian yearning and struggle.

Israel’s occupation constitutes a deprivation of Palestinian choice and lib-

erty at a time when humanity insists on individual and collective exercise of

the right to self- determination – the bedrock of human rights.17 Despite this



13 unsc Resolution 2334 (23 December 2016).

14 Sarah Begley, ‘Read John Kerry’s Full Speech on Israeli Settlements and a Two- State

Solution’, Time, 28 December 2016.

15 See Chapter 5, Reynolds.

16 See for example Human Rights Watch, A Threshold Crossed: Israeli Authorities and the

Crimes of Apartheid and Persecution, 2021, pages 170– 201.

17 Attesting to this, the right to self- determination is enshrined in Articles 1 of the UN

Charter as well as the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the

International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. See also UN Human

Rights Committee, General Comment 12: The Right to Self- determination of Peoples (Article 4 Kiswanson

insistence and the UN General Assembly affirmation in 1960 “that all peoples have an inalienable right to complete freedom, the exercise of their sover-

eignty and the integrity of their national territory”,18 Israel continues to sup-press Palestinian self- determination without a global shrug of shoulders.

Israel’s criminalisation of the symbolic representation of Palestine strikes at

the core of Palestinian self- determination. The public display of the Palestinian flag and dissemination of material of “political significance” without permis-sion from the Israeli military commander is prohibited by Israeli military order

and has resulted in the mass- incarceration and killing of Palestinians.19 On 13 May 2022, Israeli militarised police attacked the expression of Palestinian self- determination during the funeral procession of Shireen Abu Aqleh when they ripped Palestinian flags from mourners and assaulted Palestinians singing the national anthem and chanting slogans. They severely beat the pallbearers,

causing many of them to lose hold of the casket.20 Shireen Abu Aqleh, an iconic

Al- Jazeera journalist, was shot and killed by Israeli forces.21 Her killing ignited Palestinians who came together in solidarity in one of the largest Palestinian funeral processions in East Jerusalem. This incident is reminiscent of the many Palestinians killed and injured by Israeli soldiers while wrapped in or waving

the Palestinian flag during the Great March of Return in the Gaza Strip.22

Confronted with Israel’s unrelenting hold over the occupied Palestinian

territory, the editors invited legal practitioners and academics to reflect on the ways in which Israel’s control is conceptualised, framed, and manifested. The contributors were encouraged to consider the legal consequences that flow thereof and to offer alternative perspectives and characterisations of



1), 13 March 1984, para 1. The Human Rights Committee has established that the “realiza-

tion [of the right to self- determination] is an essential condition for the effective guaran-

tee and observance of individual human rights and for the promotion and strengthening

of those rights”.

18 UN Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,

adopted by unga Resolution 1514 (14 December 1960).

19 See Israeli Military Order No 101, Regarding Prohibition of Incitement and Hostile

Propaganda Actions (1967). See also Amnesty International, 50 Years of Israeli

Occupation: Four Outrageous Facts about Military Order 101, 25 August 2017.

20 See for example Ramon Antonio Vargas, ‘US Condemns Israel’s Attack on Shireen Abu

Aqleh’s Funeral’, The Guardian, 14 May 2022; Farah Najjar, ‘The Palestinian Flag: A Target

for “Erasure” by Israeli Forces’, Aljazeera, 13 May 2022.

21 ohchr, ‘Abu Akleh Shooting: Fatal Shot Came from Israeli Forces, says ohchr’, UN News,

24 June 2022.

22 See unhcr, Report of the Detailed Findings of the Independent International Commission

of Inquiry on the Protests in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, a/ hrc/ 40/ crp.2, 18

March 2019.

Introduction 5

Israel’s control and conduct.23 Contributors to this book agree that rights and responsibilities are not diminished by the passing of time or by virtue of the nationality, race, or religion of the wrongful State or individual perpetrator. If anything, the duration of the occupation must give pause to the international community’s perceptions and portrayals of Israel’s actions and cause them to re- evaluate what they have acquiesced to. It should also trigger a genuine conversation about the impact of States’ dealings with Israel on the integrity, efficacy, and implementation of international law.

This book confirms that an occupation is a temporary situation, that the

occupied population retains sovereignty while under the administration of the Occupying Power, and that their dignity and human rights shall be respected. Under no circumstance does international law tolerate the colonisation of the occupied territory, hence the prohibition against the transfer of the nation-als of the Occupying Power into occupied territory. Indefinite occupation and colonialism collide with the foundational requirement under international humanitarian law that the occupied territory be returned to the occupied population.

International law has flourished since the beginning of Israel’s occupation

in 1967: we have since seen the adoption of the major international human rights treaties and the Additional Protocols to the four Geneva Conventions, the establishment of international and special courts and tribunals, and the exemplary use of multilateral cooperation in situations of conflict and colo-

nialism around the world.24 Regrettably, the abundance of legal norms, princi-ples, structures, and mechanisms has not affected the degree of Israel’s control, let alone ensured that it is firmly placed in the hands of the occupied, indig-enous, Palestinian population. Israel’s position and duties vis- à- vis Palestine and Palestinians and the framing of its control are put under the magnifying glass in the first part of this book. Inevitable and indispensable conversations around the value and limits of international law, especially the law of occupa-tion, are either addressed in or underpin chapters in this book.

John Quigley begins the discussion in Part 1. He revisits in Chapter 1 the

historical events that resulted in the occupation of the Palestinian terri-tory and posits that the occupation is illegal since its inception. His chapter uncovers Israel’s targeted strategy to take control over Palestine before the 1967 war erupted and Israel’s orchestrated use of pre- emptive self- defence.



23 The editors encouraged a broad range of views and sought to facilitate active discussion.

The views adopted and argued in the chapters are those of the authors of the chapters

alone. They are not to be attributed to the editors, their employers, or clients.

24 See Chapter 9, Dugard.

6 Kiswanson

Vito Todeschini, however, argues in Chapter 2 that the occupation becomes illegal with the passing of time. He differentiates between the jus ad bellum and jus in bello frameworks and concludes that “a belligerent occupation that lasts for a period of time exceeding the necessities of self- defence becomes unlawful because it breaches the principles of necessity and proportionality and, by implication, the prohibition on the use of force enshrined in the UN Charter and customary international law”.





Chapter 3, written by Ray Murphy, Anita Ferrara, and Susan Power, ques-


tions the continued relevance of the international law of occupation to the situation in the opt and applies the Third World Approaches to International Law lens. “By examining how the interplay of international law and practice are manipulated to serve neo- colonial interests in Palestine”, the authors sug-gest that international law was not intended to apply to an occupation that has lasted for more than half a century.

Aeyal Gross contributes Chapter 4 to the book. It focuses on Israel’s con-

trol over the Gaza Strip and describes how Israel’s so- called disengagement from the area is an attempt by Israel to evade its legal responsibilities. Aeyal Gross proposes a functional approach to occupation, one that recognises its transformed form and emphasises the need to protect a people under foreign control and values the raison d’être of international humanitarian law.





Chapter 5 by John Reynolds looks beyond the international humanitarian


law of occupation. His chapter views Israel’s “apartheid system as a core feature of settler- colonial rule in Palestine since the Nakba and – more recently – as an increasingly central focus of international legal analysis of the Palestinian reality”. John Reynolds underscores Palestinians’ framing of their experience as that of apartheid and ties together the frameworks of colonialism and

apartheid. Chapter 6 also discusses the colonialism framework. Rimona Afana explains in that chapter, that Israel’s “occupation functions as a tool of and smokescreen for colonialism”. She argues that in treating Israel’s control as colonialism, new ways of viewing the transitional justice and conflict resolu-tion will emerge.

Chapters 7 and 8 give attention to particularly pervasive aspects of Israel’s

control that have far- reaching consequences for all Palestinians living in the

opt. Sahar Francis elaborates in Chapter 7 on Israel’s use of military orders and military courts to mass- incarcerate, punish, and silence Palestinians as a means to cement its control over the occupied territory. She views the Israeli judicial military system as an annexationist tool. Shane Darcy takes a closer look at the prison system from the standpoint of international criminal law and the involvement of private companies in Part 2.

Introduction 7

The last chapter of Part 1 is a poignant contribution. It is written in memory

of Suha Jarrar, a friend and colleague who passed away too soon, at the young age of 30. Suha Jarrar was an avid member of the Palestinian human rights community and pioneer in the field of environmental law under occupation.





Chapter 8 is based on her writings for Al- Haq. Taking Masafer Yatta as a pri-mary case study, her chapter evaluates Palestinians’ ability to adapt to environ-mental changes and illustrates the adverse impacts of Israel’s occupation on Palestinian environment and natural resources.


Those involved in what is casually referred to as the “Palestinian/ Israeli con-

flict” are military and civilian persons, States, corporations, and organisations. They breathe air into Israel’s control and reinvigorate its efforts to colonise Palestine. Irrespective of how Israel’s control is understood, these actors have legal responsibilities. Part 2 of this book assesses the legal responsibilities and involvement of individuals, corporations, and Third States.

John Dugard contributes the first chapter of Part 2. Focusing on peremptory

norms of international law and States’ responsibilities, Chapter 9 compares the international community’s responses to apartheid South Africa and Palestine. John Dugard asks imperative questions around States’ selective approaches to breaches of peremptory norms and highlights the powers that States can harness to end unlawful behaviour. He demonstrates how States, unilaterally and collectively, have failed to challenge Israel and to hold it accountable for its violation of a host of peremptory norms. He concludes that this failure has “weakened respect for human rights and humanitarian law”, as well as “brought international law into disrepute and given rise to cynicism about the respect States have for international law”.





Chapter 10 by Manuel Devers and Tom Moerenhout addresses Third States’


responsibilities in the European Union setting. They provide that measures aimed at ending trade with illegal settlements, like those in the opt and Western Sahara, do not constitute sanctions. Their chapter further under-scores that non- recognition and non- assistance are trade measures under EU law and makes a compelling case for why the EU must act where peremptory norms are breached, or else its Member States will violate their international law obligations.

States are not the only actors relevant to Israel’s occupation. Policies and

plans adopted by Israeli governments are conceived and executed by indi-

viduals. Chapters 11 through 14, examine different dimensions of individual criminal responsibility and the International Criminal Court. With the icc

complementarity framework as its point of departure, Chapter 11 explains why the court presents an unparalleled opportunity to secure victims’ rights to jus-tice, truth, and reparation. I analyse in that chapter the potential for justice 8 Kiswanson

through the Israeli military justice system and Supreme Court and aver that Israel is neither willing nor able to hold its own citizens criminally responsible for their role in the commission of war crimes and crimes against humanity in the territory of the State of Palestine.

With the involvement of corporations in the mistreatment of Palestinian

detainees and prisoners in mind, Chapter 12 by Shane Darcy explores the individual criminal legal responsibility of private sector individuals and enter-prises. Shane Darcy draws attention to various modes of liability and entry-

points for prosecutions considering icc law and policies. Chapter 13 by Susan Power views the systematic economic exploitation of the Palestinian territory within the meaning of the war crime of pillaging. She contemplates on the prosecution of pillage at international trials related to World War ii and scruti-nises the potential for modern- day prosecutions under the Rome Statute.





Chapter 14 by Halla Shoaibi and Asem Khalil relates to the issue of juris-


diction and sovereignty at the icc. It provides that the occupation does not restrict the sovereignty of an occupied State, and that it has the authority to allow the icc to exercise criminal jurisdiction over those committing Rome Statute crimes over its territory. Relatedly, their chapter argues that the Oslo Accords provisions do not bar the icc from exercising jurisdiction over the State of Palestine because these provisions conflict with the Palestinian right to self- determination and are inconsistent with Palestine’s duties under the Geneva Conventions.

There is a growing world- wide movement to hold businesses that fuel armed

conflicts for their own profit to account for their wrongdoing.25 In 2020, the United Nations Office of the High Commissioner issued a report on business enterprises involved in activities related to Israeli settlements in the opt. That report lists 112 business entities domiciled in Israel and in other States that are

engaged in settlement activities.26 Marya Farah and Maha Abdallah’s chapter on Israel’s annexation of the occupied Palestinian territory through utilities

addresses corporate responsibility. They posit in Chapter 15 that businesses’ distribution of and control over water resources, telecommunications, and electricity networks at the behest of Israel has “facilitated the physical, eco-nomic, and demographic transformation of the opt in a manner that wholly defies international law”.

25 See for example unhrc Resolution 26/ 9 (26 June 2014).

26 ohchr, Database of All Business Enterprises Involved in Activities Detailed in Paragraph

96 of the Independent Fact- Finding Mission to Investigate Implications of the Israeli

Settlements on the Civil, Political, Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights of the Palestinian

People Throughout the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, a/ hrc/ 43/

71, 12 February 2020.

Introduction 9

The last chapter of the book closes the circle. Chapter 16 by Thomas

Hammarberg recalls Jewish settlers’ ethnic cleansing of mandate Palestine

for the purpose of establishing a Jewish State. Chapter 16 further expounds on the current situation of Palestinian refugees and substantiates their continued right to return. His chapter also discusses the roles and responsibilities of the UN, in particular the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees.

The last chapter reminds us that we must unfold the past if we are to under-

stand the root- causes that set Israel on its current trajectory of apartheid, colonialism, and annexation and resolve the intergenerational trauma and injustice caused.





Part 1


Legal Frameworks and Characterisations



∵





chapter 1


Israel’s Unlawful 1967 Invasion of Palestine

John Quigley



The 1967 occupation of Palestine territory by Israel has evoked a stream of con-demnation at the United Nations. The UN General Assembly and UN Security Council have castigated Israel for annexing the eastern part of Jerusalem and

for inserting its own citizens into residential settlements,1 for devastating the

Arab economy,2 and, most to the point, for continuing the occupation.3 At the same time, the UN has given only scant attention to how the occupation began and whether it began in a manner that would make Israel’s even temporary control lawful. The UN has never examined the initiation of the war that led to the occupation. An effort was made to do so in the days immediately following the end of hostilities, but that effort was thwarted by the United States, which

argued that the issue should not be addressed.4 The UN undertook no inquiry into the facts, even though they were hotly contested, and even though a deter-mination that Israel acted unlawfully would trigger an obligation on the part of the UN Security Council to act to reverse its consequences. This dereliction on the part of the UN was not inevitable. When Israel invaded and occupied Arab territory in 1956, the UN demanded the immediate removal of the invading

force.5 As we shall see in this chapter, Israel complied.

This chapter will examine the events of the 1967 war that resulted in Israel’s

occupation of Palestine territory – the Gaza Strip and the West Bank, including East Jerusalem – and the subsequent responses of the international commu-nity. This chapter will also analyse Israel’s use of force in light of applicable jus ad bellum norms, to assess whether Israel’s occupation of Palestine territory was initially lawful.



1 unsc Resolution 465 (1 March 1980); unsc Resolution 446 (22 March 1979); unsc Resolution

2334 (23 December 2016); unga Resolution 76/ 12 (1 December 2021).

2 unga Resolution 70/ 225 (22 December 2015).

3 unga Resolution 75/ 22 (2 December 2020).

4 unsc Official Records (14 June 1967) UN Doc. s/ pv.1360, page 20.

5 The resolution called for prompt withdrawal to 1949 armistice lines. unga Resolution

997(es- i) (2 November 1956).



© John Quigley, 2023 | DOI:10.1163/9789004503939

14 Quigley

1 Inaction at the UN Security Council

The UN Charter requires the organisation to deal with aggression when aggres-

sion occurs.6 A basic reason for the existence of the UN coming out of World War ii was to stop acts of aggression. Yet in 1967, when Israeli military forces invaded and occupied Egypt’s Sinai Peninsula and two parts of Palestine (the Gaza Strip and the West Bank of the Jordan River, including East Jerusalem), the UN Security Council confined itself to calling for a ceasefire. Israel was the party on the offensive and it defied these resolutions. Therefore, on 8 June 1967, the Soviet Union tabled a resolution to demand a withdrawal to pre- war lines and to point a finger at Israel for aggression (“Soviet draft”). The Soviet draft resolution minced no words. It read:

The Security Council,

Noting that Israel has disregarded the Security Council decisions calling

for the cessation of military activities (s/ res/ 233 of 6 June 1967 and s/

res/ 234 of 7 June 1967),

Considering that Israel not only has not halted military activities but has

made use of the time elapsed since the adoption of the aforementioned

Council resolutions in order to seize additional territory of the United

Arab Republic and Jordan,

Noting that even now Israel is continuing military activities instead of

halting its aggression, thus defying the United Nations and all peace-

loving States,

1. Vigorously condemns Israel’s aggressive activities and its violations

of the aforementioned Security Council resolutions, of the United Nations Charter and of United Nations principles;

2. Demands that Israel should immediately halt its military activities

against neighbouring Arab States and should remove all its troops from the territory of those States and withdraw them behind the armistice lines and respect the status of the demilitarized zones, as

prescribed in the General Armistice Agreements.7



6 UN Charter, Article 39.

7 unsc Official Records (8 June 1967) UN Doc. s/ pv.1351, page 5.

Israel’s Unlawful 1967 Invasion of Palestine 15

This last clause was a reference to the armistice agreements that had ended hostilities in 1949. The draft was aimed in the first instance at Israel’s incur-sion into Egypt, which had merged with Syria in 1958 to form what was called

the United Arab Republic.8 When Israeli forces moved southward, they took the Gaza Strip along with Egypt’s Sinai Peninsula. The reference to Jordan in the draft resolution was to the fact that by 8 June 1967, the date of the draft resolution, Israeli forces were in the process of occupying the West Bank of the Jordan River. As the draft resolution was being debated, the US announced that it would abstain. It would take no stand on the issue on the rationale that it was more productive to work towards an overall reconciliation between Israel and

the neighbouring Arab States.9

The Soviet draft was put to a vote on 14 June 1967, separately on each of

the two paragraphs. On the paragraph condemning Israel for aggression, no State voted in the negative, but only Bulgaria, India, Mali, and the Soviet Union voted in favour. The other eleven States abstained. Under the UN Charter, nine affirmative votes out of the UN Security Council membership of fifteen were needed for a resolution to pass, so even though more States voted in favour than against, the first paragraph did not pass. The second paragraph suffered the same fate. Ethiopia and Nigeria joined Bulgaria, India, Mali, and the Soviet

Union in voting in favour, but the other nine States abstained.10 This was a remarkable outcome. No State voted against the Soviet draft, which meant that no State took the position that Israel was not the aggressor.

The UN Security Council’s failure to take a more definitive stance was

strange, not only because one State was occupying the territory of others, but because armistice agreements were in force that required all the States involved to stay within the territory they held when fighting ended in 1949. It was undisputed that Israeli troops were going past the armistice lines and were holding territory on the other side. The UN Charter required the UN Security Council to counter aggression and resolve breaches of the peace. Even if the members were not prepared to state a position on responsibility for starting the hostilities, a demand to withdraw to previously held positions would have been an obvious, if modest, approach.



8 Egypt from 1948 considered itself a belligerent occupant of the Gaza Strip. The merger of

Egypt with Syria did not affect the status of the Gaza Strip.

9 unsc Official Records (13 June 1967) UN Doc. s/ pv.1358, pages 9– 12.

10 unsc Official Records (14 June 1967) UN Doc. s/ pv.1360, pages 18– 19.

16 Quigley

2 No Support for Israel’s Justificatory Claims

A number of the States that abstained from voting on the Soviet draft gave explanations. Ethiopia said it agreed with both paragraphs of the Soviet draft but, like the United States, wanted language that would promote Middle East

peace more broadly.11 Hence, Ethiopia thought that Israel was the aggressor and that it should withdraw but it wanted the UN Security Council to do more than what was called for in the Soviet draft. Several UN Security Council mem-bers indicated that they thought the hostilities needed to be dealt with in the context of the Cold War. They did not want a split in the UN Security Council between the Soviet Union, which was in general hostile to Israel, and the US,

which was broadly protective of Israel.12 Japan said that the Soviet approach

of seeking a condemnation of Israel was divisive.13 Britain said that the UN

Security Council should not “intensify animosities” by condemning Israel.14 The British delegate took this approach despite the fact that British Foreign Secretary George Brown had just stated in Parliament that the right was on Egypt’s side. Asked by a Member of Parliament about the hostilities, Brown said that the Arab argument that Israel was the aggressor had “not only plau-

sibility but legality and force”.15 Denmark, in an obvious reference to the Cold War split, said that the UN Security Council had to “approach this problem in

the light of the political realities”.16 Canada did not “see what useful purpose

will be served by an attempt to force a vote” on the Soviet draft.17

The US said that a condemnation of Israel plus a call for troop withdrawal,

per the Soviet draft, would only “let everything go back to exactly where it was before the fighting began on 5 June”, leaving the opposing forces once again

“poised for combat”.18 It said:

Once again, opposing forces would stand in direct confrontation poised

for combat. Once again, there would be no international machinery to

keep them apart; once again, Aqaba would be blockaded against the free

and innocent passage of all maritime nations; once again nothing would



11 Ibid., pages 8– 9.

12 Ibid., page 8 (statement of Ethiopia).

13 Ibid., page 11.

14 Ibid., page 2.

15 hl Deb 5 June 1967, vol 747, col 641.

16 unsc Official Records (14 June 1967) UN Doc. s/ pv.1360, page 21.

17 unsc Official Records (13 June 1967) UN Doc. s/ pv.1359, page 5.

18 unsc Official Records (14 June 1967) UN Doc. s/ pv.1360, page 20.

Israel’s Unlawful 1967 Invasion of Palestine 17

be done to resolve the deep- lying grievances on both sides that have fed

the fires of conflict in the Near East for twenty years.19

The US statement overlooked the obvious point that an occupation by Israel of more Arab territory would make it more, not less, difficult to secure a broader settlement. The statement was also in direct contradiction of the position the US took in 1956 when Israel invaded Egypt and was occupying Egyptian terri-tory. Then, the US led the charge in the UN Security Council to force Israel out. Under pressure from the US, Israel withdrew from Egyptian territory and from

the Gaza Strip in 1957.20

China was “opposed to the use of force, as is enjoined by the Charter of the

United Nations”.21 But China was impressed that Israeli representatives were promising that Israel did not plan to hold the territories permanently. China clearly saw Israel as the aggressor but was abstaining because Israel would not stay long- term. China referred to:

[T] he declarations that have been repeatedly made by Israel that it has no

territorial designs against its neighbours. Those declarations, we believe,

are solemn commitments, for history has clearly shown that no secure

peace can be built upon the basis of territorial changes that are brought

about by the use of force.22

France was more direct in pointing to Israel as the aggressor. It declared in the UN Security Council that “[w] e understand the concern which prompted the Soviet delegation to submit its draft resolution. We believe that conquest by force of arms cannot confer the right to occupy a territory. As a question of

principles, we cannot but support the Soviet proposal”.23 France explained that its decision to abstain on the vote stemmed from practical considerations. It said that “[e]ither the draft resolution will not be adopted, or, if it is, its chances

of being implemented are questionable”.24



19 Ibid., page 20.

20 Laurence Burd, ‘Israel Gets New Ike Plea; Cabinet in Jerusalem Delays Pull- out Order’,

Chicago Daily Tribune, 3 March 1957; ‘U.N. in Gaza; Israelis Out; Complete Pull- out, Set up

New Regime Today’, Chicago Daily Tribune, 7 March 1957.

21 unsc Official Records (14 June 1967) UN Doc. s/ pv.1360, page 10.

22 Ibid.

23 Ibid., page 7.

24 Ibid.

18 Quigley

Egypt chastised the UN Security Council. “When an overt act of aggression is

committed”, it declared, “it is the primary responsibility of the Security Council to condemn that act and to take all necessary measures to restore international

peace”.25 Egypt said that the Council was failing to discharge its “primary duties in the maintenance of peace and security” because the fact of aggression was

clear.26 Mali feared that the UN Security Council’s inaction would set a prec-edent. It said that “[t] he impunity enjoyed by Israel after its aggression is an encouragement and a guarantee that the Council would apparently be ready to

grant to any future aggressor”.27 The tenor of the UN Security Council’s discus-sion was thus that Israel was the aggressor. Despite Israel’s claim that it acted lawfully, no Member State proposed a resolution to condemn the Arab States.



3 Israel’s Obfuscation

One other aspect of the debate on the Soviet draft resolution was that there was some uncertainty over the facts. Brazil said that “the evidence before us – that is, the reports of the Secretary- General – offer no grounds for a clear- cut

identification of the Power which struck first”.28 Argentina said that the factual information supplied by the UN Secretary- General and by the parties “provide us with a vague picture of the situation, some aspects of which are controver-

sial”.29 Nigeria said it was happy to vote for an Israeli withdrawal, as it did, but

wanted more time before taking a position on aggression.30

The reason for confusion over the facts was that the US, the only UN

Security Council member that had inside information on how the war started, was refusing to say what it knew. The US avoided the question of the initiation of the hostilities, even though it knew Israel to have struck first in a fashion

that constituted aggression.31 It was the only Member State that possessed that information. So, the entire debate presented a curious spectacle. The issue before the UN Security Council was how to address the hostilities, and the only

member that really knew was not talking.32 The US delegate kept silent when

25 unsc Official Records (13 June 1967) UN Doc. s/ pv.1358, page 31.

26 unsc Official Records (14 June 1967) UN Doc. s/ pv.1360, page 21.

27 unsc Official Records (13 June 1967) UN Doc. s/ pv.1359, page 6.

28 unsc Official Records (14 June 1967) UN Doc. s/ pv.1360, page 16.

29 Ibid., page 6.

30 Ibid., page 9.

31 Dean Rusk, As I Saw It (W.W. Norton 1990) 386– 387.

32 Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, 26 May 1967, 10:30 a.m., frus 1964– 1968, vol

19, 118– 122.

Israel’s Unlawful 1967 Invasion of Palestine 19

other delegates said they could not figure out who was responsible for the

hostilities.33

The US was privy to the facts because it had been in intense confidential dis-

cussion with Israel in the weeks leading up to Israel’s invasion.34 That discus-sion was led by Israel’s Foreign Minister Abba Eban, who went to Washington to gain the support of the Administration of President Lyndon Johnson for an invasion. Israel was planning to invade Egypt, having assessed, quite correctly, that the Egyptian forces that had been drawn up near the frontier with Israel in the Sinai Peninsula were in a vulnerable posture, and could readily be over-run and annihilated. That situation opened an opportunity for Israel to deci-mate the army of its strongest Arab opponent. Israel’s success would prove the assessment to have been accurate.

Eban tried to get the Johnson Administration to believe that Egypt would

soon attack, therefore that the US should support Israel in attacking Egypt, or at least turn a blind eye. In Israel’s previous aggression against Egypt, in 1956,

the US had come down hard on Israel and had forced a withdrawal.35 Now Israel was poised to try again, and it did not want a reprise of the role that the US had assumed in 1956.

The US was on Israel’s side in its conflict with the Arab world, so Eban

was seeking help from a sympathetic source. The shift from a Kennedy Administration to a Johnson Administration had moved the US firmly into Israel’s corner. At the same time, the US did not favour an Israeli invasion of Egypt. It feared that the Soviet Union might intervene militarily on the Arab side, putting the US in the awkward position of having to save Israel, and risk starting a superpower military confrontation.

The Johnson Administration was unreceptive to Eban’s entreaties. It did

not think Egypt would invade Israel. The more insistent Eban became that Israel was in imminent danger, the more insistent Johnson and the US State Department became in their response that Egypt was not going to invade. They confronted Eban with assessments by the Central Intelligence Agency, which was monitoring the situation intensively. The cia said that Israel enjoyed supe-riority over Egypt in its air war capacity, which would be crucial in the event of hostilities. Israel’s ground forces, the cia assessed, were able to “maintain



33 unsc Official Records (14 June 1967) UN Doc. s/ pv.1360, pages 6 and 16 (Brazil and

Argentina).

34 Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, 26 May 1967, 10:30 a.m., frus 1964– 1968, vol

19, 118– 122.

35 ‘Eisenhower Sends New Appeal to Ben- Gurion: Urges Israel Premier to Order Troops to

Quit Egypt “With Utmost Speed”’, Los Angeles Times, 3 March 1957. 20 Quigley

internal security, defend successfully against simultaneous Arab attacks on all fronts, launch limited attacks simultaneously on all fronts, or hold on any three

fronts while mounting successfully a major offensive on the fourth”.36 The cia said that Egypt was not poised to attack Israel. The aim of the Egyptian troop build- up in the Sinai Peninsula near the frontier with Israel, the cia said, was that the Egyptians were “embarrassed because they had not helped the Syrians in April, then made a big show of marching into Sinai, partly to show good

faith, partly in hopes of deterring the Israelis”.37

Here the cia was referencing an armed confrontation in April 1967, only

one month earlier, in which Israel and Syria had exchanged fire. The cia’s point was that the Egyptian troop build- up was a reaction to that episode. Egypt, as the strongest among the Arab States, was providing a show of force to deter Israel from attacking Syria. Syria and Egypt, as previously noted above, were united politically as the United Arab Republic.

At a 26 May meeting in Washington, Eban told US Secretary of Defence

Robert McNamara that “the Israeli Cabinet had met just before his trip and the decision was made to fight” but that Israel “had delayed thus far in striking

because of President Johnson’s urgings”.38 McNamara replied “that an Israeli attack under present circumstances would have most serious consequences” and that the US “cannot undertake to support Israel if Israel launches an

attack”.39 Eban insisted that the Government of Israel knew “that a uar- Syrian

attack was imminent”.40 McNamara replied that according to US intelligence, “the Egyptian deployments were defensive in character and anticipatory of a

possible Israeli attack”.41 General Earle Wheeler, Chair of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, asked Eban if he meant “that Israel knew with certainty the Egyptians’ intent, for example through an agent”, or on the basis of the Egyptian army’s “troop disposition”. According to the meeting minutes, Eban added no

information.42



36 Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency, 23 May 1967, frus 1964– 1968,

vol 19, 73.

37 Briefing Notes for Director of Central Intelligence Helms for Use at a White House

Meeting, 23 May 1967, frus 1964– 1968, vol 19, 74.

38 Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, 26 May 1967, 10:30 a.m., frus 1964– 1968, vol

19, 118– 119.

39 Ibid., page 120.

40 Ibid., page 121.

41 Ibid.

42 Ibid.

Israel’s Unlawful 1967 Invasion of Palestine 21

President Johnson told Eban that “our best judgment is that no military

attack on Israel is imminent”.43 He told Eban that “Israel must not make itself responsible for initiating hostilities”. According to the meeting minutes “[w] ith emphasis and solemnity, the President repeated twice, Israel will not be alone

unless it decides to go it alone”.44 When Eban insisted that Egypt was about to attack, McNamara “explained to Eban that three separate intelligence groups had looked into the matter in the last twenty- four hours” and that the Egyptian

troop deployment was defensive.45 President Johnson repeated, “that an attack

is not imminent”.46

President Johnson’s insistence that Israel should not initiate hostilities in a

manner that would make it responsible led Israel to try another tack. It asked

for US acquiescence in a scheme to draw Egypt into initiating hostilities.47 The Israel Defence Forces was already well advanced in a plan to send a ship into the Gulf of Aqaba, hopefully drawing fire from Egyptian shore batteries at the Straits of Tiran, whereupon Israel would launch its invasion of Egypt. The ship was fully outfitted in a port on the East African coast, awaiting an order to sail into the Straits of Tiran. Ephraim Evron, Israel’s Minister at its embassy in Washington, approached Walt W. Rostow, a presidential advisor, and asked if this scenario would satisfy Washington’s injunction that Israel not fire the

first shot.48 Evron explained it as a “probe at the gulf of Aqaba” that “would

be made by an Israeli ship. The first shot would be fired by the uar”.49 When that occurred, the idf “would attack the installations at Sharm al- Sheikh cov-

ering the straits of Aqaba. The next move would be Nasser’s”.50 Walt W. Rostow explained the remainder of the anticipated scenario: “[t] he Israelis believe he [Nasser] would attack Israel on a wide front and probably other Arab nations

would join the attack”.51 At that point, Israel would launch a major attack of its own.



43 Memorandum of Conversation, Washington, 26 May 1967, 7:15 p.m., frus 1964– 1968, vol

19, page 142.

44 Ibid., page 143.

45 Ibid., page 145.

46 Ibid.

47 Michael Bar- Zohar, Histoire Secrète de la Guerre d’Israël (Fayard 1968) 182.

48 Donald Bergus, ‘The View from Washington’ in Richard B. Parker (ed), The Six- Day War: A

Retrospective (University Press of Florida 1996) 189, 210.

49 Ibid.

50 Ibid.

51 Memorandum from the President’s Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson, 2

June 1967, frus 1964– 1968, vol 19, 244.

22 Quigley

4 Invasion with Embellishments

The Government of Israel did not wait for an answer. It sent another emis-sary to Washington, one who made no effort to comply with the US demands. Meir Amit, who headed Israel’s espionage agency Mossad, put the matter more bluntly to Secretary of Defence McNamara. McNamara explained the next day to British officials what Amit had told him. The Israelis “would try to destroy the Egyptian airforce first and thus gain ability for a tank strike to take Sinai

and the Straits”.52 He said that “the Israelis think they can win in 3– 4 days”.53

Amit’s task had been to find out what the US would do once Israel invaded

Egypt. Amit sought an assurance that Israel would not face a reprise of President Dwight Eisenhower’s reaction to Israel’s 1956 invasion into Sinai. The Israeli leadership made its decision to invade in a 3 June meeting. Amit, attending the meeting, reported that his contact with US officials in Washington left him con-fident that the US would not expose Israel as the aggressor. Amit related some years later that at this 3 June meeting, the Johnson Administration, despite its

protestations, would not be unhappy if Israel invaded Egypt.54

At a meeting of Israel’s Ministerial Committee on Security on 4 June, held

to make final plans, Prime Minister Levi Eshkol expressed concern that Israel

might be denounced for aggression.55 The Cabinet then met and nonetheless

authorised the invasion.56 The authorisation document, whose text was made public in 1972, recited that “the Government ascertained that the armies of Egypt, Syria and Jordan are deployed for immediate multi- front aggression,

threatening the very existence of the state”.57 However, since Cabinet members knew that not to be the case, some of them conferred to devise a story to give

to the UN Security Council.58

When the invasion was launched the next morning, Prime Minister Eshkol

sent a letter to President Johnson claiming that Israel had acted in response to shelling by Egypt of three Israeli settlements near the Gaza Strip in the



52 Memorandum of Conversation, 2 June 1967, frus 1964– 1968, vol 19, page 237.

53 Ibid.

54 See statement of Meir Amit. Richard B. Parker, The Six Day War: A Retrospective (University

Press of Florida 1996) 144.

55 Ami Gluska, The Israeli Military and the Origins of the 1967 War: Government, Armed Forces

and Defence Policy 1963– 1967 (Routledge 2007) 253.

56 Ibid., page 255.

57 Asher Wallfish, ‘Meir Reveals Text of Cabinet Decision’, Jerusalem Post, 5 June 1972.

58 Tom Segev, 1967: Israel, the War, and the Year That Transformed the Middle East (Henry

Holt 2007) 336.

Israel’s Unlawful 1967 Invasion of Palestine 23

early morning hours of 5 June.59 At the White House, Eshkol’s message landed on the desk of President Johnson’s Special Assistant Walt W. Rostow. Rostow added his own commentary when he passed the communication on to Johnson. Rostow explained that Eshkol “builds his case mainly on the gen-eral environment, but refers to bombardment of three Israel towns as the trig-

ger”.60 As for the bombardment of three towns, Rostow added that “[a] t least

that’s his story”.61 The White House foreign policy team quickly concluded that

Eshkol’s claim was fabricated and that Israel had simply attacked on its own.62 Once it became clear, as it quickly did, that the Soviet Union was not inter-vening on the Arab side, the Johnson advisors breathed a collective sigh of

relief and slipped into a mode of supporting Israel at the diplomatic level.63

At the UN Security Council, Eban responded to Egypt’s charge of aggression.

He related a series of actions by Egypt that he depicted as hostile and as presag-ing further Egyptian action. Egypt had asked the UN to remove a peacekeeping force that was stationed on Egypt’s side of the border with Israel. Egypt had announced restrictions against Israeli shipping through the Straits of Tiran into the Gulf of Aqaba. Egypt had drawn a military force up to the frontier with Israel. But all this was context. Understanding that none of this would suffice to protect Israel from a charge of aggression, Eban repeated Eshkol’s claim of early morning shelling on 5 June by Egypt of three Israeli settlements. Eban added another detail: in the early morning hours of 5 June “approaching

Egyptian aircraft appeared on our radar screens”.64 In fact, Egypt’s fighter air-

craft were all on the ground near Cairo.65 The claim about a shelling of three settlements, though difficult to put forward credibly in light of the massive nature of Israel’s assault that same morning, could not immediately be dis-proved, and Israel’s main concern was that the UN might try to stop it before it had degraded the Egyptian army and gained control of the Arab territory into which it was moving.



59 Walworth Barbour, Telegram from the Embassy in Israel to the Department of State, 5 June

1967, frus 1964– 1968, vol 19, page 302 (transmitting letter of Ben- Gurion to Johnson).

60 Ibid.

61 Ibid.

62 Dean Rusk, As I Saw It (W.W. Norton 1990) 386; Memorandum for the Record, 17 November

1968, frus 1964– 1968, vol 19, page 287.

63 Memorandum Prepared by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South

Asian Affairs (Battle), 5 June 1967, frus 1964– 1968, vol 19, page 310.

64 unsc Official Records (6 June 1967) UN Doc. s/ pv.1348, pages 14– 15.

65 Mohamed Abdel Ghani el- Gamasy, The October War: Memoirs of Field Marshal El- Gamasy

of Egypt (American University in Cairo Press 1993) 56; Yitzhak Rabin, The Rabin Memoirs

(Little, Brown 1979) 104.

24 Quigley

5 UN General Assembly Refuses to Back Israel

In light of the UN Security Council’s inaction, an emergency special session of the UN General Assembly was called. Such a session had been called in 1956 after a similar failure of UN Security Council action. This time, a call for withdrawal was not achieved. Nonetheless, the UN General Assembly session allowed the broader membership to hear Israel’s claims and to state their views on legal responsibility for the hostilities.

Eban reminded the UN General Assembly of what he had told the UN

Security Council about Egyptian aircraft and the shelling of settlements as pre-cipitating events to Israel’s invasion. “On the fateful morning of 5 June”, Eban said, “when Egyptian forces moved by air and land against Israel’s western coast and southern territory, our country’s choice was plain. The choice was to

live or perish, to defend the national existence or to forfeit it for all time”.66 As in the UN Security Council, no State indicated that it accepted Eban’s factual claims. Cyprus expressly rejected them, saying that it found “no evidence of

Arab armed attack or invasion of the territory of Israel”.67 Spain said that the timing belied Eban’s claims. “We have only to consider the deployment and movement of the combat troops of the attacking army”, it said, “and the mas-sive surprise bombing technique, to arrive at a strong moral conviction as to

who unleashed the hostilities”.68

Several States addressed anticipatory self- defence as a potential Israeli jus-

tification but rejected it as a matter of law. Malaysia said that a “[p] re- emptive strike is not recognized by the Charter; for otherwise, the excuses for resort-ing to war would soon multiply and the very purpose of the Charter in the

maintenance of peace would be nullified”.69 “Even if we accept, for the sake of argument”, said Zambia, “that there was a threat to the State of Israel the right course would have been for Israel to bring its complaint to the United

Nations”.70 A threat, Zambia said, does not constitute an armed attack under

Article 51 of the UN Charter.71



66 unga Official Records (19 June 1967) UN Doc. a/ pv.1526, page 12.

67 unga Official Records (29 June 1967) UN Doc. a/ pv.1541, page 7– 8.

68 unga Official Records (28 June 1967) UN Doc. a/ pv.1539, page 9.

69 unga Official Records (29 June 1967) UN Doc. a/ pv.1541, page 7.

70 unga Official Records (27 June 1967) UN Doc. a/ pv.1538, page 9.

71 Ibid.

Israel’s Unlawful 1967 Invasion of Palestine 25

6 Occupation of the Gaza Strip and the West Bank

Cyprus said at the UN General Assembly session that Israel’s occupation of Arab territory was the result of aggression. “The picture that unfolded before the eyes of the world”, it said, “clearly presented both the acts and the effects of aggression: co- ordinated armed attack by air and land, invasion and occupa-

tion of the territories of three Arab States”.72

The illegal occupation of the parts of Palestine that had escaped Israel’s

reach in 1948 would be the longest- lasting effect of the 1967 invasion. Israel’s aggression against Egypt carried over to the Palestine territory it took and occupied. As of 1967, the Gaza Strip was Palestine territory under control by Egypt. The West Bank area was under the control of Jordan, which came to Egypt’s defence. As a result, Jordan was acting in what is called collective self- defence. A State that assists a State that is victim of aggression is a partici-pant in the defence of the victim State. That right exists under the UN Charter, which provides in its provision on self- defence that “[n] othing in the present Charter shall impair the inherent right of individual or collective self- defence if an armed attack occurs against a Member of the United Nations until the Security Council has taken measures necessary to maintain international

peace and security”.73

Jordan and Egypt, as it happened, had just concluded a mutual defence

treaty that referenced that right, reciting:

The two contracting powers consider any armed attack on either state

or its forces an attack on both. Consequently, acting on the legitimate

right of individual and collective self- defense, they commit themselves to

hasten each to the assistance of the attacked state and immediately take

all measures and employ all means at their disposal, including the use of

armed forces, to repulse the attack.74

The existence of such a treaty is not, however, a prerequisite to acting in defence of a State that has been attacked. Israel claimed that it advised Jordan that if Jordan refrained from participating in the hostilities, Israel would not



72 unga Official Records (29 June 1967) UN Doc. a/ pv.1541, pages 7– 8.

73 UN Charter, Article 51.

74 See Article 1 of the agreement. ‘Text of the Egyptian- Jordanian Mutual Defense Treaty

Signed in Cairo’, New York Times, 31 May 1967.

26 Quigley

move against it.75 Whether such a communication was issued was never clar-ified, but it would not in any event alter the legal situation between Israel and Jordan. The rules on use of force, what is called jus ad bellum, cannot be avoided by advising a State to refrain. Moreover, even if Israel was justified in responding to Jordan’s use of force, its own use of force would be limited to countering Jordan’s use of force. Jordan quickly stopped military action against Israel.



7 Israel’s Motivation for Aggression

Israel had its own reasons for taking the Gaza Strip and West Bank. The Zionist conception of a Jewish State was for one that would extend eastward at least to the Jordan River. The statehood declaration issued in 1948 spoke ambigu-

ously of Eretz- Israel (Land of Israel).76 As that declaration was being drafted, the question arose of whether borders should be declared. David Ben- Gurion opposed the idea, not wanting to set limits. But the drafters also wanted to rely on the UN General Assembly resolution of 29 November 1947, which had

proposed an Arab and a Jewish State and had drawn borders.77 To do so might confine Israel to those borders. As of May 1948, Zionist militias were already taking territory beyond those borders. The solution was to state that the dec-laration was issued “on the strength of” the UN General Assembly resolution, but without mentioning the resolution’s projected borders. The drafters also wanted President Harry Truman’s blessing for their declaration, and Truman made clear to the Jewish Agency, represented in Washington by Eliahu Epstein, that he wanted to know just what it was he was being asked to recognise in

terms of territory.78 So Epstein told Truman, who had not seen the text of the statehood declaration, that Israel was being proclaimed “within frontiers approved by the General Assembly of the United Nations in its Resolution of

November 29, 1947”.79



75 UN Secretary- General, Measures Taken by Israel to Change the Status of the City of

Jerusalem, A/ 6753, S/ 8052, 10 July 1967 (reproducing letter of 10 July 1967 from Abba Eban,

Foreign Minister of Israel).

76 The Declaration of the Establishment of the State of Israel, 14 May 1948.

77 Ibid.

78 Memorandum of Conversations by the Under Secretary of State (Lovett), Washington, 17

May 1948, frus 1948, vol 5, page 1005.

79 The Agent of the Provisional Government of Israel (Epstein) to President Truman,

Washington, 14 May 1948, frus 1948, vol 5, page 989.

Israel’s Unlawful 1967 Invasion of Palestine 27

Later in 1948, the Israel Defence Forces went well into territory designated in

the UN General Assembly resolution for an Arab State, in Galilee and in south-ern Palestine. The UN Security Council saw what the idf was doing. The UN Security Council adopted resolution 56 in August 1948, which by its terms was aimed at all parties, but by its intent was aimed at the Zionist militias, since they were the ones that were advancing. That resolution stipulated that “[n] o party is

entitled to gain military or political advantage through violation of the truce”.80

In a November 1948 resolution, the UN Security Council directed all parties

“to withdraw those of their forces which have advanced beyond the positions

held on 14 October”.81 In December 1948, Britain charged that the “southward movement” of the militias was “flagrantly contrary” to the November resolu-

tion.82 Pressure from Britain and the US kept the militias from taking the rest of Palestine. In 1956, when the Israeli Defence Forces occupied the Gaza Strip,

Foreign Minister Golda Meir claimed it as an “integral part” of Israel.83 The idf

departed, however, again under pressure from the US.84

Israel’s seizure of the Gaza Strip and the West Bank in 1967 was thus part of a

long- term effort to hold all of Palestine. Earlier in the 1960s, the idf command began serious planning for an occupation of the Gaza Strip and the West Bank. Another war was regarded as only a matter of time. Regardless of where a war might start, the idf would take hostilities into Arab- held territory. In 1963, the idf General Staff Branch, headed by Yitzhak Rabin, drew up a directive titled “Organization Order: Military Government in State of Emergency”, providing detail on an administrative structure for an anticipated belligerent occupation of territory that included the West Bank and Gaza Strip. Belligerent occupation was correctly understood by the idf planners as a temporary situation. The Organization Order went one step further, however, to suggest that an effort would be made to annex the occupied territory. “A convenient political situ-ation might develop”, it read, “which will make it possible to retain occupied

territory indefinitely”.85 Annexation of territory under belligerent occupation

is an act that constitutes the crime of aggression.86



80 unsc Resolution 56 (19 August 1948).

81 unsc Resolution 1961 (1 November 1948).

82 unsc Official Records (15 December 1948) UN Doc. s/ pv.384, 16.

83 Homer Bigart, ‘Israel Terms Gaza Strip an Integral Part of Nation’, New York Times, 11

November 1956.

84 ‘U.N. in Gaza; Israelis Out; Complete Pull- out, Set up New Regime Today’, Chicago Daily

Tribune, 7 March 1957.

85 Adam Raz, ‘Israel Claimed its 1967 Land Conquests Weren’t Planned. Declassified

Documents Reveal Otherwise’, Haaretz, 3 June 2021.

86 Rome Statute, Article 8bis(2)(a).

28 Quigley

The idf’s planning was quite specific. It was based on the brief period of

military rule in the Gaza Strip between 1956 and 1957 and the more extensive period of military rule over Arab- populated parts of Israel between 1948 and 1966. Three command posts were envisaged, one for Gaza Strip/ Sinai, one

for the West Bank, and one for the Syrian Golan.87 Named individuals were

“appointed” to the major administrative posts.88 Training courses were run for

legal staff.89 An instruction book was produced that explained how to manage schools in the occupied territories, by “weeding out” teachers or administrators who were hostile, and as well how to encourage and reward teachers or admin-

istrators who “collaborate”.90



8 A Tale of Changing Stories

The afterlife of Israel’s Foreign Minister Abba Eban’s false story is curious. Once Israel securely held the parts of Palestine that had eluded it in 1948, and once it was clear that Israel had no proof of the supposed Egyptian shelling, or an approach by Egyptian aircraft, the story could not be sustained. Prime Minister Eshkol, when asked about the hostilities one month later, did not claim an attack by Egypt but premised Israel’s initiation of the hostilities on Egypt’s

restrictions on Israeli shipping into the Gulf of Aqaba.91

The story on which Israeli officialdom ultimately settled was the one that

Eban had unsuccessfully pressed on the White House, namely, that Egypt was on the verge of invading Israel. This story had the advantage that it was impossible to disprove one hundred percent. The downside of the story was the infirmity of anticipatory self- defence as a matter of law and the fact that so many Israeli offi-cials knew the story to be false. Within a few years, one official after another said that Egypt had not been on the verge of attacking. Yitzhak Rabin, Chief of Staff at the time of the invasion, told a reporter that the entire Israeli leadership knew

that Egypt was not going to attack.92 Menachem Begin, who was a member of



87 Shlomo Gazit, The Carrot and the Stick: Israel’s Policy in Judaea and Samaria, 1967– 68

(B’nai B’rith Books 1995) 17.

88 Ibid., page 8.

89 Ibid., page 11.

90 Ibid., page 14; Ilan Pappé, The Biggest Prison on Earth: A History of the Occupied Territories

(OneWorld 2017) xvi.

91 Ariyeh Tzimuki, ‘We will let the Vatican Have Some Control Over the Holy Places in

Jerusalem’, Yediot Aharonot, 7 July 1967.

92 Eric Rouleau, ‘Le Général Rabin Ne Pense Pas Que Nasser Voulait La Guerre’, Le Monde, 29

February 1968.

Israel’s Unlawful 1967 Invasion of Palestine 29

the Israeli Cabinet in 1967, stated openly that Israel had not been under threat

of an invasion by Egypt.93 Mordecai Bentov, another Cabinet member, said that

the story about an anticipated Egyptian attack was “invented”.94

In the aftermath of the 1967 war, the UN Security Council deferred to the

US. It avoided directly addressing the jus ad bellum issue, thereby avoiding the question of who was at fault. UN Security Council resolution 242, adopted in November 1967, was its only statement on the hostilities. That resolution did refer to “the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by war”, but that ref-

erence was to annexation.95 “Acquisition” in regard to territory refers to sover-

eignty, not to occupation in warfare.96

Resolution 242 did call on Israel to withdraw but without addressing respon-

sibility for the initiation of the 1967 hostilities. Even that call to withdraw was less than clear because of its inclusion in a paragraph that also issued a call to Arab States to make peace with Israel. Resolution 242 stated that the UN Security Council:

1. Affirms that the fulfilment of Charter principles requires the estab-

lishment of a just and lasting peace in the Middle East which should include the application of both the following principles:

(i) Withdrawal of Israel armed forces from territories occupied in

the recent conflict;

(ii) Termination of all claims or states of belligerency and respect

for and acknowledgment of the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of every State in the area and their right to live in peace within secure and recognized boundaries free from threats or acts of force.

Like the UN Security Council, the UN General Assembly failed to condemn Israel as the aggressor. At the UN General Assembly’s emergency special ses-sion on the 1967 war, held in late June 1967, the Soviet Union again proposed

a condemnation of Israel and again it failed to carry.97 In neither body was

93 Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs, ‘Address by Prime Minister Begin at the National

Defense College’, 8 August 1982; ‘Excerpts from Begin Speech at National Defense College’,

New York Times, 21 August 1982.

94 Mordecai Bentov, ‘For Whom and Why Are the Settlements Necessary?’, Al- Hamishmar, 14

April 1972. Translated in Amnon Kapeliouk, ‘Israël Était- il Réellement Menacé d’Extermi-

nation?’, Le Monde, 3 June 1972.

95 unsc Resolution 242 (22 November 1967).

96 R Y Jennings, The Acquisition of Territory in International Law (Manchester University

Press 1963) 2. Explaining “acquisition” as a term that relates to sovereignty over territory.

97 unga Official Records (4 July 1967) UN Doc. a/ pv.1548, pages 15– 16.

30 Quigley

any resolution proposed to condemn Egypt. While many Member States found Israel at fault for initiating the hostilities, none – apart from Israel – suggested

that Egypt or Jordan was at fault.98 Nonetheless, the failure of either body to condemn Israel left the door open to Israel to portray itself as having acted defensively. That false narrative about the 1967 war is used by Israel to justify its continued control of Palestine. After the Israel- Palestine Camp David nego-tiations in 2000, Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak attributed Israel’s success in avoiding territorial concessions, at least in part, to a public perception that Israel acted defensively in 1967. He said, that, “although we were the ones to fire the first shot, the world saw us as trying to free ourselves of strangulation

by our neighbors”.99 In a recapitulation of the Camp David talks, Barak wrote, “Israel occupied the West Bank and Gaza after it was attacked … [a] s I told Clinton and Arafat many times, both before and at Camp David, we will never

apologize for our victory in 1967”.100



9 Conclusion

The magnitude of Israel’s depredations as belligerent occupant over the dura-tion of its occupation of the Palestine territory that it captured in 1967 yields a compelling argument that the occupation must end. When depredations attain a certain level, it may be that the only measure to remedy them is to terminate the occupation entirely. However, the illegality of Israel’s occupation rests in the first instance on the jus ad bellum violation that brought it into occupation. As a result of that violation, the occupation became unlawful the day it began. Despite its reticence at that time, the United Nations should re- visit the jus ad bellum issue. In the immediate aftermath of the 1967 war, Israel, with the complicity of the United States, was able to deflect attention from its aggression. Today, the facts showing Israel’s aggression would be difficult to contest. A reasoned confirmation of Israel’s 1967 aggression by the UN would serve the cause of peace in the Middle East.



98 John Quigley, The Six- Day War and Israeli Self- Defense: Questioning the Legal Basis for

Preventive War (cup 2013) 104– 108.

99 Ehud Barak, ‘The Myths Spread About Camp David Are Baseless’ in Shimon Shamir and

Bruce Maddy- Weitzman (eds), The Camp David Summit – What Went Wrong?: Americans,

Israelis, and Palestinians Analyze the Failure of the Boldest Attempt Ever to Resolve the

Palestinian- Israeli Conflict (Academic Press 2005) 117, 130.

100 Ibid., page 134.





chapter 2


Out of Time: On the (Il)legality of Israel’s Prolonged

Occupation of the West Bank

Vito Todeschini



Israel’s occupation of the Palestinian territory has lasted for 55 years at the time of writing. While its duration has earned it the label of “prolonged” occu-pation, the question the present chapter will explore is whether its length ren-ders the occupation itself illegal. Under the legal frameworks that specifically regulate a situation of occupation – international humanitarian law and the law on the use of force – an occupation must be temporary. Each framework, however, attaches different value to the question of duration. International humanitarian law does not set an end date on belligerent occupation. It is rather concerned with ensuring that the protections it affords, which aim to safeguard the rights and well- being of the local population, remain applicable until the Occupying Power stops exercising effective control over the occu-

pied territory.1 On the other hand, the law on the use of force, also referred to as jus ad bellum, requires an occupation to end as soon as the circumstances justifying its establishment cease to exist. With specific reference to the law of self- defence, this will occur when an armed attack is repelled or otherwise

terminated.2

Against this background, the present chapter will consider to what extent

time is a factor that impacts the legal status of an occupation. Accordingly, it will look at time through the prisms of international humanitarian law, partic-ularly the law of occupation, and jus ad bellum. In so doing, it will posit that the infringement of the principle of temporariness makes an occupation illegal under both bodies of law.

Viewing Israel’s prolonged occupation of the West Bank as illegal, in

turn, may encourage the international community to adjust and shift their approaches and policies vis- à- vis the Palestinian territory. In this sense, fram-ing the occupation in terms of illegality allows to abstract from the single – albeit systematic – violations of specific international norms committed by



1 See Section 1.

2 See Section 2.



© Vito Todeschini, 2023 | DOI:10.1163/9789004503

32 Todeschini

Israel, and to consider the overall picture. This may then allow for a stronger case in calling on Third States to fulfil their obligations under international law to endeavour to bring Israel’s occupation of the Palestinian territory to an end.

This chapter will only address Israel’s occupation of the West Bank, includ-

ing East Jerusalem. The delimitation of the analysis’ scope3 is related to the specific focus the present chapter adopts when looking at the illegality of bel-ligerent occupation. In other words, the Occupying Power’s actual adminis-tration of the occupied territory. Regarding the Gaza Strip, Israel continues to exercise effective control over it, to the effect that it remains an occupied terri-

tory under international humanitarian law.4



1 Duration of Occupation under International Humanitarian Law

Article 42 of the Hague Regulations provides that “[t] erritory is considered occupied when it is actually placed under the authority of the hostile army. The occupation extends only to the territory where such authority has been estab-

lished and can be exercised”.5 A belligerent occupation has been further under-

stood to be established when a territory is placed under the effective control6



3 The results of the present analysis may be applied to the Golan Heights as well, given that

Israel has formally annexed this territory. However, the Golan Heights belongs to Syria

and is not part of the Palestinian territory, which is the focus of this chapter.

4 Since the 2005 “disengagement plan” and the withdrawal of its military and civilian pres-

ence from the Gaza Strip, Israel no longer administers this territory in the same terms it

does in the West Bank. While the Gaza Strip will accordingly not be part of the focus of

the present analysis, this should in no way lead to the conclusion that Israel’s belligerent

occupation of the Gaza Strip cannot be deemed illegal; such an assessment simply falls

outside the scope of this examination. Also, this should not be read as a conceptual com-

partmentalisation of the various areas of the Palestinian territory, which is comprised

of the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and the Gaza Strip, and the unity of which

must be preserved. See for example unhrc Resolution 40/ 23 (22 March 2019); unhrc,

Report of the Detailed Findings of the Independent International Commission of Inquiry on

the Protests in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, a/ hrc/ 40/ crp.2, 18 March 2019, para 67;

Shane Darcy and John Reynolds, ‘An Enduring Occupation: The Status of the Gaza Strip

from the Perspective of International Humanitarian Law’, 15(2) Journal of Conflict and

Security Law (2010) 211.

5 Hague Regulations, Article 42. Article 42 has attained customary status. See icj, Legal

Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory (Advisory

Opinion) icj Reports 136 (2004) paras 78 and 89.

6 It has been pointed out that certain States prefer to employ the term “authority”. See for

example Marco Longobardo, The Use of Armed Force in Occupied Territory (cup 2018) 35. On the (Il)legality of Israel’s Occupation of the West Bank 33

of the armed forces of a foreign State.7 Whether or not effective control is established over a given territory determines the beginning and end of an occupation, and consequently the applicability of international humanitarian

law, in particular the law of occupation – the Hague Regulations,8 the Fourth

Geneva Convention,9 Additional Protocol i,10 and related customary interna-

tional law.11 Under international humanitarian law, situations of occupation formally classify as international armed conflicts, in other words armed con-

frontation between two or more States.12 In addition to international humani-

tarian law, human rights law remains applicable in situations of occupation.13 Accordingly, an Occupying Power must ensure to the members of the local

population the range of human rights it is bound by under international law.14

The International Court of Justice,15 the UN Security Council,16 and the

Israeli Supreme Court17 have all characterised the West Bank as occupied ter-ritory in which the Hague Regulations and the Fourth Geneva Convention



The icty referred to “actual authority”, as found in treaty law. See icty, Prosecutor v Prlić

et al., Appeals Chamber, Judgement, it- 04- 74- a, 29 November 2017, para 317, footnote 964,

and para 321.

7 Eyal Benvenisti, ‘Occupation, Belligerent’ in Max Planck Encyclopedia of Public

International Law (oup 2009) para 1.

8 Hague Regulations, Articles 42– 56.

9 Fourth Geneva Convention, Articles 47‒78.

10 Additional Protocol i, Articles 14, 63, 69, 85(4)(a).

11 Jean- Marie Henckaerts and Louise Doswald- Beck (eds), Customary International

Humanitarian Law (cup 2005).

12 Fourth Geneva Convention, Article 2; icty, Prosecutor v Tadić, Appeals Chamber, Decision

on the Defence Motion for Interlocutory Appeal on Jurisdiction, it- 94- 1, 2 October 1995,

para 70.

13 icj, Armed Activities on the Territory of the Congo (Democratic Republic of the Congo v

Uganda) (Judgement) icj Reports 168 (2005) para 216.

14 icj, Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory

(Advisory Opinion) icj Reports 136 (2004) paras 106‒113; UN Human Rights Committee,

Concluding Observations on the Fifth Periodic Report of Israel, ccpr/ c/ isr/ co/ 5, 30

March 2022, para 7(b). On the complex relationship between international humanitar-

ian law and human rights law in situations of occupation, see Noam Lubell, ‘Human

Rights Obligations in Military Occupation’, 94(885) International Review of the Red Cross

(2012) 317.

15 icj, Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory

(Advisory Opinion) icj Reports 136 (2004) paras 89 and 101.

16 unsc Resolution 2334 (23 December 2016).

17 hcj 393/ 82, Jam’iat Iscan Al- Ma’almoun v IDF Commander in the Judea and Samaria Area

(28 December 1983); hcj 7015/ 02, Ajuri v The Commander of IDF Forces in the West Bank (3

September 2002).

34 Todeschini

apply.18 However, Israel defines the West Bank as “contested territory” due to the purported lack of a former sovereign power before 1967, when it took control thereof. Accordingly, Israel rejects the de jure applicability of the law of occupation and claims to apply de facto the “humanitarian provisions” of

the Fourth Geneva Convention.19 This position has been widely rebutted.20

Additionally, notwithstanding Israel’s continued opposition,21 the icj and var-ious UN human rights bodies have acknowledged that the full range of Israel’s obligations under human rights treaties continue to apply to its conduct in the

West Bank.22

In legal terms, belligerent occupation must always be temporary.23 This

means that an occupation cannot become permanent, result in annexation of the occupied territory, or cause unilateral changes of its legal and political

status by the Occupying Power.24 Consequently, an Occupying Power has the obligation to preserve, as far as possible, the status quo in the occupied terri-

tory.25 The temporary character of belligerent occupation is reflected in the

terms and spirit of the applicable law. Article 43 of the Hague Regulations26

18 Israel is not a party to Additional Protocol i, which as such does not apply to the Occupied

Palestinian Territory. Only the rules in Additional Protocol i that have attained customary

status will be applicable.

19 icj, Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory

(Advisory Opinion) icj Reports 136 (2004) paras 90 and 93.

20 Ibid., para 101; Theodor Meron, ‘The West Bank and International Humanitarian Law

on the Eve of the Fiftieth Anniversary of the Six- Day War’, 111(2) American Journal of

International Law (2016) 357, pages 361‒364.

21 Among others see Government of Israel, Fifth Periodic Report Submitted by Israel under

Article 40 of the Covenant Pursuant to the Optional Reporting Procedure, 30 October 2019,

paras 23– 26.

22 icj, Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory

(Advisory Opinion) icj Reports 136 (2004) paras 106– 113; UN Committee against Torture,

Concluding Observations on the Fifth Periodic Report of Israel cat/ c/ isr/ 5, 16 February

2015, paras 8– 9; UN Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women,

Concluding Observations on the Sixth Periodic Report of Israel, cedaw/ c/ isr/ 6, 14 July

2017, paras 14– 15; UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, Concluding

Observations on the Fourth Periodic Report of Israel, e/ c.12/ isr/ 4, 14 January 2019, paras

9‒10; UN Human Rights Committee, Concluding Observations on the Fifth Periodic Report

of Israel, ccpr/ c/ isr/ co/ 5, 30 March 2022, para 7(b).

23 icty, Prosecutor v Naletilić and Martinović, Trial Chamber, Judgement, icty- 98- 34- t, 31

March 2003, para 214; hcj 2056/ 04, Beit Sourik Village Council v The Government of Israel

(30 June 2004) para 27.

24 Fourth Geneva Convention, Article 47; Eyal Benvenisti, The International Law of

Occupation (oup 2012) 6; unsc Resolution 478 (20 August 1980).

25 Hague Regulations, Article 43; Fourth Geneva Convention, Article 64.

26 According to this provision, the Occupying Power must respect the laws in force in the

occupied territory “unless absolutely prevented”.

On the (Il)legality of Israel’s Occupation of the West Bank 35

and Article 64 of the Fourth Geneva Convention27 strictly limit the legislative competence of an Occupying Power to those acts that are necessary to restore

and maintain public order and civil life,28 ensure the well- being of the local

population,29 and guarantee its own security. In this sense, the Occupying Power must act as a de facto temporary “administrator and usufructuary” of the

occupied territory,30 and it must exercise its authority in the best interest of

the local population in a way that resembles a trust or fiduciary relationship.31

While prescribing that belligerent occupation must be temporary, interna-

tional humanitarian law does not set any specific time limit on its duration. The Fourth Geneva Convention establishes that “[i] n the case of occupied territory, the application of the present Convention shall cease one year after the gen-eral close of military operations”, save for a number of provisions that continue

to apply “for the duration of the occupation”.32 In turn, Additional Protocol i provides that its application ceases “in the case of occupied territories, on the

termination of the occupation”.33 The missing end date of the applicability of

27 Article 64 of the Fourth Geneva Convention provides that local laws can be repealed

only when they pose a threat to the Occupying Power’s security or if they constitute an

obstacle to the application of the Convention itself. The same provision prescribes that

new legislation may be enacted only when “essential to enable the Occupying Power to

fulfil its obligations under the present Convention, to maintain the orderly government

of the territory, and to ensure the security of the Occupying Power”. While the text refers

to penal laws only, it is acknowledged that the provision covers other laws as well. See

for example Iain Scobbie, ‘International Law and the Prolonged Occupation of Palestine’,

United Nations Roundtable on Legal Aspects of the Question of Palestine (2015) page 13.

28 While the English version of Article 43 of the Hague Regulations refers to “public order

and safety”, the French text refers to “l’ordre et la vie publique” (public order and civil

life). This second formulation is considered to be more accurate. See Orna Ben- Naftali,

Aeyal Gross and Keren Michaeli, ‘Illegal Occupation: Framing the Occupied Palestinian

Territory’, 23(3) Berkeley Journal of International Law (2005) page 563, footnote 54.

29 Among other things, the Occupying Power must ensure the provision of food and medi-

cal supplies to the civilian population, as well as guarantee public health. Moreover, pri-

vate property must be respected and cannot be confiscated; its destruction is prohibited

unless military operations render it absolutely necessary. See Hague Regulations, Article

46; Fourth Geneva Convention, Articles 53, 55‒56.

30 Hague Regulations, Article 55.

31 unhrc, Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights in the Palestinian

Territories Occupied Since 1967, Michael Lynk, a/ 72/ 556, 23 October 2017, para 34.

32 Fourth Geneva Convention, Article 6(3). It is worth noting that Articles 1– 12, 27, 29– 34, 47,

49, 51, 52, 53, 59, 61– 77, and 143 of the Fourth Geneva Convention remain applicable until

the end of the occupation.

33 Additional Protocol i, Article 3(b). While Additional Protocol i has formally superseded

the Fourth Geneva Convention only for those States that have ratified the Protocol, several

non- States Parties to Additional Protocol i “have expressed their intention of seeing all

ihl rules applied until the end of an occupation”. See Vaios Koutroulis, ‘The Application 36 Todeschini

the law of occupation relates to the very nature of international humanitar-ian law as a legal framework designed to govern the conduct of the parties to a conflict without imposing conditions on when a conflict should begin and

end. Those dates, it is argued, are governed by the jus ad bellum.34

As long as an occupation lasts, the goal of international humanitarian law

is to regulate and restrain the authority of the Occupying Power, safeguard the occupied territory, and protect its population. Hence, in principle, interna-tional humanitarian law, while prohibiting annexation of occupied territory, does not expressly forbid an occupation to be prolonged. While it is not pos-sible to set a specific time lapse to define such a situation, one possibility is to consider as prolonged any belligerent occupation that “extends into a period when hostilities are sharply reduced – i.e., a period at least approximating

peacetime”.35 As Vaios Koutroulis noted, however, prolonged occupation is neither a distinct legal category nor a situation governed by a separate legal regime. It is a descriptive term used to characterise belligerent occupations lasting for a protracted period of time, which remain fully subject to the law of

occupation.36

Israel’s High Court of Justice has employed the indeterminacy of the end

date of belligerent occupation, and the related concept of prolonged occupa-tion, to expand Israel’s legislative and governmental authority over the West

Bank.37 The hcj has several times recognised that, although belligerent occu-pation is temporary in nature, it may be “long term” and, in absence of limits thereto established by international humanitarian law, it may last as long as



of International Humanitarian Law and International Human Rights Law in Situation of

Prolonged Occupation: Only a Matter of Time?’, 94(885) International Review of the Red

Cross (2012) 165, pages 173‒174.

34 See below section 2.

35 Adam Roberts, ‘Prolonged Military Occupation: The Israeli- Occupied Territories Since

1967’, 84(1) American Journal of International Law (1990) 44, page 47, who defines a

prolonged occupation as “an occupation that lasts more than 5 years”. See also unsc

Resolution 471 (5 June 1980); unsc Resolution 476 (30 June 1980). Both resolutions

referred to Israel’s occupation as “prolonged” 13 years after its beginning.

36 Vaios Koutroulis, ‘The Application of International Humanitarian Law and International

Human Rights Law in Situation of Prolonged Occupation: Only a Matter of Time?’, 94(885)

International Review of the Red Cross (2012) 165, page 170.

37 For a more extensive analysis of the High Court of Justice’s caselaw, see Iain Scobbie,

‘International Law and the Prolonged Occupation of Palestine’, United Nations Roundtable

on Legal Aspects of the Question of Palestine (2015) pages 19‒32; David Kretzmer and Yaël

Ronen, The Occupation of Justice: The Supreme Court of Israel and the Occupied Territories

(oup 2021).

On the (Il)legality of Israel’s Occupation of the West Bank 37

the Occupying Power holds the occupied territory under its effective control.38 In this perspective, in the Abu ‘Aita case the hcj has affirmed that:

The needs of any area, whether under military government or otherwise,

will naturally change over the course of time, along with attendant eco-

nomic developments. […] The length of time that a military government

continues may affect the nature of the needs involved, and the urgency

to effect adjustment and reorganization may increase as more and more

time elapses. […] In the legal interpretation of Article 43, the relation-

ship between the time element, and the form taken by the provisions of

Article 43 is stressed more than once. It follows that the time element is

a factor affecting the scope of the powers, whether we regard military

needs, or whether we regard the needs of the territory, or maintain equi-

librium between them.39

According to the hcj, the time factor allows to expand, rather than limit, the authority of the Occupying Power under Article 43 of the Hague Regulations. In the Yesh Din case, the hcj has further stated that:

As has been held in many occasions under our rulings, the belligerent

occupation of Israel in the Area [the West Bank] has some unique char-

acteristics, primarily the duration of the occupation period that requires

the adjustment of the law to the reality on the ground, which imposes a

duty upon Israel to ensure normal life for a period, which even if deemed

temporary from a legal perspective, is certainly long- term. Therefore, the

traditional occupation laws require adjustment to the prolonged dura-

tion of the occupation, to the continuity of normal life in the Area and

to the sustainability of economic relations between the two authorities –

the occupier and the occupied.40

The hcj has built on this argument to rule that Israel’s exploitation of quarries in the West Bank is in line with Articles 43 and 55 of the Hague Regulations,



38 hcj 69/ 81, Abu ‘Aita et al. v Regional Commander of the Judea and Samaria Area et al. (5

April 1983); hcj 393/ 82, Jam’iat Iscan Al- Ma’almoun v idf Commander in the Judea and

Samaria Area (28 December 1983).

39 hcj 69/ 81, Abu ‘Aita et al. v Regional Commander of the Judea and Samaria Area et al. (5

April 1983).

40 hcj 2164/ 09, Yesh Din v Commander of the idf Forces in the West Bank et al. (26

December 2011).

38 Todeschini

namely, with the Occupying Power’s role as de facto temporary “administrator and usufructuary” of the occupied territory. In the hcj’s view, it is Israel’s duty under international law to take care of the continuity of “normal life” in the

occupied territory, including its economic development.41

The above-mentioned rulings show how the hcj has employed the pro-

longed nature of the occupation, which is entirely imposed by Israel, to accord Israel expanded powers. What the hcj has done, therefore, is to invert the terms of the equation; instead of subjecting the facts to the law, for example by requiring Israel to end the occupation in accordance with the principle of temporariness, it has subjected the law to the facts, adjusting the terms of the Hague Regulations to the (intentional) protracted duration of the occupation. The prolonged nature of the occupation, thus, has effectively been used to exceed the authority accorded by the Hague Regulations. As Iain Scobbie put it, the hcj “has employed the doctrine of prolonged occupation to buttress an interpretation of the Hague Regulations which obliterated the restraints

placed upon the occupant by [ihl]”.42 This way, the hcj has employed inter-national humanitarian law to justify Israel’s expansion and appropriation pol-icies in the West Bank.

According to some views, however, the protracted character of an occupa-

tion, and the undue expansion of the Occupying Power’s authority, have the effect of rendering an occupation illegal. Orna Ben- Naftali, Aeyal Gross, and Keren Michaeli argued that the legality of an occupation is to be measured against three fundamental principles of the law of occupation: (i) belligerent occupation does not allow the Occupying Power to acquire sovereignty over the occupied territory; (ii) the Occupying Power’s prerogatives are limited to the management of public order and civil life in the occupied territory; and (iii) occupation must be temporary. In these authors’ views, “[t] he violation of any one of these principles, [...] unlike the violation of a specific norm that

reflects them, renders an occupation illegal per se”.43



41 Ibid., paras 10– 13. For further caselaw on this point, see Iain Scobbie, ‘International Law

and the Prolonged Occupation of Palestine’, United Nations Roundtable on Legal Aspects

of the Question of Palestine (2015).

42 Ibid., page 22. See also Al- Haq, Legitimising the Illegitimate? The Israeli High Court of

Justice and the Occupied Palestinian Territory, November 2010.

43 Orna Ben- Naftali, Aeyal Gross and Keren Michaeli, ‘Illegal Occupation: Framing the

Occupied Palestinian Territory’, 23(3) Berkeley Journal of International Law (2005)

551, pages 554‒555. For a critical analysis of this perspective, see Yaël Ronen, ‘Illegal

Occupation and its Consequences’, 41(1) Israel Law Review (2008) 201, pages 207– 211;

David Hughes, ‘Moving from Management to Termination: A Case Study of Prolonged

Occupation’, 44(1) Brooklyn Journal of International Law (2018) 109, pages 153– 164. On the (Il)legality of Israel’s Occupation of the West Bank 39

Building on these arguments, the former UN Special Rapporteur on the

Situation of Human Rights in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, Michael Lynk, elaborated a four- part test, according to which belligerent occupation turns illegal under international humanitarian law when one of the following principles is violated:

(1) The belligerent occupier cannot annex any of the occupied terri-tory; (2) The belligerent occupation must be temporary and cannot be either permanent or indefinite; and the occupant must seek to end the occupation and return the territory to the sovereign as soon as reasonably possible; (3) During the occupation, the belligerent occupier is to act in the best interests of the people under occu-pation; (4) The belligerent occupier must administer the occupied territory in good faith, including acting in full compliance with its duties and obligations under international law and as a member of

the United Nations.44

Such a test has the merit of providing a purposive interpretation that advances one of the main goals of the law of occupation: preventing an occupation from becoming permanent, which would also potentially amount to a breach of the jus ad bellum prohibition against the acquisition of territory through the use

of force – regardless of whether the use of force was lawful or not.45 This way, temporariness acquires a specific normative character to the effect that bellig-erent occupation becomes illegal whenever its protracted nature is instrumen-tal to the adoption by the Occupying Power of measures aimed to appropriate the occupied territory or portions thereof, or that are otherwise incompatible

with the duty to return such territory as soon as feasible.46

Israel’s intention to make its occupation permanent is testified by the sys-

tem of residential, industrial and agricultural settlements, and related infra-structures such as roads and water systems, which have been established and

developed in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, since 1967.47 The Wall



44 unhcr, Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights in the Palestinian

Territories Occupied Since 1967, Michael Lynk, a/ 72/ 556, 23 October 2017, paras 29‒38.

45 See below section 2.

46 It is relevant noting that the illegality of an occupation does not affect the application of

international humanitarian law, which ceases to apply only in accordance with treaty and

customary rules.

47 Omar Dajani, ‘Israel’s Creeping Annexation’, 111 American Journal of International Law

(2017) 54.

40 Todeschini

and its associated regime have further pursued the incorporation of major settlements, especially those located around East Jerusalem, into Israel’s terri-

tory,48 giving rise to a situation of de facto annexation, which further violates the Palestinians’ rights to self- determination and permanent sovereignty over

natural resources.49 Besides being unlawful under international law,50 these kinds of policies and practices contradict the principle of temporariness by making the occupation permanent. In light of this, it is submitted that Israel’s prolonged occupation of the West Bank may be considered illegal under inter-

national humanitarian law.51

It is worth mentioning that, whereas Israel has so far refrained from for-

mally annexing the West Bank, save for Jerusalem,52 it has recently changed

its course of action, moving from de facto to de jure annexation.53 During the twentieth legislature session (31 March 2015– 28 April 2019), Israeli lawmakers introduced in the Israeli parliament, the Knesset, a number of bills that either

48 Al- Haq, The Annexation Wall and its Associated Regime, 19 July 2011.

49 icj, Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory

(Advisory Opinion) icj Reports 136 (2004) para 121; unhrc, Report of the Special

Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights in the Palestinian Territories Occupied Since

1967, Michael Lynk, A/ 73/ 447, 22 October 2018, para 25; Omar Dajani, ‘Israel’s Creeping

Annexation’, (2017) 111 American Journal of International Law (2017) 51, pages 53– 55.

50 Fourth Geneva Convention, Article 49(6); icj, Legal Consequences of the Construction of a

Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory (Advisory Opinion) icj Reports 136 (2004) para

120; unsc Resolution 2334 (23 December 2016) para 1.

51 Orna Ben- Naftali, Aeyal Gross and Keren Michaeli, ‘Illegal Occupation: Framing the

Occupied Palestinian Territory’, 23(3) Berkeley Journal of International Law (2005) 551,

pages 609‒614; unhrc, Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights

in the Palestinian Territories Occupied Since 1967, Michael Lynk, A/ 72/ 556, 23 October 2017,

paras 45‒65; unhrc, Report of the Independent International Commission of Inquiry

on the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and Israel, A/ 77/ 328, 14

September 2022, para 75. According to Ardi Imseis, the principle of temporariness under

international humanitarian law is connected to three jus cogens norms: the prohibition of

territorial acquisition by force; the right of peoples to self- determination; and the prohi-

bition on imposing regimes of alien subjugation, domination, and racial discrimination.

When any of these principles is infringed upon, a belligerent occupation, such as Israel’s,

becomes illegal. See Ardi Imseis, ‘Negotiating the Illegal: On the United Nations and the

Illegal Occupation of Palestine, 1967– 2020’, 31(3) European Journal of International Law

(2020) 1055, pages 1072– 1073.

52 According to Al- Haq, West Jerusalem is to be considered annexed since 1948. See Al-

Haq, Annexing a City: Israel’s Illegal Measures to Annex Jerusalem Since 1948, May 2020.

East Jerusalem was annexed in 1967 and 1980. See Israel, Law and Administration

Ordinance (Amendment No 11) (27 June 1967); Israel, Municipal Corporation Ordinance

(Amendment) Law (27 June 1967); Israel, Basic Law: Jerusalem, Capital of Israel (30

July 1980).

53 Michael Sfard, ‘Israel and Annexation by Lawfare’, The New York Review, 10 April 2018. On the (Il)legality of Israel’s Occupation of the West Bank 41

applied Israeli law to the West Bank on a territorial basis, hence giving effect

to a “creeping legal annexation”,54 or envisaged the future de jure annexation

thereof.55 Eight of these bills became law.56 The de jure annexation of portions of the West Bank has also been openly called for by Israeli government offi-

cials,57 and it has been included in the programmatic objectives of some gov-

ernment coalitions in Israel.58

In that respect, de jure annexation is an act that formalises both the per-

manent nature of Israel’s occupation and the de facto annexation, effectuated through the settlements, of the concerned portions of the West Bank. As such, it plainly contravenes the principle of temporariness, reinforcing the claim that the occupation itself can be deemed illegal under international humani-tarian law.



2 Duration of Occupation under the Jus Ad Bellum

The occupation of a State’s territory by foreign forces constitutes a typical

instance of unlawful use of force,59 and violates the prohibition on the use of force enshrined in Article 2(4) of the UN Charter, which has attained customary

as well as jus cogens status.60 In particular, occupation resulting from unlaw-ful use of force amounts to an act of aggression. This is set out in UN General Assembly resolution 3314 on the Definition of Aggression, according to which “any military occupation, however temporary, resulting from [...] invasion or

attack” constitutes aggression.61 The Rome Statute,62 which incorporates the

54 Yesh Din, The Occupation of the West Bank and the Crime of Apartheid: Legal Opinion, June

2020, pages 33– 34.

55 Yesh Din, Annexation Legislation Database.

56 Ibid.

57 Lubna Masarwa and Mustafa Abu Sneineh, ‘Israel’s Defence Minister Launches

Annexation Drive with Cover from Trump’, Middle East Eye, 10 January 2020.

58 Chaim Levinson and Jonathan Lis, ‘Netanyahu, Gantz Agree on West Bank Annexation

Proposal as Unity Deal Nears’, Haaretz, 6 April 2020.

59 Declaration on Principles of International Law Concerning Friendly Relations and Co-

operation Among States in Accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, adopted

through unga Resolution 2625 (xxv) (24 October 1970), Principle 1(10).

60 icj, Military and Paramilitary Activities in and Against Nicaragua (Judgement) icj Reports

14 (1986) 190; Yoram Dinstein, War, Aggression and Self- Defence (cup 2011) 105 and 117.

61 unga Resolution 3314 (14 December 1974).

62 Aggression has previously been categorized as a crime against peace. See London Charter

of the International Military Tribunal, 8 August 1945, Article 6(a); Nazi Conspiracy and

Aggression: Opinion and Judgement (US Government Printing Office 1947) page 48; ilc,

‘Principles of International Law Recognized in the Charter of the Nuremberg Tribunal 42 Todeschini

definition of aggression agreed upon by the General Assembly, establishes that occupation resulting from unlawful use of force also amounts to the crime of

aggression, for which those responsible may be held criminally liable.63 The same applies when occupation turns into annexation, which breaches the pro-

hibition of territorial acquisition through the use of force64 and constitutes an

act of aggression as well.65

As is well known, the UN Charter provides for two exceptions to the prohibi-

tion on the use of force: military action under its Chapter vii (Articles 39– 42) and self- defence under Article 51. When the UN Security Council determines that a threat to international peace and security exists, it may authorise mil-

itary action.66 Occupation authorised by the Security Council to maintain or restore international peace and security would not, in this perspective, amount

to a breach of the prohibition on the use of force.67 The objective of tackling a threat to international peace and security also implies that a Security Council- authorised occupation may last for the time necessary to address such a threat, meaning it could in principle be prolonged. However, even a Security Council- authorised occupation would be limited. Security Council action must always conform with the purposes and principles set out in Articles 1‒2 of the UN

Charter,68 among which are respect for human rights, self- determination,

and in the Judgement of the Tribunal’, A/ 1316, 1 January 1950, Principle vi(a); ilc, ‘Draft

Code of Offences Against the Peace and Security of Mankind’, a/ cn.4/ 85, 30 April 1954,

Article 2(1); ilc, ‘Draft Code of Crimes Against the Peace and Security of Mankind with

Commentaries’, a/ cn.4/ ser.a/ 1996/ Add.l, 6 May– 26 July 1996, Article 16.

63 Rome Statute, Article 8bis(2)(a). It is worth noting that, while Israel’s occupation of the

Palestinian territory in principle falls under the definition of aggression provided for in

the Rome Statute, Article 15bis(5) bars the International Criminal Court’s exercise of juris-

diction over the crime of aggression vis- à- vis non- States Parties and States Parties which

have not expressly accepted such jurisdiction. Given that Israel has not acceded to the

Rome Statute, at present Israeli officials cannot be prosecuted for the crime of aggression

before the icc (whereas they can for all other crimes under the Rome Statute). While

Article 15ter provides that the icc may exercise jurisdiction over the crime of aggression

against non- States Parties pursuant to a referral of the UN Security Council, it is highly

unlikely that States holding the veto power, and which are supportive of Israel, would

allow such a referral to pass.

64 Declaration on Principles of International Law Concerning Friendly Relations and Co-

operation Among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, Principle

1(10); icj, Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian

Territory (Advisory Opinion) icj Reports 136 (2004) para 87.

65 unga Resolution 3314 (14 December 1974); Rome Statute, Article 8bis(2)(a).

66 UN Charter, Articles 39 and 42. See for example unsc Resolution 1973 (17 March 2011).

67 Declaration on Principles of International Law Concerning Friendly Relations and Co-

operation Among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, Principle

1(10)(b).

68 UN Charter, Article 24(2).

On the (Il)legality of Israel’s Occupation of the West Bank 43

sovereignty and the territorial integrity of States. In addition, the Security

Council must respect the peremptory norms of international law,69 otherwise

known as jus cogens.70 While its resolutions, assuming they are compliant with

the UN Charter, may generally prevail over conflicting international law,71 they

cannot go against jus cogens lest becoming devoid of legal effect.72

The right to self- determination – as both a UN Charter purpose73 and a

norm jus cogens74 – is especially relevant as a limit to the duration of a UN Security Council- authorised occupation. In fact, the legal effect of belliger-

ent occupation is to suspend temporarily the exercise of sovereignty,75 which



69 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, Article 53. “[A] peremptory norm of general

international law is a norm accepted and recognized by the international community

of States as a whole as a norm from which no derogation is permitted and which can

be modified only by a subsequent norm of general international law having the same

character”.

70 See icj, Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime

of Genocide, Provisional Measures (Order) icj Reports 407 (1993), Separate Opinion of

Judge Lauterpacht, paras 98– 100; UK House of Lords, R (on the application of Al- Jedda) v

Secretary of State for Defence, Case no ukhl 58, 12 December 2007, para 35.

71 The effects of UN Security Council’s resolutions on human rights obligations have been

debated in both domestic and regional case law. Among others see UK House of Lords,

R (on the application of Al- Jedda) v Secretary of State for Defence, Case no ukhl 58, 12

December 2007; ECtHR, Al- Jedda v The United Kingdom, Judgement, 7 July 2011; ECtHR,

Al- Dulimi and Montana Management Inc v Switzerland, Judgement, 21 June 2016.

72 Kjetil Mujezinović Larsen, The Human Rights Treaty Obligations of Peacekeepers (cup

2012) 324‒326.

73 UN Charter, Article 1(2).

74 The right to self- determination has been recognised as a customary norm with erga omnes

effects. See icj, East Timor (Portugal v Australia) (Judgement) icj Reports 90 (1995) para

29; icj, Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory

(Advisory Opinion) icj Reports 136 (2004) paras 88, 155– 156; icj, Legal Consequences of

the Separation of the Chagos Archipelago from Mauritius in 1965 (Advisory Opinion) icj

Reports 169 (2019) paras 150‒153, 180. For references to self- determination as having

attained jus cogens status, see ilc, ‘Documents of the Second Part of the Seventeenth

Session and of the Eighteenth Session including the Reports of the Commission to the

General Assembly’, 2 Yearbook of the International Law Commission (1966) page 248; ilc,

‘Report of the International Law Commission on the Work of its Fifty- Third Session’, 2(2)

Yearbook of the International Law Commission (2001) page 112, footnote 641, and page 113;

icj, Legal Consequences of the Separation of the Chagos Archipelago from Mauritius in 1965

(Advisory Opinion) icj Reports 169 (2019), Separate Opinion of Judge Robinson, para 50;

Robert Jennings and Arthur Watts (eds), Oppenheim’s International Law: Volume 1 Peace

(Longmans 1992) 8.

75 Orna Ben- Naftali, Aeyal Gross and Keren Michaeli, ‘Illegal Occupation: Framing the

Occupied Palestinian Territory’, 23(3) Berkeley Journal of International Law (2005) 551,

page 574. “[A] n occupation […] suspends sovereignty insofar as it severs its ordinary link

with effective control; but it does not, indeed it cannot, alter sovereignty”.

44 Todeschini

in turn is vested in the people entitled to the right to self- determination – in

occupied territories, the people under occupation.76 From a legal standpoint, any occupation needs to comply with the principle of self- determination, which imposes an obligation to refrain from forcible action that deprives a people of their right to self- determination and to respect the exercise of this

right.77 The duration of an occupation must be temporary in order to reconcile with the right to self- determination: an indefinite occupation would be tanta-

mount to a nullification of the right to self- determination.78 Given that the UN Security Council has itself an obligation to respect and promote the exercise of the right to self- determination, it follows that also Security Council- authorised occupations must comply with the principle of temporariness. While the maintenance of international peace and security may justify that an occupa-tion lasts for a protracted period of time, such overarching objective cannot entail an undue limitation of the right to self- determination. Hence, it can be argued that a requirement of temporariness exists also in relation to Security Council- authorised occupations. While the latter are in principle permitted, they cannot be indefinite or permanent, in violation of the UN Charter and jus cogens – particularly, the right to self- determination.

Self- defence is the second exception to the prohibition on the use of force.79

Under international law, a State may use force in self- defence only when it

76 icc, Situation in Palestine, ‘Prosecution Response to the Observations of Amici Curiae,

Legal Representatives of Victims, and States’, icc- 01/ 18- 131, 30 April 2020, para 42.

77 icj, Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian

Territory (Advisory Opinion) icj Reports 136 (2004) para 81; Declaration on Principles

of International Law Concerning Friendly Relations and Co- operation Among States in

Accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, Principle 4(6); iccpr, Article 1; ice-

scr, Article 1.

78 Orna Ben- Naftali, Aeyal Gross and Keren Michaeli, ‘Illegal Occupation: Framing the

Occupied Palestinian Territory’, 23(3) Berkeley Journal of International Law (2005) 551,

page 599, which reads “[i] f occupation ‘could, from a legal point of view, continue indef-

initely’, the interests it is designed to protect – the interest of the occupied people to

reach the point in time when they regain control over their lives and exercise their right

to self- determination […] – would be rendered meaningless. Thus, the core assumptions

of the normative regime of occupation would be defied if an occupation can be stymied

indefinitely. The temporary, as distinct from the indefinite, nature of occupation is thus

the most necessary element of the normative regime of occupation, as it gives meaning

and effect – both factual and legal – to the concepts of liberty, freedom, and the right to

self- determination”. See also unhrc, Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Situation of

Human Rights in the Palestinian Territories Occupied Since 1967, Francesca Albanese, A/ 77/

356, 21 September 2022.

79 UN Charter, Article 51. The right of self- defence is part of customary international law;

see icj, Military and Paramilitary Activities in and Against Nicaragua (Judgement) icj

Reports 14 (1986) para 176.

On the (Il)legality of Israel’s Occupation of the West Bank 45

is the victim of an armed attack, in other words a use of armed force of a certain scale and gravity. If the offensive force does not reach such a thresh-

old, a State is not entitled to act in self- defence.80 Moreover, defensive force

must respect the requirements of immediacy, necessity and proportionality.81 Immediacy prescribes that no undue time lapse exist between the occurrence

of the armed attack and the exercise of self- defence.82 Necessity requires that

a State resort to armed force solely when alternative options are unavailable.83 Proportionality allows the State to use only the degree of armed force that is

essential to repel and neutralise an armed attack.84 Use of armed force in self- defence that fails to meet such cumulative requirements is in breach of inter-

national law.85 It is also worth highlighting that contemporary international

law does not envisage self- defence as a modality for acquiring territory.86

In principle, the occupation of the aggressor’s territory may be justified

under the right of self- defence whenever necessary to repel an armed attack,

and provided it complies with the above- mentioned requirements.87 Pursuant to the principle of proportionality, the State acting in self- defence can occupy only the amount of the aggressor State’s territory that is required to neutralise the armed attack. In accordance with the principle of necessity, furthermore, the State acting in self- defence must withdraw from the occupied territory as soon as the armed attack has ended. In the very moment an occupation ceases to serve the purpose of repelling an armed attack, its continuation gives rise to



80 Ibid., paras 195 and 211. It remains an open question whether self- defence can only be

used in relation to an armed attack that is ongoing or has actually occurred, or also in

respect of an armed attack that is imminent, in other words, about to occur; see Marko

Milanovic, ‘The Soleimani Strike and Self- Defence Against an Imminent Armed Attack’,

ejil Talk!, 7 January 2020.

81 icj, Military and Paramilitary Activities in and Aagainst Nicaragua (Judgement) icj

Reports 14 (1986) paras 194, 237; icj, Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons

(Advisory Opinion) icj Reports 226 (1996) para 41; icj, Oil Platforms (Judgement) icj

Reports 161 (2003) para 76.

82 Yoram Dinstein, War, Aggression and Self- Defence (cup 2011) 233.

83 Ibid., pages 231‒232.

84 Ibid., pages 232‒233, 244, 248; Christopher Greenwood, ‘Self- Defence’ in Max Planck

Encyclopedia of Public International Law (oup 2011) para 28.

85 Ibid., para 4. Article 51 of the UN Charter further requires States to report to the Security

Council on the measures adopted in self- defence. See also icj, Legality of the Threat or Use

of Nuclear Weapons (Advisory Opinion) icj Reports 226 (1996) para 44.

86 Rainer Hofmann, ‘Annexation’ in Max Planck Encyclopedia of Public International Law

(oup 2013) paras 23‒24.

87 Antonio Cassese, Self- Determination of Peoples: A Legal Reappraisal (cup 1995) 99; Matteo

Fornari ‘I Cinquant’anni Della Guerra Dei Sei Giorni: Alcune Questioni (Irrisolte) Poste

Dalla Risoluzione 242’, 2 La Comunità Internazionale (2018) 185, pages 192‒195. 46 Todeschini

a breach of the prohibition on the use of force, possibly amounting to an act

of aggression in its own turn.88 This means that, under the law of self- defence, an occupation must be temporary and, by implication, that prolonged occupa-tions will rarely meet the criteria of necessity and proportionality.

As Christine Gray noted, while States like Israel and South Africa invoked

self- defence in order to justify their presence in South Lebanon (1978‒2000) and Angola (1981‒1988), respectively, such prolonged occupations have been

condemned as unnecessary and disproportionate in terms of self- defence.89 Indeed, the longer an occupation lasts, the harder it will be for the Occupying

Power to justify its presence on foreign territory.90 Even when some sort of threat to the victim State persists, the protracted military presence on foreign territory becomes an unnecessary and disproportionate measure as long as such a threat does not concretise into an armed attack.

This reasoning may be applied to Israel’s prolonged occupation of the

Palestinian territory.91 Israel justifies its presence by claiming that it took con-

trol of the Palestinian territory following a self- defence war,92 a legal argument which is fundamentally flawed. Even if it was accepted that the initial occu-pation of the Palestinian territory and the Golan Heights during the Six- Day

War had been undertaken in legitimate self- defence,93 which John Quigley

refutes in Chapter 1, its protracted duration is unjustified under the law of self-

defence.94 The victory of Israel in that conflict proves that any existing armed attack by Egypt, Jordan and Syria was successfully repelled. Moreover, Israel first signed a disengagement agreement with Syria (1974), reinforced by the

presence of the UN Disengagement Observer Force in the Golan Heights,95 and



88 Eyal Benvenisti, The International Law of Occupation (oup 2012) 16– 17.

89 Christine Gray, International Law and the Use of Force (oup 2008) 154‒155.

90 Vaios Koutroulis, ‘The Application of International Humanitarian Law and International

Human Rights Law in Situation of Prolonged Occupation: Only a Matter of Time?’, 94(885)

International Review of the Red Cross (2012) 165, page 168.

91 Ralph Wilde, ‘Using the Master’s Tools to Dismantle the Master’s House: International

Law and Palestinian Liberation’, 22 The Palestine Yearbook of International Law (2019–

2020) 3, pages 21– 35.

92 Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Israel, ‘Israeli Settlements and International Law’, 30

November 2015.

93 This should not be read as an argument supporting the view that during the Six- Day War

Israel acted in self- defence. For analysis, see John Quigley, The Six- Day War and Israeli

Self- Defense: Questioning the Legal Basis for Preventive War (cup 2013).

94 Matteo Fornari ‘I Cinquant’anni della Guerra dei Sei Giorni: Alcune Questioni (Irrisolte)

Poste dalla Risoluzione 242’, 2 La Comunità Internazionale (2018) 185, page 195.

95 Agreement on Disengagement between Israeli and Syrian Forces, 31 May 1974; unsc

Resolution 350 (31 May 1974).

On the (Il)legality of Israel’s Occupation of the West Bank 47

subsequently reached a peace treaty with Egypt (1979) and Jordan (1994).96 The absence of an ongoing or immediate armed attack by the States against which Israel fought the Six- Day War means that the law of self- defence cannot justify the maintenance of belligerent occupation in any of the territories occupied in 1967, including the West Bank.

Israel’s self- defence claims should also be considered in light of the annex-

ation of portions of the West Bank.97 The de jure annexation of East Jerusalem since 1967 and the creation of at least 300 settlements where more than 700,000 settlers live, which has resulted in the de facto annexation of the portions of the West Bank where these are located, evidence Israel’s intention to appropriate,

in whole or in part, the territories it occupied in 1967.98 Establishing such a per-manent presence on the Palestinian territory, in turn, excludes the possibility of framing Israel’s occupation of the West Bank in self- defence terms, as such conduct inherently violates the principles of necessity and proportionality and the underlying requirement that occupation under self- defence be temporary. Moreover, annexation is itself an act of aggression, and self- defence can never

justify the acquisition of territory by force.99

Against this background, it can be concluded that Israel’s prolonged occu-

pation of the Palestinian territory breaches the requirement of temporariness of occupations inherent in the principles governing self- defence under the jus ad bellum. By failing to be justified under the law of self- defence, Israel’s pro-longed occupation of the Palestinian territory constitutes an unlawful use of force amounting to an act of aggression, in breach of the UN Charter and cus-tomary international law.



3 Responses to Breaches of the Principle of Temporariness

An infringement of the principle of temporariness determines the illegal-ity of an occupation under both international humanitarian law and the jus ad bellum. As the analysis sought to demonstrate, this is the case for Israel’s



96 Treaty of Peace between the Arab Republic of Egypt and the State of Israel, 26 March

1979; Treaty of Peace between the State of Israel and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan,

26 October 1994. Jordan already renounced all claims over the West Bank in 1988. See King

Hussein of Jordan, Address to the Nation, 31 July 1988.

97 See above Section 1.

98 Israel’s formal annexation of the Golan Heights in 1981 further supports such a claim.

99 Rainer Hofmann, ‘Annexation’ in Max Planck Encyclopedia of Public International Law

(oup 2013) paras 23‒24.

48 Todeschini

prolonged occupation of the West Bank. In light of this, the law of international responsibility prescribes on Israel an obligation to cease its unlawful actions,

withdraw its military and civilian presence from the occupied territory,100 and make adequate reparation in the form of restitution, compensation and satis-

faction both to the State of Palestine and individual Palestinians.101

Given Israel’s military occupation and partial de jure annexation of the

Palestinian territory amount to acts of aggression, the UN Security Council may in principle adopt all available measures under Chapter vii of the UN Charter, including economic sanctions and military action, to compel Israel to withdraw from the Palestinian territory. Despite having repeatedly affirmed the inadmissibility of territorial acquisition by force – an act of aggression in

and of itself – in its relevant resolutions,102 the Security Council has never determined that Israel’s occupation of the Palestinian territory constitutes a

“threat to international peace and security”,103 which is the necessary prelim-inary step required to adopt Chapter vii measures. This is explained by the persistent use on the part of the US of the veto power, which has historically

shielded Israel from being the target of any forcible action.104

The illegality of the prolonged occupation of the West Bank triggers legal

consequences for Third States as well. Under Common Article 1 of the Geneva Conventions, Third States must “ensure respect” for international humani-tarian law which, as held by the icj, translates into an obligation “to ensure

compliance by Israel with international humanitarian law […]”.105 Given that Israel’s prolonged occupation of the West Bank violates one of the pillars of



100 unsc Resolution 242 (22 November 1967) already requested Israel to withdraw its armed

forces from the territories it had occupied in June 1967, and to respect the sovereignty,

territorial integrity and political independence of all States in the area.

101 ilc, ‘Report of the International Law Commission on the Work of its Fifty- Third Session’,

2(2) Yearbook of the International Law Commission (2001), Articles 30, 31, 34‒37; icj, Legal

Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory (Advisory

Opinion) icj Reports 136 (2004) para 152.

102 See for example unsc Resolution 242 (22 November 1967); unsc Resolution 252 (21 May

1968); unsc Resolution 478 (20 August 1920).

103 This is the formula developed in the practice of the UN Security Council when acting

under Chapter vii of the UN Charter.

104 A full list of vetoed UN Security Council’s resolutions is available on the website of the

Dag Hammarskjöld Library, under the heading “Security Council – Veto List”.

105 icj, Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory

(Advisory Opinion) icj Reports 136 (2004) para 159. See also icrc, Commentary on

the First Geneva Convention: Convention (I) for the Amelioration of the Condition of the

Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field (cup 2016) paras 164‒173. On the (Il)legality of Israel’s Occupation of the West Bank 49

the law of occupation – the principle of temporariness – Third States should adopt, in order to fulfil their Common Article 1 obligation, any lawful measures at their disposal to compel Israel to put an end to it.

Under the jus ad bellum, a prolonged occupation infringes upon the pro-

hibition on the use of force, which is a jus cogens norm. In this respect, the law of international responsibility prescribes Third States neither to recog-nise nor to render aid or assistance in perpetuating the prolonged occupation

of the West Bank, and to cooperate to bring it to an end.106 Third States also have the faculty to invoke Israel’s responsibility in the interest of the State of Palestine in order to request the cessation of the occupation, guarantees of

non- repetition, and reparation.107 Third States may even adopt lawful counter-measures, including of an economic or diplomatic character, to compel Israel

to conform to international law.108

Finally, it has been suggested that the UN General Assembly and the icj

may be invested of the matter. Efforts could be made to revive the General Assembly’s position on the illegality of Israel’s occupation, while a second icj advisory opinion could be sought to declare the occupation per se contrary to

international law.109 Although not definitive in themselves, these declarations would be a significant addition to Palestine’s legal and political arsenal, which may then be employed as part of the engagement with the international com-munity in the efforts to end Israel’s occupation of the Palestinian territory.



4 Conclusion

A belligerent occupation is an exceptional situation within an international legal order based on formal sovereign equality between States and the exercise



106 ilc, ‘Report of the International Law Commission on the Work of its Fifty- Third Session’,

2(2) Yearbook of the International Law Commission (2001), Articles 40– 41; icj, Legal

Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory (Advisory

Opinion) icj Reports 136 (2004) para 159.

107 ilc, ‘Report of the International Law Commission on the Work of its Fifty- Third Session’,

2(2) Yearbook of the International Law Commission (2001), Article 48.

108 Ibid., Article 54.

109 Ardi Imseis, ‘Negotiating the Illegal: On the United Nations and the Illegal Occupation

of Palestine, 1967– 2020’, 31(3) European Journal of International Law (2020) 1055, pages

1082– 1084; unhrc Report of the Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the

Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and Israel, A/ 77/ 328, 14 September

2022, paras 84 and 92(a).

50 Todeschini

by peoples of their right to self- determination.110 Accordingly, international law regulates belligerent occupation on the assumption that it will terminate as soon as circumstances allow. This is the reason why, under both international humanitarian law and the jus ad bellum, a belligerent occupation is meant to be temporary. And yet, while both bodies of law incorporate the principle of temporariness, they conceptualise it differently.

While international humanitarian law refrains from setting an end date to

a belligerent occupation, it treats the Occupying Power as a de facto tempo-rary “administrator and usufructuary” of the occupied territory, which should strive to maintain, as far as possible, the status quo within it. Thus, interna-tional humanitarian law conceives the exercise of authority by the Occupying Power over foreign territory as inherently temporary, even though it does not prescribe its termination. The assumption is indeed that belligerent occupa-tion serves the conduct and purposes of war, meaning that it is supposed to end when such necessities cease to exist. If the Occupying Power wilfully and purposely prolongs a belligerent occupation because it intends to annex the occupied territory, de jure or de facto, then it contravenes the very principle of temporariness upon which the law of occupation is founded. It then follows that belligerent occupation becomes illegal under international humanitarian law the moment that the Occupying Power implements measures designed to appropriate the occupied territory on a permanent basis. In relation to Israel’s occupation of the West Bank, such measures are implemented through the establishment and expansion of settlements and the transfer of settlers, and through laws that purport to formally annex the totality or portions of the West Bank. This situation has engendered what Michael Lynk has called “an occupation in perpetuity”, which constitutes “the antithesis of international

humanitarian law”.111

Differently from international humanitarian law, the jus ad bellum regu-

lates the legality of the use of armed force between States and, accordingly, determines the unlawfulness of military occupations that contravene the UN Charter and customary international law. When military occupations are part of a use of armed force that is lawful, especially with respect to the right of self- defence, the jus ad bellum prescribes an end date on them. In particular,



110 Orna Ben- Naftali, Aeyal Gross and Keren Michaeli, ‘Illegal Occupation: Framing the

Occupied Palestinian Territory’, 23(3) Berkeley Journal of International Law (2005) 551,

pages 553– 556.

111 unhrc, Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights in the

Palestinian Territories Occupied Since 1967, Michael Lynk, a/ hrc/ 49/ 87, 21 March 2022,

paras 15 and 54.

On the (Il)legality of Israel’s Occupation of the West Bank 51

the principles of necessity and proportionality require a State acting in self- defence, which has occupied the aggressor State’s territory to repel an armed attack, to withdraw its forces as soon as the latter is terminated. Consequently, a belligerent occupation that lasts for a period of time exceeding the neces-sities of self- defence becomes unlawful because it breaches the principles of necessity and proportionality and, by implication, the prohibition on the use of force enshrined in the UN Charter and customary international law. As the present analysis has shown, Israel’s attempts to justify its military presence in the West Bank on the basis of self- defence are unfounded, which means that its occupation of the West Bank is illegal under the jus ad bellum.

Legally speaking, time is not on the side of the Occupying Power, and Israel’s

prolonged occupation of the West Bank does not escape this basic rule. If it were otherwise, the fundamental premises on which the international legal order rests would be negated.



Acknowledgement

The author is grateful to Nada Kiswanson, Susan Power, Ian Seiderman and Marco Longobardo for their valuable comments on earlier drafts of the chapter. Any errors are the author’s alone. This chapter was written in a personal capac-ity; the views expressed cannot be attributed to the International Commission of Jurists.





chapter 3


The Occupation of Palestine from a twail Lens

Ray Murphy, Anita Ferrara and Susan Power



This chapter will examine the international legal framework governing the situation in Palestine from a Third World Approaches to International Law lens, set out what the twail movement is, and assess its relevance today. In so doing, it will address how the interplay of international law and practice are manipulated to serve neo- colonial interests in Palestine. This chapter will establish how Israel has instrumentalised international law arguments to evade its responsibilities under the Geneva Conventions. It will further explore how regime bias underpins the deference of the Israeli High Court of Justice to the military necessity arguments of the military commander, which in turn leads to a distortion of international law in the jurisprudence of the court. This distortion is then replicated in textbooks and other influential secondary inter-national law materials. In this way, this chapter posits that international law has enabled Israel’s fragmentation, structural domination and exploitation of the Palestinian people. Given the failure of the international community to intervene, this chapter questions what the consequences are if international humanitarian law principles are continually breached during unending occu-pations intended to facilitate full colonisation.



1 Third World Approaches to International Law

Third World Approaches to International Law analyses the manner in which international law, throughout the ages, has operated as “a system of exclusion

or oppression”.1 In this way the twail approach considers international law’s role in enabling the structural domination and exploitation of States and peoples. This approach is especially useful and pertinent in the Middle East where international law has historically been exploited in order to maintain



1 Fréderic Mégret, ‘International Law as Law’ in James Crawford and Martti Koskenniemi (eds),

The Cambridge Companion to International Law (cup 2012) 80– 84. See also Antonio Cassese,

International Law (oup 2005) 11; Gerry Simpson, ‘International Law in Diplomatic History’ in

James Crawford and Martti Koskenniemi (eds), The Cambridge Companion to International

Law (cup 2012) 34.



© Ray Murphy et al., 2023 | DOI:10.1163/978900450

The Occupation of Palestine from a twail Lens 53

the imperial ambitions of other States. twail scholars consider that in order to respond to contemporary challenges to international order, international law must ensure greater participation and representation of disenfranchised peoples and promote a more equitable distribution of the world’s resources.

The source of much contemporary international law is commonly traced to

the 1648 Peace of Westphalia.2 It is not surprising that the international legal

system that evolved subsequently was a decidedly European project.3 Only so- called “civilised” European States were regarded as full subjects of interna-

tional law and thus members of international society.4 By restricting recogni-tion of statehood to “civilised” nations, European States were able to control the evolution of customary international law to suit their purposes. They also afforded themselves the role of preparing the “un- civilised” nations for subjec-

tion to international law.5

The exact treatment of non- European regions under the Euro- centric

framework of international law depended on their supposed level of civil-

isation.6 James Lorimer divided humanity into “civilised” European States, “savage” extra- European peoples and an intermediate category of “barbarous”

semi- civilised States.7 States falling in the intermediate category, including the Ottoman Empire, were subjected to capitulation treaties, which afforded



2 Martti Koskenniemi, The Gentle Civilizer of Nations: The Rise and Fall of International Law

1870– 1960 (cup 2001). Although, according to Bederman, many of the basic rules of contem-

porary international law including those concerning diplomatic immunity, the creation and

enforcement of treaties, and the initiation and conduct of armed conflict originated outside

of Europe, most notably, in the ancient Near East. See David J Bederman, ‘International law

in the Ancient World’ in David Armstrong (ed), Routledge Handbook of International Law

(Routledge 2009). See also Malcolm N. Shaw, International Law (cup 2014) 10– 13. Before

1648, medieval legal theory and the jus gentium helped enable Western European imperi-

alism, Antony Anghie, Imperialism, Sovereignty and the Making of International Law (cup

2004) Chapter 1. Anne Orford and Florian Hoffmann (eds), The Oxford Handbook of the

Theory of International Law (oup 2016) 273– 75.

3 See generally Martti Koskenniemi, The Gentle Civilizer of Nations: The Rise and Fall of

International Law 1870– 1960 (cup 2001).

4 Martti Koskenniemi, From Apology to Utopia: The Structure of International Legal Argument

(cup 2005) 144– 145. See also Antony Anghie, Imperialism, Sovereignty and the Making of

International Law (cup 2004) 35.

5 Martti Koskenniemi, From Apology to Utopia: The Structure of International Legal Argument

(cup 2005) 147– 148.

6 Antonio Cassese, International Law (oup 2005) 26.

7 Umut Özsu, ‘The Ottoman Empire, the Origins of Extraterritoriality, and International Legal

Theory’ in Anne Orford and Florian Hoffmann (eds), The Oxford Handbook of the Theory of

International Law (oup 2016) 133.

54 Murphy, Ferrara and Power

non- reciprocal privileges to European (and subsequently American) resi-

dents.8 “Savages” were subjected to outright colonisation through treaties of cession, annexation and conquest. The origins of many of the contemporary problems in the Middle East region can be traced to the exploitation of inter-national law for often short- sighted national gain.

In this way, international legal doctrines were devised to enable the colo-

nial project.9 Nowhere is this more evident than in the terrae nullius prin-ciple. Under this principle no sovereign title existed over territory outside of the Euro- centric society of States and consequently that territory was open to colonial conquest. The principle of recognition stipulated that recognition of statehood by the other members of the international society, namely Western

States, was sufficient to secure external sovereignty.10 The principle of effective-ness posited that de facto control of territory was sufficient to secure internal

sovereignty.11 Indigenous populations could attempt to forcefully defend their territory against colonial powers. Such efforts were more often than not subject to failure owing to the disparity in military capacity of such populations when compared to that of European powers. Furthermore, the situation was wors-ened by the fact that armed conflicts between colonial powers and indigenous populations were not considered subject to the laws of war between so- called civilised States and “barbarians” and “savages” who were deemed less vulnera-

ble to injury.12 This left indigenous populations disadvantaged with little alter-

native but to conclude unequal treaties with the colonial powers.13

In the course of 20th century, the United States and the Soviet Union over-

took the European States and became international superpowers. Despite support for the right to self- determination, colonialism continued after World War i. Indeed, the League of Nations imposed an obligation on the mandate



8 Ibid., pages 123– 137; Antonio Cassese, International Law (oup 2005) 26– 27; Karen Knop,

‘Statehood: Territory, People, Government’ in James Crawford and Martti Koskenniemi

(eds), The Cambridge Companion to International Law (cup 2012) 97– 98.

9 Antonio Cassese, International Law (oup 2005) 28; Simpson, ‘International Law in

Diplomatic History’ in James Crawford and Martti Koskenniemi (eds), The Cambridge

Companion to International Law (cup 2012) 34.

10 Antony Anghie, Imperialism, Sovereignty and the Making of International Law (cup

2004) 75– 80; Anne Orford and Florian Hoffmann (eds), The Oxford Handbook of the

Theory of International Law (oup 2016) 277– 278.

11 The principle of effectiveness “provides that only those claims and situations which are

effective can produce legal consequences”. Antonio Cassese, International Law (oup

2005) 12– 13.

12 Antonio Cassese, International Law (oup 2005) 28, 32.

13 Ibid., page 28.

The Occupation of Palestine from a twail Lens 55

powers to “civilise” the subjects of the mandate system.14 World War ii expe-dited the decolonisation process and the principle of self- determination was

enshrined in the UN Charter.15 However, the retention of a reference to the “general principles of law recognized by civilized nations” in the Statute of the International Court of Justice remains an implicit recognition of international

law’s colonial legacy.16 Furthermore, the World War ii victorious States were afforded a permanent position on the UN Security Council and the power of veto. The UN General Assembly was a representative and egalitarian organ, more reflective of the concept of sovereign equality which former colonies were able to use to codify international legal principles favourable to their

interests.17 However, global economic disparities often rendered the former

colonies dependent upon industrialised nations.18

Although many twail scholars consider that international law still repli-

cates the “civilising mission” through mechanisms such as the International Criminal Court and the principle of Responsibility to Protect, they acknowledge that international law is no longer exclusively an instrument of the strong. The principle of the sovereign equality of States means that the interests of weaker States must be accommodated to some extent, even if this is limited. The fact that even powerful States feel the need to legally justify their actions suggests

that international law can constrain the exercise of power to some degree.19 Furthermore, former colonies value international law’s respect for pluralism as

a means of defending their independence.20 At the same time, authoritarian rulers in post- colonial States have exploited the legal principles of sovereignty and non- interference in the domestic affairs of a State to legitimise their neo- imperial practices. twail scholars agree that if international law is to respond



14 Covenant of the League of Nations, Article 22.

15 Antonio Cassese, International Law (oup 2005) 40.

16 Statute of the International Court of Justice, Article 38(1)(c).

17 Antonio Cassese, International Law (oup 2005) 42; James Crawford and Martti

Koskenniemi (eds), The Cambridge Companion to International Law (cup 2012) 56.

18 Gerry Simpson, ‘International Law in Diplomatic History’ in Crawford and Koskenniemi

(eds), The Cambridge Companion to International Law (cup 2012) 34. Anne Orford and

Florian Hoffmann (eds), The Oxford Handbook of the Theory of International Law (oup

2016) 283.

19 BS Chimni, ‘Legitimating the International Rule of Law’ in James Crawford and Martti

Koskenniemi (eds), The Cambridge Companion to International Law (cup 2012) 299– 300.

20 Fréderic Mégret, ‘International Law as Law’ in James Crawford and Martti Koskenniemi

(eds), The Cambridge Companion to International Law (cup 2012) 87. See also Martti

Koskenniemi, The Politics of International Law (Hart Publishing 2009) 255– 256. 56 Murphy, Ferrara and Power

to contemporary global challenges, it will need to address demands for greater

participation, distributive justice, and non- selective enforcement.21

In this way international law also presents a potential tool for those that have

been oppressed and disadvantaged by its utilisation in the past. International human rights principles in particular provide a benchmark by which to mea-sure the behaviour of States and to use in order to vindicate rights, especially within the international human rights framework. Likewise, more recent developments in international law such as the International Criminal Court provide important mechanisms for individual accountability.



2 How International Law Operates a ‘System of Exclusion or

Oppression’ in Palestine

This section draws from twail theory to explain how the application of international law is subverted in Palestine and how hegemonic States and the powerful Zionist lobby have operated to ensure the continuation of Israel’s colonisation of Palestine. In this manner, international law has operated as a tool to fragment, exclude and oppress the Palestinian people, as well as deny their collective right of self- determination for decades.

2.1 Using unga Resolution 181 to Deny Palestinian Self- determination

How international law operates to the exclusion of the oppressed is evidenced in the systematic fragmentation of the Palestinian people, with 12 million refugees in the diaspora denied their right of return, while the collective Palestinian people have been denied their right of self- determination since 1948. Early patterns of exclusion were evidenced in the administration of Palestine as a Class A mandate (which meant that Palestine was provision-ally recognised as an independent nation), the administration of which was

supposed to revert back to the Palestinian people post- mandate.22 However, instead of relinquishing control back to the Palestinian people, as required of Class A mandates such as transpired in the Class A mandates of Iraq, Syria and Lebanon, the Zionist lobby mobilised the United Nations to enact UN General Assembly resolution 181. In the summer of 1947, future Israeli Prime



21 Fréderic Mégret, ‘International Law as Law’ in James Crawford and Martti Koskenniemi

(eds), The Cambridge Companion to International Law (cup 2012) 88. See also BS Chimni,

‘Legitimating the International Rule of Law’ in Crawford and Koskenniemi (eds), The

Cambridge Companion to International Law (cup 2012) 294– 295, 317.

22 The Covenant of the League of Nations, 28 June 1919, Part 1, Article 22. The Occupation of Palestine from a twail Lens 57

Minister Menachem Begin warned the UN that the “peace of the world” would be threatened if “‘the Hebrew [Biblical] homeland’ is not given in full to the

Zionists. ‘Whatever might be signed or pledged’”.23 The subsequent UN General Assembly resolution 181, voted on by the international community of nations, infringed upon the internationally recognised right of self- determination of the Palestinian people and awarded Palestinian lands to the recently arrived colonialist settler minority in Palestine. The Palestinian people were at this time the majority population in Mandate Palestine and they had permanent sovereignty over their land and national resources.

2.2 A Permanent Occupation of the Palestinian Territory In the occupied Palestinian territory, composed of the West Bank, including East Jerusalem and the Gaza Strip, Israel is flouting the laws of occupation to progress and expand its settler colonisation. Many twail scholars have high-lighted that the international rules- based system premised on the equality of States and offered as a “neutral discipline” is in fact an “instrument of naked power, skillfully dressed up so as to hide its objective of controlling the col-

onized world for the benefit of the colonial powers”.24 Similarly, the narrow de facto framework of military occupation which was originally intended to protect the property and assets of smaller weaker States against the aggran-disement of the Occupying Power, is today employed by Israel as a State sanc-tioned tool of colonisation. Nobel Laureate Desmond Tutu’s statement in 2014 that, “Israel has created an apartheid reality within its borders and through its occupation”, speaks to the manipulation of occupation law to advance settler

colonial and apartheid practices.25

While the legality of occupation de jure is governed by international law

and the UN Charter, whether a situation amounts to an occupation is deter-mined by a factual assessment on the ground. As such, the lawfulness of the occupation is irrelevant to the de facto application of international humanitar-ian law. The Hague Regulations and the Fourth Geneva Convention contain a number of important provisions relating to occupation in this regard. Article 42 of the Hague Regulations states that “territory is considered occupied when



23 Thomas Suárez, ‘Israel has Never had any Intention of Honouring Either the 1947 Partition

Plan or 1967 Borders’, Middle East Monitor, 10 October 2019.

24 Muthucumaraswamy Sornarajah, ‘The Asian Perspective to International Law in the Age

of Globalization’, 5 Singapore Journal of International and Comparative Law (2001) 284,

page 285.

25 Robert Naiman, ‘Anti- Apartheid Archbishop Tutu Calls Presbyterians to Back Divestment

from Israeli Occupation’, Truth Out, 21 June 2014.

58 Murphy, Ferrara and Power

it is actually placed under the authority of the hostile army. The occupation extends only to the territory where such authority has been established and

can be exercised”.26

According to common Article 2 of the four Geneva Conventions, the pro-

visions of the Conventions apply to any territory occupied during interna-tional hostilities. This includes situations where the occupation meets with no armed resistance. Meanwhile, Article 43 of the Hague Regulations prescribes

the fundamental administrative obligations of an Occupying Power.27 It has

been described as the “mini- constitution” of an occupation regime.28 Article 43 places a conservationist role on the Occupying Power whereby it is regarded

as trustee but there is no transfer of property.29 It also imposes a fundamental duty of governance over the occupied territory and this entails a range of duties from respect for fundamental human rights to provision of health care (Fourth

Geneva Convention, Articles 55 to 57).30 However, the situation is regarded as temporary and the occupant cannot behave as though the population of the

occupied territory are its own nationals.31

Critically, the permanent nature of Israel’s now 55- year occupation, as well

as the violation of specific peremptory norms of international law raises serious concerns as to the illegality of the occupation. One of the fundamental prin-ciples of occupation is its temporary nature as well as the prohibition against

altering the sovereignty of the occupied territory.32 It is noteworthy that the principle of temporariness enshrined in the Hague Regulations is reinforced



26 Hague Regulations, Article 42.

27 Eyal Benvenisti, The International Law of Occupation (oup 2012) 67– 72, 212– 47.

28 Ibid., page 69; hcj 2164/ 09, Yesh Din v Commander of IDF Forces in Judea and Samaria (26

December 2011) para 8.

29 Hague Regulations, Article 43. “The authority of the legitimate power having in fact

passed into the hands of the occupant, the latter shall take all the measures in his power

to restore, and ensure, as far as possible, public order and safety, while respecting, unless

absolutely prevented, the laws in force in the country”.

30 Michael Bothe, ‘The Administration of Territory’ in Andrew Clapham, Paola Gaeta,

Marco Sassoli (eds), The 1949 Geneva Conventions- A Commentary (oup 2015) 1460, 1467;

Christopher Greenwood, ‘The Administration of Occupied Territory in International

Law’ in Emma Playfair (ed), International Law and the Administration of Occupied

Territories: Two Decades of Israeli Occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip (Oxford

Clarendon Press 1992) 248; Conor McCarthy, ‘Legal Reasoning and the Applicability of

Human Rights Standards During Military Occupation’ in Roberta Arnold and Noelle

Quenivet (eds), International Humanitarian Law and Human Rights Law: Towards a

Merger in International Law (Nijhoff 2008) 126– 127.

31 Ibid., page 1460.

32 Hague Regulations, Articles 42; Fourth Geneva Convention, Article 47.

The Occupation of Palestine from a twail Lens 59

by Article 47 of the Fourth Geneva Convention.33 It deprives of legal effect any measures which otherwise could bring about a change in status of the occu-pied territory. Therefore, the law of occupation recognises that occupation is

an exceptional deviation from the normal order of sovereignty.34 This also acts as a restraint on the occupant in how it deals with the local population who are

protected persons under international humanitarian law.35

In the Palestinian territory, Israel, through its five decade long occupation,

“has extended its authority far beyond what is permitted by international law and it is clear that the prolonged and entrenched nature of the Israeli occu-pation has resulted in the enduring denial of the most basic rights of the

Palestinian people”.36 This led UN Special Rapporteur, John Dugard, to con-clude in his 2007 report to the UN Human Rights Council that “elements of the [Israel’s] occupation [of the Palestinian territory] constitute forms of colo-

nialism and of apartheid, which are contrary to international law”.37 However the failure of the High Contracting Parties of the Fourth Geneva Convention to intervene and assess the legality of the decades long occupation of the Palestinian territory, exemplifies how dominant powers can manipulate inter-national law for the purposes of maintaining domination and oppression of the occupied population, and to service settler- colonial aims.

2.3 Israel’s Manufactured Reversioner Rule As Antony Anghie observes, international law rules such as territorial acqui-sition, State succession, State responsibility and recognition, have been con-

structed by States.38 Nowhere is this more evident than in Israel’s ad hoc instrumentalisation of international law arguments on State recognition or non- recognition to evade its responsibilities under the Geneva Conventions.



33 Michael Bothe, ‘The Administration of Territory’ in Andrew Clapham, Paola Gaeta, Marco

Sassoli (eds), The 1949 Geneva Conventions- A Commentary (oup 2015) 1455– 1484, 1463.

34 Orna- Ben Naftali, ‘PathoLAWgical Occupation: Normalizing the Exceptional Case of the

Occupied Palestinian Territory and Other Legal Pathologies’ in Orna- Ben Naftali (ed),

International Humanitarian Law and International Human Rights Law (oup 2011) 133.

35 Fourth Geneva Convention, Article 4.

36 Diakonia International Humanitarian Law Resource Centre, A Veil of Compliance in Israel

and the oPt 2010– 2013, March 2014, page 7.

37 unhrc, Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights in the Palestinian

Territories Occupied since 1967, John Dugard, a/ hrc/ 4/ 17, 2007, page 3.

38 Antony Anghie, Imperialism, Sovereignty and the Making of International Law (oup

2005) 213– 216.

60 Murphy, Ferrara and Power

Under international law, Israel is bound by the Hague Regulations as cus-

tomary international law and is a party to the Geneva Conventions.39 Although Israel is not a party to Additional Protocol i, much of the Protocol applies as customary international law. Further, international human rights treaties con-tinue to apply in the context of an armed conflict and Israel has similar extra-territorial obligations under human rights treaties to which it is a party. That these laws are binding on Israel’s occupation of the Palestinian territory has

been authoritatively confirmed by the International Court of Justice,40 the UN

Security Council,41 and the UN General Assembly.42

Nevertheless, the Government of Israel has adopted an ambiguous position

declaring that the status of the West Bank and Gaza is unclear, arguing that

there was no prior legitimate sovereign43 and that it is therefore questionable whether the Fourth Geneva Convention applies to its administration of the

territory.44 According to Israel’s Ministry for Foreign Affairs:

Occupied territories are territories captured in war from an established

and recognized sovereign. As the West Bank and Gaza Strip were not

under the legitimate and recognized sovereignty of any state prior to the

Six Day War, they should not be considered occupied territories.45

This is what Israel coins the “missing reversioner” theory – that is, that the laws of occupation are inapplicable in a situation where the displaced power was not the lawful sovereign, or where such power was simply missing in the occu-

pied territory.46 In July 2002, the Israeli government established a controversial

39 The legal framework governing military occupation is the Hague Regulations, the Fourth

Geneva Convention, Additional Protocol i to the Geneva Conventions and relevant provi-

sions of general international law and international human rights law.

40 icj, Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory

(Advisory Opinion) icj Reports 136 (2004) para 101.

41 unsc Resolution 1860 (8 January 2009); unsc Resolution 2334 (23 December 2016).

42 unga Resolution 62/ 181 (19 December 2007); unga Resolution 63/ 98 (5 December 2008).

43 Alan Baker, ‘International Humanitarian Law, icrc and Israel’s Status in the Territories’,

94(888) International Review of the Red Cross (2012) 1– 11.

44 See Meir Shamgar, ‘The Observance of International Law in the Administered Territories’,

1 Israel Yearbook on Human Rights (1971) 262, pages 262– 277; David Kretzmer, The

Occupation of Justice: The Supreme Court of Israel and the Occupied Territories (New York

Press 2002) 33– 34.

45 Israel Ministry for Foreign Affairs, Disputed Territories: Forgotten Facts About the West

Bank and Gaza Strip, February 2003.

46 Yutaka Arai- Takahashi, The Law of Occupation, Continuity and Change of International

Humanitarian Law, and its Interaction with International Human Rights Law (Martinus

Nijhoff 2009) 47.

The Occupation of Palestine from a twail Lens 61

special committee, the Levy Committee, to “Examine the Status of Building in Judea and Samaria” and in effect explore the legalisation of Israeli settlement outposts established in the opt. The Committee again maintained that “from the perspective of international law, the law of ‘occupation’, as reflected in the relevant international conventions, do not apply to the special historical and

legal circumstances of Israeli presence in Judea and Samaria”.47 As such, the missing reversioner theory treats the Palestinian territory as terra nullius, and therefore subject to colonial conquest. As Oren Yiftachel observes “whether the land is cultivated (Negev) or neglected (West Bank), a legal manipulation will be found to transfer it from Arab to Jewish hands, thus making it ‘terra

nullius’ – land emptied of indigenous rights”.48

The official Israeli position that it only need apply de facto humanitar-

ian provisions has been consistently contested in the doctrinal discourse.49 This contention is also rejected by authoritative bodies such as the Inter-

national Committee of the Red Cross,50 the UN Security Council,51 and the

International Court of Justice.52 It is also contradicted by other States and

international scholars, including eminent Israeli international lawyers.53 More



47 Committee to Examine the Status of Building in the Judea and Samaria, Report of the

Committee to Examine the Status of Building in the Judea and Samaria Area, June 2012,

page 83.

48 Oren Yiftachel, ‘The Law That Exposes Israel’s True Colonialist Colors’, Haaretz, 14

December 2016.

49 Yutaka Arai- Takahashi, The Law of Occupation, Continuity and Change of International

Humanitarian Law, and its Interaction with International Human Rights Law (Martinus

Nijhoff 2009) 48– 49.

50 Peter Maurer, ‘Challenges to International Humanitarian Law: Israel’s Occupation

Policy’, 94(888) International Review of the Red Cross (2012) 1503, pages 1503 - 1510, and

the Conference of High Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention, Statement

by the International Committee of the Red Cross, 5 December 2001. “The icrc has always

affirmed the de jure applicability of the Fourth Geneva Convention to the territories occu-

pied since 1967 by the State of Israel, including East Jerusalem. This Convention, ratified

by Israel in 1951, remains fully applicable and relevant in the current context of violence.

As an Occupying Power, Israel is also bound by other customary rules relating to occupa-

tion, expressed in the Regulations annexed to the Hague Convention respecting the Laws

and Customs of War on Land of 18 October 1907”.

51 For example, unsc Resolution 242 (22 November 1967); unsc Resolution 607 (5 January

1988) paras 1 and 4.

52 icj, Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory

(Advisory Opinion) icj Reports 136 (2004) page 136.

53 David Kretzmer, ‘The Law of Belligerent Occupation in the Supreme Court of Israel’,

94(885) International Review of the Red Cross (2012) 207, pages 207– 336; Yoram Dinstein,

The International Law of Belligerent Occupation (cup 2009). See also David Kretzmer,

The Occupation of Justice: The Supreme Court of Israel and the Occupied Territories (OUP 62 Murphy, Ferrara and Power

recently, the Israeli Attorney General in his position paper on the territorial sovereignty of the International Criminal Court in the Situation in Palestine, side- stepped previous contentions of the “missing reversioner” arguing instead that Palestinian sovereignty is “in abeyance” or suspended in the Palestinian

territory, an analysis more compatible with recognition of occupation.54



3 How the Israeli High Court of Justice Maintains Oppression over

Palestinians to Facilitate Settler Colonisation

According to scholars, one important thread examined in twail is regime bias which presents itself in how international law is interpreted and applied

in internal processes to affect the Third World.55 According to twail expert Gathii:

Regime bias therefore refers to examining the choices made between

alternative ways of crafting legal rules, the meanings ascribed to a par-

ticular rule whether in its application by an administrative agency, or at

the adjudication stage by a domestic judicial body, or an international

tribunal.56

Others assert that such “different interpretations of similar or identical rules of international law can undermine the general integrity of international law, and

the overall consistency of international law”.57

One of the central legal arguments proffered by the Israeli military com-

mander, and legal representatives is a broad stroke argument that acts have



2021) 55- 60; Ardi Imseis, ‘On the Fourth Geneva Convention and the Occupied Palestinian

Territories’, Harvard International Law Journal (2003) 65, page 69.

54 Office of the Attorney General of the State of Israel, The International Criminal Court’s

Lack of Jurisdiction Over the So- called “Situation in Palestine”, 20 December 2019, para 27–

32; Al- Haq, Review Paper: Arguments Raised in Amici Curiae Submissions in the Situation in

the State of Palestine Before the International Criminal Court, 2020, 38; Anis F Kassim, The

Palestine Yearbook of International Law (Brill 1995) 86.

55 Gus Van Harten, ‘TWAIL and the Dabhol Arbitration’, 3(1) Trade, Law and Development

(2011) 132, page 136.

56 James Thuo Gathii, ‘Third World Approaches to International Economic Governance’ in

Richard Falk, Jacqueline Stevens and Balakrishnan Rajagopal (eds), International Law and

the Third World: Reshaping Justice (Routledge 2008) 261– 262.

57 Adamantia Rachovitsa, ‘On the New Judicial Animals: The Curious Case of an African

Court with Material Jurisdiction of a Global Scope’, 19 Human Rights Law Review (2019)

255, page 275.

The Occupation of Palestine from a twail Lens 63

been carried out by the military in consideration of military necessity. The “mil-itary necessity”, “military operations”, or “military need” defence is intended to mitigate against the armies’ actions in relation to the appropriation of land, destruction of Palestinian properties, the killing of Palestinians, and a myriad of other criminal acts in violation of the laws of armed conflict carried out to facilitate the ongoing settler colonial enterprise. In Schnitzer v Chief Military Censor, the Israeli Supreme Court, sitting as the High Court of Justice, outlined that the “Court is able and obliged to review the reasonableness of professional discretion in every area, so must it do so in the realm of security. In other words, there are no special limits on the power of judicial review in matters of State

security”.58 That being said, in practice, the security defence of the military commander acting in military necessity, provides a blanket justification for the military commander, who is essentially treated as a separate organ of the State.

Regime bias plays out in the continual deference of the hcj to the mili-

tary commander’s arguments of military necessity. This in turn, provides for a distortion of the legal principles. The overly broad interpretation of military necessity is invoked to justify almost any decision. The hcj has even added considerations of threats from outside the occupied territory into rationales deferring to the military commander’s military necessity arguments, consider-ations which exceed the competence of the Occupying Power’s administrative

authority.59 Article 52 “military needs” have traditionally been very narrowly applied to the direct needs of the army, such as food, quartering of horses, and shelter. The Military Tribunal at Nuremberg emphasised the direct needs per-mitting limited requisitions under Article 52 in Krupp:

All authorities are again in agreement that the requisitions in kind and

services referred to in Article 52, concern such matters as billets for the

occupying troops and the occupation authorities, garages for their vehi-

cles, stables for their horses, urgently needed equipment and supplies for

the proper functioning of the occupation authorities, food for the Army

of Occupation, and the like.60



58 Schnitzer v Chief Military Censor cited in Aharon Klieman and Stuart A Cohen, Routledge

Handbook on Israeli Security (Taylor and Francis 2018).

59 Yutaka Arai- Takahashi, The Law of Occupation, Continuity and Change of International

Humanitarian Law, and its Interaction with International Human Rights Law (Martinus

Nijhoff 2009) 105.

60 United States Military Tribunal, Trial of Krupp and Eleven Others, 1947– 1948, 10 Law

Reports of the Trials of War Criminals (1949), page 137.

64 Murphy, Ferrara and Power

However, the hcj has adopted a broad notion of “military need” to include not just the immediate needs of the military themselves, but also what the army needs in order to fulfil its task of defending the occupied area against hostile acts, which it has added into the consideration may originate from outside the

occupied territory.61 In the Beit Sourik case, the hcj linked considerations of Article 23(g) of the Hague Regulations, which specifically addresses active con-flict and enshrines a broader “military necessity” exception, together with its considerations of Article 52 of the Hague Regulations, which provides for lim-ited requisition of private property for “military needs” in occupied territory – considering both alongside Article 53 of the Fourth Geneva Convention as cre-

ating “a single tapestry of norms”.62 As noted by Alexander Orakhelashvili, “[m] ilitary operations in the West Bank ceased a long time ago and the Wall itself is hardly meant to serve the needs of the Israeli army. Whatever the situ-

ation in the West Bank, it cannot currently be denoted as a state of war”.63 By distorting the test, and drawing from the deck of the general laws of armed con-flict, the hcj justified the appropriation of vast swathes of private Palestinian land for the construction of the Annexation Wall – “an obstacle” – the court emphasised which is “intended to take the place of combat military opera-

tions”.64 Additionally, large tracts of Palestinian land in Area C have been been

declared protected areas or closed military zones for “military needs”65 and a systematic attempt is being made to depopulate these areas of Palestinians, in

particular the Bedouin.66

According to Adam Roberts, “it could be argued that a prolonged occupa-

tion […] the rights of the occupants are vastly curtailed”.67 However, this is

not the view of the Israeli Supreme Court.68 According to the hcj it is “natural



61 hcj 390/ 79, Izat Muhamed Mustafa Dweikat v State of Israel et al. (19 October 1979);

Yutaka Arai- Takahashi, The Law of Occupation, Continuity and Change of International

Humanitarian Law, and its Interaction with International Human Rights Law (Martinus

Nijhoff 2009) 105.

62 hcj 2056/ 04, Beit Sourik Village Council v The Government of Israel (29 February 2004).

63 Alexander Orakhelashvili, ‘Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the

Occupied Palestinian Territory: Opinion and Reaction’, 11 Journal of Conflict and Security

Law (2006) 119, page 137.

64 hcj 2056/ 04, Beit Sourik Village Council v The Government of Israel (29 February 2004).

65 hcj 3950/ 99, Sami Sadeq Mahmoud Sabih v The Minister of Defense (1999).

66 Al- Haq, Settling Area C: The Jordan Valley Exposed, 31 January 2018, pages 20– 29 and 33– 47

and Al- Haq, Plight of Palestinian Bedouin Depicts Impact of Illegal Israeli Occupation and

Practices in Palestinian Territory, 17 December 2014, pages 5– 15.

67 Adam Roberts, ‘Prolonged Military Occupation: The Israeli Occupied Territories Since

1967’, 84 American Journal of International Law (1990) 44, page 52.

68 Eyal Benvenisti, The International Law of Occupation (oup 2012) 217– 224. The Occupation of Palestine from a twail Lens 65

during short term military occupation, military security needs reign supreme. However, in long term military occupation, the needs of the local population

receive extra validity”.69 It follows, that certain powers which are vested in an ordinary sovereign are not vested in a military government. For this reason, a military government in situations of occupation is not permitted to make substantive changes of a permanent character to the political, administrative,

or judicial institutions in an area under belligerent occupation.70 The reality in the opt has proved somewhat different for Palestinians. Israeli High Court of Justice decisions, indicating that the welfare of the population of the occupied territory should be taken into account within the notion of necessity under Article 43 of the Hague Regulations, have also factored in the interests of ille-gally transferred in settlers, which has impeded the humanitarian guarantees accorded to the protected occupied population. Such “regime bias”, implicit in stacking considerations of the law in favour of illegally transferred in settlers, is exemplified in the judicial misdirection of Palestinian resources to support the settlement enterprise. In the Yesh Din case, the hcj found that stone products pillaged from Palestinian quarries for use in the Naale and Givat Nili settle-ments satisfied the Hague Regulations requirement of use for “the benefit of

the local population or local needs”.71 Whereas in the Electricity No 2 case, the connection of illegal settler outposts Kiryat Arba to the electricity grid, was

similarly considered as satisfying the needs of the local population.72 See fur-

ther on this Chapter 15, Farah and Abdallah.

The situation in the opt is best summarised by the Israeli daily newspa-

per Haaretz when it characterised the Israeli legal system as it applies to set-tlements as “‘[t] he state’s land grab’, a system as ‘developed over decades as a means to chip away at international law and provide a cover of legality for

illegal occupation policies’”.73 While the jurisprudence of the hcj, the judicial arm of the colonial Occupying Power, should be regarded as sui generis, as the regime bias of an unconstrained rogue State, the findings themselves have become replicated as part of the body of cited jurisprudence in the textbooks

of international law students.74 The hcj caselaw features on the authoritative



69 hcj 393/ 82, Jam’iat Iscan Al- Ma’almoun v IDF Commander (28 December 1983) para 22.

70 Fourth Geneva Convention, Article 47.

71 hcj 2164/ 09, Yesh Din v Commander of IDF Forces in Judea and Samaria (26 December 2011).

72 hcj 256/ 72, Electricity Company for Jerusalem District v Minister of Defence (1972).

73 ‘The State’s Land Grab’, Haaretz, 16 April 2015.

74 Andre Nollkaemper, August Reinisch, Ralph Janik, International Law in Domestic

Courts: A Casebook (oup 2018) 482.

66 Murphy, Ferrara and Power

icrc website as examples of national implementation of ihl.75 This in itself lends to the dilution of humanitarian protections, not only in Palestine, but in other conflict affected areas, and enables the replication of the dominant interests of imperialist neo- colonial powers.



4 How International Law Enables the Structural Domination and

Exploitation of the Palestinian People

Although international humanitarian law was intended to curb some of the excesses of authority of the malevolent Occupying Power and preserve the economic substance of the territory for the returning sovereign, Third States have contributed to the perpetuation of the colonisation of Palestine, both through their failure to hold Israel accountable and the denial of Palestinian statehood. The deliberate suppression of the oppressed by dominant powers is described in Paolo Freire’s seminal thesis, the “Pedagogy of the Oppressed” wherein he states:

The more human world to which they [the oppressed] justly aspire,

however, is the antithesis of the ‘human world’ of the oppressors – a

world which is the exclusive possession of the oppressors, who preach

an impossible harmony between themselves (who dehumanize) and the

oppressed (who are dehumanized). Since oppressors and oppressed are

antithetical, what serves the interests of one group disserves the interests

of the others.76

That Israel profits from the perpetuation of the colonisation is evident; Israel benefits from 306 million US dollars per year in fiscal leakages, in addition to the direct revenues from natural resources exploitation, and approximately 600 million US dollars in profits from the sale of settlement produce to inter-

national markets.77 While Palestinian losses from not being able to develop resources in Area C under full Israeli civil and security control are estimated



75 hcj 2056/ 04, Beit Sourik Village Council v The Government of Israel (20 June 2004) in icrc,

National Implementation of ihl.

76 Paulo Freire, Pedagogy of the Oppressed (Continuum New York 1970) 145.

77 unctad, Occupied Palestinian Territory Loses at Least $306 Million Per Year in Public

Revenue Leakage to Israel, New Study Finds, 2014; Shawan Jabarin, ‘How Businesses Profit

from Israeli Settlements’, Open Society Foundations, 12 February 2016.

The Occupation of Palestine from a twail Lens 67

at 3,4 billion US dollars per year.78 These economic pickings further serve European and international financial institutions who invest in and profit from corporations illegally active in the settlements. A recent investigate report from a coalition of 25 Palestinian, regional, and international civil soci-ety organisations found that “as of May 2021, European investors also held US$

141 billion in shares and bonds of these [settlement] companies”.79

Many of the countries still advocating for a two state solution under the Oslo

Accords are the same countries that refuse to recognise Palestinian statehood, while financial institutions domiciled in their jurisdictions profit from Israel’s

pillage of Palestinian resources.80 For example, the US, who was central to the Oslo Accords, has not only failed to recognise the State of Palestine, but has closed the offices of the Palestine Liberation Organization in Washington, in addition to relocating the US embassy to Israel to Jerusalem – territory which

Palestine remains sovereign over.81 Meanwhile as the State of Palestine moved to hold individual Israeli actors accountable for war crimes and crimes against humanity at the International Criminal Court, seven States (Austria, Australia, Brazil, Czech Republic, Germany, Hungary and Uganda) submitted amicus curiae voicing their non- recognition of Palestinian statehood to the Pre- Trial

Chamber, in an attempt to reinforce Israel’s decades- long impunity.82

twail academics therefore quite rightly conclude that “international law

that was shaped in the colonial era was not a neutral discipline but an instru-ment of naked power, skillfully dressed up so as to hide its objective of con-

trolling the colonized world for the benefit of the colonial powers”.83 Nowhere is this more keenly evident than in the power dynamics that underpin the

sanctions regime, which give rise to “distributive inequalities”.84 In the case

78 unctad, Economic Costs of the Israeli Occupation for the Palestinian People: Fiscal Aspects,

A/ 74/ 272, 2 August 2009, para 33.

79 Don’t Buy into Occupation, Exposing the Financial Flows into Illegal Israeli Settlements, 30

September 2021, page 6.

80 See France, Germany, United Kingdom, Norway, with the exception of Sweden who has

recognised Palestine. Don’t Buy into Occupation, Exposing the Financial Flows into Illegal

Israeli Settlements, 30 September 2021, pages 7– 8.

81 US Department of State, Closure of the PLO Office in Washington, 10 September 2018; Raf

Sanchez, ‘Biden Promised to Reopen the Jerusalem Consulate Trump Closed. But Can

He?’, nbc News, 6 November 2021.

82 Michael Kearney, ‘ICC/ Palestine: When Do States Recognise States?’, JusticeInfo.net, 24

April 2020.

83 Muthucumaraswamy Sornarajah, ‘The Asian Perspective to International Law in the Age

of Globalization’, 5 sjicl (2001) 284, page 285.

84 Guilherme Del Negro, ‘The Validity of Treaties Concluded Under Coercion of the

State: Sketching a TWAIL Critique’, 10(1) European Journal of Legal Studies (2017) 39,

page 41.

68 Murphy, Ferrara and Power

of Palestine, the abject failure of the international community to circumvent the veto block in the UN Security Council and place regional and individual economic sanctions and countermeasures on Israel is clearly political. As the international community mobilised to sanction Russia, one month into its aggressive war on the Ukraine, the US, EU, and UK placed economic individ-ual sanctions on over 1,000 businesses and individual oligarchs linked to the

Kremlin.85 For Palestine, even Israel’s announced de jure annexation planned

for June 2020, did not garner the sanctioning response of Third States.86



5 Conclusion

A serious weakness in any negotiated solution between Israel and Palestine is the imbalance of power and the consequent asymmetrical bargaining posi-tion of Palestinians. This too is where international law can play an important role in ensuring a fair outcome consistent with international norms. Although the political outlook looks bleak right now, it will not always remain so. International law is not an a la carte menu that powerful States may pick and choose from depending on what is politically expedient or the whim of a pop-ulist political leader. At the same time, it must be acknowledged that interna-tional humanitarian law was never intended to apply to a 55- year occupation and it is right to question its use in providing a veil of legality for something never envisioned in the first instance. In so doing it makes all States complicit in maintaining the current situation. The problem is what will replace it? Human rights are not relegated to second place in situations of occupation. It remains imperative that international law remain at the forefront of efforts to achieve a just and lasting peace and that international humanitarian law is central to this strategy.



85 ‘What Sanctions Are Being Imposed on Russia Over Ukraine Invasion?’, bbc News, 12

April 2022.

86 Susan Power, ‘Annexation and Human Rights’ in State of Palestine (ed), Looming

Annexation: Israel’s Denial of Palestine’s Right to Exist (2020).





chapter 4


Reducing the Friction: A Functional Analysis of the

Transformed Occupation of the Gaza Strip

Aeyal Gross



In 2004, Israel announced its plan to withdraw all its troops and citizens from the Gaza Strip, claiming that it had “come to the conclusion that there is cur-rently no reliable Palestinian partner with which it can make progress in a two-

sided peace process”.1 The plan stated that “relocation from the Gaza Strip and from an area in Northern Samaria should reduce friction with the Palestinian

population”,2 and that “the completion of the plan will serve to dispel the claims

regarding Israel’s responsibility for the Palestinians in the Gaza Strip”.3 The plan called for Israel to evacuate all existing towns and villages that Israelis inhab-ited and end the permanent presence of Israeli security forces in the Gaza

Strip.4 At the same time, the plan stated that “Israel will guard and monitor the external land perimeter of the Gaza Strip, will continue to maintain exclusive authority in Gaza air space, and will continue to exercise security activity in

the sea off the coast of the Gaza Strip”,5 reserving “its fundamental right of self- defence, both preventive and reactive, including where necessary the use of

force, in respect of threats emanating from the Gaza Strip”.6 On 12 September 2005, on the day that the last Israeli soldiers left, the Israeli army’s Chief of Southern Command, Major General Dan Harel, issued an official decree pro-

claiming the end of military rule in the Gaza Strip.7

Importantly, neither the disengagement plan nor the official decree issued

by Major General Dan Harel explicitly announced the end of the occupation. Furthermore, rather than referring to reducing control over the Gaza Strip, the



1 Government of Israel, Revised Disengagement Plan, Decision No 1996, 6 June 2004; Israeli

Knesset, Disengagement Plan of Prime Minister Ariel Sharon – Revised, 28 May 2004.

2 Israeli Knesset, Disengagement Plan of Prime Minister Ariel Sharon – Revised, 28 May 2004,

Section 1, Article 5. Emphasis added.

3 Ibid., Article 6. Emphasis added.

4 Ibid., Section 2, Article 3.1.

5 Ibid., Section 3, Article 1.

6 Ibid.

7 Israeli Defence Forces, IDF Declaration Regarding End of Military Rule in Gaza Strip, 12

September 2005.



© Aeyal Gross, 2023 | DOI:10.1163/9789004503939_0

70 Gross

disengagement plan referred to reducing friction, alongside a general state-ment on the purpose of the plan as meant “to lead to a better security, political,

economic and demographic situation”.8 The final version of the disengage-

ment plan (unlike the first version that had been made public9) stopped short

of expressly negating the status of the Gaza Strip as occupied territory.10 This has, however, not deterred Israel from arguing that it does not occupy the Gaza Strip in proceedings before the Israeli High Court of Justice, when it seeks to limit its role and responsibilities towards Palestinians living there.

Israel’s carefully crafted language in the disengagement plan and related

decree, its position before its own court, and the de facto evacuation of set-tlements and withdrawal of troops, have triggered an academic debate about the legal status of the Gaza Strip. This chapter will contribute to that debate. It will, on the one hand, point to the problematic nature of the argument that the occupation of the Gaza Strip has ended and, on the other hand, illustrate the limits of a position that the disengagement plan did not have any bearing whatsoever on the legal status of the territory. This chapter will adopt a func-tional, as opposed to conceptual approach to the question of whether the Gaza Strip is still occupied. It will argue that the occupation of the Gaza Strip did not end but was transformed into a form of remotely controlled occupation. The functional approach argued in this chapter understands this transformed form of occupation and is founded in the applicable law of occupation and its

raison d’être.11

This chapter will first describe Israel’s continued exercise of control over

the Gaza Strip after 2005. Second, it will discuss the inflexible binary academic debate around the occupation of the Gaza Strip and develop an alternative functional approach. Third, it will analyse the Israeli Supreme Court’s view of and approach to the occupation of the Gaza Strip. Finally, this chapter will suggest that the debate over whether the Gaza Strip is occupied is reflective of Israel’s indeterminacy towards the status of the Palestinian territory occupied by it in 1967 and explain the role of the functional approach as one that, facing this indeterminacy, aims to create accountability where power is exercised.

8 Israeli Knesset, Disengagement Plan of Prime Minister Ariel Sharon – Revised, 28 May 2004.

9 Israeli Prime Minister’s Office, The Disengagement Plan – General Outline, 18 April 2004.

Article 2(i)(3) states that “[...] there will be no basis for claiming that the Gaza Strip is

occupied territory”.

10 Geoffrey Aronson, ‘Report: Issues Arising from the Implementation of Israel’s

Disengagement from the Gaza Strip’, 34(4) Journal of Palestine Studies (2005) 49.

11 See in detail Aeyal Gross, The Writing on the Wall, Rethinking the International Law of

Occupation (cup 2017). For the normative approach see Orna Ben- Naftali, Aeyal Gross

and Keren Michaeli, ‘Illegal Occupation’, 23 Berkely Journal of International Law (2005) 551. A Functional Analysis of the Transformed Occupation 71

1 Israel’s Continued Control of the Gaza Strip

International organisations and non- governmental groups, including Palesti-nian human rights groups and the Israeli non- governmental organisation Gisha, have all shed light on Israel’s complex methods of controlling the Gaza Strip after its disengagement in a series of reports. These reports detail how the disengagement did not end Israel’s control but instead changed it in form and

expression.12 The reports point to Israel’s continued substantial control over the Gaza Strip’s land crossings and complete control over the Gaza Strip air-space and territorial waters. Israel’s physical hold over the Gaza Strip enables it to restrict Palestinians from fishing off the coast of the Gaza Strip and prevents Palestinians from using their rich land that is located within the so- called buf-fer zone. Furthermore, Israel controls most of the supply of water, electricity, and fuel to the Palestinian population in the Gaza Strip, as well as cellular and

electronic communication lines.13

The reports also describe sporadic yet not uncommon incursions of Israeli

troops into the Gaza Strip and Israel’s control of the Palestinian Population Registry, as well as its tax policy and tax revenue transfers. Not least, they depict how Israel prevents the passage of people and goods between the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, and the Gaza Strip and the wider world, thereby severely



12 Palestinian Centre for Human Rights, Sharon’s Gaza Redeployment Plan: A Denial of

Human Rights, Not an End To Occupation, October 2004; Palestinian Centre for Human

Rights, Human Rights and the Lessons of ‘Peace Plans’: From the Geneva Accords to Sharon’s

Disengagement Plan, February 2005; Al- Haq, Al- Haq’s Rejoinder to Gisha’s “Scale of Control”

Position Paper: Israel’s Continued Responsibility as the Occupying Power in the Gaza Strip,

12 December 2011; Al- Haq, One Year after the “Disengagement”: Gaza still Occupied and

under Attack, 17 July 2011; Al- Haq, Shifting Paradigms – Israel’s Enforcement of the Buffer

Zone in the Gaza Strip, 23 August 2011; Gisha, Disengaged Occupiers: The Legal Status of

Gaza, January 2007; Gisha, Scales of Control, November 2011; Gisha, Ten Years Later, 8

September 2015; Gisha, Hand on the Switch: Who’s Responsible for Gaza’s Infrastructure

Crisis?, January 2017; Gisha, 50 Shades of Control, 7 June 2017. See also Sari Bashi and

Kenneth Mann, ‘Control and Responsibility: The Legal Status of the Gaza Strip After the

“Disengagement”’, 14 Hamishpat [College of Management Law Journal] (2010) 35.

13 Gisha, Scales of Control, November 2011, pages 20– 23; Gisha, Disengaged Occupiers: The

Legal Status of Gaza, January 2007, pages 49– 50; Gisha, Closing In: Life and Death in Gaza’s

Access Restricted Areas, 8 August 2018. See also Helga Tawil- Souri’s discussion of “digi-

tal occupation” in Gaza, manifested inter alia in Israel’s control of the telecommunica-

tion system as part of its attempts at “frictionless control”. Allocations of bandwidth, the

placement number and strength of Internet routers or telephone exchanges, the range

of cellular signals, and the equipment used – all remain limited by Israeli restrictions.

Helga Tawil- Souri, ‘Digital Occupation: Gaza’s High- Tech Enclosure’, 41 Journal of Palestine

Studies (2012) 27.

72 Gross

restricting Palestinians’ freedom of movement and interaction with the out-side world.

The epitome of Israel’s continued control over the Gaza Strip after its disen-

gagement is its imposition of the closure on the Gaza Strip, considered by the UN Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights in the Palestinian

Territories Occupied since 1967 to be a form of collective punishment.14 Because of the closure imposed on the Gaza Strip airspace and its control over land crossings, any Palestinian in the Gaza Strip wanting to travel from an Israeli or Jordanian airport (there is no airport in the Gaza Strip) needs to go through Israel. The irregularly managed and mostly closed Rafah crossing into Egypt does not offer a sustainable alternative. Palestinians that neverthe-less manage to leave through the Rafah crossing face an arduous, insecure, and long- distance journey through the Sinai desert to Cairo.

1.1 The Imposition of the Closure on the Gaza Strip In the 2006 elections to the Palestinian Legislative Council, Hamas gained a majority of votes and ended the Fatah dominance that had prevailed since the Palestinian Authority’s establishment. In March 2007, a Hamas- led national unity government was formed together with Fatah, the largest group in the Palestine Liberation Organization. This alliance broke down and following its success in an armed struggle with Fatah in June 2007, Hamas assumed overall control of the Gaza Strip. As a result, pa President Abbas, himself a member of Fatah, dismissed the Hamas- led government. Ever since, the West Bank has

been under Fatah control and the Gaza Strip under Hamas.15

In the wake of the internal Palestinian developments in 2007, the Israeli

Security Cabinet authorised restrictions on the movement of goods and people to the “humanitarian minimum” as a means of pressuring the Hamas regime in the Gaza Strip. Israel’s declared intention was to block all goods beyond what it considered “essential for the survival of the civilian population”, halting exports and production, and preventing the passage of items deemed to be “luxu-

ries”.16 The policy was framed by Israel as “sanctions” and later as “economic



14 unhrc, Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights in the Palestinian

Territories Occupied Since 1967, Michael Lynk, a/ hrc/ 44/ 60, 15 July 2020.

15 See Iain Scobbie, ‘Gaza’ in Elizabeth Wilmshurst (ed), International Law and the

Classification of Conflicts (oup 2012) 280– 315.

16 Letter from Brigadier- General Eitan Dangot, Coordinator for Government Activities in

the Territories, idf, to Gisha, Legal Center for Freedom of Movement, 13 January 2010 (on

file with authors).

A Functional Analysis of the Transformed Occupation 73

warfare”.17 In essence, it was designed, according to the Israeli government, to compel Palestinians to pressure Hamas to stop firing rockets, and to release

Gilad Shalit, the Israeli soldier captured by Hamas in June 2006.18 Outgoing goods were banned and incoming goods were allowed only when considered

essential and only in the required minimum.19 Concerning fuel and electricity, the minimum was recognised as a legitimate standard in the Bassiouni judge-

ment of the Israeli Supreme Court that will be discussed in Part 3 below.20 Restrictions were arbitrary, as apparent in the kind of foodstuffs that were pro-

hibited and allowed.21 Ground coriander, for example, was not allowed into the

Gaza Strip, whereas hyssop was permitted.22 Pasta was banned until the direct intervention of John Kerry, then US Senator, who discovered it was prohibited

(though rice was allowed).23 Israel’s policy was formalised on 19 September 2007 in a decision by Israel’s Security Cabinet declaring the Gaza Strip hostile

territory and imposing a closure on it.24

Israel cancelled the ban on most consumer products and raw materials only

in 2010 following Israel’s military operation against the Gaza Freedom Flotilla. However, it has continued to ban the entry of building materials and the export of finished products to markets in Israel and the West Bank, with exceptions made for building materials for internationally sponsored projects, and limited



17 hcj 9132/ 07, Jaber Al- Bassiouni Ahmed et al. v Prime Minister and Minister of Defence (30

January 2008) paras 43– 44 (State’s response to the petition). An unofficial English trans-

lation of these passages is available on Gisha’s website.

18 Sari Bashi, ‘Controlling Perimeters, Controlling Lives: Israel and Gaza’, 7(2) Law and Ethics

of Human Rights (2013) 243, pages 272– 273. Gilad Shalit was released on 18 October 2011

in exchange for 1027 Palestinian prisoners as part of a prisoners- exchange deal. Ethan

Bronner, ‘Israel and Hamas Agree to Swap Prisoners for Soldier’, New York Times, 11

October 2011.

19 Sari Bashi, ‘Controlling Perimeters, Controlling Lives: Israel and Gaza’, 7(2) Law and Ethics

of Human Rights (2013) 243, page 259.

20 Ibid.

21 Aeyal Gross and Tamar Feldman, ‘“We Didn’t Want to Hear the Word Calories”: Rethinking

Food Security, Food Power, and Food Sovereignty – Lessons from the Gaza Strip Closure’,

33(2) Berkeley Journal of International Law (2015) 379, page 434; Sari Bashi, ‘Controlling

Perimeters, Controlling Lives: Israel and Gaza’, 7(2) Law and Ethics of Human Rights (2013)

243, page 260.

22 Amira Hass, ‘Why Won’t Israel Allow Gazans to Import Coriander?’, Haaretz, 7 May 2010.

23 See Avi Issacharoff and Barak Ravid, ‘Clinton Warns Israel Over Delays in Gaza Aid’,

Haaretz, 25 February 2009.

24 Israeli Prime Minister’s Media Advisor, ‘Security Cabinet Declares Gaza Hostile Territory’,

Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 19 September 2007. 74 Gross

exports, mostly to Europe, as part of an agricultural project sponsored by the

Netherlands.25

1.2 Israel’s Control over Land Crossings There are two land crossings for Palestinians to enter and leave the Gaza Strip: the Rafah crossing into Egypt and the Erez crossing into Israel. Through the 2005 Agreed Document on Movement and Access, Israel controlled the movement of people not only from Gaza into Israel, but also between Gaza and Egypt via the Rafah crossing, despite the disengagement and until 2007. During that period, Israel monitored Palestinians’ movement via cameras and intervened in decisions about entry into the Gaza Strip and whether the cross-

ing would stay open.26 After Palestinians attacked an Israeli military outpost at Kerem Shalom and captured in June 2006 an Israeli soldier, Gilad Shalit, Israel

kept the crossing mostly closed.27 After June 2007, when Hamas formed the de facto government in the Gaza Strip, Israel froze the implementation of the

Agreed Document on Movement and Access.28 Ever since, and given changes

of government in Egypt, the crossing has often been closed.29 From mid- 2012 to mid- 2013, the crossing operated regularly and some 40,000 crossings in both directions were recorded each month. From July 2013 to May 2018, it remained mostly closed. Pressure on Egypt to open it, generated by the Great March of Return protests and deteriorating humanitarian conditions in Gaza, led to the crossing being open five days per week, with a monthly average of 11,000

entries and exits recorded in the first half of 2019.30

In an effort to circumvent the siege, Palestinians have attempted to

breach the border31 and dig tunnels under it.32 They have also entered ad hoc

25 Sari Bashi, ‘Controlling Perimeters, Controlling Lives: Israel and Gaza’, 7(2) Law and Ethics

of Human Rights (2013) 243, pages 260– 261.

26 See Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs, ‘Agreed Documents on Movement and Access From

and To Gaza’, 30 November 2021. See Gisha, Rafah Crossing: Who Holds the Keys?, 23 March

2009. The agreement terms stated that the pa was to operate the Rafah Crossing under

the supervision of EU monitors who would be present at the crossing, and Israeli security

officials who would monitor the operation via video footage and supervision of the pas-

sengers list. Also, under this agreement Israel controlled all imports into the Gaza Strip.

Except for personal effects brought in by travelers, imports were not permitted via air, sea,

or the Rafah Crossing, and only goods passing through and inspected in Israel could be

brought in. See Sari Bashi, ‘Controlling Perimeters, Controlling Lives: Israel and Gaza’, 7(2)

Law and Ethics of Human Rights (2013) 243, pages 252– 253.

27 Gisha, Disengaged Occupiers: The Legal Status of Gaza, January 2007, page 27.

28 Ibid., page 29.

29 Ibid., pages 35– 38.

30 Gisha, Gaza Strip: Mapping Movement and Access, January 2020.

31 Gisha, Disengaged Occupiers: The Legal Status of Gaza, January 2007, pages 44– 47.

32 Ibid., pages 52– 55.

A Functional Analysis of the Transformed Occupation 75

Egypt- Hamas arrangements that led to unpredictable and irregular openings

for brief periods in response to pressures from both sides of the border.33

The question of who can and who has the authority to open and close the

Rafah land crossing changes over time.34 Clearly, under the Agreed Document on Movement and Access, Israel had exercised powers over the Rafah crossing alongside other parties, but the scope and type of control that it had changed after June 2007. After that, Egypt and Hamas appear to have had the great-est control of the Rafah crossing. The form of exercise of power by Israel also changed after the flotilla incident in 2010 when Israel partly eased the siege,

especially regarding the import of goods.35

1.3 Israel’s “Naval Blockade” on the Gaza Strip Israel has exercised full control over the territorial waters off the Gaza Strip coast since the beginning of the occupation. With only a few isolated excep-

tions, Israel has never allowed any vessel to enter or leave these waters,36 and it has imposed significant restrictions on fishing activities along the

Gaza Strip coast.37 Notwithstanding, Israel declared in January 2009, during the broad- scale military operation called “Cast Lead”, that it was imposing a “naval blockade” on the Gaza Strip. The naval blockade declaration remains

in force.38

The Turkel Commission, appointed by the Israeli government after the Gaza

Freedom Flotilla operation to examine the terms of the naval blockade, held that the idf’s actions were no longer subject to the law of belligerent occupa-tion after the disengagement. Instead, given the “armed conflict” with armed Palestinian groups inside the Gaza Strip, the law of naval warfare now sup-

posedly applied.39 The alleged recent legal form of Israel’s control – a naval blockade as part of an armed conflict – fails, however, to camouflage the fact



33 Ibid., pages 47– 52.

34 Ibid., pages 119– 137. See also Gisha, Rafah Crossing: Who Holds the Keys?, 23 March 2009.

35 For an analysis of these developments, see Aeyal Gross and Tamar Feldman, ‘“We didn’t

Want to Hear the Word Calories”: Rethinking Food Security, Food Power, and Food

Sovereignty – Lessons from the Gaza Strip Closure’, 33 Berkeley Journal of International

Law (2015) 379.

36 Ibid., Article 53.

37 Gisha, Scales of Control, November 2011, pages 20– 23; Gisha, Disengaged Occupiers: The

Legal Status of Gaza, January 2007, pages 49– 50; Gisha, Closing In: Life and Death in Gaza’s

Access Restricted Areas, 8 August 2018.

38 Ibid., Article 27.

39 The Public Commission to Examine the Maritime Incident of 31 May 2010, The Turkel

Commission Report, Part One, January 2010.

76 Gross

that the so- called naval blockade is simply a continuation of Israeli control of Palestine’s territorial waters.



2 The Academic Debate over the Status of the Gaza Strip: Diverging

Positions and the Need for a Functional Approach

Part 1 above has shown that while Israel’s withdrawal of settlers and military from the Gaza Strip changed the nature and degree of Israel’s control, it did not end it. This section will present academic views on Israel’s status as occupier in the Gaza Strip after the “disengagement” and suggest a functional approach, according to which Israel is bound by the duties of an Occupying Power to the extent that its actions affect the lives of Palestinians in the Gaza Strip.

2.1 The Existing Academic Debate Yuval Shany has suggested a three- pronged test to examine whether a territory in general, and the Gaza Strip in particular, is occupied. The test places greater emphasis on the potential for effective control than on actual control by con-sidering (1) the physical presence of hostile troops in the area, (2) the ability of troops to exercise effective powers of government, and (3) the incapability of

the legitimate government to exercise effective powers of government.40 These three conditions are cumulative and therefore, according to Shany, an occupa-

tion is terminated when one factor is negated.41

In Shany’s view, the test for determining the end of occupation represents a

“mirror image” of the test for determining its beginning. Shany argues that the first condition of occupation, being the physical presence of hostile forces, has been reversed and the territory is thus not occupied when hostile forces are not present. He rejects the idea that effective control can be exercised with-out the actual and continuing presence of troops on the ground and argues that without them an occupier could not be expected to execute its obligations under jus in bello – maintain law and order, provide basic services, and so forth. Shany therefore concludes that despite Israel’s power to influence events in the Gaza Strip through its control of the airspace, maritime zones, and most border entries, its ability to enforce day- to- day law and order in the Gaza Strip

is minimal to non- existent.42 As for the second condition, Shany acknowledges



40 Yuval Shany, ‘Faraway, So Close: The Legal Status of Gaza after Israel’s Disengagement’, 8

Yearbook of International Humanitarian Law (2005) 369, pages 376– 777.

41 Ibid., pages 378– 379.

42 Ibid., pages 381– 382.

A Functional Analysis of the Transformed Occupation 77

that Israel retains some powerful points of leverage over Palestinians’ lives in the Gaza Strip, but that it can hardly govern the Gaza Strip effectively and con-

trol day- to- day life.43 Regarding the third condition, Shany notes that the pa (at the time of writing Hamas is more significant as it exercises de facto govern-ment control) operates tens of thousands of governments officials and security personnel who assume the daily functions of government in the Gaza Strip. Even if its actual exercise of control is unsatisfactory or insufficient, the pa is

in a much better position than Israel to exercise authority.44 It is important to note that Shany’s application of his test to Israel’s control over the Gaza Strip was done in 2005 and pre- dates Israel’s imposition of the closure. In any case, Shany concludes that Israel may still have international obligations vis- à- vis the Gaza Strip derived from the laws of armed conflict applicable to Israeli military operations in and around the Gaza Strip, from the general law of obli-gations, and from human rights law, but that it cannot execute its obligations

to maintain law and order and provide basic services.45 Shany’s view can be criticized based on the interpretation of the law of occupation which in accor-dance with Article 42 of the Hague Regulations puts emphasis on the ability to

exercise control.46 A discussion of the international caselaw on the existence

of occupation47 and analysis of his view according to it, exceeds the scope of this chapter. That said, Shany’s reliance on existing caselaw is too restrictive.

Iain Scobbie holds a different view than Shany’s. One significant differ-

ence with Shany is that Scobbie separates the question of whether an existing occupation has been terminated from the question of whether an occupa-tion has been established. Scobbie seemingly concedes that it is necessary for ground forces to create and maintain control at the beginning of an occupa-tion. However, its termination, Scobbie suggests, may well involve different considerations, and the conditions required to end an occupation are not as clearly delineated in the governing instruments, as those determining when

an occupation has been established.48 While, according to the traditional test,

43 Ibid.

44 Ibid., page 383.

45 Ibid. See also Yuval Shany, ‘The Law Applicable to Non- Occupied Gaza: A Comment

on Bassiouni v. Prime Minister of Israel’, 42 Israel Law Review (2009) 101.

46 United States Military Tribunal, Trial of Wilhelm List and Others, 1947– 1948, 8 Law Reports

of Trials of War Criminals (1949) page 17.

47 See Aeyal Gross, The Writing on the Wall, Rethinking the International Law of Occupation

(cup 2017) 61– 113.

48 Iain Scobbie, ‘An Intimate Disengagement: Israel’s Withdrawal from Gaza, the Law of

Occupation and of Self- Determination’ in Eugene Cotran and Martin Lau (eds), Yearbook

of Islamic and Middle Eastern Law 2004– 2005, Volume 11, 2005– 2006 (Brill Publishers

2006) 6– 7.

78 Gross

occupation ends when authority passes back into the hands of the displaced sovereign, Scobbie suggests, that in order to claim that this condition has been met, the transfer must be shown to be genuine, and the post- occupation gov-ernment must be able to exercise sovereign authority. To determine whether a post- occupation entity can exercise actual independence over the territory in question, Scobbie requires that not only factual but also normative factors

be taken into account.49 In Scobbie’s view, to consider Israel’s withdrawal of its ground troops in isolation from its continued control of the airspace is to

ignore the context.50 He argues that the pa does not have the exclusive gov-ernment powers characteristic of a sovereign and should rather be seen as an

administration to which the occupant devolved competence.51 To be legally effective a termination of occupation needs to conform to the requirements

of self- determination.52 Israel’s unilateral withdrawal shows no respect for self- determination, either as a process (through the free expression of the Palestinians’ will) or in its substance (the occupant’s duty to maintain territo-

rial integrity).53 Scobbie notes that the Gaza Strip is neither formally nor actu-ally independent. Indeed, according to the disengagement plan, Israel retains control over the Gaza Strip’s maritime zones and airspace, and authorities in the Gaza Strip are unable to exercise control “to the exclusion of any other

State, the function of a State”.54 Scobbie understands the disengagement as an attempt on Israel’s part to retain powers over the territory while divesting itself of its responsibility towards the Palestinian population in that territory. In his view, a State cannot unilaterally exempt itself from the performance of

its duties under international law, as is the case here.55

Shany and Scobbie, do agree that a decision must be made on whether the

Gaza Strip remains occupied after the disengagement, and both consider the relevant powers of Israel and the Palestinians. Unlike Shany, who adheres to a factual approach, Scobbie suggests a normative approach, that places the dis-engagement’s respect for the principle of self- determination at the centre. The



49 Ibid., pages 9– 10.

50 Ibid., page 15.

51 Ibid., page 17– 19.

52 Ibid., page 21.

53 Ibid., pages 24– 25.

54 Permanent Court of Arbitration, Island of Palmas Case (USA v Netherlands) 2 Reports of

International Arbitral Awards, (4 April 1928), page 838 cited in Iain Scobbie, ‘An Intimate

Disengagement: Israel’s Withdrawal from Gaza, the Law of Occupation and of Self-

Determination’ in Eugene Cotran and Martin Lau (eds), Yearbook of Islamic and Middle

Eastern Law 2004– 2005, Volume 11, 2005– 2006 (Brill Publishers 2006) 29– 30.

55 Ibid.

A Functional Analysis of the Transformed Occupation 79

contrast between these two positions may be viewed as a reincarnation of the Oslo debate, when scholars were divided on Israel’s continued occupation of

areas controlled by the pa.56 In fact, the debate on the occupation of the entire Palestinian territory, or parts thereof, is as old as the occupation; after 1967, Israel consistently argued that the Fourth Geneva Convention did not apply in the territories it occupied during the war as they did not belong to a sovereign State. The Israeli Supreme Court held that the Hague Regulations apply but left open the question of the applicability of the Fourth Geneva Convention

based on the notion that it was not incorporated into Israeli law.57 This Israeli engineered indeterminacy about the status of the Palestinian territory could be viewed as an attempt to evade some of its responsibilities towards the Palestinian population while retaining power over the territory. In this sense, Israel’s disengagement from the Gaza Strip adds to the indeterminacy of the occupation.

In light of Israel’s rejection of the norms that place on it the responsibility

to provide for the local population and embracing of the norms that allow it to exercise powers in accordance with its perceived military needs, Scobbie’s position emerges as more persuasive. Nevertheless, like Shany, he anchors his view in the occupation/ non- occupation antithesis and rests it on the

sovereignty- occupation dichotomy58 by insisting that only the establishment of sovereignty can signal the end of occupation. Scobbie rightfully rejects the notion that the end of occupation is a mirror image of its beginning, but the claim that only the establishment of sovereignty can signal the end of occu-pation implies a binary structure that cannot fully capture situations such as that of the post- disengagement Gaza Strip. A third option, one that recognises the existence of non- binary situations but precludes a pick and choose mecha-

nism that allows for the evasion of responsibilities is suggested here.59



56 See Aeyal Gross, The Writing on the Wall, Rethinking the International Law of Occupation

(cup 2017) 181– 204.

57 Ibid., pages 141– 180.

58 In another article, Shany acknowledges the limitations of this dichotomy. Yuval Shany,

‘Binary Law Meets Complex Reality: The Occupation of Gaza Debate’, 41 Israel Law Review

(2008) 68.

59 For a more nuanced approach, that considers that occupation continues to exist, see also

Yoram Dinstein, The International Law of Belligerent Occupation (cup 2019) 297– 303. For

a discussion of Dinstein’s position and where it stands in relationship to my own position,

see Aeyal Gross, The Writing on the Wall, Rethinking the International Law of Occupation

(cup 2017) 210– 211.

80 Gross

2.2 A Functional Approach to the Legal Status of the Gaza Strip The polarised debate on the legal status of the Gaza Strip illustrates the limits of the framework of the discussion. Occupation seems in this debate to be one

of the “concepts of jurisprudence” that Felix Cohen60 describes as “existing in their absolute purity, freed from all entangling alliances with human life”

and creating a “heaven of legal concepts”.61 Cohen describes the approach in

which legal concepts are “thingified” as “transcendental nonsense”.62 In this approach, legal analysis ignores practical questions of value or positive fact and takes refuge in “legal problems” that can always be answered by manipu-lating legal concepts in certain approved ways that Cohen argues bar the way

to “intelligent investigation of social facts and social policy”.63 Occupation, which as a legal term is a creation of law, can thus be considered one more of

the “magic solving words”, as Cohen called them.64

“Magic solving words” and debates around whether a situation falls or does

not fall within a certain definition of occupation inevitably result in a circu-lar exercise that is detached from the reality of lived lives. In Cohen’s legal realist suggestion, norms should not follow from abstract concepts but rather the opposite. For instance, rather than saying that a labour union can be sued because it is “a person” or “a quasi- corporation”, one ought to take the approach that a labour union is “a person” or “quasi- corporation” because it can be

sued.65 Whereas the former determination is coined in “transcendental” terms by asserting what sounds like a proposition but cannot be confirmed or refuted by positive evidence or ethical argument, the latter avoids an argument formu-

lated as a vicious circle.66 In the current context, such analysis has resulted in contradictory “factual” and “notional” concepts around the end of occupation,

or between a “de facto and a de jure” end of occupation.67

The alternative to the world of “heavenly legal concepts” and “transcen-

dental nonsense” is in Cohen’s terms the “functional approach” that “rep-resents an assault upon all dogmas and devices that cannot be translated into terms of actual experience” and from which “all sorts of empirical decisions



60 Felix S Cohen, ‘Transcendental Nonsense and the Functional Approach’, 35 Columbia Law

Review (1935) 809.

61 Ibid., page 809.

62 Ibid., page 811.

63 Ibid., page 820.

64 Ibid., pages 820– 821.

65 Ibid., page 813.

66 Ibid., page 814.

67 icrc, Expert Meeting: Occupation and Other Forms of Administration of Foreign Territory,

2012, page 27.

A Functional Analysis of the Transformed Occupation 81

are supposed to flow”.68 “If the functionalists are correct”, argues Cohen, “the

meaning of a definition is found in its consequences”.69 To paraphrase Cohen’s approach to contract, we should consider whether or not liability should be attached to certain acts when considering if an occupation exists. This is an ethical question that cannot be answered in purely legal terms since that

would make it circular.70

A functional approach takes into account the major purpose of the law

of occupation to protect people living under the rule of a foreign entity and determines that norms from the law of occupation apply as long as the foreign power exercises control. At the same time, a functional approach is necessary in order to avoid an abstract determination that the Gaza Strip is occupied, while ignoring the elements on which Israel does not exercise control.

To illustrate how the discussion on whether occupation exists or not has

been taking place in conceptual terms, consider the landmark Bassiouni case (addressed in detail in Part 3), in which the Israeli Supreme Court, sitting as

High Court of Justice, held that Israel no longer occupies the Gaza Strip.71 In that case, the court held that Israel is not bound by the duties of an Occupying Power concerning the supply of electricity and fuel and may consequently limit deliveries. The court’s finding was supposedly derived from the (heavenly) legal concept of “occupation”, or rather a perceived lack thereof. While the hcj’s dic-tum in this case left room for moving beyond the conceptual approach toward a more functional one, its ratio decidendi remained within the bounds of the conceptual approach in ways that does not make Israel accountable for the power it exercises over electricity in Gaza. Other judicial cases point more

explicitly in a similar direction.72 I address them in detail in my book73 and will

only mention here the Aerial Bombardment decision74 by the Ethiopia Eritrea Claim Commission. The Ethiopia Eritrea Claim Commission held that it was

68 Felix S Cohen, ‘Transcendental Nonsense and the Functional Approach’, 35 Columbia Law

Review (1935) 809, pages 822– 823.

69 Ibid., page 838.

70 Ibid., pages 840– 842.

71 hcj 9132/ 07, Jaber Al- Bassiouni Ahmed et al. v Prime Minister and Minister of Defence (30

January 2008) para 2.

72 This in contrast to other cases which emphasise physical presence of the occupying mil-

itary and make the requirements for the determination of the existence of occupation

more rigid. See ECtHR, Sargsyan v Azerbaijan, Judgement, 16 June 2015.

73 Aeyal Gross, The Writing on the Wall, Rethinking the International Law of Occupation (cup

2017) 61– 113.

74 Eritrea- Ethiopia Claims Commission, Partial Award, Western Front, Aerial Bombardment

and Related Claims, Eritrea’s Claims 1, 3, 5, 9– 13, 14. 21, 25, 26 Between The State of Eritrea and

The Federal Democatic Republic of Ethiopia, 19 December 2005, para 27. 82 Gross

not necessary to determine abstractly whether an occupation exists to deter-mine the occupier’s duties. Instead, it was enough to hold that where Ethiopia, even if it ruled the territory in question for a short time, exercised power as

an occupier, occupation existed and duties followed.75 In this logic, Ethiopia’s duties derived from its actual exercise of power, not from locating the situation into an abstract concept of “occupation” or “sovereignty”.

Epistemologically, the question of whether occupation exists is often inde-

terminate, and this indeterminacy often becomes a form of control. The func-tional approach proposed, and a version of which the icrc eventually adopted, may be used to ensure rather than circumvent accountability, while recognis-ing that some actions are beyond the Occupying Power’s effective control and

others are undesirable.76

Arguably, the functional approach may encourage occupiers to exercise

fewer powers to avoid responsibility. This is not a problem per se if this means that, in the Israeli/ Palestinian context, Palestinians have more control over their own lives. Clearly, however, the functional approach must not mean that



75 Aeyal Gross, The Writing on the Wall, Rethinking the International Law of Occupation (cup

2017) 75– 78.

76 I first introduced the “functional approach” to occupation in a conference in 2007 and

then in writing in an opening post for an online symposium that addressed my proposal.

See Aeyal Gross, ‘Rethinking Occupation: The Functional Approach’, Opinio Juris, 23 April

2012. For responses and the full symposium, see Kevin Jon Heller, ‘Symposium on the

Functional Approach to the Law of Occupation’, Opinio Juris, 23 April 2012. In 2015, the

icrc adopted this position stating that, while in principle the law on the end of occu-

pation should mirror its beginning, “in some specific and rather exceptional cases […]

the law of occupation may continue to apply within the territorial and functional limits

of such competences” and effective control may continue – for the purpose of the law

of occupation – in spite of the lack of physical presence of foreign forces in the territory

concerned. In the same document, the icrc also recognised that geographical contiguity

between belligerents could facilitate the remote exercise of effective control, and the con-

tinued application of relevant provisions of the law of occupation is all the more import-

ant in such scenario. See icrc, International Humanitarian Law and the Challenges of

Contemporary Armed Conflict – Report of the 32 International Conference of the Red Cross

and Red Crescent, October 2015, page 12. This view was adapted in the Commentary of

2016 to the First Geneva Convention. icrc, Commentary on the First Geneva Convention

of 12 August 1949: Convention I for the Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded and

Sick in Armed Forces in the Field (cup 2016) pages 304– 313. While recent reality has led

some scholars and the icrc to recognise the need for a more “functional” approach to the

beginning or the end of occupation, my view on the “functional” approach is not limited

to exceptional cases of beginning or end of occupation. Indeterminacy about the exis-

tence of occupation and the need for an anti- conceptual approach is typical of many, if

not most, post- wwii occupations. See Gisha, (Re)- introducing the Functional Approach to

Occupation, 15 December 2015.

A Functional Analysis of the Transformed Occupation 83

an Occupying Power is relieved of its duties when no one else is exercising them, or when it prevents a legitimate sovereign from exercising them. Article 43 of the Hague Regulations remains instructive here. Similarly, the functional approach does not deny that several different entities may be considered responsible in some cases. Importantly, it should not be interpreted in a way that strengthens the “pick and choose” approach. The functional approach aims to ensure that powers that exercise control, even in scenarios that do not look like “classic” occupation, are prevented from avoiding responsibility for their actions by denying, transforming, or relinquishing part of their control.

The functional approach exposes a number of characteristics that, as noted,

were already inherent in the disengagement plan: (1) the continuation of the pre- disengagement ambiguity concerning the situation in general and the cur-rent status of this specific area in particular with the indeterminacy of the sit-uation, in itself a form of control, (2) the circumstances allowing Israel to go on exercising some of an occupant’s powers while negating the applicability of norms protecting the local population, and (3) the continuing shift to fric-tionless control – recall the disengagement’s purposes as including “reducing friction” between the Israeli army and the local Palestinian population. In this regard, the disengagement must be understood in tandem with other attempts at reducing friction, especially the Oslo Accords, the building of the Wall, and the handing over of the management of some of the Israeli checkpoints in the

occupied Palestinian territory to private security companies.77

Some of the arguments raised as part of the binary debate show the recur-

rence of these characteristics. Shany’s position, requiring the continued ground presence of a hostile force for an occupier to execute its obligations, led him to conclude that Israel’s ability to enforce day- to- day law and order in the Gaza Strip was minimal to non- existing. The duties that Shany notes Israel cannot fulfill, seem to be the ones that Scobbie would argue Israel must fulfill because it could not unilaterally exempt itself from its duties as an Occupying Power. This polarity leaves no room for an Occupying Power that exercises a transformed form of control.

If one was to endorse a binary approach and hold that the Gaza Strip is occu-

pied, then Article 43 of the Hague Regulations would stipulate that Israel not only has the power, but also the duty to act in the Gaza Strip to protect civilians from the local government. According to Article 43, the Israeli army should on this basis have intervened to restore public order and safety in the Gaza Strip



77 For a detailed discussion see Aeyal Gross, The Writing on the Wall, Rethinking the

International Law of Occupation (cup 2017) 253– 256. 84 Gross

on various occasions, in particular during the 2007 clash between Fatah and

Hamas.78 In one of the most often cited decisions on the existence of occu-pation, the Hostages case from the post- World War ii International Military Tribunal, the tribunal held that an occupiers’ power “is as great as his respon-

sibility”.79 In this context, this would mean that given the occupier’s responsi-bility under Article 43, its power includes the right – and in fact the duty – to act in the Gaza Strip in case of internal hostilities. We can discern from the

Ethiopia Eritrea Claim Commission’s Aerial Bombardment decision80 an oppo-site proposition. In other words, that an occupier’s responsibility should be as great as its power, or in fact as great as the power it exercises over the territory and its residents. The functional approach suggests that Israel may have no duty to intervene in incidents and developments that are outside its purview (movement of goods and people are undoubtedly within its purview). But this example also shows that a finding that Israel continues to occupy the Gaza Strip is a double- edged sword in that greater responsibility may as a result be justified in contexts where Israel’s interventions are unwanted, such as in the struggle between Fatah- Hamas or even in mundane matters (consider the run-ning schools).

The binary approach is thus a dubious tool for anyone seeking to guarantee

protection to a civilian population living under occupation, not only because deciding that the law of occupation does not apply while power is still exercised entails far- reaching consequences, but also because of the equally far- reaching consequences of deciding that it does. Those who advocate greater protection for Palestinians through the application of the law of occupation may thus, paradoxically, undermine the exercise of Palestinian self- governance, however limited, and reinforce Israel’s power. Given the lack of full and substantive self- determination (which in the Palestinian case must include effective self- government in both the West Bank and Gaza Strip), it may appear at first sight preferable to characterise the situation as one of occupation and assert the full scope of duties associated with occupation. But is reinforcing the occupant’s right and duty to intervene always desirable? A functional approach may help to avoid this double bind and maintain the framework of the law of occupation.



78 On the dispute, see Nathan J Brown, ‘The Hamas- Fatah Conflict: Shallow but Wide’, 34(2)

Fletcher Forum of World Affairs (2010) 35.

79 United States Military Tribunal, Trial of Wilhelm List and Others, 1947– 1948, 8 Law Reports

of Trials of War Criminals (1949), page 57.

80 Eritrea- Ethiopia Claims Commission, Partial Award, Western Front, Aerial Bombardment

and Related Claims, Eritrea’s Claims 1, 3, 5, 9– 13, 14. 21, 25, 26 Between The State of Eritrea and

The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, 19 December 2005, para 27.

A Functional Analysis of the Transformed Occupation 85

3 Israel’s Supreme Court on the Status of the Gaza Strip

Sitting as the Israeli High Court of Justice, Israel’s Supreme Court has addressed the status of the Gaza Strip in several rulings. The most important ruling, in the Bassiouni case, dealt with Israel’s decision to reduce or limit the supply of fuel and electricity to the Gaza Strip as part of the Israeli government’s sanctions against Hamas’s rule. Israel declared Hamas a terrorist organisation that had

taken control of the Gaza Strip and turned it into hostile territory.81

Both parties to the proceedings agreed that Israel supplied sixty percent

of the electricity needed for the Gaza Strip82 but disagreed on the acceptable consequence of restricting electricity. The petitioners argued that the restric-tions would cause electricity cuts in hospitals, stop the pumping of clean water to the civilian population, and inflict serious and irreversible damage to essen-

tial humanitarian needs of the Gaza Strip.83 They also pointed to the situation at the time of the litigation. The Israeli Air Force had bombed the local power plant and local authorities had already been compelled to cut power every day for several hours. The power cuts affected the functioning of essential services. Palestinians in the Gaza Strip had also been prevented from receiving clean drinking water in their homes and the restrictions had interrupted the func-

tioning of water and sewage pumps.84

The respondents claimed that reducing the electricity supply would not

affect the basic humanitarian needs of Gaza Strip residents.85 They also argued that Palestinians had conceded that, should restrictions be imposed, they could regulate loads by reducing consumption in the distribution area of a cer-

tain line without affecting the supply for humanitarian needs.86

The hcj addressed the extant situation and noted that “since September

2005, Israel no longer has effective control over what happens in the Gaza

Strip”.87 “Military rule that had applied in the past in this territory”, noted the hcj, “came to an end by a decision of the government, and Israeli soldiers are no longer stationed in the territory on a permanent basis, nor are they in

charge of what happens there”.88 Given these circumstances, the hcj held

81 hcj 9132/ 07, Jaber Al- Bassiouni Ahmed et al. v Prime Minister and Minister of Defence (30

January 2008) paras 2– 6.

82 Ibid., para 6.

83 Ibid., para 5.

84 Ibid., para 7.

85 Ibid., para 6.

86 Ibid., para 10.

87 Ibid., para 12.

88 Ibid.

86 Gross

that “the State of Israel does not have a general duty to ensure the welfare of the residents of the Gaza Strip or to maintain public order in the Gaza Strip according to the entirety of the law of belligerent occupation in international

law”.89 Furthermore, the hcj held that Israel has no effective ability, in its pres-

ent position, to enforce order and manage civilian life in the Gaza Strip.90 The hcj made this determination without citing any of the relevant international caselaw on the existence of occupation. It referred to what it saw as both the lack of effective control and the lack of capability to exercise such control. But the hcj stopped short of determining that Israel does not owe Palestinians in the Gaza Strip any duties. Instead, it determined that:

In the prevailing circumstances, the main obligations of the State of Israel

relating to the residents of the Gaza Strip derive from the state of armed

conflict that exists between it and the Hamas organization that controls

the Gaza Strip. These obligations also derive from the degree of control

exercised by the State of Israel over the border crossings between it and

the Gaza Strip, as well as from the relationship that was created between

Israel and the territory of the Gaza Strip after the years of Israeli military

rule in the territory, as a result of which the Gaza Strip is currently almost

completely dependent upon the supply of electricity from Israel.91

Regarding the first set of these duties, the one deriving from the state of armed conflict, the hcj cited international humanitarian law provisions that the respondents had stated that they applied in this case, such as Article 23 of the Fourth Geneva Convention determining that a party to a conflict must allow the free passage of consignments intended for civilians of the other party. The hcj noted, however, that the respondents had argued this is a very limited obligation relating to medical equipment and foodstuffs, clothing and med-icine intended for children under the age of fifteen, and expectant mothers. The respondents also cited Article 70 of Additional Protocol i, claiming that it constitutes customary international law, which imposes a general and broader obligation requiring parties to allow the rapid and unimpeded passage of essen-tial goods for the civilian population. They also cited Article 54 of Additional Protocol i, prohibiting the starvation of civilians as a method of warfare as well



89 Ibid.

90 Ibid.

91 Ibid.

A Functional Analysis of the Transformed Occupation 87

as any attack of installations required by the civilian population, including

foodstuffs, agricultural areas, and drinking water installations.92

Israel’s High Court of Justice thus accepted the State’s position that the

applicable humanitarian duties are those between parties to an armed con-flict, but not the broader duties of an occupying army. In the State’s interpre-tation, these humanitarian obligations did not require it to allow passage of “non- essential goods” or goods in amounts that exceeded “what is required for

basic humanitarian needs”.93 The State argued that the amount of electricity entering the Gaza Strip is indeed sufficient for the proper functioning of all the

humanitarian services in the territory.94 The hcj did not elaborate on the two other sources of obligations it cited and determined that the planned reduc-tion of the supply of electricity does not breach Israel’s humanitarian obliga-tions within the context of the armed conflict taking place between it and the

Hamas organisation that controls the Gaza Strip.95 It rejected the petition, holding that the amount of electricity supplied by Israel is capable of satisfying

the humanitarian needs of the Gaza Strip.96

This decision can be considered from several perspectives. On the factual

side, the hcj accepted the State’s arguments that the supply of electricity could be reduced without causing power stoppages in hospitals, affecting water sup-plies and essential services, and disrupting life for the entire civilian popula-tion. Other than citing to the fact that the State had submitted that Palestinian officials had informed it, that they could manage the load reductions without harm to humanitarian needs and purposes, and relying on a submission by the Israeli army, the ruling does not explain why the hcj found the army’s position more convincing than that of the petitioners.

More generally, the hcj accepted that the law of occupation in its entirety

does not apply to the case, because military rule in the area had come to an end by a decision of the government and Israeli soldiers were no longer stationed in the territory on a permanent basis, or in charge of what happened there. The hcj determined that Israel has no effective control of the Gaza Strip and there-fore it has no obligation towards the Palestinian population nor is it capable of maintaining public order in the Gaza Strip and ensuring the welfare of its resi-dents. The hcj did not explain what theory or facts led it to this conclusion and it did not engage any of the existing caselaw on the issue. By holding that Israel



92 Ibid., para 13.

93 Ibid., paras 15– 16.

94 Ibid., para 16.

95 Ibid., para 18.

96 Ibid., para 22.

88 Gross

has no effective control, the hcj is ignoring other forms of control discussed throughout this chapter, whereby the occupying force disavows its responsibil-ity (dismantles the military regime) and shifts to a form of control that entails minimal friction (through the absence of a permanent military presence). As for the hcj’s determination that, in its present position, the Israeli army has no capability to enforce order and manage civilian life in the Gaza Strip, the question is whether these issues are relevant to the matter at hand. Endorsing a functional rather than a binary view of occupation would have clarified that Israel has duties deriving from its control that may not encompass the mainte-nance of public order, a question that, in any event, was not before the court.

Given the location of the Israeli army and its proven ability to enter the

Gaza Strip at will, one might question whether it lacks the power needed to restore order in the Gaza Strip. What is unquestionable is that Israel does con-trol much of life in Gaza, as the case before the hcj actually shows. The hcj ruling, that Israel has no effective control while it reviews Israeli actions that illustrate extensive control of civilian life in the Gaza Strip, is somewhat para-doxical. By implicitly allowing such actions, the hcj itself, becomes part of the control mechanism.

Notably, the hcj did not hold that Israel has no duties towards the Gaza

Strip. It held that Israel is not to be bound by the broader duties entailed in the law of occupation. This caveat significantly narrows the duties of the con-trolling State toward the population affected by its acts, as illustrated below. The two additional sources of duties, on which the hcj did not elaborate, are duties deriving from Israel’s control over its border crossings with the Gaza Strip, and duties following from the relationship with the Gaza Strip after the many years of Israeli military rule, which have resulted in the area’s almost complete dependence on Israel for its electricity supply. In its ruling, the hcj limits the second source of duties to those following from Israel’s control of the border crossings. Yet, the statement that the laws of occupation do not apply “in their entirety” could suggest that these duties apply to any form of control exercised by Israel – crossings, the airspace, the waterways etcetera – beyond the basic humanitarian duties applying between combatant parties. Taken to its logical conclusion then, this determination could end up under-mining the rationale of the hcj’s ruling itself, which dealt with an issue that Israel does control. As such, the Bassiouni decision can also be seen as poten-tially supporting a functional rather than a conceptual approach to occupa-tion. A deeper analysis would have viewed control of the border crossing as part of Israel’s extant powers in Gaza, approaching its control of the fuel and electricity supply as one instance of a broader form of control, implying duties A Functional Analysis of the Transformed Occupation 89

more akin to those of an occupier than to those of a combatant party. The hcj, however, did not do this.

The third source deals with duties derived from the relationship created

after the many years of Israeli military rule that resulted in Gaza’s almost com-plete dependence on Israel for the supply of electricity. These obligations, which may at times be incumbent on the occupier even after occupation ends, have been described by some scholars as post- occupation duties. A notion per-

haps worth developing.97 The failure of the hcj’s decision is starkly evident here; although its discussion of how much fuel and electricity the Gaza Strip will receive demonstrates Israel’s continued control, the hcj’s finding suggests that the opposite is true. In this case, then, control (dis)appears – present and absent at the same time.

The effect of the Bassiouni decision was felt in a subsequent case concern-

ing Israel’s Law on the Incarceration of Unlawful Combatants from 2002.98 This law allows for the internment of people who take part in hostile activities against Israel or are members of a force that conducts hostile activities against Israel and who do not have Prisoner of War status, according to the Third

Geneva Convention.99 Given the law’s referral to the Third Geneva Convention and its declared statement of purpose – to facilitate the internment of unlawful combatants in a way that fits Israel’s obligations under international humani-tarian law – the hcj held that the law is intended to apply only to members of a terrorist organisation acting against the security of the State outside Israel, but not to citizens and residents of Israel who threaten its security. The hcj

held in regard to the latter that other legal means are available.100 In an obiter dictum, the court noted that, given that the West Bank is under Israel’s effective control, residents of the West Bank should probably be subject to adminis-trative detention as regulated by military legislation in the West Bank, rather

than to the Incarceration of Unlawful Combatants Law.101 The case involved the detention of two Palestinians from the Gaza Strip who had previously been



97 Yuval Shany, ‘The Law Applicable to Non- Occupied Gaza: A Comment on Bassiouni

v. Prime Minister of Israel’, 42 Israel Law Review (2009) 101, pages 114– 115; Eyal Benvenisti,

‘The Law on the Unilateral Termination of Occupation’ in Andreas Zimmermann

and Thomas Giegerich (eds), Veröffentlichungen des Walther- Schücking- Instituts für

Internationales Recht an der Universität Kiel (Institute of International Law Press

2009) 371– 383; Benjamin Rubin, ‘Disengagement from Gaza and Post- Occupation Duties’,

42 Israel Law Review (2009) 528.

98 Israeli Incarceration of Unlawful Combatants Law (2002).

99 Third Geneva Convention.

100 CrimA 6659/ 06, Riad Saadai Abed Al Hamid Iyad v The State of Israel (2008), para 11.

101 Ibid., para 36.

90 Gross

detained under orders issued by the Israeli Military Commander of the Gaza Strip as an occupied territory, which allowed for administrative detention. On 12 September 2005, however, on the day the Southern Command issued a proc-lamation about the end of the Israeli military government in the Gaza Strip, the appellants were issued detention warrants signed by the idf Chief of Staff,

under the Incarceration of Unlawful Combatants Law.102 Holding that the law in question is only relevant to external agents, the hcj noted that “external agents” may include residents of an enemy State but also residents of the Gaza Strip, which is no longer under belligerent occupation. Following the end of the Israeli military government in Gaza in 2005, Israel has no permanent pres-ence in the Gaza Strip and no possibility of fulfilling the duties of an occu-pier under international law. Any attempt by Israel to fulfil these duties, held the hcj, including the duty to maintain public order and security, will require complex and lengthy military operations. According to the hcj, Gaza should not be considered an area under belligerent occupation in terms of interna-tional law in the absence of real potential for effective control, even though Israel has some duties toward Gaza residents given the sui generis nature of

the circumstances.103

In making this determination, the Supreme Court relied, inter alia, on the

International Court of Justice ruling in the Armed Activities case.104 It held that the icj had emphasised the importance of physical presence for the existence of occupation. Since this is no longer the case in regard to the Gaza Strip, it considered Palestinians living there as foreign agents to whom this law may

apply.105 This shift in status implies that Palestinians from the Gaza Strip that are detained by Israel enjoy less protection after the disengagement. This downgrading of protection is significant because, compared to other Israeli laws, the Incarceration of Unlawful Combatants Law ensures appreciably less

guarantees of due process.106 The courts’ distinction between the West Bank and the Gaza Strip for the purpose of this law clearly reveals that the deci-sion that the Gaza Strip is no longer under Israeli control allows for harsher



102 Ibid., para 1.

103 Ibid., para 11.

104 icj, Armed Activities in the Territory of the Congo (Democratic Republic of Congo v Uganda)

(Judgement) icj Reports 116 (2005). See the discussion and critique of this case in Aeyal

Gross, The Writing on the Wall, Rethinking the International Law of Occupation (cup

2017) 75– 78.

105 CrimA 6659/ 06, Riad Saadai Abed Al Hamid Iyad v The State of Israel (2008) para 11.

106 See Aeyal Gross, The Writing on the Wall, Rethinking the International Law of Occupation

(cup 2017) 221– 222.

A Functional Analysis of the Transformed Occupation 91

measures to be taken against its residents, who can still be subject to detention

in ways less respectful of due process.107

In the same case, the petitioners argued that Israel should have released

them at the end of the military regime in the Gaza Strip. The court disagreed and found that Israel had no such duty as long as they represent a security risk, especially since the armed conflict continued. Israel’s ability to detain Palestinians from the Gaza Strip thus mutated into a harsher form, which was justified by the new situation being akin to hostilities between Israel and a “foreign” power.

The hcj put emphasis in this case on the army’s physical presence. By con-

trast, a dynamic, functional, and normative approach to control all its man-ifestations are not necessarily based on permanent ground troop presence. Although Hamas controls the daily running of government services, it is Israel that controls who and what enters and leaves the area. Israel significantly

shapes life in Gaza108 and its responsibilities should correspond to that abil-ity. Consider further the field of education. Israel may not control the selec-tion and supervision of schoolteachers in the Gaza Strip or the curriculum. It does affect, however, the right to education through its restrictions on the movement of people and goods. The hcj has received petitions regarding Palestinian students who want to study elsewhere, teachers who want to teach in the Gaza Strip, schoolbooks, materials needed to build schools, and so forth. The functional approach would view Israel’s responsibility in this sphere as that of an occupier, but commensurate to its power.

An exhaustive discussion of the growing body of caselaw is beyond the

scope of this chapter.109 Just to illustrate the discussion on education above, it is worth mentioning that the hcj rejected twice the petition of a group of students who had received scholarships to study occupational therapy in the

West Bank, a course not available in the Gaza Strip.110 Israel classified indi-viduals aged 16– 35 as a risk group and banned their entry into the West Bank



107 Ibid., pages 40– 47. The Court addressed the issue of the detention’s judicial review under

the law.

108 Sari Bashi, ‘Controlling Perimeters, Controlling Lives: Israel and Gaza’, 7(2) Law and Ethics

of Human Rights (2013) 243, page 263.

109 See Aeyal Gross, The Writing on the Wall, Rethinking the International Law of Occupation

(cup 2017) 224– 235; Michael Luft, ‘Living in a Legal Vacuum’, 51(2) Israel Law Review

(2018) 193; Gisha, Ten Years, Ten Judgments: How Israel’s Courts Sanctioned the Closure of

Gaza, December 2017.

110 hcj 11120/ 05, Osama Mahmud Hamdan et al. v The Southern Military Commander et al. (7

August 2007). The decision reaffirmed an earlier decision on the same matter, hcj 7960/

04, Muhammad Mousa Al- Razi v IDF Gaza Strip Military Commander (29 September 2004). 92 Gross

even though, individually, they did not pose a security risk. The State argued that, even if these students entered the West Bank without any intention of engaging in terrorist activities, they might be influenced by the surroundings. In its submission, the State distinguished between the Gaza Strip as no lon-ger being under Israeli belligerent occupation, and the West Bank as an area that still was, with Israel holding overall security responsibility. Israel refused to treat this as a humanitarian case and allow the students entry, even for the two months of clinical training needed to complete their degree, for which

they had studied online.111 This is but one example of how Israel continues to control many aspects of the life of Gaza’s residents post- disengagement, when its control of crossings, airways and waterways effectively prevents these stu-dents from completing their studies. Other cases have dealt with restrictions

on people who needed medical care outside of the Gaza Strip,112 or needed

to move for other purposes such as family visits,113 and sports competition,114 amongst others.

In these situations, the hcj has often accepted the position of the Israeli

government that Palestinians from the Gaza Strip are “residents” of an “Enemy

Territory” with no right to enter Israel.115 It has treated Palestinians who wish to enter Israel or the West Bank as “strangers” rather than as people to whom Israel owes a special duty as an Occupying Power.

But Palestinians are not “strangers”. In one case that illustrates Israel’s selec-

tive approach to the Gaza Strip, the hcj upheld a prohibition imposed by the Israeli authorities on a resident of the Gaza Strip to return to home from Israel, using regulations that allow the State to prevent Israelis from leaving Israel for alleged security reasons. It suggested that Palestinians from the Gaza Strip are strangers of a unique nature and, unlike tourists, Israel can restrict their free-

dom of movement with ease.116 There are also instances where Israel permits

travel beyond the humanitarian minimum.117 As Michal Luft argues, this and other cases illustrate the existence of a legal gap in Israel’s position towards Palestinians from the Gaza Strip. On one hand, Israel formally relates to them as “strangers” and considers that it does not owe them special duties, despite

111 Ibid.

112 See for more information Aeyal Gross, ‘Litigating the Right to Health Under Occupation’,

27 Minnesota Journal of International Law (2018) 421.

113 hcj 5268/ 08, Anbar et al. v GOC Southern Command (9 December 2009).

114 hcj 2486/ 14, Nader Abdallah Abd al- Razeq Masri v Minister of Defense et al. (7 April 2014).

115 See for example Appeal 4620/ 11, Kishawi v Minister of Interior (7 August 2012).

116 hcj 9329/ 10, Anonymous v Minister of Defense et al. (14 April 2011). For a discussion of the

case see Michael Luft, ‘Living in a Legal Vacuum’, 51(2) Israel Law Review (2018) 193.

117 Ibid.

A Functional Analysis of the Transformed Occupation 93

its vast control over their lives. On the other hand, its policy towards them is vague and arbitrarily applied to obscure Israel’s international duties without

jeopardising its actual control over the Gaza Strip and its interests therein.118

In some cases, the hcj has chosen not to clarify what the status of the

Gaza Strip is. For example, the hcj refrained from issuing a comprehensive judicial decision on the status of the Gaza Strip in the case concerning the occupational therapy students. The hcj held that such a determination would be mistaken given the liquidity of the situation and that there is no need to decide on complex international law questions regarding the matter given the sui generis nature of the situation. It said it preferred a humanitarian and prag-matic solution. The hcj’s “pragmatist” approach did not help the petitioners

in this case.119



4 Closure, Siege, or Occupation: From the Policing to the

Belligerency Model

In December 2008, following the continued firing of rockets from the Gaza Strip, Israel launched a large- scale military operation against the Gaza Strip that lasted three weeks. If Israel still maintains responsibility as an Occupying Power after the disengagement, the question is whether the full range of the laws on the use of force, including the jus ad bellum principle of self- defence and the jus in bello regulation of the conduct of hostilities, apply. As we shall see, the answer to that question depends on the determination of the status of the Gaza Strip.

An Occupying Power is unable to invoke the right to self- defence vis- à- vis

the territory that it occupies. Its security powers in the occupied territory are restricted to the maintenance of public order and safety in the interest of the occupied population under Article 43 of the Hague Regulations, and admin-istration of the occupation pursuant to the Fourth Geneva Convention. Self- defence is invoked against an external threat – not against a territory that a State controls and where it enjoys policing powers. If an armed conflict erupts (or rather re- erupts) within the occupied territory, regardless of the initiating party, the jus in bello provisions relevant to the conduct of hostilities will pre-sumably apply between the Occupying Power and the occupied population. To the contrary, one may argue if an occupation does not exist, that Israel may

118 Ibid.

119 hcj 11120/ 05, Osama Mahmud Hamdan et al. v The Southern Military Commander (7

August 2007).

94 Gross

resort to force under the jus ad bellum principle of self- defence under Article 51 of the UN Charter. By disengaging from the Gaza Strip, Israel may be under the impression that it has greater freedom to conduct military activities in the

Gaza Strip on the basis of the right to self- defence.120 Indeed, the supposed end of occupation may be considered to permit Israel to operate more force-fully in the Gaza Strip on the basis of the jus ad bellum right to self- defence.

Critics of the position that Israel’s occupation of Gaza Strip ended correctly

note that the disengagement enabled Israel to have its cake and eat it too; in other words, it placed Israel in a position of a (remote) occupier and that of an external belligerent. But to conclude on the basis of this valid critique that Israel cannot invoke a right to self- defence concerning the Gaza Strip – given that it is still occupied territory and only law enforcement operations are there-

fore allowed121 – alludes to the limits of the binary approach that attempts to argue that the occupation is unchanged. This argument fails to consider the absence of both a permanent Israeli military presence and an occupation regime engaged in policing and law enforcement.

The hcj’s decision on the Israeli army’s raid of the six- ship Mavi Marmara

flotilla that tried to break Israel’s naval blockade of the Gaza Strip and ended

in the death of ten passengers should be considered in this context.122 The hcj found that the naval closure had been imposed to prevent the entry of weap-ons into the Gaza Strip after Hamas gained control over government func-

tions.123 This approach raises questions about the restrictions on movement discussed in the previous section and the shift from an occupation to a bellig-erency model discussed in this one, and points out their interrelations. Israel claimed a right to maintain its naval blockade, declared during “Operation Cast Lead”. But the blockade, as noted above, has been a continuous feature of Israel’s control over the Gaza Strip. As an Occupying Power (1967– 1993), Israel prevented use of the Gaza Strip’s territorial waters for the movement of



120 Geoffrey Aronson, ‘Report: Issues Arising from the Implementation of Israel’s

Disengagement from the Gaza Strip’, 34(4) Journal of Palestine Studies (2005) 49, page 57.

121 See Noura Erakat, ‘It’s Not Wrong: It’s Illegal: Situating the Gaza Blockade Between

International Law and the UN Response’, 11 ucla Journal of Islamic and Near East Law

(2012) 37, page 42.

122 On the flotilla incident and the legal questions it raises, see George Bisharat, Carey

James and Rose Mishaan, ‘Freedom Thwarted: Israel’s Illegal Attack on the Gaza Flotilla’,

4 Berkeley Journal of Middle Eastern and Islamic Law (2011) 85; Daniel Benoliel, ‘Israel,

Turkey and the Gaza Blockade’, 33 University of Pennsylvania Journal of International

Law (2011) 615; Douglas Guilfoyle, ‘The Mavi Marmara Incident and Blockade in Armed

Conflict’, 81 British Yearbook of International Law (2011) 171.

123 hcj 4169/ 10, Yiftah Cohen et al. v Minister of Defense et al. (2 June 2010).

A Functional Analysis of the Transformed Occupation 95

persons or goods.124 Under the terms of the Oslo Accords (1993– 2005), fishing was supposed to be permitted up to twenty nautical miles off the coast, but in fact was only allowed for three to six miles. Plans for a deep- water seaport were

not implemented after Israel bombed the construction site in 2001.125 After the disengagement (2005), Israel prevented access to the Gaza Strip from the

sea, purportedly abiding by the law of armed conflict,126 to which it added in 2007 severe restrictions on the movement of goods. The declaration of a naval blockade during an armed conflict in January 2009 did therefore not really

change Israel’s control of Palestinian waters,127 which it had blocked contin-

uously since 1967.128 Barring isolated exceptions Israel has never permitted

vessels to enter or leave the territorial waters of the Gaza Strip,129 and has also

enforced significant restrictions on fishing activities along the Gaza coast.130

Furthermore, if this declaration was based on the existence of hostilities,

why was it still valid after the end of the Israeli operation in January 2009? A discussion of the flotilla raid, the legality of using force, and the law of the

sea, cannot be addressed in this chapter,131 but the incident points to the vio-lence that Israel exercises when maintaining the naval blockade and retaining control after the disengagement.

Scholars have argued that the naval blockade was illegal since it served

no military purpose and was only meant to put political pressure on Hamas.

Moreover, even if it were legal, it violated the principle of proportionality,132

124 See Sari Bashi, ‘International Legal Implications of Israel’s Attack on the Gaza Aid Flotilla’,

105 Proceedings of the American Society of International Law (2011) 463, page 463.

125 Ibid. See also Ahron Bregman, Cursed Victory – Israel and the Occupied Territories: A

History (Pegasus Books 2014) 301– 302.

126 Sari Bashi, ‘International Legal Implications of Israel’s Attack on the Gaza Aid Flotilla’, 105

Proceedings of the American Society of International Law (2011) 463, page 463.

127 For a detailed analysis of how the naval blockade, if purportedly not part of occupation,

violates international law, see Sari Bashi, ‘International Legal Implications of Israel’s

Attack on the Gaza Aid Flotilla’, 105 Proceedings of the American Society of International

Law (2011) 463, pages 464– 465.

128 Ibid.

129 The Public Commission to Examine the Maritime Incident of 31 May 2010, The Turkel

Commission Report, Part One, January 2010.

130 Gisha, Gaza Strip: Mapping Movement and Access, January 2020.

131 The Public Commission to Examine the Maritime Incident of 31 May 2010, The Turkel

Commission Report, Part One, January 2010; George Bisharat, Carey James and Rose

Mishaan, ‘Freedom Thwarted: Israel’s Illegal Attack on the Gaza Flotilla’, 4 Berkeley

Journal of Middle Eastern and Islamic Law (2011) 79. For a critique of the Turkel report,

see Amichai Cohen and Yuval Shany, ‘The Turkel Commission’s Flotilla Report (Part

One): Some Critical Remarks’, ejil: Talk!, 28 January 2011.

132 George Bisharat, Carey James and Rose Mishaan, ‘Freedom Thwarted: Israel’s Illegal Attack

on the Gaza Flotilla’, 4 Berkeley Journal of Middle Eastern and Islamic Law (2011) 79, pages 96 Gross

was tantamount to prohibited collective punishment,133 and violated Israel’s

duties as occupier.134 Furthermore, its legality cannot be examined separately from the question of Israel’s control of Gaza as sustained by its overall closure,

of which the blockade is but one manifestation.135

Under the functional approach proposed here, the blockade can and

should be seen as a situation violating the duties that Israel, as occupier, owes the Palestinian population. The argument that the suitable paradigm is that of closure and naval blockade rather than occupation should thus be viewed as another attempt to shift from an occupation model, involving duties toward protected persons, to a belligerent model. In Israel’s belliger-ent model, Palestinians are citizens of an enemy State that it does not recog-nise as an independent State but it is also Israel that maintains an extensive measure of control over its population, thus preventing them from exercising self- determination.

Food insecurity in the Gaza Strip, caused by the closure, provides further

illustration.136 The Turkel Commission was appointed by the Israeli govern-ment to investigate the May 2010 events of the flotilla and to examine the legal-ity of the naval blockade. The Commission determined that the blockade had never been intended to starve the civilian population, and that given the mon-itoring and protection mechanisms adopted by Israel to prevent a humanitar-ian crisis in the Gaza Strip, the closure could not be said to be unlawful under the laws regulating naval siege. The Commission thereby largely downplayed the data submitted by human rights organisations attesting to extremely high



97– 103. For a similar position, see also Douglas Guilfoyle, ‘The Mavi Marmara Incident

and Blockade in Armed Conflict’, 81 British Yearbook of International Law (2011) 171.

133 George Bisharat, Carey James and Rose Mishaan, ‘Freedom Thwarted: Israel’s Illegal

Attack on the Gaza Flotilla’, 4 Berkeley Journal of Middle Eastern & Islamic Law (2011) 79,

pages 103– 105.

134 Ibid., pages 105– 109.

135 Aeyal Gross and Tamar Feldman, ‘“We didn’t Want to Hear the Word Calories”: Rethinking

Food Security, Food Power, and Food Sovereignty – Lessons from the Gaza Strip Closure’,

33 Berkeley Journal of International Law (2015) 102; George Bisharat, Carey James and

Rose Mishaan, ‘Freedom Thwarted: Israel’s Illegal Attack on the Gaza Flotilla’, 4 Berkeley

Journal of Middle Eastern and Islamic Law (2011) 79, pages 101– 103; Russel Buchan, ‘The

Palmer Report and the Legality of Israel’s Naval Blockade of Gaza’, 61 International and

Comparative Law Quarterly (2012) 264.

136 For a detailed discussion, see Aeyal Gross and Tamar Feldman, ‘“We didn’t Want to

Hear the Word Calories”: Rethinking Food Security, Food Power, and Food Sovereignty –

Lessons from the Gaza Strip Closure’, 33 Berkeley Journal of International Law (2015) 102.

On the effects of the Israeli closure on Gaza’s economy, see Sara Roy, The Gaza Strip: The

Political Economy of De- Development, (Institute of Palestine Studies 2016) xix- cii. A Functional Analysis of the Transformed Occupation 97

levels of food insecurity in the Gaza Strip resulting from the complete break-

down of the Gaza economy caused by the closure policy.137 The UN- appointed

Palmer Committee reached similar conclusions.138 The Turkel Commission looked at both the San Remo Rules governing naval warfare (Article 102(a) pro-hibits a blockade intended to starve the population), and the general rules of belligerency (Article 54(1) to Additional Protocol i prohibit starvation of civil-

ians as a method of warfare).139 But the Commission determined that noth-ing in the materials before it indicated that Israel had attempted to deny the Palestinian population food or to annihilate or weaken them by starvation.

As argued in this chapter, an analysis of the closure and the naval blockade’s

legality cannot be based solely on the laws on the conduct of hostilities. The analysis must take into account obligations stemming from the law of occu-pation (as well as international human rights law). In this regard, Article 59 of the Fourth Geneva Convention requires the Occupying Power to allow and facilitate consignments “[i] f the whole or part of the population of an occu-

pied territory is inadequately supplied”.140 Additionally, Article 55 of the Fourth Geneva Convention determines that:

To the fullest extent of the means available to it, the Occupying Power has

the duty of ensuring the food and medical supplies of the population; it

should, in particular, bring in the necessary foodstuffs, medical stores and

other articles if the resources of the occupied territory are inadequate.

The obligation imposed on the Occupying Power to allow relief consignments to reach the civilian population is unconditional, meaning that “consignments

to occupied territories must be permitted to cross even a blockade line”.141 As



137 The Public Commission to Examine the Maritime Incident of 31 May 2010, The Turkel

Commission Report, Part One, January 2010; see further Aeyal Gross and Tamar Feldman,

‘“We didn’t Want to Hear the Word Calories”: Rethinking Food Security, Food Power,

and Food Sovereignty – Lessons from the Gaza Strip Closure’, 33 Berkeley Journal of

International Law (2015) 102.

138 UN, Report of the Secretary- General’s Panel of Inquiry on the 31 May 2010 Flotilla Incident,

July 2011. See also Aeyal Gross and Tamar Feldman, ‘“We didn’t Want to Hear the Word

Calories”: Rethinking Food Security, Food Power, and Food Sovereignty – Lessons from

the Gaza Strip Closure’, 33 Berkeley Journal of International Law (2015) 102.

139 The Public Commission to Examine the Maritime Incident of 31 May 2010, The Turkel

Commission Report, Part One, January 2010.

140 Fourth Geneva Convention, Article 59. Emphasis added.

141 Yoram Dinstein, The Conduct of Hostilities under the Law of International Armed Conflict

(cup 2010) 226. These articles deal with the supply of medical equipment and were

cited as the source for Israel’s duties as occupier in regard to medical supplies during 98 Gross

Dinstein notes, “[u] nfortunately, no similar obligation exists outside of occu-

pied territories”.142 Indeed, the provisions in Articles 55 and 59 set the bar higher than the “humanitarian minimum” standard (arguably sufficient to fulfill the belligerent’s duties under the law of armed conflict), and resembles more the human right standard of ensuring adequate food and living con-

ditions.143 The shift from occupation to belligerency, “naval blockade”, and “siege”, exempts Israel from an occupier’s responsibilities. Its obligations are minimised even if its control, in a different guise, continues to fundamentally

affect Palestinians living in the Gaza Strip.144 Even though the implementation

of human rights norms may lead to similar results,145 complex questions arise about their extra- territorial applicability – specifically that of socio- economic

rights.146 Although in this case, human rights norms would probably have led

to the same results given the degree and length of Israel’s control,147 applying the relevant norms of occupation law on a functional basis is significant. The example of food insecurity demonstrates the risks entailed in accepting the declaration that occupation is over in the Gaza Strip, but also the limits of the conceptual approach to law generally, and to occupation specifically.

This point is critical, because it shows how Israel’s control has assumed dif-

ferent legal forms and names since 1967 and only for part of the time, if at



the covid- 19 crisis. See Marco Longobardo, ‘The Duties of Occupying Powers in Relation

to the Fight Against COVID- 19’, ejil! Talk, 8 April 2020; Marco Longobardo, ‘The Duties

of Occupying Powers in Relation to the Prevention and Control of Contagious Diseases

Through the Interplay between International Humanitarian Law and the Right to Health’,

55 Vanderbilt Journal of Transnational Law (2022).

142 Yoram Dinstein, The Conduct of Hostilities under the Law of International Armed Conflict

(cup 2010). See also Shane Darcy and John Reynolds, ‘Enduring Occupation: The Status

of the Gaza Strip from the Perspective of International Humanitarian Law’, 15(2) Journal

of Conflict and Security Law (2010) 211, pages 217– 218.

143 icescr, Article 12. See discussion in Aeyal Gross and Tamar Feldman, ‘“We didn’t Want to

Hear the Word Calories”: Rethinking Food Security, Food Power, and Food Sovereignty –

Lessons from the Gaza Strip Closure’, 33 Berkeley Journal of International Law (2015) 102.

144 Ibid. In relation to how the control of the external perimeter affects the life of Gaza resi-

dents, see Sari Bashi, ‘Controlling Perimeters, Controlling Lives: Israel and Gaza’, 7(2) Law

and Ethics of Human Rights (2013) 243.

145 Ibid., page 102.

146 See Noam Lubell, ‘Human Rights in Military Occupations’, 94 International Review of the

Red Cross (2012) 317. Israel rejects the application of human rights in the opt. See UN

Committee on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights, Concluding Observations on the

Fourth Periodic Report of Israel, e/ c.12/ isr/ co/ 4, 12 November 2019, para 8.

147 See Aeyal Gross and Tamar Feldman, ‘“We didn’t Want to Hear the Word Calories”:

Rethinking Food Security, Food Power, and Food Sovereignty – Lessons from the Gaza

Strip Closure’, 33 Berkeley Journal of International Law (2015) 102.

A Functional Analysis of the Transformed Occupation 99

all, did Israel formally recognise it as falling under the rubric of “occupation”. Shifting from a conceptual to a functional notion of control requires consider-ing the different guises of control. The indeterminacy of the status of the Gaza Strip after 2005 and the departure of Israeli troops and settlements should not blind us to the persistence of control. The disengagement rather underscored its implications: Palestinians in the Gaza Strip are not considered citizens of Israel, protected persons under the law of occupation, nor citizens of a sov-ereign independent State. They cannot be considered citizens of a sovereign independent State because of Israel’s continued occupation of the West Bank, the restrictions that Israel imposes on Gaza’s ability to exercise sovereignty, and the American backed opposition to a unilateral Palestinian declaration of independence. Thus, even if Palestine did begin to gain international rec-

ognition as a State after 2012,148 it remains occupied and unable to exercise sovereignty.

As noted, Israel rejected in 1967 the de jure application of the Fourth Geneva

Convention to the opt. The disengagement enabled it to seek exemption even

from responsibilities it had recognised or assumed before.149 As Eyal Weizman notes, tightening the siege of Gaza is the culmination of a process of transfor-

mation from physical “occupation” to “humanitarian management”.150 In Adi Ophir’s poignant formulation, Israel has been keeping the occupied Palestinian territory, in particular the Gaza Strip, on “‘the verge’ of a humanitarian catastro-

phe”,151 a term first used by the UN Special Rapporteur on the Right to Food

in the context of the opt.152 At the same time, it has asserted that it will do

its utmost, if required, to avoid crossing the threshold of such catastrophe.153

148 See Aeyal Gross, The Writing on the Wall, Rethinking the International Law of Occupation

(cup 2017) 252– 253.

149 For an analysis of the Israeli control of Gaza as a form of neglect, see Ariella Azoulay and

Adi Ophir, The One- State Condition: Occupation and Democracy in Israel/ Palestine (sup

2012) 285, pages 289– 297.

150 Eyal Weizman, The Least of All Possible Evils: Humanitarian Violence from Arendt to Gaza

(Verso 2012) 81.

151 Adi Ophir, ‘The Politics of Catastrophization: Emergency and Exception’ in Didier Fassin

and Mariella Pandolfi (eds), Contemporary States of Emergency: The Politics of Military and

Humanitarian Interventions (Zone Books 2010) 59.

152 UN Commission on Human Rights, The Rights to Food – Report by the Special Rapporteur,

Jean Ziegler, Addendum, Mission to the Occupied Palestinian Territories, e/ cn.4/ 2004/ 10/

Add.2, 31 October 2003, para 8.

153 Adi Ophir, ‘The Politics of Catastrophization: Emergency and Exception’ in Didier Fassin

and Mariella Pandolfi (eds), Contemporary States of Emergency: The Politics of Military and

Humanitarian Interventions (Zone Books 2010) 77– 82. See also Ariella Azoulay and Adi

Ophir, The One- State Condition: Occupation and Democracy in Israel/ Palestine (sup 2012)

170– 179.

100 Gross

“The idea is to put the Palestinians on a diet, but not to make them die of hun-

ger”, Dov Weisglass, Advisor to the Israeli Prime Minister, reportedly stated.154

Going back to the strong effects of Gaza’s closure on food security,155 we should recall that crises often attract more attention than widespread and persistent

vulnerabilities.156 Whereas hungry people “look the part”, as Carolan points out, malnourished people whose diets are lacking in certain essential micro-nutrients, do not. But the results of malnutrition, which Israel does not con-sider falls within its responsibility anymore, are no less detrimental: reduced

well- being and a shortened life span.157 The words of the Director of unrwa Gaza Operations are most telling in this context:

Here you don’t see kids with blown up bellies … [H] ere they are not starv-

ing. But if you do a little research on the medical side you will find that

there is malnutrition and a very high prevalence of anemia which has to do

with the diet … [T]hose who are keeping a very good household economy

are eating, perhaps, one meal a day. Many families are eating every two

days. But nobody is starving. Everybody is hungry, nobody is starving.158

When a population is on the verge of humanitarian disaster, the spectators, be they the courts of law or the courts of public opinion, are not as alert to the harms as they would be if the sufferers were “looking the part”. Deliberations on whether “hunger” exists in the Gaza Strip in, for example, the Turkel

Commission missed this “hidden hunger”.159 This point is crucial for under-standing the conditions in the opt in general but, more significantly, in “post-

disengagement Gaza”.160



154 Conal Urquhart, ‘Gaza on Brink of Implosion as Aid Cut- Off Starts to Bite’, The Guardian,

16 April 2006, Weisglass later denied saying this. Ronny Sofer, ‘Hamas Sworn In: Israel to

Cut off Funds’, Ynet News, 15 February 2006.

155 Aeyal Gross and Tamar Feldman, ‘“We didn’t Want to Hear the Word Calories”: Rethinking

Food Security, Food Power, and Food Sovereignty – Lessons from the Gaza Strip Closure’,

33 Berkeley Journal of International Law (2015) 102.

156 See Bryan McDonald, Food Security (Cambridge, Polity 2010) 26.

157 Michael Carolan, Reclaiming Food Security (Routledge 2013).

158 Laila El- Haddad and Maggie Schmitt, The Gaza Kitchen: A Palestinian Culinary Journey

(Just World Books 2013) 26.

159 Patrick Webb and Andrew Thorne- Lyman, ‘Entitlement Failure from a Food Quality

Perspective: The Life and Death Role of Vitamins and Minerals in Humanitarian Crises’

in Basudeb Guha- Khasnobis et al. (eds), Food Insecurity, Vulnerability and Human Rights

Failure (Palgrave Macmillan 2007) 243.

160 On the effect of degrading environmental conditions on water, hygiene, nutrition, and

health care as one that may create preventable deaths not recorded when only deaths A Functional Analysis of the Transformed Occupation 101

The ones affected by food insecurity join those who died by violence, which

only exacerbated in post- disengagement Gaza. The situation in the Gaza Strip replicates a process that began with the Oslo Accords, where Israel supposedly relinquished control in the opt, only to shift its military activity from that of an occupier exercising security duties to that of a belligerent. This shift has been particularly evident in the three Israeli military operations in the Gaza Strip

between 2009– 2014 in which thousands of civilians have died,161 and Israel’s repression of the Great March of Return of 2018 in which 214 Palestinians, 46

of them minors, were killed.162 The Israeli Supreme Court’s decision to uphold the rules of engagement used by the Israeli army during the Great March of

Return also underscores this shift.163

Under a law enforcement model of occupation, lethal force can only be used

under very strict circumstances to protect life. Under a belligerency model, however, occupying forces are permitted to attack enemy combatants as well as civilians directly participating in the hostilities. Civilian losses are not prohib-ited either, unless they are the result of indiscriminate, disproportionate, and

targeted attacks.164 The model of occupation with reduced friction ironically



from violence or hunger related causes are counted, see Eyal Weizman, The Least of All

Possible Evils: Humanitarian Violence from Arendt to Gaza (Verso 2012) 86.

161 During “Operation Cast Lead”, between 27 December 2008 and 18 January 2009, 1,391

Palestinians were killed in Gaza (759 of them did not take part in hostilities). “Operation

Pillar of Defence” between 14– 21 November 2012 took the lives of 167 Palestinians (87 of

them did not take part in hostilities), while “Operation Protective Edge”, 8 July 2014 to 26

August 2014, ended with at least 2,104 deaths in Gaza (1,462 of them were civilians). See

B’Tselem, Fatalities During Operation Cast Lead, 2009; ocha, Gaza Emergency Situation

Report, 28 August 2014; B’Tselem, B’Tselem’s Findings: Harm to Civilians Significantly

Higher in Second Half of Operation Pillar of Defense, 8 May 2013. The year 2014 was in fact

the one with the highest Palestinian civilian death toll since 1967. See ocha, Fragmented

Lives: Humanitarian Review 2014, March 2015.

162 ocha, Two Years On: People Injured and Traumatized During the “Great March of Return”

Are Still Struggling, 6 April 2020.

163 hcj 3003/ 18, Yesh- Din v IDF Chief of Staff (25 May 2018). The State of Israel argued that

it was using a law enforcement model that is specific to the law of international armed

conflict, rather than the “regular” law enforcement model familiar from international

human rights law. For a critique see Eliav Lieblich, ‘Collectivizing Threat: An Analysis of

Israel’s Legal Claims for Resort to Force on the Gaza Border’, Just Security, 16 May 2018. See

also unhcr, Report of the Detailed Findings of the Independent International Commission

of Inquiry on the Protests in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, a/ hrc/ 40/ crp.2, 18

March 2019.

164 icrc, Expert Meeting: Occupation and Other Forms of Administration of Foreign Territory,

2012, pages 109– 110.

102 Gross

causes more lethal friction.165 If international law is to be relevant rather than merely a cover for a transformation of control that involves less responsibil-ity but more lethal power, it must recognise through a functional approach, new forms of control. These detrimental effects of the purported transforma-tion of occupation highlight the urgency of increasing accountability, rather than denying or diminishing it when we cannot see occupiers with “boots on the ground”. The European Court of Human Rights’s insistence of the “boots on the ground” requirement for occupation in the Nagorno- Karabakh cases it issued in 2015, as well as a similar insistence on the part of some authors, offers an inadequate solution to the changing nature of control described in

this chapter.166



5 Conclusion

As shown throughout this chapter, Israel’s indeterminacy concerning the status of the Gaza Strip is but another facet of its indeterminacy concerning the existence of an occupation of the entirety of the opt. Similarly, the hcj’s finding that the Gaza Strip is a sui generis case, with the Gaza Strip being nei-ther a State nor an occupied territory (which is also the official position of the

Israeli government),167 is another expression of Israel’s attempted exception-alism of its occupation of the entirety of the opt. The argument that the opt represents, as a whole, a sui generis situation was voiced by Israel’s Attorney General (and later President of the Supreme Court) Meir Shamgar shortly after

1967, when Israel did not fully recognise the status of the opt as occupied.168 Israel’s indeterminacy enables it to “pick and choose” the legal regimes and duties that best suit it and evade its legal responsibilities.

This chapter has proposed a functional approach to Israel’s control of the

Gaza Strip. In essence, the functional approach binds Israel to the duties of an Occupying Power where its actions affect the lives of Palestinians in the Gaza Strip. This is so because the functional approach acknowledges that there



165 Compare with James Ron, Frontiers and Ghettos: State Violence in Serbia and Israel

(University of California Press 2003) 14.

166 ECtHR, Chiragov et al. v Armenia, Grand Chamber Judgement, 16 June 2015; ECtHR,

Muradyan v Armenia, Judgement, 24 November 2016.

167 Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs, ‘The Operation in Gaza: Factual and Legal Aspects’, 29

July 2009, para 30.

168 Meir Shamgar, ‘The Observance of International Law in the Administered Territories’, 1

Israel Yearbook on Human Rights (1971) 262, page 263.

A Functional Analysis of the Transformed Occupation 103

are significant undesirable consequences to the binary, inflexible approaches proposed by other academics. Guided by the raison d’être of the law of occu-pation, and mindful that Israel’s control has transformed but not ended, the functional approach seeks to hold Israel accountable for its continued hold over the Palestinian population of the Gaza Strip.



Acknowledgement

The author is grateful to Idan Reiter and Shani Tsur for their research assis-tance and to Sari Bashi, Tania Hary and Michal Luft for their helpful sugges-tions. Further thanks to the Tami Steinmetz Center for Peace Research at Tel Aviv University for its support of this research.





chapter 5


Apartheid and International Law in Palestine

John Reynolds



The Israeli occupation of the West Bank including East Jerusalem and Gaza Strip, now “prolonged” to the point of absurdity, began in 1967. Israeli apartheid was already effectively in place for some decades prior: the legal inscription of difference and domination by the settler State, from its foundation in 1948. This chapter will conceptualise and contextualise this apartheid system as a core feature of settler- colonial rule in Palestine since the Nakba and – more recently – as an increasingly central focus of international legal analysis of the Palestinian reality. The chapter begins in the first section by situating Israeli apartheid within Zionism’s colonial project in Palestine, and by highlighting the longstanding Palestinian intellectual and activist traditions which have provided the foundations for now- widespread understandings of the apart-heid nature of Israel’s regimes of oppression and exclusion of the Palestinians. The second section will trace the vital role that Palestinian lawyers and rights organisations played from the 1980s in developing extensive legal analyses of Israeli apartheid, which western liberal human rights organisations have lately endorsed and elaborated. The third section will flesh out some of the key legal and material characteristics of Israel’s apartheid regime as not just a racially discriminatory regime but a colonial- apartheid regime. The fourth section will consider the tactical possibilities and pitfalls for movements seeking to mobil-ise international law to end apartheid, with reference to the definitions and prohibitions of apartheid that exist across a number of branches of interna-tional law. How central or peripheral international law will ultimately be to the dismantling of Israeli apartheid remains an open question, but it is certain that it must be dismantled.



1 Framing Israeli Apartheid

The Israeli apartheid regime is a centrepiece of the juridical and constitutional expression of Zionism’s colonial project in Palestine. Settler- colonialism is the core ideological pillar from which apartheid flows as a derivative and imple-menting structure, defined by the logics of conquest and colonisation, racial-isation and replacement. A settler- colonial State is, typically, a racial State.



© John Reynolds, 2023 | DOI:10.1163/978900450393

Apartheid and International Law in Palestine 105

Nadia Abu El- Haj emphasises the “racist character of the Israeli state – the organization of the state around the distinction between Jew and non- Jew, military and civilian legal systems, enclosure and movement, and, since the

1967 war, the additional distinction between citizen and subject”.1 Apartheid was most visibly enacted from the outset through the Israeli State’s citizenship, nationality and immigration laws, its land and property regimes, and its inter-nal military- emergency regime governing the minority of Palestinians who had not been ethnically cleansed during the Nakba and had acquired Israeli citizenship. Israeli apartheid was subsequently channelled into the West Bank including East Jerusalem and Gaza Strip after 1967. Many of its most overt manifestations are indeed visible in the occupied territory, but it is not lim-ited to the Israeli occupation and certainly cannot be understood in isolation from Israel’s own basic laws, character and constitution. The prolonged post- 1967 occupation itself, similarly, cannot be understood in isolation from the underlying structures of Israeli settler- colonialism and apartheid. Apartheid in this sense provides a valuable and vital conceptual link between settler- colonialism in historic Palestine and the prolonged occupation of partitioned Palestinian territory.

This understanding of apartheid having its roots in settler- colonialism and

being instituted prior to and beyond the occupied territory is not a novel lens, nor one that has only been superimposed retroactively. It was indeed already asserted by Palestinian scholars, thinkers and activists before the occupation had begun. In 1965, Fayez Sayegh wryly noted that “the Zionist settler- state” had learned everything it could from the white settler- States in Europe and Asia and applied their templates in a tailored and less explicit fashion: “whereas the Afrikaner apostles of apartheid in South Africa, for example, brazenly pro-claim their sin, the Zionist practitioners of apartheid in Palestine beguilingly

protest their innocence!”.2 Through the 1960s and 70s, intellectuals, scholars and activists associated with the plo’s Palestine Research Center were intent on internationalising the Palestinian struggle “by theorizing the particular and

connected forms of racism animating Zionist settler colonialism”.3 They placed an emphasis on Israeli State racism and apartheid, and critiqued Zionism as a

form of racism.4 As such, while articulations and analysis of Israeli apartheid

1 Nadia Abu El- Haj, ‘Racial Palestinianization and the Janus- faced Nature of the Israeli State’,

44 Patterns of Prejudice (2010) 27, page 30.

2 Fayez Sayegh, Zionist Colonialism in Palestine (plo Research Center 1965) 27.

3 Keith Feldman, A Shadow over Palestine: The Imperial Life of Race in America (University of

Minnesota Press 2015) 229.

4 This culminated in the adoption of UN General Assembly Resolution 3379 declaring Zionism

as “a form of racism and racial discrimination”.

106 Reynolds

have further proliferated – and have in some cases been focused primarily on the occupied territory, especially following the fragmentation and consolida-tion of Israel’s occupation under the Oslo Accords – it is important to empha-sise the longer Palestinian radical tradition. We have certainly witnessed in

recent years a form of analytic renewal or return5 to these earlier anti- apartheid framings, with a newer generation of Palestinian scholars, activists and allies re- emphasising the racial, apartheid and settler- colonial analyses of the 1960s

and 1970s.6

Strikingly, 2021 has been characterised as “the year of Israeli apartheid”7

due to a torrent of high- profile reports and interventions advancing the apart-heid critique. In this context, Palestinian scholars have made the crucial arguments that the more radical traditions of anti- apartheid politics beyond international law should also continue to guide Palestinian liberation efforts

and movement activism.8 But it is clear that international law’s definitions and prohibitions of apartheid, and the positions now increasingly being taken by major human rights organisations, have been a core driver of the broadening consensus on Israeli apartheid. Within the space of just over a year straddling either side of 2021, Israeli human rights organisations Yesh Din and B’Tselem and international organisations Human Rights Watch, Diakonia and Amnesty International all produced reports on Israel’s maintenance of an apartheid

regime or commission of apartheid crimes.9 The plo’s Negotiation Affairs

5 Noura Erakat and Marc Lamont Hill, ‘Black- Palestinian Transnational Solidarity: Renewals,

Returns, and Practice’, 48(4) Journal of Palestine Studies (2019) 7.

6 See for example Noura Erakat, Justice for Some: Law and the Question of Palestine (Stanford

University Press 2019); Noura Erakat, ‘Beyond Discrimination: Apartheid is a Colonial

Project and Zionism is a form of Racism’, ejil: Talk!, 5 July 2021; Mazen Masri, The

Dynamics of Exclusionary Constitutionalism: Israel as a Jewish and Democratic State (Hart

2017); Mazen Masri, ‘Colonial Imprints: Settler- colonialism as a Fundamental Feature of

Israeli Constitutional Law’, 13(3) International Journal of Law in Context (2017) 388; Nimer

Sultany, ‘The Legal Structures of Subordination: The Palestinian Minority and Israeli Law’

in Nadim Rouhana and Sahar Huneidi, (eds.), Israel and Its Palestinian Citizens: Ethnic

Privilege and Equal Citizenship (cup Press 2017); Ahmad Amara and Yara Hawari, ‘Using

Indigeneity in the Struggle for Palestinian Liberation’, Al- Shabaka, August 2019; Lana

Tatour, ‘The Culturalisation of Indigeneity: the Palestinian- Bedouin of the Naqab and

Indigenous Rights’, 23(10) International Journal of Human Rights (2019) 1569.

7 Ahmed Abbes and Jonathan Rosenhead, ‘2021, the Year of Israeli Apartheid’, Mondoweiss,

27 July 2021.

8 Lana Tatour, ‘Why Calling Israel an Apartheid State is Not Enough’, Middle East Eye, 18

January 2021; Noura Erakat and John Reynolds, ‘We Charge Apartheid? Palestine and

the International Criminal Court’, Third World Approaches to International Law Review –

twailr: Reflections 33 (April 2021).

9 Yesh Din, The Israeli Occupation of the West Bank and the Crime of Apartheid, June 2020;

B’Tselem, A Regime of Jewish Supremacy From the Jordan River to the Mediterranean Apartheid and International Law in Palestine 107

Department likewise released its own study concluding that “[i] t is Apartheid”.10 All of this echoed the work that Palestinian activists and rights organisations have long been doing, and continue to do. Most recently, in November 2021, Al Mezan published its analysis of the particular form that Israeli apartheid takes

in “the Gaza Bantustan”,11 and in January 2022, Al- Haq and Addameer filed a UN submission on Israel’s “apartheid regime over the Palestinian people as a

whole”.12 The April 2021 report from Human Rights Watch in particular – one of the world’s largest and most conservative human rights organisations – was a marker of how mainstream the analysis of Israeli apartheid has become. This intervention coincided with the outbreak of the “Unity Intifada” and a historic general strike across all of Palestine in May 2021: a watershed moment in which Palestinians “again revealed a solid geography of people across and despite the

partitions and separations imposed by Israeli settler- colonialism”.13 And amidst the overwhelming power and persistence of reactionary support for Israel from imperial centres, there was a widely articulated sentiment that something feels different this time, at least on certain registers. Palestinian labour demon-strated its strength in numbers when taking collective action across the par-tition lines. Unapologetic Palestinian voices penetrated international media outlets in unprecedented ways, and global mass mobilisation surged with clear reverberations from the 2020 Black Lives Matter revolt. Hundreds of solidar-ity statements, petitions and open letters were drafted, circulated and signed around the world – many of which condemned Israel as an apartheid regime

and referenced the Human Rights Watch and B’Tselem reports.14



Sea: This Is Apartheid, January 2021; Diakonia, Expert Opinion by Miles Jackson on

the Interplay between the Legal Regime Applicable to Belligerent Occupation and the

Prohibition of Apartheid under International Law, March 2021; Human Rights Watch: A

Threshold Crossed: Israeli Authorities and the Crimes of Apartheid and Persecution, April

2021; Amnesty International, Israel’s Apartheid against Palestinians: Cruel System of

Domination and Crime against Humanity, February 2022.

10 Palestine Liberation Organization, Negotiation Affairs Department, It Is Apartheid: The

Reality of Israel’s Colonial Occupation of Palestine, June 2021.

11 Al Mezan, The Gaza Bantustan: Israeli Apartheid in the Gaza Strip, November 2021.

12 Al- Haq, Addameer and Habitat International Coalition, Joint Submission to the United

Nations Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights in the Palestinian Territories

Occupied Since 1967, January 2022.

13 Sherene Seikaly and Rashid Khalidi, ‘From the Editors’, 50(3) Journal of Palestine Studies

(2021) 1, page 1.

14 See among many examples ‘A Letter against Apartheid’; Palestine and Praxis, ‘Palestine

& Praxis: Open Letter and Call to Action’; Jaddaliya, ‘Declaration on the Suppression and

Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid in Historic Palestine’, 7 July 2021.

108 Reynolds

This breakthrough in 2021 did not emerge in a vacuum. Much as Human

Rights Watch and Amnesty International might feel the need to keep a cer-tain level of distance from the activists who cleared the path for them, 2021 could not have been “the year of Israeli apartheid” without the tireless work of social movements, grassroots campaigners, trade unionists, student organ-isers, civil society advocates and researchers for many, many years prior. This lineage includes the local and global organising towards the UN’s Durban anti- racism conference in 2001, the annual running of Israeli Apartheid Week across hundreds of cities and campuses since 2005, the ongoing campaign for boycott, divestment and sanctions – and the punishments endured by activ-

ists, workers and students involved in those movements.15 It runs from some of

Edward Said’s earliest writings on Palestine in the 1970s16 to the extensive work

of Palestinian scholars more recently.17 It is also indebted to the sustained



15 In the European context, for example, the European Legal Support Center continues to

be engaged full- time in supporting activists, organisers, academics and students who are

subject to State- imposed or institutional sanctions and legal processes for involvement in

bds activities or campaigns against Israeli apartheid.

16 Edward W Said, ‘Intellectual Origins of Imperialism and Zionism’ in Walter Lehn

(ed), Zionism and Racism: Proceedings of an International Symposium (International

Organisation against All Forms of Racial Discrimination 1977); Edward W Said, The

Question of Palestine (Vintage 1979).

17 See for example Jamil Dakwar, ‘It’s Simple Apartheid’, Al- Ahram Weekly, 21– 27 December

2006; Nimer Sultany, ‘Don’t Call it Discrimination’, The Guardian, 30 April 2007; Hassan

Jabareen, ‘The Israeli Regime of Hafradah’, Fasl al- Maqal, 11 April 2008 (English translation

published in 47 Adalah Newsletter, April 2008); Hazem Jamjoum, ‘Not an Analogy: Israel

and the Crime of Apartheid’, The Electronic Intifada, 3 April 2009; Sahar Francis, ‘Denial

of the Right to Life and Liberty of Person as an Act of Apartheid’, 47 Al- Majdal (Autumn

2011); Victor Kattan, ‘The Russell Tribunal on Palestine and the Question of Apartheid’, Al-

Shabaka, November 2011; Noura Erakat and Rania Madi, ‘UN Committee Concludes Israeli

System Tantamount to Apartheid in 2012 Session’, 49 Al- Majdal (Spring – Summer 2012);

Hazem Jamjoum, ‘Refugees: Israeli Apartheid’s Unseen Dimension’, Al- Shabaka, June

2012; Nimer Sultany, ‘The Making of an Underclass: The Palestinian Citizens of Israel’,

27(2) Israel Studies Review (2012) 190; Amjad Alqasis, ‘Zionist Apartheid: a Crime Against

Humanity’, 53 Al- Majdal (Summer 2013); Noura Erakat, ‘The Structural Roots of Israeli

Apartheid’, Aljazeera, 28 October 2013; Rinad Abdulla, ‘Colonialism and Apartheid Against

Fragmented Palestinians: Putting the Pieces Back Together’, 5(1) State Crime Journal

(2016) 51; Mazen Masri, ‘Entrenching Apartheid: The Netanyahu- Trump Annexation plan’,

EUI Global Citizenship Observatory (14 May 2020); Hassan Jabareen, ‘How the Law of

Return Creates One Legal Order in Palestine’, 21(2) Theoretical Inquiries in Law (2020) 459;

Noura Erakat and John Reynolds, ‘We Charge Apartheid? Palestine and the International

Criminal Court’, Third World Approaches to International Law Review – twailr: Reflections

33 (April 2021); Noura Erakat, ‘Beyond Discrimination: Apartheid is a Colonial Project and

Zionism is a Form of Racism’, ejil: Talk!, 5 July 2021; Rania Muhareb, ‘Apartheid, the Green

Line, and the Need to Overcome Palestinian Fragmentation’, ejil: Talk!, 7 July 2021. Apartheid and International Law in Palestine 109

documentation, research and conceptual analysis of Palestinian legal advo-cacy groups and human rights organisations over several decades.



2 Palestinian Legal Activism and Anti- apartheid Analysis

In 1981, just two years after co- founding Al- Haq, Raja Shehadeh was writing about the “parallels” between the legal system underpinning Israeli colonisa-tion of the West Bank with that of apartheid South Africa and pointing to the “strong similarities which, all indications point, are only bound to increase

with time”.18 The core focus of Al- Haq and Shehadeh’s work through the 1980s was on questions of law and land. This required reckoning with the particular contours of Israel’s civil and military legal regimes. Shehadeh fixed his ana-lytic sights on the establishment of the Israeli civil administration in the West Bank in 1981, which formalised and “formulated the apartheid system in the

West Bank”.19 This was the legal- institutional consolidation of Zionism’s racial logic within the occupied territory: “a way of separating the civilian rule of Israeli Jews from that of non- Jews living in the same territory, making each group subject to different laws and different authorities that implement dif-

ferent laws, which is a form of apartheid”.20 For Shehadeh, Israeli apartheid in the West Bank was the process of these “different laws applicable to dif-ferent groups” producing “different and unequal distribution of resources and opportunities for development”. In 1992, in the maelstrom of the Madrid- Oslo conjuncture, Shehadeh stepped back to situate developments in the context of the UN’s 1973 Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid. He forewarned the plo that the way the negotiations were heading, they were going to end up blunting Palestinian self- determination and facili-tating Israeli colonialism. Unless the plo changed tack decisively “they would be contributing to the consolidation of the system of apartheid put in place by

successive Israeli governments over the past twenty- five years”.21 The warning



18 Raja Shehadeh, ‘The Legal System of the Israeli Settlements in the West Bank’, 27 icj

Review (1981) 59, pages 73– 74.

19 Raja Shehadeh, ‘Human Rights and the Israeli Occupation’, 8(1) cr: The New Centennial

Review (2008) 33, page 47.

20 ‘Interview with Raja Shehadeh’, 94(885) International Review of the Red Cross (2012) 13,

page 17.

21 Raja Shehadeh, ‘Negotiating Self- Government Arrangements’, 21(4) Journal of Palestine

Studies (1992) 22, page 28.

110 Reynolds

was ignored, and as a result of the Oslo agreements “the apartheid structure …

became more entrenched”.22

Importantly, in this reading, Israel’s apartheid was always understood in the

context of Zionism’s expansionary “land acquisition policy” through which

“colonialism is to be formalized and made permanent”.23 In her compelling “global history” of Al- Haq, Lynn Welchman notes that the apartheid legal framework which is “now routinely invoked by al- Haq and other human rights NGOs” can be traced back to this period in the 1980s: “[i] t is easy to point to pre-

dictions of these frameworks in early al- Haq work”.24 Jonathan Kuttab, another co- founder of Al- Haq, appeared before the Foreign Affairs Committee of the US House of Representatives in 1985, for instance, and testified on the con-sequence of Israel’s colonisation, Judaisation and annexation of Palestinian land. He said that it:

[L]eads to systematically robbing Palestinians of their land and water

resources, placing such resources in the hands of Jewish settlers for

whom an entire infrastructure and separate regime is created. A classic

de facto apartheid system has thus been created, with two separate and

differing structures, courts, residences and rights – one for Palestinian

Arabs and another for Israeli Jews.25

In 1998, law – The Palestinian Society for the Protection of Human Rights and the Environment, published a 78- page study of the Oslo process enti-

tled “Apartheid, Bantustans, Cantonization: The abc of Oslo”.26 In 2001, they built on this with a further and longer report, “Israel’s Brand of Apartheid: The

Nakba Continues”,27 which analysed Israeli law and policy with reference to the Apartheid Convention and other international legal treaties, and situ-ated Israeli apartheid as very much part of a colonial project based on racial domination. After this, law referred repeatedly in its publications to Israel’s



22 Raja Shehadeh, ‘Human Rights and the Israeli Occupation’ 8(1) cr: The New Centennial

Review (2008) 33, page 42.

23 Raja Shehadeh, Occupier’s Law (Institute for Palestine Studies 1988) 46.

24 Lynn Welchman, Al- Haq: A Global History of the First Palestinian Human Rights

Organization (University of California Press 2021) 7.

25 Jonathan Kuttab, ‘Statement for the Palestine Human Rights Campaign’, 7 Al- Haq

Newsletter (March– April 1985), pages 4– 5.

26 law – The Palestinian Society for the Protection of Human Rights and the Environment,

Apartheid, Bantustans, Cantonization: The ABC of Oslo, 1998.

27 law – The Palestinian Society for the Protection of Human Rights and the Environment,

Israel’s Brand of Apartheid: The Nakba Continues, 2001.

Apartheid and International Law in Palestine 111

“apartheid system” – its movement restrictions and permits which “resembles the system of ‘pass laws’ as used by the apartheid regime in South Africa” and

“cuts the West Bank into eight bantustans”.28 The organisation called on the international community to condemn racial segregation and apartheid, and

“to take effective measures to dismantle Israel’s apartheid system”.29

Other Palestinian rights organisations were also by now incorporating

the apartheid framework into their analysis and advocacy. The UN’s World Conference Against Racism in Durban in 2001 was a pivotal moment. Al- Haq prepared a legal position paper for the conference which linked apartheid to colonisation and self- determination, and concluded that under the terms of the Apartheid Convention, “Israel’s regime is, for all respects and purposes, an

apartheid regime”.30 The work of Palestinian legal activists informed the Cairo Declaration in advance of the conference, in which 65 Arab, Asian, African and international human rights organisations called for the abolition of Israel’s

“legal and institutionalised apartheid regime”.31 It similarly fed into the NGO Forum Declaration and Programme of Action adopted during the conference itself, which decided to formally “declare Israel as a racist, apartheid state” and call for an end to “the institutionalized racism and Apartheid regime in

Israel”.32 In doing so, the document characterised Israeli apartheid as a direct

obstruction to Palestinian collective rights to self- determination and return.33 The reactionary backlash – against the critiques of Israel by human rights NGOs and social movements, including the charge of apartheid – was such that it engulfed the entire conference.

Over the following twenty years, Palestinian legal research and advocacy

organisations like Badil and Al- Haq, and grass- roots organisations like Stop the Wall, continued to deepen and sharpen their apartheid analyses. Badil was at the vanguard of much of this work. In 2008, they published an important article



28 law – The Palestinian Society for the Protection of Human Rights and the Environment,

Israel Strengthens Apartheid Policies, 23 May 2002.

29 Ibid.

30 Al- Haq, Discrimination Is Real: Discriminatory Israeli Policies in Israel, the Occupied

Territories and Occupied East Jerusalem (‘The World Conference Against Racism’, Durban,

2001) 46.

31 Arab Regional Preparatory Conference for the World Conference Against Racism, ‘Cairo

Declaration Against Racism’, 22 July 2001.

32 NGO Forum Declaration and Programme of Action, World Conference Against Racism,

Durban, 2001, paras 162 and 418.

33 NGO Forum Declaration and Programme of Action, World Conference Against Racism,

Durban, 2001, para 418.

112 Reynolds

on the “applicability of the crime of apartheid to Israel”,34 and in the years that followed Badil’s Al- Majdal journal dedicated a notable number a special

issues to thinking about – and against – apartheid in Palestine.35 Also in 2008, the Palestinian Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions National Committee rep-resenting a broad coalition of trade unions, rights organisations and civil soci-ety groups published its landmark position paper, “United Against Apartheid, Colonialism and Occupation”, in advance of the UN’s 2009 Durban Review Conference. During this time, the two main legal organisations representing Palestinian rights on either side of the Green Line, Al- Haq and Adalah, were also core contributors to a major study commissioned in 2007 by South Africa’s

Human Sciences Research Council.36 I was working with Al- Haq at the time, where we had robust internal discussion about the implications of centering Al- Haq’s work more definitively around the analysis of Israeli apartheid. If the study would conclude that the Israeli occupation regime was part of a deeper apartheid regime, what would that mean for Al- Haq’s work that had drawn so extensively to date on the laws of war and occupation? How would anti- apartheid remedies relate to the Palestinian rights to self- determination and land restitution? Was there a risk that focusing on apartheid could in any way undermine the legal work against illegal settlement colonies in the West Bank?

The study was published in report and book form in 2009 and 2012 respec-

tively and found that Israel was in breach of the international legal prohibi-

tions on both apartheid and colonialism.37 While the findings emphasised that this was in addition to – and would not compromise or dilute – Israeli and international obligations under the laws of occupation, the thrust (and title) of the study made clear the need to go “Beyond Occupation”. The conversation among Palestine- oriented scholars, advocates and activists about how best to understand and mediate the various overlapping legal frameworks of occupa-tion, apartheid, colonialism and population transfer/ ethnic cleansing would



34 Karine Mac Allister, ‘Applicability of the Crime of Apartheid to Israel’, 38 Al- Majdal

(Summer 2008) 11.

35 See for example Al- Majdal, ‘Israel and the Crime of Apartheid: Towards a Comprehensive

Analysis’, 47 Al- Majdal (Autumn 2011); Al- Majdal, ‘The Vision of the Anti- Apartheid

Struggle’, 48 Al- Majdal (Winter 2012).

36 I was involved in this project as a researcher and co- author. Al- Haq and Adalah partici-

pated along with a group of legal scholars and practitioners from South Africa, Ireland

and Britain.

37 Human Sciences Research Council, Occupation, Colonialism, Apartheid? A Re- assessment

of Israel’s Practices in the Occupied Palestinian Territories Under International Law (Human

Sciences Research Council 2009); Virginia Tilley (ed), Beyond Occupation: Apartheid,

Colonialism & International Law in the Occupied Palestinian Territories (Pluto 2012). Apartheid and International Law in Palestine 113

continue. A loose consensus formed around the position that while occupa-tion law continues to offer important basic protections and accountability avenues, it is insufficient for understanding and addressing root- causes and structures and can itself feed into the problems of partition and fragmenta-

tion of the Palestinian people and territory.38 The Human Sciences Research Council study would be the launchpad for Al- Haq’s escalation of the apartheid analytic frame as more central to its work. It underpinned Al- Haq’s 2017 sub-mission to the International Criminal Court with a collective of Palestinian

legal organisations which presented evidence of crimes of apartheid,39 as well as a 2019 joint submission to the UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial

Discrimination detailing the nature and workings of Israeli apartheid.40 For Lisa Hajjar, “Al- Haq’s work deserves some of the credit for the fact that ‘Israeli apartheid’ now slips easily off the tongue and has become a focus for new gen-

erations of activists in support of Palestinian rights”.41



3 The Israeli Apartheid Regime

Israel defines itself in its basic (constitutional) laws as a “state of the Jewish people”, in which the right of self- determination is “unique to the Jewish



38 See for example Hassan Jabareen, ‘Discrimination is the Solution’, 70 Adalah Newsletter

(March 2010); Darry Li, ‘Occupation Law and the One- State Reality’, Jadaliyya, 2 August

2011; Nimer Sultany, ‘Occupation Law: Part of the Conflict or the Solution?’, Jadaliyya,

22 September 2011; Aslı Ü. Bâli, ‘Occupation Law: Part of the Conflict or the Solution?’,

Jadaliyya, 22 September 2011; Lisa Hajjar, ‘Occupation Law: Part of the Conflict or the

Solution?’, Jadaliyya, 22 September 2011; Lama Abu Odeh, ‘The Limits of International

Law Legalese’, Jadaliyya, 5 December 2011; Birzeit University Institute of Law, Concept

Note (‘Options and Strategies for the Palestinian People in International Law’ conference,

Birzeit, 2013); Allegra Pacheco, ‘Expanding the Legal Paradigm for Palestine’, Jaddaliyya,

8 May 2013; Ingrid Jaradat, ‘How to Make International Law work for Palestinians’, Al-

Shabaka, July 2013; Birzeit University Institute of Law and Civic Coalition for Palestinian

Rights in Jerusalem, Advocating for Palestinian Rights in Conformity with International

Law: Guidelines (Brill Publishers 2015); George Bisharat, ‘Justice for All: Toward an

Integrated Strategy for the Liberation in Palestine’, 17 Palestine Yearbook of International

Law (2014) 28; Noura Erakat, ‘What Role for Law in the Palestinian Struggle for Liberation?’,

Al- Shabaka, March 2014; John Reynolds, ‘Anti- Colonial Legal Resistance: Paradigms,

Tactics & Strategy’ 18 Palestine Yearbook of International Law (2015) 8.

39 Al- Haq, Palestinian Human Rights Organisations Submit Evidence to the ICC Prosecutor on

Crimes Committed in West Bank, 20 September 2017.

40 Al- Haq et al, Joint Parallel Report to the United Nations Committee on the Elimination of

Racial Discrimination on Israel’s Seventeenth to Nineteenth Periodic Reports, 2019.

41 Lisa Hajjar, ‘The World that Al- Haq Made’, Jadaliyya, 17 June 2021. 114 Reynolds

people” and “Jewish settlement is a national value”.42 Its leaders state openly that “Israel is not a state of all its citizens … Israel is the nation- state of the

Jewish people and only them”.43 Across the territory of historic Palestine con-trolled by Israel, between the Jordan River and Mediterranean Sea, roughly half of the inhabitants do not identify as Jews and as such are not included in this articulation of constitutional belonging. As of 2021, there are approximately 6,8 million Jewish- Israelis living in this territory and 6,8 million Palestinians

(of whom 1,6 million are citizens of Israel).44 Israel’s constitutional, civil and military law and practice across Israel and the occupied Palestinian territory systematically discriminates against Palestinians as a racialised group, for the purpose of maintaining domination over them in favour of Jewish- Israelis. In this sense, it is an apartheid regime. But it is also intrinsically linked to ongo-ing Zionist settler- colonisation – and concomitant dispossession and dis-placement of Palestinians. It gives certain legal privileges to non- Israeli Jews elsewhere, over and above native Palestinians. In these senses, it is a colonial- apartheid regime.

Israel’s legal- constitutional apparatus, and in particular its citizenship,

nationality and immigration laws, defines Jewishness primarily on matrilineal blood lines. Jewish identity is codified in Israel’s Law of Return as based on descent (“for the purposes of this Law, ‘Jew’ means a person who was born of a Jewish mother…”) or conversion according to certain criteria. The law grants settlement rights in Israel (and, since 1967, the rest of occupied Palestine) to any Jewish person born anywhere in the world who meets that definition of a Jew, and then extends those rights further to anyone with at least one Jewish

grandparent (and their spouse).45 When originally introducing the Law of Return in 1950, Israel’s founding prime minister David Ben- Gurion emphasised its centrality to the very character and constitution of the State, asserting that the Jewish right of settlement “existed before the state did, and it is that which built the state”:



42 Israel, Basic Law: Israel – The Nation- State of the Jewish People (19 July 2018). See also

Israel, Basic Law: Freedom of Occupation (9 March 1994); Israel, Basic Law: Human

Dignity and Liberty (17 March 1992); Israel, Basic Law: Knesset (12 February 1958).

43 ‘Benjamin Netanyahu Says Israel is “Not a State of All its Citizens”’, The Guardian, 10

March 2019.

44 See ‘Mapping Israeli Occupation’, Aljazeera, 18 May 2021, collating population statistics

from the Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics, the Israeli Central Bureau of Statistics,

the Israeli Ministry of Interior, and the Jerusalem Institute for Policy Research.

45 Israel, Law of Return (5 July 1950). This law was amended in 1970 to include definition

of “Jew”. According to the amendment “‘Jew’ means a person who was born of a Jewish

mother or has become converted to Judaism and who is not a member of another religion”. Apartheid and International Law in Palestine 115

The Law of Return is not one of these immigration laws which determine

under which conditions the country will accept certain kinds of immi-

grants. It is the unchanging law of Jewish history, reflecting the princi-

ple whereby the State of Israel was established. It is the historic right of

any Jew anywhere to come and settle in Israel for whatever reason. The

Nationality Law complements the Law of Return, determining that by vir-

tue of the fact that he has immigrated to Israel a Jew becomes a national

of his country, needing no further verification or condition other than his

desire to settle and live here. The Law of Return and the Nationality Law

constitute the charter of rights guaranteed to every Jew in Israel by virtue

of the fact that he is Jewish.46

To complement the Law of Return, the 1952 Nationality Law grants immediate automatic citizenship to Jews who migrate, while explicitly excluding those who were residents and citizens of Palestine before the creation of the State of Israel if they were not “in Israel, or in an area which became Israeli territory after the establishment of the State, from the day of the establishment of the

State [May 1948] to the day of the coming into force of this Law [April 1952]”.47 Thus, Palestinian refugees – including those born in Palestine who were forced out of their homes and into exile in 1948 – are barred from entering the territory, let alone returning to their homes and accessing even second- class citizenship or residency rights. Others with no prior connection to Palestine/ Israel (and no equivalent requirement of continuous residence from 1948– 1952), meanwhile, are entitled to citizenship on the basis of a particular construction of Jewish nationality. Anyone who is Jewish by descent can migrate as a colonist to any part of historic Palestine and will be granted automatic citizenship by Israel and the full benefits of Jewish nationality within its hierarchical constitutional system. This includes access to land, housing and social services on a level that native non- Jews, even those with citizenship, do not enjoy. The constitution of Israel as “a state for the Jews of the world”, as John Quigley put it in one of the earlier international legal analyses of Israeli apartheid, meant “less than

full status for others”.48 It is also central to understanding how and why the

46 David Ben- Gurion, Sitting 160 of the Knesset, 3 July 1950 (18 Tammuz 5710).

47 Israel, Nationality Law (14 July 1953), Article 3. It is crucial to note in this context that more

than 85% of the 900,000 Palestinians “who at the start of 1948 lived in the territory that

came to be Israel were gone by the end of that year, having becoming refugees in nearby

states”. John Quigley, ‘Apartheid Outside Africa: The Case of Israel’, 2 Indiana International

and Comparative Law Review (1991) 221, page 225.

48 John Quigley, ‘Apartheid Outside Africa: The Case of Israel’, 2 Indiana International and

Comparative Law Review (1991) 221, pages 224– 225. Given that the “state’s self- definition as 116 Reynolds

Israeli apartheid regime is also colonial, and not just internally discriminatory between two existing groups of citizens. As Darryl Li explains:

Although Zionism inscribes Jewishness in terms of nationality [le’om], it

is more usefully thought of as a racial category. It is primarily based on

bloodlines but in contrast to jus sanguinis principles that shape many

nationality regimes around the world, the Law of Return disclaims any

need to trace an individual’s connection to the territory through a family

member.49

Israeli law is indeed peculiar in how it distinguishes between nationality [le’om] and citizenship [ezrahūt]. For purposes of law as well as policy, no “Israeli nation” exists. Israeli Supreme Court jurisprudence confirms that Israel is defined as the State not of the “Israeli nation” but of the “Jewish nation” [le’om yahūdi]. When individuals have petitioned the Israeli Supreme Court seeking to register their nationality as “Israeli” as opposed to “Jewish”, the Court has held that “there is no Israeli nation separate from the Jewish nation”, with the Jewish nation “composed not only of those residing in Israel but also of

Diaspora Jewry”.50 The Supreme Court has made it clear that to recognise a common Israeli nationality would be to “negate the very foundation upon

which the State of Israel was formed”.51 Non- Jews who hold Israeli citizenship remain subordinated by virtue of the fact that they are not Jewish nationals. This racial privileging of Jewishness filters through the legal system and func-tions as an equivalent of whiteness in European settler- colonies historically. Its dynamics are deeply entangled with property and racial capitalism, and

prompt analyses of “whiteness as property in Israel”52 and “Jewishness as prop-

erty under Israeli law”.53



a state of a single racial group impliedly excludes others” Quigley concluded that Israel’s

nationality and citizenship laws amount to apartheid legislation calculated to prevent a

racial group from participation in the political, social, economic and cultural life of the

country, in breach of the Apartheid Convention.

49 Darryl Li, ‘On Law and Racial Capitalism in Palestine’, Law and Political Economy Project,

15 June 2021.

50 ca 630/ 70, George Rafael Tamarin v State of Israel (1972).

51 Ibid. The Court again rejected the existence of any Israeli nationality in ca 8573/ 08, Uzi

Ornan et al. v Ministry of Interior et al. (2 October 2013).

52 Noura Erakat, ‘Whiteness as Property in Israel: Revival, Rehabilitation, and Removal’, 31

Harvard Journal on Racial Ethnic Justice (2015) 69.

53 Rabea Eghbaria, ‘Jewishness as Property under Israeli Law’, Law and Political Economy

Project, 9 July 2021.

Apartheid and International Law in Palestine 117

While Palestinians holding Israeli citizenship make up approximately

22 percent of the State’s population and are entitled to vote, they are hugely restricted in critical areas such as land use and access to natural resources and key services. They are excluded by planning laws and institutions, and sys-tematically discriminated against at municipal and national levels in the eco-nomic, social, and cultural spheres. Jewish nationals, whose exclusive interests are served by parastatal institutions such as the Jewish Agency and the Jewish National Fund, are privy to exclusive access to most of the State’s territory and can claim extraterritorial rights and privileges in areas controlled by Israel. Notably, for instance, the 1960 Basic Law: Israel Lands provides that ownership of real property (“land, houses, buildings and anything permanently fixed to land”) held by the State of Israel, the Development Authority and the Jewish National Fund “shall not be transferred either by sale or any other manner”,

but is to be held in perpetuity for the benefit of the Jewish people.54 The World Zionist Organization and the Jewish National Fund are given an explicitly “cor-nerstone” role in Israel’s land policy, under which “93% of the land in Israel is in the public domain; that is, either property of the state, the Jewish National Fund or the Development Authority” and thus cannot be leased by non- Jews

(including non- Jewish citizens of Israel).55

This illustrates the foundation provided by the concept of Jewish national-

ity for an institutional regime that affords preferential legal status and mate-rial benefits to Jews over non- Jews. This is entrenched throughout Israel’s constitutional system. The 1958 Basic Law: The Knesset, for instance, makes the political participation of Palestinian citizens in the Israeli legislative sys-tem conditional on their acceptance of Israel as a Jewish State, and effectively bars them from challenging the laws that racially subordinate them. Most recently and perhaps most egregiously, the 2018 Basic Law: The Nation- State of the Jewish People consolidates the project of “constitutionally enshrining

policies that amount to apartheid”.56 Here, according to Hassan Jabareen and Suhad Bishara:

[A]partheid is evident in the fact that there is discrimination in citizen-

ship rights, cultural and language rights, the rights to land and housing,

and religious rights in every area of historical Palestine where both Jews



54 Israel, Basic Law: Israel Lands (25 July 1960), Article 1; see also Keren Kayemeth LeIsrael –

Jewish National Fund webpage ‘Jewish People Land’.

55 Israel Land Authority website.

56 Hassan Jabareen and Suhad Bishara, ‘The Jewish Nation- State Law’, 48(2) Journal of

Palestine Studies (2019) 43, page 43.

118 Reynolds

and Palestinians live … The law specifies that the two groups, Jews and

Arabs, living in areas subject to Israeli control are not constitutionally

equal.57

This is an apartheid constitutional regime which, as Jabareen and Bishara remind us, is part of a colonial constitutional regime:

The colonial nature of the regime is evident in the imposition of a Jewish-

Israeli constitutional identity on all Palestinians, in the severing of their

relationship to their homeland, and in the consolidation of Jewish ethnic

supremacy and domination.58

A total of fifteen petitions were filed challenging the legitimacy of the Nation- State Law. The Israeli Supreme Court allocated just one day for a single hearing on all fifteen petitions – including those setting out in detail the “discrimina-tory and racist nature of this law, a law which clearly shows the Israeli regime as a colonial one with distinct characteristics of apartheid” – before dismissing

the petitions in July 2021.59 At the same time, when Palestinian members of the Israeli parliament drafted a proposed Basic Law: State of all its Citizens, the Knesset Presidium refused to allow submission of the bill or even a discussion

of equal rights for all citizens, and the Supreme Court upheld this refusal.60

The apartheid nature of Israel’s legal regime is further visibly evidenced in

the separate legal systems in place for Jewish- Israeli settlers (civil law) and Palestinians (military law) in the occupied territory, and the racialised extra-territorial application of Israeli civil law to settlements and settlers from 1967

onwards, through a blend of personal and territorial jurisdiction grounds.61 The overarching structure of Israeli apartheid in the occupied territory mani-fests through specific “acts of apartheid” that feed into an institutionalised sys-tem of domination. Such acts range from the violent (torture and ill- treatment, extra- judicial killing, persecution of dissent) to the legal- administrative



57 Ibid., page 53.

58 Ibid., page 52.

59 hcj 5555/ 18, Akram Hassoun et al v. The Knesset (8 July 2021); Adalah, Israeli Supreme

Court Upholds the Racist and Discriminatory Jewish Nation- State Law, 8 July 2021.

60 Adalah, Israeli Supreme Court Refuses to Allow Discussion of Full Equal Rights & ‘State of All

its Citizens’ Bill in Knesset, 30 December 2018.

61 For further elaboration see John Dugard and John Reynolds, ‘Apartheid, International Law

and the Occupied Palestinian Territory’, 24 European Journal of International Law (2013)

867; John Reynolds and John Dugard, ‘Apartheid in Occupied Palestine: A Rejoinder to

Yaffa Zilbershats’, ejil: Talk!, 2 October 2013.

Apartheid and International Law in Palestine 119

aspects (categorisation of different population groups, permit systems, appro-priation of land for exclusive Jewish use, carving up of territory into segregated reserves). The law, in this sense, is both instrumental to, and constitutive of, apartheid. Numerous authorities and extensive legal studies over recent years have outlined the reality of Israeli apartheid under international law and docu-

mented the “legal architecture”62 and the acts of apartheid perpetrated against Palestinians in granular detail.

In 2007, as UN Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights in

the Palestinian Territories Occupied by Israel since 1967, John Dugard raised questions as to “the legal consequences of a regime of prolonged occupation

with features of colonialism and apartheid”.63 This was taken up directly in the aforementioned project initiated by the Human Sciences Research Council of South Africa, which was explicitly undertaken with the aim of studying and answering Dugard’s questions. The 300- page study set out detailed documen-tation and analysis of Israeli law and practice in Palestinian territory and con-cluded that there exists an institutionalised and oppressive system of Israeli domination and oppression over Palestinians as a group – that is, a system of

apartheid – which Israel and all States have legal obligations towards ending.64 Even with the territorial mandate of this study being confined to the 1967 occu-pation, it contained extensive analysis and critique of Israeli colonialism, and was unambiguous in pointing to the structural links between apartheid and settler- colonialism.



62 Susan Power, ‘The Legal Architecture of Apartheid’, Against Apartheid and Racial

Discrimination, 2 April 2021.

63 unhrc, Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights in the

Palestinian Territories Occupied Since 1967, John Dugard, a/ hrc/ 4/ 17, 29 January 2007,

page 3. Richard Falk picked up the baton when he replaced Dugard as Special Rapporteur

from 2008– 2014, noting in his 2010 report that the nature of the Israeli occupation as

it stood “substantiates earlier allegations of colonialism and apartheid in evidence and

law … The entrenching of colonialist and apartheid features of the Israeli occupation has

been a cumulative process”. unhrc, Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Situation of

Human Rights in the Palestinian Territories Occupied Since 1967, Richard Falk, a/ 65/ 331,

30 August 2010, para 3. In June 2020, a group of 47 UN Special Rapporteurs released a

joint statement warning that Israel’s annexation plans “would be the crystallisation of

an already unjust reality: two peoples living in the same space, ruled by the same state,

but with profoundly unequal rights. This is a vision of a 21st century apartheid”. ohchr,

‘Israeli Annexation of Parts of the Palestinian West Bank would Break International Law –

UN Experts Call on the International Community to Ensure Accountability’, 16 June 2020.

64 Human Sciences Research Council, Occupation, Colonialism, Apartheid? A Re- assessment

of Israel’s Practices in the Occupied Palestinian Territories under International Law (Human

Sciences Research Council 2009); Virginia Tilley (ed), Beyond Occupation: Apartheid,

Colonialism & International Law in the Occupied Palestinian Territories (Pluto 2012). 120 Reynolds

In 2011, the Russell Tribunal on Palestine went further, applying its inquiry

into Israeli apartheid beyond the 1967 territory. It found at the conclusion of its Cape Town session that “Israel subjects the Palestinian people” as a whole “to an institutionalised regime of domination amounting to apartheid as defined under international law”. While Israel’s “discriminatory regime mani-fests in varying intensity and forms against different categories of Palestinians depending on their location”, the Tribunal concluded that “Israel’s rule over the Palestinian people, wherever they reside, collectively amounts to a sin-

gle integrated regime of apartheid”.65 In 2017, the UN Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia report similarly examined “the treatment by Israel of the Palestinian people as a whole, considering the distinct circum-stances of geographic and juridical fragmentation of the Palestinian people

as a condition imposed by Israel”.66 The report concluded that “Israel has established an apartheid regime that dominates the Palestinian people as a whole”, and found that “the strategic fragmentation of the Palestinian people

is the principal method by which Israel imposes an apartheid regime”.67 As such, findings by both the Russell Tribunal and the UN Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia relate to the territory of historic Palestine in its entirety and refuse the logic of partition, as well as including the Palestinian refugees as subject to the apartheid regime. Under the Apartheid Convention, any measures “designed to divide the population along racial lines by the creation of separate reserves and ghettos for the members of a racial group” amount to an act of apartheid. Hence, as John Quigley notes, “[i] f forcing a group into a designated area within a country constitutes apartheid, forcing

the group out entirely would seem to be hyper- apartheid”.68

65 Russell Tribunal on Palestine, Findings of the South Africa Session, November 2011, paras

5.44 and 5.45. On the role of civil society tribunals such as the Russell Tribunal as truth-

telling mechanisms that represent a “jurisprudence of conscience” see Richard Falk,

‘Is Israel Guilty of the Crime of Apartheid?’, Aljazeera, 5 December 2011. See also John

Reynolds, ‘The Spectre of South Africa’, Jadaliyya, 29 October 2011; Victor Kattan, ‘The

Russell Tribunal on Palestine and the Question of Apartheid’, Al- Shabaka, November 2011.

66 UN Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia, Israeli Practices towards the

Palestinian People and the Question of Apartheid, e/ escwa/ ecri/ 2017/ 1, March 2017,

page 4. The report caused such a strong and reactionary political response from Israel

and some Western States that the UN Secretary- General did not endorse it and the report

was removed the UN website. As a result of this, escwa Executive Secretary Rima Khalaf

resigned in protest.

67 UN Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia, Israeli Practices towards the

Palestinian People and the Question of Apartheid, e/ escwa/ ecri/ 2017/ 1, March 2017,

pages 1 and 5. See also John Reynolds, ‘Israel and the A- word’, Counterpunch, 17 March 2017.

68 John Quigley, ‘The Palestinian Right of Return Could Go to the ICC’, Opinio Juris, 17

May 2021.

Apartheid and International Law in Palestine 121

Following the tendencies established over recent years, the 2021 Human

Rights Watch report was then simultaneously significant and superfluous in likewise detailing the nature of Israeli apartheid throughout all of the territory, from the river to the sea, in great depth. Human Rights Watch did also include the Palestinian refugees as affected by Israel’s intention to maintain domina-tion over Palestinians, though did not incorporate the question of refugees and return into its apartheid analysis as fully or coherently as it should have. The report was also somewhat uneven in the application of its analysis across the Green Line. Rania Muhareb has pointed out the oddity that when addressing the fragmentation of Palestinians, Human Rights Watch “only discusses ‘the separation policy’ within the occupied Palestinian territory, failing to mention the artificial division of Palestinians along the Green Line and the denial of the

right of return of Palestinian refugees and exiles”.69 The Human Rights Watch report does reinforce the logic of partition in some senses, finding that 1948

Palestinians face a type of discrimination which is “less severe”70 than 1967 Palestinians are subjected to, and that some of the core elements of systematic oppression and inhumane acts of apartheid “are only committed in the occu-

pied Palestinian territory”.71 The section of the report dedicated to document-ing Israel’s inhumane acts of apartheid explicitly differentiates “inhumane acts in the opt” from what it refers to as “other abuses” that are carried out “sepa-rately” by Israel against Palestinians inside the 1948 territory, even where it is the same essential policy perpetrated by the same state against the same racial

group.72 Land expropriation in the West Bank is presented by Human Rights

Watch as an inhumane act of apartheid,73 whereas land expropriation inside Israel (“the massive confiscation of land from Palestinian citizens” – and the ongoing denial of restitution claims) is characterised not as an act of apartheid

but an “other abuse” of Palestinian rights.74 In implementing apartheid laws throughout historic Palestine, however, in practice the Israeli State is guided more by the logic of ‘Greater Israel’ than of partition, and the reality as we must understand it and analyse it is effectively a one- State reality. Ultimately,



69 Rania Muhareb, “Apartheid, the Green Line, and the Need to Overcome Palestinian

Fragmentation”, ejil: Talk!, 7 July 2021.

70 Human Rights Watch: A Threshold Crossed: Israeli Authorities and the Crimes of Apartheid

and Persecution (April 2021) pages 80, 146.

71 Rania Muhareb, “Apartheid, the Green Line, and the Need to Overcome Palestinian

Fragmentation”, ejil: Talk!, 7 July 2021. Emphasis in original.

72 Human Rights Watch: A Threshold Crossed: Israeli Authorities and the Crimes of Apartheid

and Persecution, April 2021, pages 170– 204.

73 Ibid., pages 176– 182.

74 Ibid., pages 195– 199.

122 Reynolds

the land grabbing, home demolitions, evictions and prison conditions that Palestinians are subjected to are inhumane acts of apartheid whether in the Naqab or Ni’lin, Nazareth or Nablus.



4 Confronting Israeli Apartheid under International Law

Apartheid as imposed in South Africa was a system of white domination structured on three pillars: racial categorisation and segregation, territorial fragmentation, and political repression. It was an institutionalised system in the sense that it was created by law and enforced by legal institutions. From the 1960s onwards, with the “non- aligned” States having assumed a majority at the UN in the wake of the waves of decolonisation across Africa and Asia, concerns over the systemic malice of the apartheid system in southern Africa were addressed in treaties of international human rights and humanitarian law, in the adoption of a specific international convention to criminalise apart-heid, and in the procedures and resolutions of the UN General Assembly and

Security Council.75 As such, the definitions, prohibitions and criminalisations of apartheid that now exist across a number of branches of international law (human rights law, international criminal law, international humanitarian law, and public international law generally) are derived from the southern African experience but have a broader universal application.

In 1965, the same year as Fayez Sayegh published his canonical text theo-

rising race and racism in the context of Israeli colonialism in Palestine, the UN’s first global human rights treaty – the International Convention for the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination – was adopted. Article 3 laid down an obligation for the signatories to oppose and eliminate apart-heid: “States Parties particularly condemn racial segregation and apartheid and undertake to prevent, prohibit and eradicate all practices of this nature in territories under their jurisdiction”. As such, “governmental policies based on racial superiority or hatred, such as policies of apartheid, segregation or separation” were condemned and proscribed by the Convention as a systemic form of human rights abuse.



75 See further John Dugard and John Reynolds, ‘Apartheid, International Law and the

Occupied Palestinian Territory’, 24 European Journal of International Law (2013) 867. The

non- aligned States are those (mostly Global South) States who were/ are not formally

aligned with either of the Cold War era/ legacy power blocs. Building on the 1955 Afro-

Asian conference in Bandung, the Non- Aligned Movement was formally established at a

summit in Yugoslavia in 1961, and currently includes 120 Member States.

Apartheid and International Law in Palestine 123

When it comes to the crime of apartheid, the 1968 Convention on the Non-

Applicability of Statutory Limitations to War Crimes and Crimes against Humanity included among crimes against humanity, “inhuman acts result-

ing from the policy of apartheid”.76 Following on from this, the Apartheid Convention was adopted in 1973 to enable “more effective measures at the inter-national and national levels with a view to the suppression and punishment of

the crime of apartheid”, allowing for universal jurisdiction to be exercised.77 The categorisation of apartheid as a crime against humanity was retained in

the 1998 Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.78 Within the rubric of the laws of war, apartheid is also framed as a crime amounting to a grave breach of the Geneva Conventions when practised in the context of an armed

conflict, under Additional Protocol i to the four Geneva Conventions.79

Apartheid is also an internationally wrongful act under public international

law, held by the International Court of Justice to constitute a “flagrant violation

of the purposes and principles of the [UN] Charter”.80 From the 1960s, the UN General Assembly condemned apartheid as an inherent violation of the right to self- determination, and consistently associated the rights of those living under such a regime of racial domination with the rights of peoples subjugated by colonialism or foreign occupation. In 1970, the General Assembly affirmed “the legitimacy of the struggle of peoples under colonial and alien domination rec-ognized as being entitled to the right of self- determination to restore to them that right by any means at their disposal”, and condemned “those Governments that deny the right to self- determination of peoples recognized as being enti-

tled to it, especially of the peoples of southern Africa and Palestine”.81 Such coupling of the Palestinian and South African causes was commonplace in

General Assembly resolutions during the 1970s.82 The UN Security Council oscillated and equivocated more in its approach to apartheid through the 1960s and 1970s, and its role was diluted by the frequent abstentions and vetoes



76 This followed references to apartheid as a crime against humanity in various instru-

ments of soft law from the mid- 1960s onwards. See for example unga Resolution 2202

(xxi) (16 December 1966), para 1; Proclamation of Teheran, Final Act of the International

Conference on Human Rights, a/ conf.32/ 41, 13 May 1968, para 7.

77 Apartheid Convention, preamble and Article 4.

78 Rome Statute, Article 7(1)(j).

79 Additional Protocol i, Article 85(4)(c).

80 icj, Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of South Africa in Namibia

(South West Africa) Notwithstanding Security Council Resolution 276 (1970) (Advisory

Opinion) icj Reports 16 (1971) para 131.

81 unga Resolution 2649 (xxv) (30 November 1970).

82 See for example unga Resolution 3070 (xxviii) (30 November 1973). 124 Reynolds

cast by Britain, France and the US to shield the apartheid regime.83 By 1977, the Security Council’s language had eventually begun to sharpen, now “strongly condemning” South Africa’s racist regime and “demanding” the abandonment

of apartheid,84 before deciding under Chapter vii of the UN Charter to impose

a mandatory arms embargo on South Africa.85 This decision was followed up

and recalled by subsequent resolutions in the years that followed,86 and when the South African government declared a state of emergency in large parts of the country in 1985, the Security Council called for the adoption of sectoral

economic boycotts and the suspension of sports and cultural relations.87 The Security Council’s engagement (which continued until the termination of the

arms embargo with the formal dismantling of the apartheid system in 199488) demonstrates an international legal norm that apartheid is considered a threat to international peace and security, and that the violence and repression nec-essary to sustain it are illegitimate.

Apartheid is listed alongside genocide and other crimes against humanity

as an example of a breach of an international obligation consisting of a “com-posite wrongful act” under Article 15 of the International Law Commission’s

Articles on States Responsibility for Internationally Wrongful Acts.89 The prohibition of apartheid is also considered a norm of jus cogens giving rise to obligations erga omnes. The International Law Commission views the pro-hibition of apartheid as a peremptory norm of general international law and emphasises that the practice of apartheid amounts to “a serious breach on a widespread scale of an international obligation of essential importance for

safeguarding the human being”.90 The Commission notes the “widespread agreement” shared by States as to the peremptory character of the prohibition



83 For further analysis of this period see John Reynolds, ‘Third World Approaches to

International Law and the Ghosts of Apartheid’ in David Keane and Yvonne McDermott

(eds), The Challenge of Human Rights: Past, Present and Future (Edward Elgar 2012).

84 unsc Resolution 417 (31 October 1977).

85 unsc Resolution 418 (4 November 1977).

86 See for example unsc Resolution 421 (9 December 1977); unsc Resolution 473 (13 June

1980); unsc Resolution 55 (13 December 1984).

87 unsc Resolution 569 (26 July 1985) (with Britain and the US abstaining).

88 unsc Resolution 919 (25 May 1994).

89 ilc, ‘Report of the International Law Commission on the Work of its Fifty- Third Session’,

2(2) Yearbook of the International Law Commission (2001), page 62. According to the com-

mentary, “[s] ome of the most serious wrongful acts in international law are defined in

terms of their composite character”.

90 Ibid., page 113.

Apartheid and International Law in Palestine 125

on apartheid, and that apartheid is “prohibited in widely ratified international

treaties and conventions admitting of no exception”.91

The most powerful implication of the growing consensus that Israel is main-

taining an apartheid regime is the connections and intersections it provides between popular resistance, social movements, global solidarity and political action. Ultimately it will be mass mobilisation, civil disobedience and general strikes that will bring Israeli apartheid to an end, more than legal advocacy or remedies themselves. But the legal work that has been and is being done offers important outlets for critiques of Israeli apartheid to be elaborated and substantiated, and certainly feeds into broader consensus, campaigning and

political strategy.92

At the level of international human rights law, the claim of Israeli apartheid

as a breach of the icerd treaty has arisen on two parallel registers before the UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination: the Committee’s own periodic reviews of Israel, and an inter- State dispute filed by Palestine against Israel before the Committee in 2018. As early as its 1987 review of Israel, the Committee criticised the Israeli settlement policy in the occupied territory and expressed a particular concern that “people had been settled there on a

racial basis”.93 It also highlighted “the problem of racial discrimination and the

increasing trend towards racist extremism in Israel”.94 In terms of structural racial discrimination in a broad sense, the Committee honed in on the ques-tion of “why Israel did not permit the Palestinian Arabs who had been driven from their lands to come back and obtain the same treatment as Jewish peo-

ple in respect of the recovery of their land”.95 And so while at this point the Committee was not explicitly invoking the specific prohibition of apartheid in its critiques of Israel, it was identifying core features of Israel’s racial structures and presages the legal analyses of Israeli apartheid that would follow. When it came to Article 3 and apartheid specifically, the Committee at this point also flagged Israel’s problematic affinity with the archetypal racial regime of the time. The Committee “regretted the attitude of Israel towards the apart-heid regime of South Africa” and its “full partnership”’ and “collaboration with



91 Ibid., page 112.

92 See further John Reynolds, ‘Anti- Colonial Legalities: Paradigms, Tactics & Strategy’, 18

Palestine Yearbook of International Law (2015) 8.

93 UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, Report of the Committee on

the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, A/ 42/ 18, 1987, para 588.

94 Ibid., para 590.

95 Ibid., para 593.

126 Reynolds

South Africa in every field, including the economic, cultural, arms and, in par-

ticular, the nuclear”. It lamented that “Israel was South Africa’s closest ally”.96

In subsequent periodic reviews through the 1990s, the Committee on the

Elimination of Racial Discrimination continued to highlight and condemn Israel’s institutional discrimination against Palestinians in the areas of return

and citizenship,97 education, labour and public services,98 as well as structural

“ethnic inequalities” particularly in the area of housing and land rights.99 In 2007, the Committee again expressed its concern about structural systematic racial discrimination against Palestinians across the entire societal spectrum of citizenship laws, public services, land access and allocation, rights to work, health, education, family life, childcare, freedom of movement, access to water, cultural rights, religious rights, racial profiling, lack of effective remedies against racial discrimination and violence, and the implementation of sepa-

rate and discriminatory legal regimes in the occupied territory.100 This effec-tively described the material outcomes of Israel’s constitutional composition as essentially an apartheid system, though having alluded to so many elements of systemic discrimination, when it came to the constitutional claims of the State itself the Committee arrived at the somewhat naive and contradictory recommendation that “the State party ensure that the definition of Israel as a Jewish nation State does not result in any systemic distinction, exclusion, restriction or preference based on race, colour, descent, or national or ethnic

origin in the enjoyment of human rights”.101 The Committee did at the same time make references in the context of Israel’s regime to Article 3 of icerd which prohibits segregation and apartheid – and raised specific warnings

about segregation while still not (yet) naming apartheid.102

A breakthrough of sorts came in 2012, when the Committee again criticised

Israel under Article 3 but this time referred to “policies and practices of racial segregation and apartheid” and directed Israel to “eradicate any such policies



96 Ibid., para 591.

97 UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, Report of the Committee on

the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, a/ 46/ 18, 1992, para 369.

98 Ibid., paras 372– 376.

99 UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, Concluding Observations of

the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination, Israel, cerd/ c/ 304/ Add.45, 30 March

1998, para 19.

100 UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, Concluding Observations

of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination, Israel, cerd/ c/ isr/ co/ 13, 14

June 2007.

101 Ibid., para 17.

102 Ibid., paras 22 and 34.

Apartheid and International Law in Palestine 127

or practices which severely and disproportionately affect the Palestinian pop-ulation in the Occupied Palestinian Territory and which violate the provisions

of article 3 of the Convention”.103 The Committee condemned the general segregation of Jewish and non- Jewish communities under Israeli jurisdiction, and declared itself “particularly appalled at the hermetic character of the sep-

aration” between Jewish and Palestinian populations.104 Though this was a significant development as the first time that the Committee had explicitly invoked the prohibition of apartheid against Israel’s regime, it kept its word-ing sufficiently ambiguous for mainstream human rights scholars like Patrick Thornberry to assert that the Committee had not specifically “individuated” apartheid as a distinct violation committed by Israel. Instead, the Committee bracketed Israel’s regime as an overall violation of Article 3, which could be read as signifying a regime of apartheid, or segregation, or a composite of both. Thornberry, a former Committee member himself, noted that:

[T]he Committee has made an unusually high number of references to

Article 3 in concluding observations on the territories occupied by Israel,

employing the language of grave concern or deep concern and, more

unusually, as a violation, though without individuating the elements of

the article.105

In their 2019 shadow report submission to the Committee, Al- Haq and a col-lective of Palestinian rights organisations noted the “cumulative recognition of Israeli apartheid” as a continuing trend over recent years, pointing to the Committee’s own findings in 2017 and 2012, as well as the 2017 UN escwa

report.106 In its concluding observations after this 2019 review, however, the Committee did not fully and unreservedly continue its previous trajectory of taking a progressively stronger position on Israeli apartheid than it had in the previous review. It again invoked its General Recommendation 19 from 1995 “concerning the prevention, prohibition and eradication of all policies



103 UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, Concluding Observations

of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination, Israel, 9 March 2012, para 24.

Emphasis added.

104 Ibid.

105 Patrick Thornberry, The International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial

Discrimination: A Commentary (oup 2016). See also David Keane, ‘ICERD and Palestine’s

Inter- State Complaint’, ejil Talk!, 30 April 2018.

106 Al- Haq et al., Joint Parallel Report to the United Nations Committee on the Elimination of

Racial Discrimination on Israel’s Seventeenth to Nineteenth Periodic Reports, 10 November

2019, page 3.

128 Reynolds

and practices of racial segregation and apartheid”, and urged Israel to eradicate any violations of Article 3 of icerd against Palestinians on both sides of the

Green Line.107 On the one hand, the Committee’s findings represent a historic shift, as Adalah have asserted, as the first time a UN treaty- monitoring com-mittee has treated Israel’s regime of domination over Palestinians between the river and the sea as a single entity (rather than treating Israel and the occupied territory as two distinct entities and jurisdictions) – and one that amounts to a unified regime of racial segregation against Palestinians across the Green

Line.108 On the other hand, in the context of this racial regime, the Committee referred to the obligation to “eradicate segregation between Jewish and non- Jewish communities and any such policies or practices which severely and dis-proportionately affect the Palestinian population”, without explicitly including

apartheid in that part of its formulation.109 This ambiguity may have been a conscious or unconscious defence mechanism after witnessing the reaction-ary backlash against the escwa report in 2017. It may also have been due to a desire to avoid pre- empting the outcome of the inter- State dispute initiated by Palestine against Israel in 2018, which is the second register on which Israeli apartheid has arisen before the Committee.

This complaint against Israel, submitted by the Palestinian authorities to the

Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination in April 2018, was one of the first ever inter- State dispute communications under the UN human rights treaty system. It argues that Israel has established a legal regime of apartheid in the Palestinian territory in breach of Article 3 of icerd, as well as systemic racial discrimination in violation of Article 5. Israel responded with arguments that the complaint should be dismissed from the outset on grounds that the Committee had no jurisdiction to adjudicate a complaint brought against Israel by an entity that Israel did not recognise, and/ or that the complaint itself was inadmissible in an international forum as there are adequate legal rem-edies available in the Israeli judicial system which had not been exhausted. In December 2019, the Committee decided (by a majority of 13- 5) that it did indeed have jurisdiction to proceed with adjudicating the complaint. In April



107 UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, Concluding Observations

on the Combined Seventeenth to Nineteenth Reports of Israel, cerd/ c/ isr/ co/ 17– 19, 12

December 2019, para 23.

108 Adalah, For First Time, UN Body Criticizes Israel’s Policies of Racial Segregation against

Palestinians in Israel and OPT – as a Single Entity, 19 December 2019.

109 UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, Concluding Observations

on the Combined Seventeenth to Nineteenth Reports of Israel, cerd/ c/ isr/ co/ 17– 19, 12

December 2019, para 23. Emphasis added.

Apartheid and International Law in Palestine 129

2021, the Committee ruled that the complaint is admissible on the basis that there was enough evidence of “generalized policy and practice” by Israel to implicate it in substantive questions to answer under icerd. This meant that Palestine did not need to show that specific domestic remedies in the Israeli legal system had been exhausted. As indicative of Israel’s generalised policy and practice, the Committee drew again on its own prior language about “the continuing segregation between Jewish and non- Jewish communities” and the evidence of systemic discrimination against Palestinians “as regards their civil status, legal protection, access to social and economic benefits, or right to

land and property”.110 With the complaint deemed admissible, under icerd’s inter- State dispute procedures the establishment of an ad hoc Conciliation Commission is mandatory (in contrast to inter- State communications under some other human rights treaties where it is optional). Israel declined to par-ticipate in consultations over the membership of the Conciliation Commission and so it was left to the Committee to elect the five- person commission from its own membership. In December 2021, the chair of the Committee announced the appointment of this ad hoc Conciliation Commission, which will now seek

to work towards the ultimate aim of ensuring compliance with icerd.111

When it comes to the crime of apartheid under international criminal law,

the International Criminal Court is the primary institutional arena, and any potential prosecution there would again be breaking new ground: there has never been a prosecution of the crime of apartheid in any court to date (though notably, in November 2021, the first indictment of the crime against human-ity of apartheid in South Africa’s history was served on Christiaan Rorich and

Tlhomedi Mfalapitsa in the Gauteng Division of High Court in Johannesburg112). After Palestine joined the icc in 2015, a collective of Palestinian rights organi-sations began to file submissions to the Prosecutor detailing crimes committed by high- level Israeli civilian and military officials. The first three submissions related to crimes perpetrated in the wars and siege on Gaza. The fourth,



110 UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, Decision on the Admissibility

of the Inter- State Communication Submitted by the State of Palestine against Israel, cerd/

c/ 103/ r.6, 20 May 2021, para 64.

111 UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, 2865th Meeting, 105th

Session, 3 December 2021; ohchr, ‘State of Palestine against Israel: UN Committee

Sets Up Ad Hoc Conciliation Commission’, 17 February 2022. For analysis and further

explication, see Jan Eiken and David Keane, ‘Appointment of the Ad Hoc Conciliation

Commissions under ICERD’, ejil: Talk!, 13 December 2021; David Kattenburg, ‘The Obscure

UN Committee That (May) Charge Israel with Apartheid’, Mondoweiss, 10 February 2022.

112 David Forbes, ‘Former Apartheid- Era Security Branch Officers Charged with Crimes

against Humanity’, Daily Maverick, 24 November 2021. 130 Reynolds

submitted in 2017, covered war crimes and crimes against humanity in the

West Bank – including the crime of apartheid.113 Following the icc Pre- Trial Chamber’s February 2021 decision that the icc has jurisdiction to move ahead to investigate and prosecute international crimes committed in Palestine, the organisations reiterated the charge that Israel’s systemic segregation and sub-jugation of the Palestinians constitutes “an institutionalised regime of racial domination and oppression, and amount to the crime of apartheid; it is imper-ative that the Prosecutor include acts of apartheid in the scope of her investi-

gation”.114 This intervention by Palestinian legal advocates is a vanguard claim of institutionalised oppression as an international crime beyond what most mainstream legal institutions have been willing to engage with to date. It is also the legal claim that most directly feeds into the mass popular mobilisation

of Palestinian and global social movements over the last twenty years.115 It is quite possible, of course, that the Prosecutor will choose to ignore apartheid entirely and focus the investigation on more discrete war crimes, irrespective of Palestinian interventions. For Israeli officials to be indicted for apartheid, the prosecution needs to show an intention to maintain systemic racial oppres-sion. There is a perception that this element of intent makes it more difficult to prove than some other categories of international crimes. But the intentional nature of the regime is what underpins the significance of the crime of apart-heid, and the concerted design and maintenance of Israel’s oppressive regime is well- documented. As a structural crime, it demands prosecution of its polit-ical architects at the highest level.

Finally, we turn to public international law and State responsibility for the

internationally wrongful act of maintaining an apartheid regime. Whereas international law has legitimised and immunised established settler- colonial sovereignties, its prohibition of an apartheid regime requires the application

of State responsibility norms.116 The existence of a regime of apartheid has pro-found implications under public international law. The State of Israel is subject to duties of cessation and reparation: it is obliged to dismantle the apartheid



113 Al- Haq, Palestinian Human Rights Organisations Submit Evidence to the ICC Prosecutor on

Crimes Committed in West Bank, 20 September 2017.

114 Al- Haq, Landmark Decision of the Pre- Trial Chamber of the International Criminal Court

Welcomed by Human Rights Organizations, 6 February 2021.

115 See further Noura Erakat and John Reynolds, ‘We Charge Apartheid? Palestine and the

International Criminal Court’, Third World Approaches to International Law Review –

twailr: Reflections 33 (April 2021).

116 John Reynolds, ‘Challenging the Nakba through International Law’, The Nakba Files, 27

July 2016.

Apartheid and International Law in Palestine 131

regime and make reparations. Third States have duties not to recognise, aid or assist the apartheid regime, and a duty to cooperate to bring the apartheid situation to an end. This obliges all States to restrict trade and to divest from complicit institutions and investments, as well as to impose arms embargoes and targeted sanctions.



5 Conclusion

Among the core international institutional mechanisms for monitoring and documenting apartheid and assessing Third State responsibility were the UN Centre Against Apartheid and the Special Committee against Apartheid. Both were dissolved in 1995, while the treaty- monitoring body for the Apartheid Convention was suspended. In September 2021, to coincide with the UN General Assembly’s high- level summit to mark the 20th anniversary of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action against racism, another series of petitions against Israeli apartheid were published. Parallel interventions from

prominent intellectuals and public figures across both Global South117 and

Global North118 – again citing the B’Tselem and Human Rights Watch reports –

endorsed the campaign originating from Palestinian civil society119 which calls on the UN General Assembly to mandate an investigation of Israeli apartheid and to re- activate the Special Committee Against Apartheid and the Center on Apartheid to address Israel’s regime over the Palestinians. In March 2022, in his final report to the UN as Special Rapporteur on human rights in occu-pied Palestine, Michael Lynk similarly endorsed the position of Palestinian civil society. The report concluded that “apartheid is being practised by Israel in the occupied Palestinian territory and beyond” and echoed the calls for

re- establishment of the UN Special Committee Against Apartheid.120 Unlike the UN Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia study five years earlier, this time the UN Secretariat did not move to disassociate itself, under



117 ‘The Global South Stands United Against Apartheid’, Progressive International, 14

September 2021.

118 ‘#UNInvestigateApartheid: A Call from Intellectuals and Personalities in the West’, 22

September 2021.

119 Al- Haq et al., Global Response to Israeli Apartheid: A Call to the UNGA from Palestinian and

International Civil Society Organizations, 22 September 2020; Palestinian bds National

Committee, As UN Meets, Urge Investigation of Israeli Apartheid, 22 September 2020.

120 unhrc, Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights in the Palestinian

Territories Occupied Since 1967, Michael Lynk, a/ hrc/ 49/ 87, 21 March 2022, paras 61– 62. 132 Reynolds

external pressure, from the findings of the report. As the Unity Intifada con-tinues to evolve and global solidarity continues to grow, all States and interna-tional institutions will ultimately be forced to reckon with reality: apartheid in Palestine is unacceptable and untenable.





chapter 6


The Occupation– Colonialism Continuum: Impact

on Transitional Justice in Palestine/ Israel

Rimona Afana



Though belligerent occupations are, under international law, presumed to be extraordinary, temporary, and conservationist, Israel’s occupation of Palestinians appears normalised, permanent/ indefinite, and invasive/ inter-ventionist. Given its role in blocking resistance and normalising subjugation, the occupation functions as a tool of and smokescreen for colonialism. While diverging from “classic” settler colonialism in logic, in implementation the Zionist project features practices emblematic of colonial enterprises else-where. To delineate the specificity of transitional justice in the (com)promised lands, the continuities between different layers of harm were mapped. As evi-denced by my theoretical and empirical findings, these harms include settler colonialism and its offshoots: ethnic cleansing, military occupation, annex-ation, apartheid, the conflict’s protracted and deliberate non- resolution, third party interventionism, and a pervasive culture of intransigence.

To track the colonialism– occupation continuum, this chapter will first dis-

cuss the shifting interpretations of the Palestine/ Israel impasse, showing why settler colonialism and apartheid have eclipsed the occupation trope, in schol-arship and activism. Second, it will show that the occupation of Palestinians, because of its functional tie to a colonial project, diverges from conventional occupations and should thus be treated as unlawful. Third, though positioning settler colonialism as normalised State crime, the core process and structure fuelling the impasse, to me the ambiguous legal status of colonialism and its antagonising effect make the settler colonialism paradigm a less than ideal replacement for the occupation framework. Finally, drawing on fieldwork findings, a range of perspectives are illustrated on the colonialism– occupation continuum among founders, directors of, and activists in leading justice and reconciliation organisations in Palestine/ Israel. Our dialogues evidenced the handicap of civil society to meaningfully combat colonial criminality while stuck in the misleading occupation paradigm. Given the failure of the occupa-tion framework to capture the pervasiveness and chronicity of harm, a chasm between the 1948 and 1967 frameworks emerged in civic praxis.



© Rimona Afana, 2023 | DOI:10.1163/9789004503939

134 Afana

1 Backdrop: Shifting Interpretations of the Impasse

Over the past decade settler colonialism and apartheid have become the lead-ing interpretative frameworks for engaging critically with Palestine/ Israel. These paradigms have eclipsed the misleading trope depicting the impasse as rooted in the clash between two national movements and exacerbated by the occupation. Though for decades, critical scholars have treated Palestine/ Israel

as a colonial problem,1 only recently have we seen a boom globally in research and activism within the settler colonial framework. This reflects Palestine’s

“settler colonial turn” and “global turn”.2 These also echo “fourth generation

transitional justice”: the interrogation of peripheries.3 The limitations of tra-ditional transitional justice discourse are increasingly recognised, new stud-ies exploring colonial harms, structural violence, socioeconomic rights, or

development.4

1 Edward Wadie Said, ‘Zionism From the Standpoint of its Victims’, 1 Social Text (1979) 7;

Yeshayahu Leibowitz, Judaism, Human Values and the Jewish State (Harvard University

Press 1992); Baruch Kimmerling, Politicide: Ariel Sharon’s War Against the Palestinians

(Verso 2003); Lorenzo Veracini, Israel and Settler Society (Pluto Press 2006); Fayez Sayegh,

‘Zionist Colonialism in Palestine (1965)’, 2(1) Settler Colonial Studies (2012) 206; David Lloyd,

‘Settler Colonialism and the State of Exception: The Example of Palestine/ Israel’, 2(1) Settler

Colonial Studies (2012) 59; Virginia Tilley (ed), Beyond Occupation: Apartheid, Colonialism

and International Law in the Occupied Palestinian Territories (Pluto Press 2012); Nur Masalha,

The Zionist Bible: Biblical Precedent, Colonialism and the Erasure of Memory (Routledge

2014); Nadera Shalhoub- Kevorkian, Security Theology, Surveillance and the Politics of Fear

(cup 2015).

2 John Collins, Global Palestine (C Hurst and Co Publishers 2011).

3 Dustin N Sharp, ‘Interrogating the Peripheries: The Preoccupations of Fourth Generation

Transitional Justice’, 26 Harvard Human Rights Journal (2013) 149.

4 Lisa J Laplante, ‘Transitional Justice and Peace Building: Diagnosing and Addressing the

Socioeconomic Roots of Violence Through a Human Rights Framework’, 2(3) International

Journal of Transitional Justice (2008) 331; Zinaida Miller, ‘Effects of Invisibility: In Search

of the “Economic” in Transitional Justice’, 2(3) International Journal of Transitional Justice

(2008) 266; Catherine Lu, ‘Colonialism as Structural Injustice: Historical Responsibility

and Contemporary Redress’, 19(3) Journal of Political Philosophy (2011) 261; Evelyne Schmid

and Aoife Nolan, ‘“Do No Harm’’? Exploring the Scope of Economic and Social Rights in

Transitional Justice’, 8 International Journal of Transitional Justice (2014) 362; Paul Gready

and Simon Robins, ‘From Transitional to Transformative Justice: A New Agenda for Practice’,

University of York Centre for Applied Human Rights, Briefing Note tfj- 1, June 2014; Jennifer

Balint, Julie Evans, Nesam McMillan, ‘Rethinking Transitional Justice, Redressing Indigenous

Harm: A New Conceptual Approach’, 8(2) International Journal of Transitional Justice (2014)

194; Padraig McAuliffe, Transformative Transitional Justice and the Malleability of Post- conflict

States (Edward Elgar Publishing 2017); Bill Rolston and Fionnuala Ní Aoláin, ‘Colonialism,

Redress and Transitional Justice: Ireland and Beyond’, 7(2) State Crime Journal (2018) 329;

Khanyisela Moyo, Postcolonial Transitional Justice: Zimbabwe and Beyond (Routledge 2019). The Occupation-Colonialism Continuum 135

Notwithstanding growing interest in the impact of colonial legacies on tran-

sitional justice theory and praxis, research in this area is nascent, predomi-nantly focused on settler societies like Australia, New Zealand, the United States, and Canada. This drive towards expansive analytical frameworks was absent in early transitional justice research on Palestine/ Israel: studies only

assessed specific mechanisms and single thematic areas.5 Most did not even bring up colonialism, while others superficially touched on it, only as a facet of divergent narratives. Transitional justice research on Palestine/ Israel still pre-dominantly embraces political– legal or psychosocial approaches. Both seem reductionist given their poor engagement with the core source of harm here, settler colonialism. Also, these analyses do not track how the need for justice and for reconciliation often pull in opposite directions.

One way of looking at the roots of the impasse is seeing settler colonialism

as normalised State crime, examining the structural, intergenerational vio-lence it produces. In criminology, State crime designates an (in)action which breaches a State’s own criminal law or its international law obligations. Critical indigenous criminology highlights that colonialism and State crime remain interwoven: since some liberal democracies are rooted in State crime, an under-standing of colonial legacies should inform our analysis of crimes, State crimes,



5 Stanley Cohen, ‘Justice in Transition? Prospects for a Palestinian– Israeli Truth

Commission’, 25(194/ 195) Middle East Report (1995) 2; Aeyal Gross, ‘The Constitution,

Reconciliation, and Transitional Justice: Lessons from South Africa and Israel’, 40 Stanford

Journal of International Law (2004) 47; Yoav Peled and Nadim N Rouhana, ‘Transitional

Justice and the Right of Return of the Palestinian Refugees’, 5(2) Theoretical Inquiries in Law

(2004) 317; Ariel Meyerstein, ‘Transitional Justice and Post- conflict Israel/ Palestine: Assessing

the Applicability of the Truth Commission Paradigm’, 38(2) Case Western Reserve Journal of

International Law (2007) 281; Zinaida Miller, ‘Settling with History: A Hybrid Commission

of Inquiry for Israel/ Palestine’, 20 Harvard Human Rights Journal (2007) 293; Ron Dudai,

‘A Model for Dealing With the Past in the Israeli– Palestinian Context’, 1 International

Journal of Transitional Justice (2007) 249; Jeremie Bracka, ‘Somewhere Between Myopia

and Utopia: Conceptualizing an Israeli– Palestinian Truth and Reconciliation Commission’,

Minerva Center for Human Rights Working Paper 2011; Leila Hilal, ‘Transitional Justice

Responses to Palestinian Dispossession: Focus on Restitution’, International Center for

Transitional Justice and Brookings- lse Project on Internal Displacement, 2012; Munir

Nuseibah, ‘Forced Displacement in the Palestinian– Israeli Conflict, International Law and

Transitional Justice’ (DPhil thesis, University of Westminster 2013); Rafi Nets- Zehngut,

‘Transitional Justice and Addressing the History of Active Conflicts: The Case of the Israeli–

Palestinian Conflict’, Dialogues on Historical Justice and Memory Network Working Paper,

2014; Mark Osiel, ‘“Transitional Justice” in Israel/ Palestine? Symbolism and Materialism in

Reparations for Mass Violence’, Ethics and International Affairs (2015). 136 Afana

and injustice broadly.6 This reflects the growing recognition in transitional justice theory and praxis that “mature” democracies are not necessarily end points in the transitional journey; liberal democracies themselves are rife with unaddressed past harms. The International State Crime Initiative embraces a wide approach to State crime, contrasting strictly legal approaches to crime, which can be narrow, incomplete, reflecting the hegemonic, colonial nature of international law, or out of touch with current forms of criminality. “The law is

ill- equipped to respond to these diffuse, complex, subtle processes.”7

The limited role of law vis- à- vis colonial criminality informed my research:

while discussing applicable legal frameworks, I sought to move beyond law to map crime. This broad view on crime draws on different disciplines (inter-national law, critical legal theory, criminology, settler colonial and postcolo-nial studies, revisionist history, peace psychology) and expands the analysis thematically, spatially, and chronologically, to understand the continuities between different layers of harm and thus, the contours of repair. Tracking these was needed to contextualise the justice- reconciliation nexus. This nexus, encompassing the synergies, tensions, and trade- offs between justice and reconciliation, is to me the fundamental dilemma of transitional justice in Palestine/ Israel. My research treats settler colonialism as the core structure and process shaping the justice– reconciliation nexus, with the occupation as an offshoot of the colonial matrix. This conceptualisation foregrounds the multifaceted, intersectional, intergenerational nature of harm.



2 Occupation/ Colonialism: The Legalities of Illegality

Though both Palestinian communities and their lands remain occupied, pri-marily a people are subjected to the military might of another people. The opt designation foregrounds a space being occupied, obscuring its people. People belong to lands, yet lands do not belong to people: we all are transient beings on earth. “Israel’s occupation of Palestinians” instead of “Occupied Palestinian Territory/ Territories” thus better reflects my understanding of the impasse. While typically in belligerent occupations both lands and people are occu-pied, here the occupation is woven in a colonial- like enterprise which started



6 Christopher Cunneen, ‘State Crime, the Colonial Question and Indigenous Peoples’ in Alette

Smeulers and Roelof Haveman (eds), Supranational Criminology: Towards a Criminology of

International Crimes (Intersentia Press 2008).

7 Penny Green and Tony Ward, ‘Civil Society, Resistance and State Crime’ in Elizabeth Stanley

and Jude McCulloch (eds), State Crime and Resistance (Routledge 2013) 28. The Occupation-Colonialism Continuum 137

in the late 19th century, claimed as a return to the ancient homeland. The Jewish spiritual bond to the land is invoked as a justification for the crimes committed on and for that land. Whether one finds this bond legitimate or not, Jewish “return” remains tied to Palestinian displacement and dispossession. Seeing Israel as occupying a people, yet not necessarily the land, recognises the infringement on Palestinians’ rights while not erasing the Jewish bond to the land. This distinction between occupying lands and occupying people shapes my sense of transitional justice needs, and it also came up amid talks with Palestinians and Israelis during my fieldwork.

Israel’s occupation of Palestinians is often regarded as the longest mili-

tary occupation of our times. As an ongoing source of harm (which requires repair within the transitional journey), the occupation shapes the justice– reconciliation nexus. The occupation militarises the power asymmetry; it normalises brutality by abstracting it, feeding Israel’s culture of violence and denial; it obstructs Palestinians’ lives through multiple layers of arbitrariness; it erects physical and psychological barriers in the name of “military necessity”, institutionalising humiliation and despondency for Palestinians, which sus-tains trauma and enmity. As a smokescreen for Israel’s colonial- like structures, the occupation proactively (not inadvertently) disables the occupied. The fixa-tion with the occupation over the past decades in diplomacy, scholarship and activism has obscured the underlying structure: colonialism.

The deficiency of the occupation framework stems from its being routinely

violated by Israel and its being incomplete and misleading when depicting the brutalities punctuating Palestinians’ lives. Since occupations are toler-

ated under international humanitarian law,8 this induces an aura of lawful-ness. Yet, as the occupation of Palestinians is woven in a colonial matrix, its boundaries remain blurred. Legally, military occupations are presumed to be extra- ordinary: a territory coming under the authority of a hostile army is not ordinary, but it becomes (or is invoked as) necessary due to specific cir-cumstances on the ground. Occupations are mandated to be temporary and conservationist. The occupation of Palestinians is however not rooted in excep-tional military necessities. Instead, it is meant to preserve a socio- geographic design with salient colonial features. Settler colonialism, due to its intrinsic

“logic of elimination”,9 shapes the occupation. As avowed by Ze’ev Jabotinsky, founder of revisionist Zionism, no colonisation occurs with the consent of



8 See Hague Regulations, Fourth Geneva Convention, and Additional Protocol i.

9 Patrick Wolfe, ‘Settler Colonialism and the Elimination of the Native’, 8(4) Journal of Genocide

Research (2006) 387, page 388.

138 Afana

the indigenous.10 To extrapolate, since no people are willingly dispossessed– displaced– discriminated and the natural reaction to subjugation is resistance, this resistance will be resisted by colonisers, to preserve colonial hierarchies. To me, the occupation of Palestinians embodies this resistance to resistance.

While this functional tie between occupation and colonialism is attested

by current realities in Palestine/ Israel, events over the past decades point to a similar conclusion. To historians like llan Pappé and Tom Segev, the 1967 War served as a pretext to Judaize the remaining Palestinian territories (those not incorporated in 1948 in the State of Israel) and thwart Palestinian self-

determination,11 points substantiated also by several activists interviewed for my study. Architects and urban planners have likewise engaged with this colonialism– occupation continuum. Eyal Weizman notes, “[c] haos has its peculiar structural advantages. It supports one of Israel’s foremost strategies of obfuscation: the promotion of complexity — geographical, legal or lin-

guistic”.12 In spite of this apparent complexity sustaining the occupation, “the conflict over Palestine has been a relatively straightforward process of coloni-

sation, dispossession, resistance and suppression”.13 While the occupation was initially a “temporary aberration”, occupied territories have become “an inte-

gral part of the Israeli regime”.14 Though the overlapping strata of domination may appear autonomous “it is the perceived separation between these layers

that makes the politics of vertical apartheid so effective and resilient”.15

This colonialism– occupation continuum surfaces in how space affects

power and vice versa. “On the one hand, what you are (ontologically) and where you are (by Zionist placement and displacement) are fixed poles, between which Zionist- only institutions are reproduced. On the other hand,

Zionist Space, aiming to be pure, has permanently loose ‘borders’”.16 Indeed, “obfuscation and the blurring of boundaries is the defining feature of the



10 Ze’ev Jabotinsky, ‘The Iron Wall’, Razsviet, 4 November 1923.

11 Ilan Pappé, ‘Decolonizing Israel’ (The Israel Lobby and American Policy’ Conference,

National Press Club, Washington DC, 2017); Ilan Pappé, ‘Israel’s Occupation Was a Plan

Fulfilled’, The Electronic Intifada, 6 June 2017; Tom Segev, 1967: Israel, the War, and the Year

that Transformed the Middle East (Metropolitan Books 2005).

12 Eyal Weizman, Hollow Land: Israel’s Architecture of Occupation (Verso 2012) 8.

13 Ibid., page 9.

14 Oren Yiftachel, ‘“Ethnocracy”: The Politics of Judaizing Israel/ Palestine’, 6(3)

Constellations: International Journal of Critical and Democratic Theory (1998) 364, page 369.

15 Eyal Weizman, ‘The Vertical Apartheid’, Open Democracy, 13 July 2017.

16 Shimrit Baer, ‘In Order to Change Israel Activists Must Disrupt Zionist Space’, Mondoweiss,

21 June 2017.

The Occupation-Colonialism Continuum 139

Israeli occupation”.17 The colonised– occupied space emerges as “elastic geog-raphies”, a “‘structured chaos’, in which the — often deliberate — selective absence of government intervention promotes an unregulated process of vio-

lent dispossession”.18 Erasure, in its linearity of intent yet evershifting forms, persists: “there is an underlying and uninterrupted continuity of intent that recurring and sustained Zionist attempts to distinguish between pre- and

post- 1967 Israeli circumstances are unable to disguise”.19 Yet, “the occupation’s very success (in terms of unassailable control) renders the project’s success (in

terms of settler integration/ indigenisation) impossible”.20 It is the additional layer of domination presented by the occupation which exposes the colonial foundation: as Lorenzo Veracini notes, Israeli leaders failed to realise that “the systemic ‘matrix of control’, and the consequent separation they were enforc-ing, would inevitably produce precisely the colonised Palestinian subjectivity

that heralds the strategic failure of a settler colonial project”.21

While researching how these intersecting harms impact transitional justice

my aim was not to demonstrate Zionism’s colonial essence, but to document its colonial- like manifestations. Displacement, dispossession, land appropri-ations, unlawful exploitation of natural resources, racism, and impeding the self- determination of the occupied — widely documented practices against Palestinians — are in line with settler– extractive colonial enterprises else-where. Though the impasse is now routinely framed as a colonial problem, settler colonialism here is both typical and extraordinary. To Derek Penslar, Zionism exhibits concurrently colonial, anti- colonial, and post- colonial fac-

ets.22 Israel’s hybridity is attested by Ella Shohat: though most Nation States could be considered anomalous, “Israel is perhaps more anomalous than oth-ers. It is a mixed formation, on the one hand it represents a nationalist proj-ect — and thus analogous to Third World and minority struggles — but from

the Palestinian point of view, it is also a colonial settler project”.23

17 Orna Ben- Naftali, Aeyal Gross and Keren Michaeli, ‘Illegal Occupation: Framing the

Occupied Palestinian Territory’, 23(3) Berkeley Journal of International Law (2005) 551,

page 609.

18 Eyal Weizman, Hollow Land: Israel’s Architecture of Occupation (Verso 2012) 5.

19 Lorenzo Veracini, ‘The Other Shift: Settler Colonialism, Israel, and the Occupation’, 42(2)

Journal of Palestine Studies (2013) 26, page 28.

20 Ibid., page 26.

21 Ibid., page 32.

22 Derek J Penslar, ‘Zionism, Colonialism and Postcolonialism’, 20(2– 3) Journal of Israeli

History (2001) 84, page 85.

23 Emanuelle Santos and Patricia Schor, ‘An Interview with Ella Shohat and Robert Stam —

“Brazil is Not Traveling Enough”: On Postcolonial Theory and Analogous Counter- Currents’,

Buala, 1 October 2013.

140 Afana

The exceptional features of the Zionist project are also outlined by Moshe

Machover: “its anachronism — its extreme lateness in colonial history”, also the land’s geographic and socio- economic characteristics did not suit a typical

colonial project.24 The land was however picked for ideological reasons; these conditions “made the indigenous Palestinian people much more resistant to pulverisation — which had been the general rule in ‘classical’ exclusionary

colonisation”.25 To Machover, the logic of immigration was also exceptional, settlers lacking a mother country but “seeking a surrogate mother — an impe-

rial power that would dominate the region and promote the Zionist project”,26 namely Britain. As Nadim Rouhana and Areej Sabbagh- Khoury attest, Zionism is concurrently a settler colonial project with no motherland and a national

movement.27 These nuances also surfaced during my fieldwork: nearly half of my interviewees depicted the impasse as unequivocally colonial. Others, while recognising the effects of Zionism as consistent with those of other colonial projects, disputed the applicability of settler colonialism given the peculiarity or exculpatory rationale here: the Jewish spiritual (and arguably genetic) tie to the land. This paints Jewish people as both indigenous and non- indigenous, making Zionism both a national liberation movement and a settler colonial project.

The overlapping layers of violence and fragmentation surface in the

Occupying Power’s persistent violations of its legal duties: sovereignty was declared over part of the territory by annexation; insidious demographic engineering continues unabated via forcible transfer and expansion of illegal settlements; destruction and seizure of property, and undue exploitation of natural resources; discrimination and collective punishment; extrajudicial kill-ings, maiming, torture; obstruction of self- determination by moving the occu-pation from temporariness to permanence or open- endedness. Non- derogable rights such as the right to life, the prohibition of torture, the right to a fair trial, the prohibition of collective punishment, prohibition of forcible transfer, or the freedom of thought and conscience remain routinely violated. Yet, the occupation’s most widespread breaches have been vis- à- vis derogable rights, derogations invoked as serving security needs. This has normalised the occu-pation’s abnormality.



24 Moshe Machover, ‘The Decolonisation of Palestine’, The Weekly Worker, 23 June 2016.

25 Ibid.

26 Ibid.

27 Nadim N Rouhana and Areej Sabbagh- Khoury, ‘Memory and the Return of History in a

Settler- Colonial Context: The Case of the Palestinians in Israel’ in Nadim N Rouhana (ed),

Israel and its Palestinian Citizens: Ethnic Privileges in the Jewish State (cup 2017) 397. The Occupation-Colonialism Continuum 141

These pervasive breaches of core principles guiding the law on occupations

have led legal scholars to discuss the “criminality of the occupation”,28 “the

matrix of an illegal occupation”,29 while as early as 1977 the United Nations

expressed concern over the illegality of the Israeli occupation.30 As noted by Aeyal Gross, this body of law needs to shift from a “merely factual” to a nor-mative and functional approach, premised on the illegality of an occupation

which violates the basic norms of the law on occupations.31 An occupation that violates the following basic, interrelated principles is considered illegal: “(a) sovereignty and title to an occupied territory are not vested in the Occupying Power; (b) the Occupying Power is entrusted with the management of public order and civil life in the territory under control; (c) occupation is temporary

and may be neither permanent nor indefinite”.32

Violations aside, the law on occupations cannot adequately capture the

specificity of the transformative occupation33 and multilateral occupation34 in Iraq and Afghanistan, or the prolonged occupation meeting colonisation and apartheid in Palestine/ Israel. Circumstances unforeseen when humani-tarian rules were codified and others deliberately omitted (given the colonial background of international law) fall outside the scope of the current frame-work. Significantly, it does not cover occupations enmeshed in colonial enter-prises. Arai- Takahashi notes that the exclusion of colonialism makes the law on occupations incomplete and biased; colonial occupation remains tied to the civilising mission of colonial powers: “because the law of occupation was developed chiefly as a social construct among European powers entitled to sovereignty, it trivialised the fate of non- Western peoples divested of sover-

eignty”.35 Eyal Benvenisti draws attention also to a pattern of denial occupiers



28 Richard Falk, ‘The Israeli Assault on Human Rights in the Occupied Palestinian Territories’

(Middle East Monitor and Palestine Solidarity Campaign Seminar, London, 2010).

29 Orna Ben- Naftali, Aeyal Gross and Keren Michaeli, ‘Illegal Occupation: Framing the

Occupied Palestinian Territory’, 23(3) Berkeley Journal of International Law (2005) 551,

page 609.

30 unga Resolution 32/ 20 (25 November 1977); unga Resolution 33/ 29 (7 December 1978).

31 Aeyal Gross, The Writing on the Wall: Rethinking the International Law of Occupation (cup

2017). See further Chapter 4, Gross.

32 Ibid., page 3.

33 Adam Roberts, ‘Transformative Military Occupation: Applying the Laws of War and

Human Rights’, 100(3) American Journal of International Law (2006) 580.

34 Grant T Harris, ‘The Era of Multilateral Occupation’, 24(1) Berkeley Journal of International

Law (2006) 1.

35 Yutaka Arai- Takahashi, ‘Preoccupied with Occupation: Critical Examinations of the

Historical Development of the Law of Occupation’, 94(885) International Review of the

Red Cross (2012) 51, page 78.

142 Afana

engage in around the applicability of this body of law, because they seek to evade legal responsibilities and/ or intend to permanently control the territory

occupied.36 Both aspects seem to have motivated Israel’s engagement with humanitarian law.

Another difficulty with the laws of occupation concerns enforcement: the

Hague Regulations and Geneva Conventions do not include review, report-

ing and accountability mechanisms.37 Though Article 1 common to the four Geneva Conventions mandates the High Contracting Parties “to respect and to ensure respect for the present Convention in all circumstances”, Third Parties have persistently failed to fulfil their positive and negative obligations towards

Israel’s violations of the Conventions.38 The United States in particular, through its decades- long financial, military, and diplomatic support to Israel, sustains the occupation’s criminality. The paralysis of the United Nations vis- à- vis Israel’s breaches has also been denounced by the scholars and activists working with the Russell Tribunal on Palestine: “The unlawful nature of the UN omis-

sions is acute due to their exceptional gravity under international law”.39 The prohibitions of colonialism and apartheid, peremptory norms of international law, come with additional expectations from Third Parties. Attesting Israel’s systematic colonial and apartheid practices, the Human Sciences Research

Council of South Africa40 discusses Third Party obligations based on the ilc

Draft Articles on State Responsibility.41 To former UN Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights in the Palestinian Territories Occupied since 1967, Michael Lynk, “accountability has been applied by the international com-munity in a selective and partisan fashion to many serious issues, reflecting a

dispiriting mixture of design and indifference, collusion and apathy”,42 noting

36 Eyal Benvenisti, The International Law of Occupation (Princeton University Press 1993) 149.

37 Kristen Boon, ‘The Future of the Law of Occupation’, 46 Canadian Yearbook of International

Law (2008) 107, page 110.

38 icrc, Commentary on the First Geneva Convention: Convention (I) for the Amelioration

of the Condition of the Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field (cup 2016) para

118; Diakonia, Everyone’s Business: Third Party Responsibility and the Enforcement of

International Law in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, October 2016.

39 Russell Tribunal on Palestine, Fourth International Session — US Complicity and UN

Failings in Dealing with Israel’s Violations of International Law Towards the Palestinian

People, 2012, page 13.

40 Human Sciences Research Council of South Africa, Occupation, Colonialism, Apartheid?

A Re- assessment of Israel’s Practices in the Occupied Palestinian Territories Under

International Law, 2009.

41 ilc, ‘Report of the International Law Commission on the Work of its Fifty- Third Session’,

2(2) Yearbook of the International Law Commission (2001).

42 unhrc, Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights in the Palestinian

Territories Occupied Since 1967, Michael Lynk, A/ 74/ 507, 8 November 2019, para 30. The Occupation-Colonialism Continuum 143

the multiple factors which make Israel’s crimes unique given the impunity they

have been met with.43 As most of my interviewees also indicated, addressing the complicity of Third Parties (governments, inter- governmental bodies, and corporations) will need to be integral to the transitional justice process.

While the length and gravity of the occupation here are unprecedented in

modern times, Adam Roberts discusses Palestine/ Israel alongside other cases of prolonged occupation after the Second World War, such as the Allied occu-pations of Germany and Japan, South Africa’s occupation of Namibia, the presence of Turkish forces in Northern Cyprus, of Moroccan forces in Western

Sahara, or Vietnamese forces in Kampuchea.44 As Roberts documents, norms become difficult to define and apply when occupations are not provisional and conservationist but transformational, and when the occupation extends during peacetime. He views a risk in not adjusting the law on occupation to the particularities arising from prolonged occupation, in that it may be used to leave a society disenfranchised: the population being unable to exercise rights of their sovereign State but also not entitled to citizenship of the occupying country. That is precisely what Palestinians are subjected to: “Israel enjoys both the powers of an occupant and a sovereign in the opt, while Palestinians enjoy

neither the rights of an occupied people nor the rights of citizenship”.45

To Richard Falk, the cumulative record of Israeli illegality, carrying both gov-

ernmental and individual responsibility, constitutes an abuse of its custodial

status, independent of the Palestinian claim to self- determination.46 To miti-gate the risks of prolonged occupations, which evade the scope of the Hague Regulations and Geneva Conventions, Falk suggested in 1989, an international convention on the effects of prolonged military occupation in deliberately

impairing the rights of the resident population.47 This convention would set up an automatic mechanism to challenge the occupation after a given period, so that the rights of the occupied are restored and their collective resistance to occupation translates into self- determination. In 2014, Falk recommended the Human Rights Council to “appoint an expert group to propose a special proto-col to the Fourth Geneva Convention with the specific purpose of proposing a

43 Ibid., para 77.

44 Adam Roberts, ‘Prolonged Military Occupation: The Israeli- Occupied Territories Since

1967’, 84(1) American Journal of International Law (1990) 44, pages 47– 52.

45 Orna Ben- Naftali, Aeyal Gross and Keren Michaeli, ‘Illegal Occupation: Framing the

Occupied Palestinian Territory’, 23(3) Berkeley Journal of International Law (2005) 551,

page 611.

46 Richard Falk, ‘Some Legal Reflections on Prolonged Israeli Occupation of Gaza and the

West Bank’, 2(1) Journal of Refugee Studies (1989) 40, page 43.

47 Ibid., pages 45– 47.

144 Afana

legal regime for any occupation that lasts for more than five years”.48 Roberts also considers a prolonged occupation one “that lasts more than 5 years and extends into a period when hostilities are sharply reduced — i.e., a period at

least approximating peacetime”.49

As both Falk and Roberts hold, it is desirable in prolonged occupations

to observe human rights standards which set the bar higher, in addition to humanitarian law. Yet, this may not expand protection but undermine it. As Aeyal Gross observed “the introduction of a rights analysis into the context of occupation abstracts and extrapolates from the context of occupation and puts all involved persons — the citizens of the Occupying State and the peo-

ple living under occupation — on a supposedly equal plane”.50 In its advisory opinion on the legal consequences of the Wall, the International Court of Justice also affirmed the applicability of human rights instruments, besides the

Hague Regulations, the Fourth Geneva Convention and Additional Protocol i.51 Although the icj warned that “the wall and its associated régime create a ‘fait accompli’ on the ground that could well become permanent … tantamount to

de facto annexation”,52 the court did not opine on the interface between pro-longed occupation and its colonial and apartheid features.

During his term as UN Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights

in the Palestinian Territories Occupied since 1967, Richard Falk recommended the UN General Assembly to request the International Court of Justice to issue an advisory opinion on the legal status of the prolonged occupation, aggra-vated by transfers of population by the occupant within the occupied terri-tory and by the discriminatory laws and practices in place against Palestinians, “and further assess allegations that the prolonged occupation possesses legally unacceptable characteristics of ‘colonialism’, ‘apartheid’ and ‘ethnic cleans-

ing’”.53 Prior UN Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights in the

48 unhrc, Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights in the

Palestinian Territories Occupied Since 1967, Makarim Wibisono, a/ hrc/ 25/ 67, 13 January

2014, para 81(c).

49 Adam Roberts, ‘Prolonged Military Occupation: The Israeli- Occupied Territories Since

1967’, 84(1) American Journal of International Law (1990) 44, page 47.

50 Aeyal Gross, ‘Human Proportions: Are Human Rights the Emperor’s New Clothes of the

International Law of Occupation?’, 18(1) European Journal of International Law (2007) 1,

pages 4– 5.

51 icj, Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory

(Advisory Opinion) icj Reports 136 (2004).

52 Ibid., para 121.

53 unhrc, Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights in the

Palestinian Territories Occupied Since 1967, Makarim Wibinoso, a/ hrc/ 25/ 67, 13 January

2014, para 81(b).

The Occupation-Colonialism Continuum 145

Palestinian Territories Occupied since 1967, John Dugard also notes that while occupations are tolerated in international law, colonialism and apartheid are

not.54 This view is increasingly recognised civically too. For instance, badil Resource Center for Palestinian Residency and Refugee Rights attests that fol-lowing the 1967 War, “Israel has developed a legal, political and military regime over the Palestinian people that combines occupation, apartheid and colo-

nization”.55 This juxtaposition of the three regimes was also substantiated by most human rights practitioners I interviewed.

Reviewing the specificity of the occupation here, the core disparities between

the law on occupations and the occupation of Palestinians can be observed on three levels. First, military occupations are presumed to be extraordinary, tem-porary and conservationist; Israel’s occupation of Palestinians appears per-manent/ open- ended, and invasive/ interventionist. Second, occupations are bound by a body of law; here, the systematic transgression of legal norms by the Occupying Power for over five decades creates an additional layer of harm for the occupied, due to the intergenerational, chronic, self- replicating nature of criminality. Third, though occupations are permitted, settler colonialism, annexation, apartheid, and acts amounting to ethnic cleansing are unlawful yet ongoing. In Palestine/ Israel, as the occupation intersects these overlapping illegalities, it appears difficult to deal with from a transitional justice perspec-tive. The “occupation” thus evokes a sliver of the problem. These are just some aspects questioning the relevance of the laws on occupation, given their defi-cient implementation combined with their inability to meaningfully capture the specificity of harm in Palestine/ Israel.



3 Colonialism: A Fuzzy Framework?

While lacking a precise legal definition, colonialism is outlined in the UN Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and

Peoples.56 The Declaration on Colonialism upholds the right of all peoples

to self- determination, considered a jus cogens, erga omnes norm.57 Though

54 John Dugard, ‘Apartheid and Occupation Under International Law’ (Hisham B. Sharabi

Memorial Lecture, Palestine Center, Washington DC, 2009).

55 badil Resource Center for Palestinian Residency and Refugee Rights, Survey of Palestinian

Refugees and Internally Displaced Persons 2013– 2015, vol viii, 2015, page xxxiv.

56 unga Resolution 1514 (14 December 1960).

57 Matthew Saul, ‘The Normative Status of Self- Determination in International Law: A

Formula for Uncertainty in the Scope and Content of the Right?’, 11(4) Human Rights Law

Review (2011) 609; Virginia Tilley (ed), Beyond Occupation: Apartheid, Colonialism and 146 Afana

non- binding, the Declaration is a norm in customary international law.58 The Declaration on Colonialism, the United Nations General Assembly Resolution

3103,59 and the Fourth Geneva Convention all address contexts of alien subju-gation and domination, segregation, and discrimination. Additional Protocol i also identifies “armed conflicts in which peoples are fighting against colonial domination and alien occupation and against racist régimes in the exercise of

their right of self- determination”.60

Since Palestine/ Israel is not treated as a colonial problem at the United

Nations, colonial crimes remain abstracted in human rights talks. In 1961, a UN Special Committee on Decolonization was set up. The Palestinian terri-tory is not listed among non- self- governing territories under colonial rule and in recent reports of the UN Special Rapporteur on the Rights of Indigenous

Peoples,61 Palestinians are not once mentioned though the Rapporteur’s mandate claims to include indigenous peoples globally, who “experience the consequences of historical colonisation and invasion of their territories, and face discrimination because of their distinct cultures, identities and ways

of life”.62 The Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples notes the ties

between colonisation and dispossession.63 Though non- binding and lacking clarity in its definition of indigeneity, on self- determination and just use of land and resources, it stipulates a series of individual and collective rights which, in the context of Israel’s occupation of Palestinians, remain systemati-cally violated.

Two comprehensive studies64 concluded, based on the Declaration on

Colonialism, the Fourth Geneva Convention and international law, that Israel’s

International Law in the Occupied Palestinian Territories (Pluto Press 2012); Marc Weller,

Escaping the Self- Determination Trap (Martinus Nijhoff 2008).

58 Christos Theodoropoulos, Colonialism and General International Law: The Contemporary

Theory of National Sovereignty and Self- Determination (New Horizon 1988).

59 unga Resolution 3103 (12 December 1973).

60 Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and Relating to the

Protection of Victims of International Armed Conflicts (8 June 1977) Article 1(4).

61 unhrc, Report of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the Rights of

Indigenous Peoples, Victoria Tauli- Corpuz, a/ 73/ 176, 17 July 2018; unhrc, Report of the

Special Rapporteur on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, Victoria Tauli- Corpuz, a/ hrc/ 30/

41, 6 August 2015.

62 unhrc, UN Special Rapporteur on Indigenous Peoples: Overview, 2020.

63 unga Resolution 61/ 295 (13 September 2007).

64 Human Sciences Research Council of South Africa, Occupation, Colonialism, Apartheid?

A Re- assessment of Israel’s Practices in the Occupied Palestinian Territories Under

International Law, 2009, pages 120– 151; Virginia Tilley (ed), Beyond Occupation: Apartheid,

Colonialism and International Law in the Occupied Palestinian Territories (Pluto Press

2012) pages 79– 106.

The Occupation-Colonialism Continuum 147

military occupation exhibits the character of a colonial regime. These stud-ies document how Israel has violated the territorial integrity of the occupied territory; deprived the occupied people of the capacity for self- governance; integrated the economy of the occupied territory into that of the occupant; deprived the occupied people of permanent sovereignty over their natural resources; and suppressed the culture of the occupied population. Though Israel’s settler– extractive colonial structures are evident, legally the colonial-ism framework is problematic. Because colonialism is not criminalised, little

accountability is attached to this framework.65 Also, the prohibition of colo-nialism might only apply to Israel’s actions in the Palestinian territory occu-pied since 1967 and not to Israel “proper” (lands and resources grabbed in 1948). Since anti- colonial liberation movements kicked off in the 1950s and the Declaration on Colonialism was only adopted in 1960, the prohibition would not apply retroactively to Israel’s establishment.

As specified during a conference at the Birzeit Institute of Law, “the domi-

nant legal opinion is that the legal framework of colonialism is not applicable within the borders of existing states, even where founded through aggression, colonization, ethnic cleansing or genocide, such as the United States, Australia

and Israel”.66 Indeed, colonialism is often treated as obsolete and anachronis-tic. Given the limited scope and deficient implementation of the occupation and colonialism frameworks, scholars and practitioners recognise the apart-heid framework as the strategic path for countering crime under international

law.67 Significantly, Human Rights Watch, arguably the leading international human rights organisation, which historically has only discussed violations within the occupation framework and avoided the colonialism or apartheid frameworks, now sees Israeli policies and practices amounting to apartheid

and persecution.68

Another aspect surfacing from my findings is the antagonising potential of

discussing the impasse in terms of settler colonialism. While the occupation framework is now seen as incomplete and misleading, this does not turn the



65 Nadia Hijab and Ingrid Jaradat Gassner, ‘Talking Palestine: What Frame of Analysis?

Which Goals and Messages?’, Al Shabaka, 12 April 2017.

66 Birzeit University Institute of Law, Advocating for Palestinian Rights in Conformity with

International Law: Guidelines (‘Options and Strategies for the Palestinian People in

International Law’ Conference, Birzeit, 2013) 6.

67 John Reynolds, ‘Challenging the Nakba Through International Law?’, The Nakba Files,

27 July 2016; Nadia Hijab and Ingrid Jaradat Gassner, ‘Talking Palestine: What Frame of

Analysis? Which Goals and Messages?’, Al Shabaka, 12 April 2017.

68 Human Rights Watch, A Threshold Crossed: Israeli Authorities and the Crimes of Apartheid

and Persecution, 27 April 2021.

148 Afana

settler colonialism paradigm into an ideal replacement. My research docu-mented its analytical value, its capacity to map in a nuanced and historically accurate manner the roots of injustice and discord, both significant for transi-tional justice. Yet, its theoretically critical and emancipatory nature contrasts its diffuse value practically. During fieldwork, practitioners distinguished between the dry analytical approach targeting theory- building (typical of aca-demic work) and the fluid problem- solving one (specific to civic psychosocial activism). Some Israeli Jewish interviewees, while recognising the regime’s colonial facets, felt that insisting on settler colonialism may impede justice and reconciliation.

This theory/ praxis dichotomy (intellectually dissecting the impasse versus

practically transcending it) is not as clear- cut. “There is nothing so practical as

a good theory”,69 believed pioneer of action research Kurt Lewin. Theories are meant to distil social processes and thus ideally to optimise them. Words (re) structure realities: as shown in my research on knowledge (re)production in and on Palestine/ Israel, words can precipitate emancipation or can entrench

subjugation.70 Boxing and labelling realities is reductionist and can alienate stakeholders who do not resonate with a certain framing. Yet, boxes and labels are needed to counter the epistemic erasures pervasive here. Parrhesia (can-did speech) is key to research and activism on Palestine/ Israel — a site featur-ing the colonisation of space locally and the colonisation of minds globally. Knowledge (re)production can be emancipatory if premised on intellectual rigor, ethical clarity, and risk- taking.

Part of this distinction between pertinence and usefulness, when framing

the impasse as settler colonial, has to do with reception: the right terminology can create the wrong effects. For Palestinians, internalising the colonialism framework might deepen a sense of entitlement, which can block the critical and conciliatory mindset needed in the transitional journey. The settler colo-nialism framework can also antagonise Israeli society, one already dominated by denial and intransigence. Aside from the affective component, terminology has material facets, it drives political, legal, economic, social consequences. Recognising a conduct as colonial drives the imperative of decolonisation. Yet, looking at other “post”- colonial societies, decolonisation seldom is a smooth, non- violent process. As standards of justice are uneasy to agree upon and apply, decolonisation remains partial and can replicate injustice.



69 Kurt Lewin, Field Theory in Social Science: Selected Theoretical Papers (Harper and Row

1951) 169.

70 Rimona Afana, Words as Swords: Resisting Epistemic Violence on Israel/ Palestine (‘European

International Studies Association’ Conference, Barcelona, 2017).

The Occupation-Colonialism Continuum 149

Worth noting is also that the power asymmetry and deep- seated antago-

nism common in colonial societies lead to essentialist conceptions of identity. Palestine’s “settler colonial turn”, appears to me, often marked by reduction-ism and militancy, inimical to critical reflection and praxis. After for several years insisting on settler colonialism as the pertinent lens for delineating the justice– reconciliation nexus in Palestine/ Israel, I concluded my transi-tional justice research in 2017 with a sense of ambivalence. The fuzzy legal status of colonialism, the partial applicability of colonialism to this site and its antagonising effect can deepen the tensions and tradeoffs between justice and reconciliation. The settler colonialism framework thus frustrates certain transitional justice goals. These aspects motivated me to explore other analyt-ical lenses relevant to the justice– reconciliation nexus, since my interest as a peace researcher and activist is not to simply designate a process as illegal or immoral, but to understand how antagonism and crime can be transcended so that fewer lives get broken.

Inspired by the literature on hybridity,71 my recent research has challenged

the unnuanced decolonisation trope previously embraced.72 Building on

hybridity, I added insights from vulnerability theory,73 jurisprudence which foregrounds vulnerability as universal and constant, an alternative to formal equality and to identity politics. Vulnerability characterises the universal human condition: embodied (we depend on a fragile material case, the body) and embedded (we are never autonomous but depend on others in complex ways). The opposite of vulnerability, resilience — the capacity to withstand harm, becomes the responsibility of law and of institutions. Vulnerability the-ory makes me imagine Israelis and Palestinians as a continuum of both vulner-

ability and resilience within the transitional journey.74 The conundrum here is that settler colonialism seems incompatible with vulnerability theory: how

71 Homi K Bhabha, The Location of Culture (Routledge 1994); Amar Acheraïou, Questioning

Hybridity, Postcolonialism and Globalization (Palgrave Macmillan 2011); Pnina Werbner

and Tariq Modood (eds), Debating Cultural Hybridity: Multicultural Identities and the

Politics of Anti- Racism (Zed Books 2015).

72 Rimona Afana, Israel/ Palestine and the Settler Colonial Paradigm: The Thorny Practicalities

of a Good Theory (‘University of Warwick Critical Legal’ Conference, Coventry, 2017);

Rimona Afana, Settler Colonialism and Hybridity: Transcending the Native/ Settler Binary in

Israel/ Palestine (‘Communication, Identity, Context’ Conference, Craiova, 2017).

73 Martha Albertson Fineman, ‘The Vulnerable Subject: Anchoring Equality in the Human

Condition’, 20(1) Yale Journal of Law and Feminism (2008) 1; Martha Albertson Fineman,

‘The Vulnerable Subject and the Responsive State’, 60(2) Emory Law Journal (2010) 251.

74 Rimona Afana, ‘Settler Colonial Binaries Unsettled: Exploring the Justice– Reconciliation

Nexus in Israel/ Palestine Through a Vulnerability Lens’ (Emory University School of Law,

Vulnerability and the Human Condition Initiative Visiting Scholars Talks, Atlanta, 2018). 150 Afana

does universal vulnerability apply to a settler colonial site where the focus is disproportionately on the vulnerability of the colonised? To me, the uni-versality of vulnerability unsettles the settler/ native binary common in this paradigm. Should we then consider the vulnerability of both oppressor and oppressed, or does placing them on an equal analytical plane only replicate the power differential?

When applied to settler colonial spaces and temporalities, vulnerability the-

ory illumes interdependence and challenges simplistic hierarchies of victim-hood. While Zionism itself is hybrid (blending features of both settler colonial and national emancipation movements), the lives of Israelis and Palestinians remain bound by the hybridity produced by cultural commonalities, demo-graphic dynamics, economic ties, and by the centrality of the impasse to each

side’s collective identity. To me, this “relentless reciprocity”75 in settler colonial sites makes the need to harmonise justice with reconciliation inevitable. One segment of that journey is transcending what Homi Bhabha calls “primordial

polarities”.76 The application here of vulnerability theory unsettles standard accounts of indigeneity and decolonisation. A fluid approach to identity, rights, responsibilities may thus be needed to transcend the impasse — not concen-trating on the exclusive vulnerability of the oppressed (and essentialised) native, but mapping gradients and interdependencies around vulnerabilities.



4 Occupation– Colonialism: Views from the Field

This section collates excerpts from my interviews, complementing the theory earlier discussed. My research on the justice– reconciliation nexus included the intersection between occupation and colonialism within my contextual-isation of this nexus (alongside its conceptualisation and operationalisation, in a structure akin to three concentric circles). During fieldwork in fall 2016, I spoke with Israelis and Palestinians engaged with justice and reconciliation issues: founders, directors of, and activists with: Al-Haq, badil, the bds move-ment, B’Tselem, Gisha, Zochrot, Machsom Watch, Rabbis for Human Rights, Al Quds University Human Rights Clinic, the Parents Circle, Roots, Two Nations One Homeland, Alternative Action, and other voices in what I identified as an epistemic community shaping the meaning of justice and reconciliation. As transitional justice studies on Palestine/ Israel are mostly theoretical and

75 Jean- Paul Sartre, ‘Introduction’ in Albert Memmi, The Colonizer and the Colonized

(Earthscan Publications 2003) 24.

76 Homi K Bhabha, The Location of Culture (Routledge 1994) 5.

The Occupation-Colonialism Continuum 151

reliant on secondary data, my empirical findings contribute a grassroots perspective.

The spatial and social fragmentation at the heart of the impasse seemed

mirrored by activism seeking to treat the impasse: civil society operates as a non- contiguous, heterogeneous space. To me, this transitional activism amid a non- transitional site evidences disparities between justice (materialised in truth- seeking and accountability efforts, engaged with the political and legal spheres, so vertically: people versus State and reconciliation (mainstream-ing interpersonal engagement, often within a psycho- social framework, so horizontally, people- to- people). My interviews evidenced the failure of the occupation lingo to capture everyday colonial realities, some contributors depicting the occupation as a smokescreen foror extension of colonialism. Practitioners’ insights also unveiled the handicap of civil society to meaning-fully combat colonial criminality while stuck in the misleading occupation paradigm. A tension emerged in civic praxis between the ’67 and ’48 frame-works: while most groups work within the 1967 paradigm (occupation), many activists recognised the need to shift to 1948 (colonialism) for a substantive engagement with injustice and discord. This is a recognition of how significant the ties between colonialism and occupation are for transitional justice here. These interview excerpts show how contributors see the ties between the colo-nial matrix and the occupation.

Professor Mazin Qumsiyeh, Director of the Palestine Museum of Natural

History and former Chairman of the Palestinian Centre for Rapprochement between People:

One needs to make a diagnosis: why did I mention the origin of the prob-

lem in the 19th century? Because if you need to make a diagnosis, the

doctor first asks a bit about the history: when did the first symptoms

manifest? The first symptoms and the history of the patient allow me to

make the right diagnosis, which helps me later not confuse a symptom

with the underlying aetiology. If you confuse a symptom with the under-

lying aetiology, you are a poor doctor. […] Identifying the cause, that is

colonialism, is critical and colonialism entails racism and all the issues

we talked about earlier. Once you make the right diagnosis, then you

are not confusing symptoms, like the occupation, like violence, the wall,

like colonies here — settlements (this is a colony right here, Jabal Abu

Ghneim in Arabic, Har Homa in Hebrew), with the underlying aetiology.

[…] When you deal with just one of the symptoms, you’re liable to leave

the disease uncured and you’re liable to get other symptoms. 152 Afana

Ingrid Jaradat, Al- Shabaka Policy Advisor, former Director and co- founder of badil, and founding member of the Palestinian Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions campaign:

You start with a colonial project, but the institutionalisation of that

here is apartheid. […] This framework of occupation, the Fourth Geneva

Convention, Hague Regulations, international humanitarian law is not a

framework suitable for justice. It’s the laws of war, who would think it’s

the basis for justice? But it’s the framework that became prominent in the

legal advocacy work and human rights, simply because it fits the political

approach we’ve had. It seemed if we advocate on this basis, we have a bet-

ter chance of getting support and making a difference. Nowadays there is

more recognition, especially among the human rights organisations with

more capacity and experience, like Al- Haq, that we need to go beyond

this framework. […] We need to package these individual human rights

violations into something bigger that stands for the serious violations

and crimes against mankind — colonialism, apartheid and other crimes

against humanity, and demand commitments from Third States on this

basis. Otherwise, we can talk human rights forever. […]

The problem is that the little human rights organisations don’t have

yet the capacity. International humanitarian law became prominent

starting with the First Intifada: everyone was training Palestinian civil

society on ihl. So, the smaller organisations do this kind of copy/ paste

of what they hear, they do not look into issues by themselves and develop

their own ideas. We repeat that talk as if the Fourth Geneva Convention

was the only framework we had. […] But then Palestinian organisations

are also afraid to talk colonialism or apartheid because their donors do

not like it or because they don’t really understand it themselves, and it

feels like sloganizing. To be brave, you need to study. People do not read,

unfortunately. It has to do with capacity and knowledge. Of course, there

is pressure; but you can resist pressure if you are convinced. But if you

don’t even know what it is about, how would you defend it?

Shawan Jabarin, General Director of Al- Haq:

Here you see a colonial nature, occupation nature, and apartheid nature

in one — in practices, policies, in all aspects of everyday life. […] At Al-

Haq we studied this prolonged occupation and in an academic paper,

together with other organisations, we now call it an occupation with the

nature of colonialism and apartheid. […] When you start with justice, The Occupation-Colonialism Continuum 153

you put a prevention wall before the next crimes. Here you cannot ignore

the crimes that took place. Without treating what happened before in a

just way, you will not prevent crimes in the future. We look at justice as

prevention; we are not dealing with justice as a technical, philosophical

thing. If you set a lesson that you can commit crimes and nothing will

happen to you, this is a very bad lesson in history. That is what I mean

when I say justice first, justice second, justice last. Without justice, no

way for reconciliation or transition.

Dr Munir Nuseibah, Director of the Al Quds University Human Rights Clinic and Director of the Community Action Center:

In international humanitarian law you have the principle that forced

displacement and transferring your own population in occupied terri-

tory are illegal, you also have the prohibition on discrimination. If you

combine different principles, you get enough to condemn as illegal the

colonial practices of Israel in the opt. The answer to illegality can come

in two forms: State responsibility (stopping the action, guarantees of

non- repetition, reparations including restitution, compensation, and

satisfaction which means apology) and individual responsibility. These

issues find expressions of illegality in international law: settlements, dis-

placement, torture, illegal imprisonment. […] We cannot do transitional

justice and keep the status quo at the same time. The peace process never

used transitional justice, only used realistic politics. What bothers me is

this: attempts to force transitional justice into the realistic framework.

I would argue we need to choose either/ or. Transitional justice is linked

to justice, justice is linked to international law and if we go down that

route, we need to introduce equality, reparations, and so on. If we want

to think of transitional justice, we need to be unrealistic; that’s my choice

in what I write and what I do.

Eitan Diamond, Manager/ Senior Legal Expert of Diakonia ihl Centre, for-merly Executive Director of Gisha — Legal Center for Freedom of Movement, and legal adviser for the icrc:

I share the view that framing it in the language of occupation obscures

the full scope and the core of the problem. To the law of occupation

terminology many Israelis would respond with anger; they see it as an

unacceptable critique. Yet, this language of occupation serves the State: it

gives a legal, political, ethical justification for maintaining a regime that 154 Afana

distinguishes between different populations on ethnic grounds. […] The

architects of this believe if you do it for long enough, then the violation

is no longer an issue. […] The international community predominantly

follows this narrative of the law of occupation and the two- state solu-

tion; alternative models are a threat to the accepted solution. But gradu-

ally circumstances on the ground dictate rethinking. The colonisation of

Palestine has been successful at setting realities on the ground. Like other

colonial enterprises in the New World, the idea that they would just leave

seems less and less viable. There has been no justice for the indigenous,

yet Palestinians are still here and alive. […].

Given the occupation, even without addressing the broader injustices

before the occupation, this human rights work has been about trying

to maximise justice within an unjust framework. There’s constant frus-

tration about the framework, about our limits to challenge the broader

problem. [...] For quite few of us and it is the case with me, even the way

the core problem is articulated is not enough. Israeli human rights organ-

isations identify the fundamental source of injustice and what needs

to be solved for reconciliation as the 1967 occupation. They don’t gen-

erally speak about other injustices and sources of tension, for instance

’48 is rarely addressed in this language of human rights. For some of us

that is a real concern. […] Some of the human rights NGOs now try to

shift emphasis, try tackle what they see as the core problem rather than

operating within the framework, they try to upset this framework and

pressure Israeli authorities using Western power agendas. The appeal

of international law for activists here is that it’s not the same as going

to Israeli courts and pleading their justice, but you bring in a normative

framework created outside and mobilise actors committed to those stan-

dards to put pressure on Israel.

Dr. Zahira Kamal, former Minister of Women’s Affairs of Palestine; founding and board member in several women’s rights NGOs:

Any occupation lasts for a certain time, not forever. Israel considers this

is their own land, although signing the Oslo. By 1995 Israel should have

withdrawn from all Palestinian lands and by 1999 they should have with-

drawn and negotiated a final status. But we find that after twenty years

Israel has not withdrawn, it confiscates more lands, tearing into pieces

Palestinian lands, dividing the country into small pieces through cutting

roads, like Bantustans in South Africa.

The Occupation-Colonialism Continuum 155

Osama Al Risheq, Legal Supervisor, Al Quds University Human Rights Clinic:

It’s an underestimation when you say what’s happening now is only

an occupation. […] That’s why you may find a huge gap between inter-

national humanitarian law and the status in Palestine. International

humanitarian law has been made to organise international conflicts

and occupation, but it was not at all in their mind that an occupation

could extend for 50 years. For example, you do not see much protection

of the right to education in international humanitarian law; you do not

see a clear and strong protection for many human rights of the people

under occupation. […] That is why we believe the word "occupation” is an

understatement. We believe it’s colonialism implementing an apartheid

system under the name of occupation.

Meissa Irshaid, Attorney formerly with the Public Committee Against Torture in Israel and with Gisha:

“Military occupation” is too naive and does not reflect the reality of the

Israeli control over the Palestinians’ bodies and minds in the broader

concept than the military frame. For example, Palestinians like me, hav-

ing Israeli citizenship, are not under direct military occupation. I can live

in any Arab city within Israel for my whole life and never see a check-

point or soldier! Still, I live under dominant control over my identity, life,

education, economic system: a colonialism maintained by the State civil

system. So, the symbol of militarism is not seen or felt in my daily life.

While if we take the West Bank, soldiers do apply the so- called “Israeli

law” on Palestinians (military courts, checkpoints), but not because the

military rule as a strong power with different agenda than the State poli-

cies. […] Even if the Israeli military control over the West Bank and Gaza

ends now, the colonialism does not stop by this act. Military occupation

isn’t comprehensive. Settlers also: another perspective why it is not a mil-

itary occupation by definition.

Doubi Schwartz, regional Program Officer of the Alliance for Middle East Peace; former co- Director of Parents Circle– Families Forum:

I find it difficult to call it occupation. It was an interim stage, it was sup-

posed to be something temporary, you are right. We had this illusion we

are a democratic State: Jews have many democratic privileges, even those

we are losing slowly. But how can you be democratic when millions live 156 Afana

without basic human and civil rights? I would take it to a different per-

spective: you need to understand what the army and the occupying force

mean in Israeli society. I was working for many years on different iden-

tity issues in informal education in Israel. The identity of secular Israelis

stands on two feet: the Holocaust and the army. People define themselves

using these two variables. The army is something sacred: this is why it’s

so difficult to talk about the occupation. You cannot talk badly about the

army, you’re treated as a traitor; how dare you talk about the army? People

in peace NGOs, our kids are all going to the army. […] Many Israelis don’t

see it as an occupation and it’s not just psychological: most Israelis came

here (or were born) after ’67. For them this is reality, they do not know

what was here before. The ‘Occupation’ to them became like ‘Peace’. […]

If you listen today to people on the left, by occupation they mean con-

trolling the life of people, they do not talk about the land. People under-

stand it better: you cannot deny you control them. For them occupying

the land is a taboo, they won’t listen when you talk about occupation.

Meron Rapoport, co- founder of Two States One Homeland:

I do not have an answer to what is the purpose of this almost fifty- year

occupation. I certainly agree with you and this is strangely enough a dis-

cussion I have with my friends on the left, the more radical left. For me

’67 is no accident. Many times it’s described especially by the classical

left (the Zionist left, the Labour Party) as if Israel was going in a cer-

tain way and then there was an accident: Israel was de- routed by this

occupation and all we have to do is move back this train on its tracks.

This is a total misconception of reality, of the very nature of Zionism.

[…] I remember that moment, for me as a leftist born and raised in Tel

Aviv, believing in the two- state solution, believing if we fix ’67 everything

will come back to normal. Understanding it’s all about ’48 was not easy

for me. […] But the fact that it goes on for fifty years is no accident; it

has to do with the deeper feeling that we Jews own all the land. […] My

movement does not dispute this feeling; that you feel part of it is alright.

I am not going to lecture it’s not like this, I’m just saying you need to

share it. We try to decolonise the practice of Jewish settlement, to make

Israeli Jews part of this land, to nativise those coming from Europe, from

Yemen, from Morocco. It won’t work if we see only ’67 and only the occu-

pation as a problem.

A 29- year- old Palestinian male who preferred to remain anonymous:

The Occupation-Colonialism Continuum 157

It’s just an excuse for both governments and extremist parties to keep the

conflict going, to get what they want from powerful countries they wish

to associate to as big daddies. They minimise the problem as mere occu-

pation as represented by checkpoints; they know they can remove these

at any point and everything that is the actual occupation which rep-

resents segregation — those would stay. It’s not difficult, but they make it

seem impossible, so both sides can keep blackmailing the world for secu-

rity and protection. That’s whom this narrative serves: the organisations

interested in violence and both governments. If it were not identified as

occupation, as it’s more than that — it’s segregation and oppression, then

you wouldn’t find all these organisations and businesses, and interna-

tional interests. It seems the international community is not so moved by

segregation as it is by what “occupation” sounds like. The problem is not

military occupation: there is no opposing side from Palestinians for us to

really call it a military conflict. […] As long as it keeps being defined as

traditional occupation, we are just delusional, in denial, and we keep try-

ing to fix semi- or sub- problems, like talking about “equality” or “justice”.



5 Conclusion

Seeing Israel’s occupation as an offshoot of the settler– extractive colonial matrix changes how we discuss criminality against Palestinians. While the occupation paradigm has monopolised academic, civic and diplomatic dis-course for decades, a rigorous engagement with the impasse requires treat-ing the illness (colonialism) and not persist in symptomatic relief (ending the occupation). Treating the occupation as a form of resistance to (or suppression of) the colonised people’s resistance to colonialism offers new ways of concep-tualising transitional justice and conflict resolution in Palestine/ Israel. While removing the occupation is more feasible logistically and politically than addressing colonialism, for any realistic prospects for nonviolence and equity, at least some ramifications of colonialism will need to be also addressed. A truth commission, apologies, prosecutions, restitution, and reparations are needed to repair colonial legacies and thus prevent further intergenerational trauma.

If the past is any indication of the future when it comes to Israel’s willingness

to take responsibility and the international community’s capacity to demand accountability, the prospects for transitional justice are bleak. Decolonisation is more aspirational than a process we have witnessed successfully unfold in other colonised societies. Both the extra- ordinary nature of Israel’s occupation 158 Afana

and its intricate ties to the colonial matrix evidence the inadequacy of inter-national law to prevent, halt and repair contemporary forms of criminality. The deficiency of international humanitarian law and criminal law, and the paralysis of international fora meant to deliver justice are shaped by the geo-politics of victimhood and accountability. The colonial nature of international law and the inconsistent ways in which it is applied leave illusory solutions for the weak and indefinite loopholes for the powerful. The brutality and impunity of Israel’s occupationare thus part of a wider discussion about the changing nature of crime, the limitations and fragility of international law, and the geo-political agendas shaping repair.





chapter 7


Israel’s Military Justice System as an Annexationist

Tool

Sahar Francis



Israel’s military justice system that came into effect in the wake of the Israeli occupation in 1967, as well as its various amendments and modifications over the subsequent decades, is the result of long- term Israeli strategic planning that was initiated even as far back as 1963. This included a legal scheme to take military control not only of Palestinian lands, but also of its civilian residents and every aspect of their daily lives to serve the Israeli interest in maintaining the occupation indefinitely. It is through military control that Israel has pro-gressed the occupation from a temporary situation into a long- lasting reality, ending with the actual de facto and de jure annexation of the land.

Since 1967, Israel in its capacity as Occupying Power, has issued almost

2,000 military orders governing all aspects of Palestinian political, civilian, economic, cultural, and social life. Through these military orders, Israel has outlawed activities that are considered fundamental human rights and form the cornerstones of democracy, such as freedom of expression and opinion,

political participation, and the formation of political parties.1 Military orders have been issued on, State property, absentee property, closed military areas,

land confiscation, urban planning, and taxation.2 Crucially, these military orders have paved the way for two internal systems of control; the judicial system, including the military courts, military objection committees, military



1 See Israeli Military Order No 101 (1967), Order to Prevent Incitement and Hostile Propaganda

(1967); Defence (Emergency) Regulations (1945), Section G, Article 84 and 85. The Israeli

occupation declared all Palestinian political parties at that time as illegal organisations.

2 Israeli Military Order No 59, Related to State Property (31 July 1967); Israeli Military Order No

291, Related to Land Registration and Water Planning (19 December 1968); Israeli Military

Order No 58, Related to Absentees’ Property (Private Property) (23 July 1967); Israeli Military

Order No 25, Related to Purchase of Immovable Property (18 June 1967); Israeli Military Order

No 28, Related to Income Tax and Property Tax (22 June 1967).



© Sahar Francis, 2023 | DOI:10.1163/978900450393

160 Francis

judges and prosecutors, and the civil administration system created in 1981.3 The focus of this chapter will be on the former.

In particular, this chapter will examine how Israel created a military judi-

cial justice system through a series of restrictive military orders.4 The problem with the Israeli military judicial system goes beyond its continuous violations of the guarantees to a fair trial. The military judicial system raises serious questions as to the legality of the occupation given its prolonged, and now entrenched, exercise of jurisdiction over Palestinian civilians before Israeli military courts. In 1990, after some 20 years of occupation, Palestinian legal

scholar Raja Shehadeh,5 proposed that the real intention behind Israel’s sys-tem of military control over the opt, is to impose irreversible changes on the geography and demography of the occupied territory, with one aim: to uproot

the Palestinian people and annex the land.6 Today, some 30 years after the so- called Oslo peace agreement, Israel still refuses to withdraw its troops from the occupied territory, the military governor acts as de facto sovereign, and the military courts have become a much more sophisticated system.



1 Establishment, Scope and Jurisdiction of the Military Courts

On 7 June 1967, in the immediate wake of the occupation, the Israeli military commander of the West Bank area issued three military proclamations. The first proclamation concerned the takeover of administration by the Israeli

Occupying Forces (security and public order) of the occupied territory,7 and

the second concerned administrative and judicial procedures. Section 2 of the second proclamation stated that:



3 Israeli Military Order No 947, Order Related to Civil Administration (1981). The military gov-

ernor transferred the authority on more than 140 issues related to taxes, banking, property

and others, under the civil administration.

4 Israeli Military Order No 412, Order Related to Local Courts (1970), Article 4. This order dis-

mantled the local High Court of Justice and replaced it with the Appeal Court. See further

Military Order No 164, Order Related to Local Court (Status of idf Personnel) (1967), Article

2. This article excluded the State of Israel, commanders, soldiers, and any employee who was

appointed by the military commander or the civil administrator from the jurisdiction of the

local courts.

5 Raja Shehadeh, Occupier’s Law: Israel and the West Bank (Institute for Palestine Studies, 1990).

6 Ibid., page 24.

7 Israeli Proclamation No 1, Concerning the Takeover of Administration by the idf (7

June 1967).

Israel’s Military Justice System as an Annexationist Tool 161

All laws which were in force in the area on 7 June 1967, shall continue to

be in force as far as they do not contradict this, or any other proclamation

or order made by me (The West Bank Area Commander) or conflict with

the changes arising by virtue of the occupation of the Israeli Defense

Forces of the area.8

Further, Section 3 stated that:

Every governmental, legislative, appointive and administrative power

in respect of the region or its inhabitants shall henceforth be vested in

me (The West Bank Area Commander) alone and shall only be exercised

by me or by persons appointed by me for that purpose or acting on my

behalf.9

The third proclamation, Concerning Security Provisions (West Bank) of 1967,10 introduced the security provisions Order No 3 (which became Israeli Military

Order No 378).11 Order No 3 granted the military commander the authority to establish military courts in the opt. The military courts were granted lib-eral jurisdiction to hear any violation under the order or any other military order, proclamation or statement issued by the military commander, or any

other crime that the commander decides on.12 Following this, the military

commander established five military courts (currently there are two)13 and appointed military judges. Initially, the military courts were presided over

8 Israeli Proclamation No 2, Concerning Administrative and Judiciary Procedures (West

Bank Area) (1967).

9 Ibid.

10 Israeli Proclamation No 3, Concerning the Entry into Force of the Order of Security

Provisions (West Bank Area) (1967). This proclamation had an annex Israeli Military

Order No 3, Order Concerning the Security Provisions (West Bank Area) (1967), which

became later the Israeli Military Order No 378, Security Provisions Order (West Bank)

(1970).

11 Ibid.

12 Israeli Military Order No 3, Concerning Security Provisions (1967), Articles 5 and 8. Noting

that Article 8 was the basis for the restrictions on the jurisdiction of the local courts after

the occupation and paved the way for the Israeli military commander to criminalize

many aspects of daily life in the opt, like building without a permit, traffic offences and

much more.

13 After the Oslo Accords, the Israeli Occupying Forces moved out of the Palestinian cit-

ies. Part of the reorganizing process was to include the relocation of the military courts.

Under this process two courts were closed and a third one was closed during the second

Intifada after 2000. Today there are only two military courts, one if in the north of the

West Bank, Salem military court, and one near Ramallah, Ofer military court. 162 Francis

by one judge or a panel of three judges.14 Of these, only Israel’s Chief Justice

was required to be a legally qualified officer,15 while the other two members were officers of any ranking. In practice, this resulted in the prosecution of thousands of Palestinians in a military court system that failed to provide professional, specialised judges. This practice continued for 37 years until the amendment of 2004 that required all members of the judicial panel to possess

legal and judicial competencies.16

Article 19 of the Order Concerning Security Provisions (West Bank) (No 3) of

1967,17 prevented the appeal of military court rulings, a practice that was only

amended in the 1980s when a military Court of Appeals was established.18 Military Order No 3 also established the judicial procedures of the military court, as well as the arrest and search procedures. Moreover, the military order defined crimes that fell within the scope of the courts and granted the military commander the authority to issue administrative detention orders. Most nota-bly, Article 35 of Order No 3 required the court to follow and give precedence to the Geneva Conventions stating that a:

[M] ilitary court and its administration shall follow the provisions of

the Geneva Convention of 12 August 1949 relating to the Protection of

Civilians in War insofar as concerns judicial proceedings, and where

this Order conflicts with the said Convention, the provisions of the

Convention shall prevail.19

Israel soon backtracked and removed this article in an amendment,20 under-scoring its intention towards the mistreatment and maladministration of the occupied territory and people. At the same time, the military orders granted the military commander and military judges a wide scope of author-ity enabling them to act in any way they deemed fit. For example, Articles 10 and 11 of Military Order No 3 concerning security provisions, allow the court to



14 Israeli Military Order No 1651, Concerning Security Provisions (Consolidated Version)

(December 2009). Articles 15 and 17(c), The order entered into effect on 2 May 2010.

A judge sitting in a one judge panel court can issue sentences up to 10 years, and a three-

judge panel court can issue sentences in excess of 10 years.

15 Israeli Military Order No 3, Concerning Security Provisions (1967), Article 6.

16 Israeli Amendment No 89, Order Concerning Security Provisions No 378 (1970).

17 Israeli Military Order No 3, Concerning Security Provisions (1967).

18 Israeli Security Provisions Order (Amendment No 58) (Judea and Samaria) (No

1265) (1989).

19 Israeli Military Order No 3, Concerning Security Provisions (1967).

20 Amendment No 9, Israeli Military Order No. 144 (22 October 1967).

Israel’s Military Justice System as an Annexationist Tool 163

deviate from the principles governing admissible evidence for special reasons,

if the justices deem it necessary to achieve justice.21

In practice, the military courts have relied on unfamiliar procedural rules

and legal precedents borrowed from Israeli law, which most Palestinian law-yers who study in Palestinian universities are unfamiliar with. Hebrew is the main language in the court, there are no professional translators, instead poor incomprehensible translations from Hebrew to Arabic are done by soldiers

serving their military service.22 The language barrier seriously affects due pro-cess and is part of the coercive conditions that force plea bargain deals in the military courts.

1.1 The Scope of the Military Courts Notably, the Israeli military courts have breached international humanitarian law both in terms of their scope and legal procedures. In terms of scope, the military courts have extended their jurisdiction over civilians for minor civil law offenses. Palestinian detainees include those who have participated in active conflict or resisted the occupation, in addition to thousands of civilian Palestinian labour workers who have entered Israel without security permits, as well as civilian Palestinians summoned by the Israeli forces for minor traf-

fic violations or for building without permits from the Civil Administration.23 Many jurists argue that prosecuting civilians before military courts fails to uphold the guarantees of a right to a fair trial, in violation of their right to an

independent and impartial tribunal.24

21 Article 10, Israeli Military Order No 3, Concerning Security Provisions (1967), “Military

courts follow in evidentiary procedures, the procedures followed in the military courts of

soldiers. Under the condition that the military court is allowed to decide not to follow the

procedures if it thinks justices deems this, and for special reasons that is written by the

court”.

22 Article 116, Israeli Military Order No 1651 (2009). See also Lisa Hajjar, Courting Conflict –

The Israeli Military Court System in the West Bank and Gaza (University of California Press

2005) 132– 153.

23 This data can be found on the Military Courts Unit of the Annual Reports of the Military

Advocate General. It gives statistics on the activities of the military courts in the opt,

related to the division of cases. To understand better the division and the categories, there

is a useful statistics review in Yesh Din, Back Yard Proceedings, The Implementation of Due

Process Rights in the Military Courts in the Occupied Territories, 2007, pages 41– 44.

24 icrc, Customary International Humanitarian Law, Volume i: Rules (cup 2009) 313– 314.

There, several cases from the European Court of Human Rights on the situation of Cyprus

are examined, in particular, the “close structural links between the executive power and

the military officers serving on the ‘trnc’ military courts”. Further the decisions of the

African Commission on Human Rights, and the Inter American Commission on Human

Rights are examined. Also see Amnesty International, Fair Trial Manual, 2014, page 247 164 Francis

The military commander has further expanded the jurisdiction of the mili-

tary courts beyond the borders of the opt, granting the military courts extra-territorial jurisdiction to prosecute anyone who has committed an act outside the region which would, “constitute an offence had it been committed within the region and the act harmed or was designed to harm the security of the

Region or public order therein”.25

Military orders grant the military courts the authority to try any person

who commits an offense in violation of the military orders, or any other law, regardless of the person’s citizenship status – whether an Israeli or a foreigner. However even when Israeli settlers kill Palestinians in the opt, they have not been prosecuted by the military courts. They are instead, prosecuted before

the Israeli civilian courts, outside the occupied territory.26 The practice clearly offends against Article 42 of the Hague Regulations, which establishes, that “the occupation extends only to the territory where such authority has been

established and can be exercised”.27 Accordingly, Sharon Weill persuasively argues, that the occupation possesses no legal jurisdiction outside of the State’s region; otherwise, the extraterritorial legislative authority becomes, “a tool for

domination and not necessarily for protection”.28

Rarely is an Israeli settler prosecuted for an offense before the military courts

in the occupied territory. One exceptional case, in 2006, was that of an Israeli

settler who was ordered under house arrest by the military commander.29 At

(fair trial rights under armed conflict). Amnesty International calls for the prosecution of

crimes related to human rights violations and crimes included in international law before

civil courts and not in military courts.

25 It should be noted that the military order to assign extraterritorial jurisdiction to the mili-

tary courts outside the occupied territory was provided for in 1973. For more on geograph-

ical jurisdiction and Israel’s violation of ihl see Sharon Weill, ‘The Judicial Arm of the

Occupation: The Israeli Military Courts in the Occupied Territories’, 89(886) International

Review of the Red Cross (2007) 395. The author has observed over the decades working

for Addameer, that there have been tens of cases, if not more, of students who studied

abroad and who were prosecuted on charges of security threat.

26 Yesh Din, Back Yard Proceedings, The Implementation of Due Process Rights in the Military

Courts in the Occupied Territories, 2007, pages 57– 59. One of the most heinous cases

was the case of burning of the Dawabsheh family, known as the Duma case submitted

to the District Court in Lod. Israel District Court Lod, Criminal Case 932- 01- 16, State of

Israel v Amiram Ben Ulie (2016). See also Elisha Ben Kimon, Gilad Morag and Elior Levy,

‘Indictments Filed Against Two Duma Arson Suspects, Gag Order Lifted’, Ynet news, 1

March 2016.

27 Hague Regulations, Article 42.

28 See Sharon Weill, ‘The Judicial Arm of the Occupation: The Israeli Military Courts in the

Occupied Territories’, 89(886) International Review of the Red Cross (2007) 413.

29 Court of Military Appeals in Judea and Samaria, Eran Schwartz v the Commander of IDF

Forces in the Region, Decision, Appeals Committees 5/ 06, 31 October 2006. Israel’s Military Justice System as an Annexationist Tool 165

the time, judge Netanel Benisho, Vice President of the Military Appeals Court, concluded that Israeli settlers should be classed as local residents for the pur-poses of the Fourth Geneva Convention, and the military commander must therefore, protect their interests when deciding on their liberty. Judge Benisho further considered that the court’s territorial jurisdiction is applicable equally to all residents and visitors of the occupied territory without discrimination

based on nationality, religion, or place of residence.30 The reasoning is in stark violation of Article 49 of the Fourth Geneva Convention, prohibiting the Occupying Power from transferring parts of its own civilian population into

the occupied territory.31

1.2 Impartiality, Legality and the Rule against Retroactive Effect The military retains significant influence over military court judges, which seriously compromises their independence. Although, Article 8 of Military Order 1651 provides that “there is no authority over one authorized to adjudi-cate, apart from the authority of the law and security legislation”, in practice,

this has not been achieved.32 For example, the military commander appoints judges based on the recommendations of the Judicial Selection Committee comprising of seven members. The Committee is chaired by the President of the Courts- Martial Appeals Court and includes one civil representative of the Israel Bar Association, to be selected by the National Council of the Bar

Association.33 The majority of the Judicial Selection Committee are mem-bers of the military and subject to its authority; administratively, both the jsc and the military prosecutors, are subject to the authority of the Office of the Military Advocate General. Inevitably, therefore, most military court judges are military officers who climbed the ladder of the military ranks to become judges. Some of those judges having previously served as military prosecutors

before the military courts.34



30 Ibid., pages 5– 6.

31 For more details on the Israeli military court system in the opt and its use, abuse and

misuse of international law norms, see Nery Ramati, ‘The Rulings of the Israeli Military

Courts and International Law’, Journal of Conflict and Security Law (2019) 1– 21. Lawyer

Nery Ramati worked at the military court for years.

32 icrc, Customary International Humanitarian Law, Volume i: Rules (cup 2009) 314.

33 Israeli Military Order No 1651, Concerning Security Provisions (Consolidated Version)

(December 2009), Article 13(A).

34 The current Chief Judge of the Appeal Military Court, Natanel Benisho used to be the

Chief Military Prosecutor in Tulkarem, between 1992– 1998. He studied in the Beit El set-

tlement Yeshiva between 1987– 1988. More information is available about the military

judges under the unit of military courts in Judea and Samaria on the idf Hebrew website. 166 Francis

That some of the judges are settlers is also a matter of serious concern for

the independence and impartiality of the military judicial system, especially

given cases relating to the construction of the Wall, or settlements.35

Similar, to the British Security Regulations of 1945, the crimes provided

for under military orders are drafted in a very general manner. In the opt for example, an offense against public order is prohibited under Military Order 1651 stating:

A person will not commit an act or omission which entail harm, damage,

disturbance or danger to the security of the region or the security of the

idf, or to the operation, use or security of one of the following: boat, air-

plane, port, platform, dock, harbor, airport.36

Accordingly, the military courts may liberally interpret what activities entail or pose a security threat, justifying the arrest of hundreds of Palestinian detainees.

International humanitarian law provides a number of critical procedural

safeguards protecting the occupied population against violations of due pro-cess and fair procedure by the military courts of the Occupying Power. The Geneva Conventions incorporate the principle of legality and protect civilians and prisoners of war against prosecution for acts that were not considered a

crime at the time they were committed.37 The principle of legality is further

reflected in international human rights treaties, applicable to the opt.38 The general principle provides that, “only the law can define a crime and prescribe a penalty and the principle that criminal law must not be extensively construed

to an accused’s detriment”.39 Further, the prohibition against retroactive appli-cation of criminal laws means that no one “may be prosecuted for an act or omission that did not constitute a criminal offence in national or international

law when it was committed”.40



35 Judge Yoram Haniel used to be the Chief Justice of Military Court in Beit El and later Ofer

and was a settler when he served on the bench. He lives in the Elkana settlement.

36 Israeli Military Order No 1651, Concerning Security Provisions (Consolidated Version)

(December 2009), Article 222.

37 Third Geneva Convention, Article 99; Fourth Geneva Convention, Article 67. See also

Additional Protocol i, Article 75(4)(c); Additional Protocol ii, Article 6(2)(c). They con-

firm that the sentence imposed cannot be more than the sentence that was accepted at

the time of the action, and if the law approved a shorter sentence the perpetrator should

benefit from this.

38 iccpr, Article 15(1), International Convention on the Rights of the Child, Article 40(2)(a).

39 icrc, Customary International Humanitarian Law, Volume i: Rules (cup 2009) 372.

40 Third Geneva Convention, Article 99; Fourth Geneva Convention, Article 67.

Israel’s Military Justice System as an Annexationist Tool 167

One case illustrating how the military courts have breached the principle

of legality and the rule against retroactive effect, is the Case of the Palestinian

Legislative Council from 2006.41 In June 2006, Israeli forces arrested 48 mem-bers of the “Change and Reform” bloc of the plc who were members of par-liament and ministers in the Palestinian government. The plc members were charged with membership of and working for an illegal organisation, occupy-ing a position in an illegal organisation, as well as representing an illegal organ-isation through their membership in the plc. Key international law principles, such as sovereign immunity from prosecution, were rejected outright by the military court. At the time of their arrest, the “Change and Reform” bloc had not been declared by the Israeli military commander as an illegal organisa-tion. It was not for nearly another year in March 2007, that the “Change and Reform” bloc was outlawed in the opt under military order. Nevertheless, the parliamentarians were all retroactively sentenced for membership in an illegal organisation. Clearly, the main aim behind the arrest and prosecution of the 48 parliamentarians, was to paralyse the plc and impede Palestinian political discourse against the occupation.

In 2009, the Israeli military commander issued the Order Regarding

Security Provisions.42 This order, also known as the Criminal Code of the Military Courts, codified dozens of previous military orders on topics such as

criminal procedures and judges’ appointments.43 The codification addressed some key criticisms aimed at the military courts’ operating procedures by local

and international human rights organisations, Third States and UN bodies.44

41 An indictment was submitted to the court against each member of the plc with a request

to detain him until the end of the procedures. Advocate Francis represented Wael Abd

Alrahman in Case No 3817/ 06, Military Prosecutor v Wael Abd Alrahman, in the military

court of Yehuda. The Military Court of Appeals decided to unite all the appeals of the

military prosecutor against the decision to release the plc members on bail by the first

military court. The case was published under the name Military Court of Appeals, Military

Prosecutor v Bassem Za’arur, Appeal No 3249/ 06, 12 September 2006.

42 Israeli Military Order No 1651, Concerning Security Provisions (Consolidated Version)

(December 2009).

43 The codified Israeli Military Order No 1651 included Order Regarding Security Provisions

(Judea and Samaria) (No 378) (1970), which defined most military court proceed-

ings, offenses and punishments, along with Israeli Military Order No 132, Regarding

Adjudication of Juvenile Delinquents (Judea and Samaria) (1967) and Israeli Military

Order No 30, Order Regarding Judicial Authorities in Criminal Offenses (Judea and

Samaria) (1967) and many others.

44 Numerous reports have been issued by local Palestinian and Israeli organisations

concerning the military courts rulings on, torture, administrative detention, child

detention and other related issues. These include reports from Defence for Children

International- Palestine, B’Tselem, Hamoked, pcati, acri, Yesh Din and Addameer. Also, 168 Francis

For example, Israel raised the majority age of Palestinian children from 16 to

18 years.45 The following section will address some of these procedures and amendments, highlighting in particular, Israel’s failure to uphold its respon-sibility to ensure a fair trial to every Palestinian detainee arrested and prose-cuted before the military court system.



2 How Israel uses the Military Courts against Palestinian Civilians

Article 66 of the Fourth Geneva Convention, permits the Occupying Power to prosecute those accused of breach of penal provisions before “properly consti-tuted, non- political military courts, on condition that the said courts sit in the

occupied country”.46 However, while ihl grants the Occupying Power compe-tence to establish military courts and pass military laws, it also imposes strin-gent conditions to regulate them. Article 64 of the Fourth Geneva Convention only narrowly permits the Occupying Power to repeal or suspend the penal laws of the occupied territory on condition, “they constitute a threat to its security or an obstacle to the application of the present Convention”. The pri-mary consideration in replacing penal legislation is to safeguard the interests of the people of the occupied territory, or for the legitimate security interests of the Occupying Power.

Therefore, one must examine the jurisdiction of the military courts in the

opt over all aspects of life, including land confiscation, the construction of the Wall, settlements, checkpoints, and bypass roads, and question whether this



international organisations such as unicef, Children in Military Custody, as well UN

Special Procedures, working groups and treaty bodies. Important publications on the

subject include the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, Concluding Observations

on the Second to Fourth Periodic Report of Israel, crc/ c/ isr/ co/ 2– 4, 4 July 2013; Defence

for Children International, No Way to Treat a Child: Palestinian Children in the Military

Detention System, April 2016; unicef, Children in Military Detention Observations and

Recommendations Bulletin No 2, February 2015; Delegation of British Lawyers, Children in

Military Custody, UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office, June 2012.

45 Amendment Number 10, Israeli Military Order No 1676 (2011), redefined juveniles as those

under 18 years old in Article 136 of Israeli Military Order No 1651, Concerning Security

Provisions (Consolidated Version) (December 2009). Up until 2011, Palestinian children

were considered adults between the ages of 16– 18. The UN Committee on the Rights of

the Child raised the issue on several occasions. In the 2013 Concluding Observations, the

crc welcomed the state response; UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, Concluding

Observations on the Second to Fourth Periodic Report of Israel, crc/ c/ isr/ co/ 2– 4, 4 July

2013, page 5.

46 Fourth Geneva Convention, Article 66.

Israel’s Military Justice System as an Annexationist Tool 169

exceeds Israel’s competence under ihl. Further, one must question whether the extension of jurisdiction beyond what has been provided for under the Geneva Conventions amounts to an unlawful extension of the Occupying Power’s sovereignty over the occupied territory, in breach of jus cogens norms

on the non- acquisition of territory through use of force.47

Even after the Oslo Accords, Israel continued to grant authority to the mil-

itary courts to prosecute any Palestinian citizen residing in Area A (per the Oslo Accords classification) who committed an offense that harmed or meant

to harm the security of the region.48 Further, the military courts retained the authority to prosecute any Palestinian residing in Area A who committed a criminal offense according to the Jordanian Criminal Code No 16, the gen-

eral law of the occupied territory applicable prior to 1967.49 This effectively means that the military commander has superseded the competence of the Palestinian domestic courts, a decades- long overreaching of jurisdiction that goes far beyond the competence of the military commander to maintain the status quo under Articles 43 of the Hague Regulations, and subject to the humanitarian and security considerations of Articles 64 of the Fourth Geneva Convention.

Worryingly, minor offences such as traffic violations and entry into Israel

without a work permit, constitute more than half of the cases prosecuted

before the military courts (Ofer and Salem court) in recent years.50 Out of 10,273 charge sheets filed before the courts in 2016, some 6,201 were traffic violations, while 1,092 were cases of entry into Israel without a work permit;

together accounting for 71.24 percent of the charge sheets.51 Security and public



47 For more detailed analysis of the legality of the occupation based on these three con-

ditions see: Orna Ben- Naftali, Aeyal Gross and Keren Michaeli, ‘Illegal Occupation: The

Framing of the Occupied Palestinian Territory’, 23(3) Berkeley Journal of International Law

(2005) 557.

48 Israeli Military Proclamation No 7, Concerning the Application of the Interim Agreement

(West Bank) (1995). Article 6(a) confirms that the military commander continues his

authority and responsibility in relation to legislation, judiciary and administration in

all areas outlined in the article, including security and public order of any area under

Israeli security. This may even include the area under the jurisdiction of the Palestinian

Authority.

49 Israeli Military Order No 1651, Concerning Security Provisions (Consolidated Version)

(December 2009), Articles 10(E) and 10(F). In 1995, the Jordanian Criminal Code was

amended by Military Order No 1428, Regarding the Amendment of the Criminal Code

(Amendment No 6) (Judea and Samaria) (1995).

50 Military Advocate General, The Annual Activity Report of the Military Court, 2016 and 2017.

51 Addameer, ‘The Annual Activity Report’ annexed to Addameer, Annual Violation

Report, 2017.

170 Francis

disorder offences constituted 25.52 percent of the overall charge sheets, that is 2,613 charges altogether. In 2017 alone, there were 10,454 charge sheets filed in the criminal courts, of which 5,857 were for traffic violations and 1,064 were for entry into Israel without a work permit; amounting to 66.26 percent of the

overall cases.52 In addition, there were 2,072 security offenses and 1,020 charge sheets for public disorder offenses; this in total accumulated to 29.69 percent of the total cases in 2017.

Consequently, most cases prosecuted before the Occupying Power’s mili-

tary courts in recent years are not relevant to the security of the Israeli forces or public order. Military courts have not only become a tool of oppression, but also a tool of economic exploitation of the Palestinian people. In 2016, the military courts collected 21,967,710 nis in fines, and in 2017, they collected 20,590,090 nis in fines. These fines were imposed in addition to other forms of punishment decided by the courts. Needless to say that these sums of money are not invested for the benefit of the protected Palestinian population in the occupied territory, but rather support the military judicial system and settle-

ment construction.53

2.1 The Use of Torture and Other Coercive Practices This section examines the coercive conditions that Israel, the Occupying Power imposes on Palestinian detainees, so that they are left with no other choice but to plead guilty and agree a plea deal to guarantee a shorter sentence. The plea bargain also shortens the length of the trial, that could last up to two years, and guarantees a shorter sentence. More than 90 percent of the cases prosecuted

before the military courts end in a plea bargain with the military prosecutors.54

Critically, Article 15 of the UN Convention Against Torture, which is binding

on Israel as a jus cogens norm, provides that a statement made as a result of torture is inadmissible. Despite this, the Israeli Supreme Court has approved the use of special interrogation methods in so- called “ticking bomb” sce-narios, including practices amounting to torture, inhumane and degrading



52 Ibid.

53 Amira Hass, ‘This is how the Palestinians Finance the Occupation: Millions in Fines in the

Military Courts’ Haaretz, 8 March 2013. Haas, an Israeli journalist writing for Haaretz, pub-

lished an article concerning the fines paid by Palestinian prisoners in the military court

system. She confirmed that she received an answer from cogat to her question: that the

money is deposited to the general account of the civil administration office and is used

for the sake of the area, including road structures, electricity, and other environmental

issues and development of infrastructures.

54 Lisa Hajjar claims it is over 97 percent. Lisa Hajjar, Courting Conflict – The Israeli Military

Court System in the West Bank and Gaza (University of California Press 2005) 219. Israel’s Military Justice System as an Annexationist Tool 171

treatment.55 In many cases, there is evidence of torture and mistreatment by Israeli authorities starting from the moment of arrest and continuing

throughout the interrogation stages, before the filing an indictment in court.56 Conditions imposed on the detainee during interrogation are inter alia severe physical and psychological torture including the detainees total isolation from the outside world, the prevention of the detainee from meeting with his law-

yer for weeks,57 as well as in many cases, the arrest of family members and

friends.58 All of these conditions aim to further psychologically pressure the detainee in order to force a confession.

2.2 Prosecuting Minors

The military commander of the occupied territory has made numerous amend-ments to the Order Regarding Security Provisions (Judea and Samaria), No 378 of 1970, and later to the Military Order 1651. An examination of all amendments to the military orders over the decades, is beyond the scope of this chapter. Notwithstanding, it must be noted that occasionally an amendment is adopted which supports the best interest of Palestinian detainees, usually as a result of continuous pressure from human rights organisations and international bod-ies, such as the increase in the age of majority.

Until 2011, Israeli military orders defined a Palestinian child as a person

under the age of 16. After this, following the adoption of Amendment 10, Article 136 of Military Order 1651 was changed to set the legal age of an adult to 18. However, in practice, the age of the detainee is decided on the filing date of the indictment, not the date of the committed offense. Therefore, the amend-ment to the legal age did not result in a fundamental change to the judicial procedures of prosecuting children. The military courts do not abide by the international principle that detention of children should only be the last resort



55 Much has been written and published about the hcj 94/ 5100, Public Committee Against

Torture in Israel v The State of Israel (6 September 1999) decision which laid the founda-

tion of the “necessity defense”. In subsequent rulings, the Supreme Court expanded the

necessity defence, in the case of Firas Tbeish for example. For more details, see Addameer,

Annual Violations Report, 2018. See also Chapter 11, Kiswanson and Chapter 12, Darcy.

56 Addameer prisoner support and human rights association issues annual reports on viola-

tions that Palestinian prisoners face under detention, that explains in detail all forms of

torture and ill treatment.

57 Addameer, Annual Violations Report, 2019, page 53.

58 Mays, the daughter of Waleed Hanatsheh who was violently interrogated under the over-

sight of doctors, was arrested for three days while her father was under interrogation.

Addameer, Annual Violations Report, 2019, page 24. 172 Francis

of any court- ordered punishment, instead the military courts adopt detention

as a first priority.59

2.3 Mass Prosecution of Minor Offenses Carrying out arrests strictly in accordance with the provisions of the law is a fundamental principle of a fair trial, and the guarantee against arbitrary detention is non- derogable, and therefore cannot be infringed upon without serious and legitimate reasons. In this vein, Article 42 of the Fourth Geneva Convention states that “the internment or placing in assigned residence of protected persons may be ordered only if the security of the Detaining Power makes it absolutely necessary”. Further, Article 78 of the Convention reiterates the absolute necessity of “imperative reasons of security” to justify detention. The International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia has interpreted

absolute necessity to include acts of the gravity of sabotage or espionage.60

As previously mentioned, the Israeli military courts prosecute Palestinians

not only for offenses like stone throwing or participation in demonstrations, but also for political affiliation, membership of student movements, and writ-ing or sharing posts on social media platforms under the pretext of incite-ment. Tens of thousands of Palestinian detainees incarcerated throughout the decades of Israel’s occupation have not committed serious offenses yet have been subjected to harsh punishments. For example, 16- year- old Palestinian girl, Ahed Al- Tamimi, was sentenced to eight months detention in a high secu-rity trial held in a closed military court for slapping an Israeli soldier during a

military raid on her family home.61

2.4 Presumption of Innocence The presumption of innocence, whereby an accused is presumed innocent until proven guilty, is a fundamental principle of criminal justice. This entails that the accused’s right to liberty is protected until all legal proceedings take

place and a verdict is reached.62 The accused remains free if acquitted, but if found guilty, is sentenced in accordance with the gravity of the offense. This principle is rarely upheld in Israeli military courts. In reality, there is a pre-sumption that persons accused of affiliation with or membership of any illegal organisation, including outlawed political parties and student groups, pose



59 Defence for Children International- Palestine, No Way to Treat a Child, 2016.

60 icrc, Customary International Humanitarian Law, Volume i: Rules (cup 2009) 304– 305.

61 Jaclynn Ashly, ‘Ahed Tamimi Gets Eight Months in Prison after Plea Deal’, Aljazeera, 22

March 2018.

62 Lawyers Watch Canada, Pre- Trial Release and the Right to be Presumed Innocent, 2013, 11. Israel’s Military Justice System as an Annexationist Tool 173

a real threat. The accused is generally interned until all legal procedures are finalised, regardless of the nature of the acts a person carries out through his

membership of the organisation.63 The burden of proof falls on the detainees, which have to show that they are no longer active members of the organisation.

2.5 Administrative Detention and Right to Information Administrative detention is a procedure whereby a person is detained without charge or a trial based on secret evidence. In the opt, the military commander

is authorised,64 to order the arrest and administrative detention of any per-son for a period of six months who is considered a risk to the security of the area or the State of Israel. Originally based on Article 111 of the British Defence

(Emergency) Regulations of 1945,65 an administrative order can be renewed based on the same allegations indefinitely. Although Article 78 of the Fourth Geneva Convention permits the use of administrative detention, this is limited to specific circumstances, “for imperative reasons of security”.

In practice, Israel carries out the arbitrary arrest and detention of thousands

of Palestinian detainees, based on secret files containing information that nei-ther detainee nor his lawyer is given access to, thus leaving them completely unaware of the nature of the allegations against him. Both the detainee and lawyer need to know the substance of the allegations in order to build a defence. Meanwhile, orders for administrative detention are routinely renewed on the same allegations no matter how much time passes. Often the administrative detention lasts more than a year, and in some cases, up to two years or more.

Notably, Article 9(2) of the International Covenant on Civil and Political

Rights, guarantees the right to be informed of the reasons for arrest or detention. Further, the UN Human Rights Committee outlines the right to be informed of the reasons for arrest, regarding the use of preventive

detention for reasons of public security.66 The UN Committee Against

63 Military Court of Appeals, 3249/ 06, Military Prosecutor v Basem Ahmad Musa Za’arur and

Others (2006). This ruling was on the arrest of members of the Palestinian Legislative

Council in June 2006. The Court of First Instance released them, deeming their activity to

pose no threat. However, the Military Court of Appeals ruled in favor of their detention

until the end of the criminal proceedings.

64 Israeli Military Order No 1651, Concerning Security Provisions (Consolidated Version)

(December 2009). And inside Israel the Emergency Powers Law (Detention) (1979)

(Emergency Law). Permitting the Minister of Defence to order detention for up to six

months.

65 In 1948, Israel incorporated the Emergency Regulations into its law under the Government

and Law Arrangements Ordinance (1948).

66 UN Human Rights Committee, General Comment No 8: Right to Liberty and Security of

Persons (Article 4), 1982.

174 Francis

Torture,67 has condemned Israel’s practice of administrative detention for indefinite periods of time. Such long detention based on secret information without clear legal procedures of defence, can amount to psychological tor-

ture.68 Despite international condemnation,69 Israel continues the practice targeting strategic sectors of the Palestinian population, including political leaders, students, social activists, human rights defenders, journalists, and

even children.70



3 Conclusion

Since 1967, Israel has used the military courts as a primary tool in oppress-

ing and controlling the Palestinian population in the opt.71 The longstanding criminalisation of all Palestinian political parties until this day, despite the Oslo Accords, as well the criminalisation of hundreds of civil organisations, Islamic charity organisations (Zakat committees), student movements, media outlets, and even sports clubs under the pretext of supporting terrorism is indicative of a broader policy of repression. By targeting the entirety of Palestinian society and criminalising any political or civic activity challenging the Israeli occu-

pying authorities,72 Israel maintains its effective control and indefinite legal jurisdiction over the Palestinian people, enabling its settlement and de facto



67 See the UN Committee Against Torture, Concluding Observations on the Fifth Periodic

Report of Israel cat/ c/ isr/ co/ 5, 13 May 2016, page 5.

68 For more information on Israel’s policies of administrative detention and international

law, see Addameer, Administrative Detention in the Occupied Palestinian Territory: A Legal

Analysis Report, Fourth Edition, 2016.

69 UN Human Rights Committee, Concluding Observations on the Fourth Periodic Report of

Israel, ccpr/ c/ isr/ co/ 4, 21 November 2014.

70 Addameer, Administrative Detention in the Occupied Palestinian Territory: A Legal Analysis

Report, Fourth Edition, 2016, pages 30– 47.

71 To delve more into the scope and jurisdiction set forth by Articles 64 and 66 of the Fourth

Geneva Convention, as well the Occupying Power’s authority in legislating and placing

the Palestinian residents under the rule of its military courts, see Sharon Weill, ‘The

Judicial Arm of the Occupation: The Israeli Military Courts in the Occupied Territories’,

89(886) International Review of the Red Cross (2007).

72 Hundreds of organisations and individuals were declared illegal and terrorist groups

by the Minister of Defence inside Israel or the military governor in the opt. The last

Palestinian student movement declared an unlawful association was the Alcotob Altolabi

Aldemocraty Altakodomi, Democratic Progressive Students Pole, on 13 August 2020. The

list is also published usually on Israel’s Ministry of Defence website.

Israel’s Military Justice System as an Annexationist Tool 175

annexation of Palestinian lands without resistance.73 As each amendment confers more and more power to the military commander while eroding the human and humanitarian rights of the Palestinian people, there is no doubt, that Israel’s military justice system is a cultivating tool designed to entrench its annexationist settler colonial regime.



73 Al- Haq, Questions and Answers: Israel’s De Facto Annexation of Palestinian Territory, 25

May 2021.





chapter 8


Adaptation under Occupation: Climate Change

Vulnerability

Suha Jarrar †



Within the global general climate change framework, there is growing evi-dence and acknowledgement of the complex relationship between climate- related threats and armed conflict, often intersecting with socio- political and economic determinants. There is also increased realisation that armed conflict, including situations of occupation, contribute to, and may result in, substantial environmental harm, furthering the already prevalent marginali-sation of communities who are primarily dependent on natural wealth and resources, particularly indigenous communities in regions marred by impe-

rial and colonial powers.1 Simultaneously, the impact of climate change on the deterioration of natural resources, especially when it leads to the deteriora-tion of people’s livelihoods, has been examined as a major catalyst for conflict situations worldwide. Importantly, climate change is increasingly recognised

today as a concrete “threat multiplier” to international peace and security.2

Within the context of Israel’s prolonged occupation of Palestinian territory,

Israel has caused extensive environmental degradation, further deepening and exacerbating environmental vulnerabilities amongst Palestinians, in particular



1 “Indigenous peoples are among the first to face the direct consequences of climate change,

owing to their dependence upon, and close relationship with the environment and its

resources. Climate change exacerbates the difficulties already faced by vulnerable indig-

enous communities, including political and economic marginalization, loss of land and

resources, human rights violations, discrimination and unemployment”, United Nations

Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, Climate Change and Indigenous Peoples.

2 Numerous studies have emerged in recent years highlighting the relationship between

indigenous rights and environmental rights and the disproportionate impacts of environ-

mental damage and climate change on indigenous peoples and communities who are least

prepared and least able to adapt to the adverse impacts of climate change. See, ‘Climate

Change Recognized as “Threat Multiplier”, UN Security Council Debates its Impact on Peace’,

UN News, 25 January 2019. See also, ‘ICRC to UN Security Council: Double Impact of Climate

Change and Armed Conflict Harms People’s Ability to Cope’, icrc, 25 January 2019.



© Suha Jarrar, 2023 | DOI:10.1163/9789004503939_

Adaptation under Occupation: Climate Change Vulnerability 177

pastoral, herding, and other farming communities. This chapter will examine the applicability of community- based climate change adaptation measures in Masafer Yatta, in the South Hebron Hills region. It is one of the most cli-matically vulnerable areas of the Occupied Palestinian Territory, alongside the Jordan Valley and the Gaza Strip. Taking Masafer Yatta as a primary case study, this chapter will examine its adaptive capacities, the adverse impact of Israel’s occupation on Palestinian environment and resources, and the applicable law.

This chapter adopts an environmental justice approach,3 that draws atten-

tion to the linkages between climate change adaptation, the ramifications of prolonged occupation, and geopolitical injustices in the opt. This chapter will examine the applicability of international law, including international envi-ronmental law to the context in the South Hebron Hills and the Palestinian territory at large. It will conclude that Palestinians residing in climatically vul-nerable areas are precluded from applying basic community- based and small- scale climate change adaptation options and enjoying their inalienable right to exercise sovereignty over their natural resources.



1 Masafer Yatta – the South Hebron Hills4

Masafer Yatta is located in the southern hills of the Hebron Governorate, in the south of the occupied West Bank, and to the north of Al- Naqab Desert, located across the 1949 Armistice Agreement Line. The entire Masafer Yatta region is classified as Area C, which falls under Israel’s full civil and military control.

Masafer Yatta is home to approximately 1,700 Palestinians,5 living in small,

remote communities, most of whom are Palestinian Bedouin,6 who have tradi-tionally and historically, since before the Nakba in 1948, relied on pastoral and



3 Al- Haq, An Environmental Approach: The Protection of Natural Resources in the Occupied

Palestinian Territory, 2017.

4 The field information presented in this chapter was collected during a series of field visits

conducted by Al- Haq to Masafer Yatta and surrounding villages in the South Hebron Hills,

throughout 2018.

5 In 2013, ocha’s statistics indicated that approximately 1,300 individuals resided in Masafer

Yatta. The figure provided here was obtained by Al- Haq from the head of the Masafer Yatta

Council, Mr Nidal Younis. Figures by B’Tselem cover a larger geographic area within the

South Hebron Hills, suggesting a total of 4,000 residents distributed across 30 communities

and villages. See B’Tselem, The South Hebron Hills, 1 January 2013.

6 Al- Haq, Plight of Palestinian Bedouin Depicts Impacts of Illegal Israeli Occupation and Practices

in Palestinian Territory, 17 December 2014.

178 Jarrar

agricultural practices, namely livestock breeding and livestock production, as their main sources of livelihood and traditions of life.

To the east of Masafer Yatta is a large area of land covering 35,000 dunums,7

declared by the Israeli occupying authorities in 1970 as a closed military area

and active firing zone (the so- called “Firing Zone 918”).8 Consequently, the entirety of the Masafer Yatta region is either surrounded by Israeli settlers or by active Israeli military presence, putting the area and its residents’ lives at great risk. Its location also affects the Palestinian residents’ everyday livelihood and subsistence due to their inability to access vast areas of their lands and natural resources.

Since its declaration as a closed military area and active firing zone,

Palestinians have been systematically denied access to their land and the natu-ral resources therein. The firing zone encompasses lands on which 12 out of the 16 Palestinian communities of Masafer Yatta reside, comprising some 1,500 res-

idents.9 The Israeli occupying authorities have used the firing zone as a pretext,

to carry out systematic forcible transfer measures;10 the military commander has issued military orders designating the area a no- go zone requiring waves of

forced evictions of Palestinian residents.11 Most notably, in 1999, Israel expelled over 700 Palestinians who had resided in “Firing Zone 918” since before the Nakba in 1948.

Following the mass- displacement of Palestinians in the aftermath of the

1967 war, Palestinians in Masafer Yatta challenged military orders for their

expulsion from the firing zone before Israel’s High Court of Justice.12 On 4 May 2022, the hcj rejected their appeal against the eviction order holding that the Israeli military forces could forcibly transfer the residents and use the area for

its military training.13 The ruling has been condemned by UN experts who have



7 A dunum is a unit of land used to measure land areas in Palestine since the British

Mandate. One dunum of land is equivalent to 1,000 square metres.

8 See for example B’Tselem, Firing Zone 918, 30 October 2017.

9 Field information obtained by Al- Haq, 2018.

10 Direct and indirect forcible transfer violate international humanitarian law, in particu-

lar Article 49 of the Fourth Geneva Convention. Forced displacement, including forced

evictions, violate a series of rights enshrined under international human rights law and

applicable in the opt, including residency rights, family rights, and the right to an ade-

quate standard of living, including adequate housing, amongst other fundamental rights.

See UN Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement, 2004, Principle 6.

11 See also ocha, Firing Zones and Risk of Forcible Transfer, 4 July 2017.

12 Field information obtained by Al- Haq, 2018. See also B’Tselem, Masafer Yatta Communities

Whose Land Has Been Declared a Firing Zone, 10 February 2016.

13 ‘UN Experts Alarmed by Israel High Court Ruling on Masafer Yatta and Risk of Imminent

Forcible Transfer of Palestinians’, United Nations, 16 May 2022.

Adaptation under Occupation: Climate Change Vulnerability 179

stated that their transfer is “all the more disconcerting, as it is done to allow Israeli military trainings in the area” and questioned how that can be given

priority.14 They have concluded that “Israel has shown no ‘imperative mili-tary necessity’ to vacate the area” and that therefore their displacement may

amount to a war crime.15



2 Climate Change Adaptation Planning in the Occupied Palestinian

Territory

The Convention on Climate Change aims to stabilise “greenhouse gas con-centrations in the atmosphere at a level that would prevent dangerous

anthropogenic interference with the climate system”.16 In 2016, following its

accession to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,17 the Environment Quality Authority of the State of Palestine released its

National Adaptation Plan to Climate Change.18 Since then, the Convention on Climate Change has become binding on the State of Palestine in the opt. Importantly, Israel has extraterritorial duties and obligations towards the opt,

since its ratification of the Convention on Climate Change on 4 June 1996.19

The process of developing country- driven National Adaptation Plans was

established under the Cancun Adaptation Framework in 2010.20 The process is intended to enable States to identify climate change adaptation needs and develop adaptation strategies in accordance with those needs. In its National Adaptation Plan, the State of Palestine presented a vulnerability assessment for the opt, building on the guidelines provided by the Convention on Climate Change for least developed countries, as well as the Climate Change Adaptation Strategy and Program of Action for the Palestinian Government developed in

2011.21 The National Adaptation Plan identifies sectors highly vulnerable to



14 Ibid.

15 Ibid.

16 UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, Article 2.

17 UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, 21 March 1994.

18 State of Palestine, EQA, National Adaptation Plan (NAP) to Climate Change, 2016, page 15.

19 Marc Limon, ‘Human Rights Obligations and Accountability in the Face of Climate

Change’, Georgia Journal of International and Comparative Law (2010) 559.

20 UN Climate Change, Report of the Conference of the Parties on its Sixteenth Session, held in

Cancun from 29 November to 10 December 2010, fccc/ cp/ 2010/ 7/ Add.1, 15 March 2011.

21 undp- papp, Climate Change Adaptation Strategy and Programme of Action for the

Palestinian Authority, 9 June 2011.

180 Jarrar

climate change and proposes adaptation options for each sector in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.

According to the analysis presented by the National Adaptation Plan, much

uncertainty surrounds projected impacts of climate change.22 That said, the National Adaptation Plan for the State of Palestine concludes that “[i] n gen-eral, the contention is that the overall water situation will deteriorate, with more potential for drought and floods, increased evaporation, [and] reduced

river flow”.23 It further concludes that, despite the uncertainties surrounding future climate change projections, there is “unanimity that temperatures will

increase, although there is some disagreement by how much”.24 In addition, Palestine’s National Adaptation Plan notes that, “most analyses suggest future decreases in rainfall, although the amount of decreases is somewhat uncer-

tain”.25 In light of such uncertainties, a precautionary approach,26 must be adopted, by prioritising the need to increase the adaptive capacity in partic-ularly vulnerable areas in the opt, even if the extent of the harm of long- term climate trends remains unclear. The National Adaptation Plan ranks an array of sectors as “highly vulnerable” to climate change across the opt, including, inter alia, agriculture, coastal and marine, energy, health, food, and water.

Sensitivity to climate change is relevant to the degree to which a region or

in this case, a community, is affected by climate- related stimuli such as climate variability and frequency and intensity of extreme weather events and disas-ters. Adaptive capacity is the degree to which a community has the capacity to cope with or adjust to the consequences of climate change. Vulnerability is therefore portrayed as the degree to which a community is unable to cope with or is susceptible to the consequences of climate change. An analysis of the interrelations between vulnerability, sensitivity, and adaptive capacity is key to conducting a comprehensive vulnerability assessment, a tool used to

22 Mitigation of climate change refers to human interventions to reduce greenhouse gas

emissions. In climate policy, mitigation measures refer to a variety of practices that

contribute to the mitigation process. The first UN Framework Convention on Climate

Change, mitigation objective was introduced under the Article 2 of the Convention was

implemented under the 1997 Kyoto Protocol, which established commitments to miti-

gate global warming by reducing greenhouse concentrations in the atmosphere through

reducing anthropogenic (human- made) greenhouse gases.

23 State of Palestine, EQA, National Adaptation Plan (NAP) to Climate Change, 2016, page 15.

24 Ibid.

25 Ibid.

26 In the context of climate change, a precautionary approach refers to considering the pre-

cautionary principle in decision making. The precautionary principle implies the need

to take precautionary actions to prevent adverse, and possibly catastrophic impacts of

climate change, even in the presence of scientific uncertainty.

Adaptation under Occupation: Climate Change Vulnerability 181

identify and prioritize climate change vulnerabilities and adaptation options for a system or a region.

2.1 The Dual Strike

During interviews conducted by the author in Masafer Yatta and surround-ing villages in the South Hebron Hills, Palestinian communities historically dependent on pastoralism and other agricultural activity recalled experienc-ing recent signs of climatic changes, including increases in annual tempera-tures, rainfall fluctuation, more frequent extreme weathers and temperatures, and notably intensified summer droughts leading to the observation of signs

of desertification.27 Combined with discriminatory Israeli measures imposed on Palestinians in the area, such changes adversely impact pastoral and other herding communities and agricultural activities in most parts of the South

Hebron hills, particularly in Masafer Yatta.28

According to community members, including heads of village councils

and agricultural communities in the area, Masafer Yatta, was once the entire region’s breadbasket. Most of the dairy products and seasonal crops were gen-erated, produced, and sold in the market – especially prior to the late 1970s. Today, the environmental crisis in the South Hebron Hills, attributable primar-ily to Israel’s prolonged occupation, has dramatically changed the demography and agricultural nature of the area, which once defined economic and social activity in the area. The greatest challenge facing communities’ ability to imple-ment climate change adaptation options and to cope with climate change are at large caused by Israel’s discriminatory measures, such as the targeting and exploitation of natural resources that are highly vulnerable to climate change. This is evidenced by Israel’s control over water and land resources, and Israeli- imposed restrictions on Palestinians’ access to cultivable lands and grazing areas, destruction of property, including homes, animal sheds, and water infra-

structure, as well as the confiscation of land and water infrastructure.29

Notably, Article 49 of the Fourth Geneva Convention prohibits “[i] ndividual

or mass forcible transfers, as well as deportations of protected persons from

27 Drought and desertification are related phenomena; drought can be a natural phenome-

non exacerbated by human activity such as exploitation of water resources, land degra-

dation, and negative agricultural practices. In extreme cases, drought can be one of the

factors contributing to the desertification of land, turning land that was once fertile into

a desert- like land. While most individuals interviewed throughout the research process

mentioned observing such changes, all of them attributed their magnified impacts to the

Israeli occupying authorities’ practices in the region.

28 Field information obtained by Al- Haq, 2018.

29 See also B’Tselem, The South Hebron Hills, 1 January 2013. 182 Jarrar

occupied territory to the territory of the Occupying Power or to that of any

other country, occupied or not […] regardless of their motive”.30 At the same time, international human rights law prohibits arbitrary displacement, includ-ing displacement “based on policies of apartheid, ‘ethnic cleansing’ or similar practices aimed at/ or resulting in altering the ethnic, religious or racial compo-

sition of the affected population”.31

2.2 Climate Change and Geopolitical Vulnerabilities Across the opt, a number of climate change trends are expected to intensify and exacerbate in the coming years. These include uneven rainfall distribution, a decrease in available natural grazing areas and vegetation cover, increased trends of droughts, and increased intensity and frequency of extreme weather

events and temperatures.32 Palestine’s National Adaptation Plan takes into account vulnerabilities resulting from existing political inequalities caused by Israel’s prolonged occupation and the occupying authorities’ policies and practices. Two sectors identified as highly vulnerable to climate change, are the

water and agriculture sectors, including livestock production.33 Israel’s policies and practices have thus contributed to the creation of a climate- vulnerable population.

Considering the interrelations between climate change sensitivity and

adaptive capacity, it can be concluded that restrictions on climate change adaptation in the opt are not only limited to restricting the implementation of adaptation options, but also involve practices contributing to decreased resil-ience and adaptive capacity amongst the protected Palestinian population, thereby increasing their sensitivity and vulnerability to climate change.

For indigenous peoples around the world, resilience to climate change is

rooted in traditional knowledge.34 Indigenous communities’ capacity to adapt



30 Fourth Geneva Convention, Article 49.

31 UN Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement, 2004, Principle 6.

32 For more information on possible scenarios and impacts relevant to the opt see State

of Palestine, EQA, National Adaptation Plan (NAP) to Climate Change, 2016. The Plan also

addresses discussions on uncertainties relevant to projected impacts and trends.

33 Palestine’s nap states that “[t] he process for assessing vulnerabilities and identifying

adaptation options … [is] built on the [UN Framework Convention on Climate Change]

guidelines for least developed countries and the Climate Change Adaptation Strategy

and Program of Action for the Palestinian Government”. State of Palestine, EQA, National

Adaptation Plan (NAP) to Climate Change, 2016, page 11.

34 See UN Climate Change, Sharing Traditional Knowledge to Adapt, 12 July 2014. See

also ‘Why Traditional Knowledge Holds the Key to Climate Change’, UN University, 13

December 2011.

Adaptation under Occupation: Climate Change Vulnerability 183

to environmental change is based on a deep understanding of the land and tra-ditional agricultural practices. As climate change increasingly impacts indig-enous communities, responses seek to increase their resilience, reduce their vulnerability, and enable them to cope with inevitable existing and predicted changes. In a statement to the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Climate Change, the International Indigenous Peoples Forum on Climate Change affirmed the importance of recognising traditional knowledge and practices as integral components of climate change adaptation and mitiga-

tion efforts.35 Indigenous Palestinians, residing in the South Hebron Hills, have extensive knowledge of the territory and its suitable agricultural and live-stock production, which has constituted their main source of livelihood for generations.

Women have traditionally been the providers as livestock caregivers in

Masafer Yatta, and have taken up the role of providing food for their fami-

lies, the staple traditional food including meat and dairy products.36 As such, women carry most of the traditional indigenous knowledge affiliated with livestock production, and are therefore the key observers of the diminishing production rate and its consequences, compounded by the Israeli occupation and climate change effects.

2.3 Gender- Differentiated Vulnerability to Climate Change In adopting a gender- differentiated analysis on climate change vulnerability in the opt, it is important to note that gender analysis is not merely about

women.37 Rather it includes analysis of the designated roles and responsibil-ities, the intersectionality of relations between women and men, and other social determinants, including class and location. Vulnerability, therefore, is shaped by social determinants and hence varies across social positions and locations.



35 In a recent statement to the Conference of the Parties to the UN Framework Convention

on Climate Change, the International Indigenous Peoples’ Forum on Climate Change reit-

erated “the need for recognition of our traditional knowledge, which we have sustainably

used and practiced for generations; and the need to integrate such knowledge in global,

national and sub- national efforts. This knowledge is our vital contribution to climate

change adaptation and mitigation”.

36 Field information obtained by Al- Haq, 2018.

37 Gender analysis is the analysis of the different roles women and men play in order to

understand the relationship between the resources to which women have access, their

assigned roles within their communities, and accordingly, their specific needs as a socie-

tal group. See Food and Agricultural Organization of the UN, Invisible Guardians: Women

Manage Livestock Diversity, 2012.

184 Jarrar

In every household visited, the author found that women were responsible

for the majority of the tasks associated with livestock production, including all areas of animal husbandry, from day- to- day care, to the raising of livestock and the production of dairy products for both commercial and domestic use. Accordingly, Palestinian women play a key role in managing livestock produc-tion, and therefore in attaining and sustaining food security.

Due to its dire effect on the water and agriculture sectors, climate change

has, and will continue to have, a direct and ominous impact on all aspects of food security, including food availability, accessibility, and stability. Within the threat of food insecurity as a result of the dual strike of climate change and Israel’s prolonged occupation of the opt, the risk facing Palestinian women’s livelihoods is magnified, rendering them overburdened and more vulnera-ble to climate change. This vulnerability is largely due to the risks resulting from unavailability of traditional food sources and sources of income, as well as water resources for domestic use in the context of both politically and

environmentally- induced scarcity.38



3 Frustration of Adaptability Actions

Israel’s prolonged occupation has hindered Palestinians’ ability to develop and implement the adequate adaptation strategies and tools necessary to positively cope with climate change. Palestine’s National Adaptation Plan has identified adaptation options necessary for coping with the risks projected for the agri-

culture sector.39 To overcome vulnerabilities related to irrigation, crop produc-tion, and loss of vegetation cover, access to and self- determination over water and land resources are key. Similarly, reducing vulnerabilities associated with livestock production and soil erosion requires access to rangeland and water resources to sustain livestock production, as well as control over building and construction in order to implement options needed to prevent soil erosion. However Palestinian communities are systematically denied these adaptation options as a result of Israeli administrative restrictions.

This section will provide examples of the ways in which Israel thwarts

Palestinian adaptability. It will focus on the adverse measures of discrimina-tory water allocation, loss of vegetation cover, restrictions on construction, and settler violence.

38 undp, Impact Gender: Food and Nutritional Security, Climate Change Adaptation. See also

UN Climate Change, Introduction to Gender and Climate Change.

39 State of Palestine, EQA, National Adaptation Plan (NAP) to Climate Change, 2016, page 15. Adaptation under Occupation: Climate Change Vulnerability 185

3.1 Discriminatory Water Allocation In order to sustain its illegal settlement enterprise in the West Bank, includ-ing the settlements’ agricultural activity, Israel has systematically controlled Palestinian water supply, limiting access to water for Palestinians. Today, nearly 113,000 Palestinians in the West Bank, some 50,000 of whom reside in Area C, are not connected to the water network, while approximately 600,000

Israeli settlers,40 illegally residing in the West Bank, are fully connected to water networks. The colonial settlers consume somewhere between three to

eight times,41 more water than the entire Palestinian population of the West

Bank, who make up some 2.9 million Palestinians.42

Discriminatory water allocation and supply to Palestinian communities

in Masafer Yatta and throughout Area C of the West Bank by Israel’s national water company, Mekorot, has resulted in insufficient amounts of water avail-able to Palestinians, inadequate quality, and physically inaccessible and unaf-fordable water, in violation of Palestinians’ right to an adequate standard of

living, including adequate water and sanitation.43 In Masafer Yatta, Israeli set-tlers are exclusively connected to the water network through pipelines laid out by Mekorot, often passing near or underneath Palestinian communities to sup-

ply water for illegal settlements and outposts.44 Meanwhile, most Palestinian villages in Masafer Yatta are not connected to the water grid. Palestinians are therefore forced to purchase water tankers at elevated prices. Water prices vary depending on the transportation distance from the water source to the com-munity. The more remote and less accessible the community is, the higher the price of water becomes.

Due to Israel’s systematic denial of access to water, most Palestinians in the

South Hebron Hills, including in Masafer Yatta, reported an inability to sus-tain livestock flocks that they had inherited and raised for generations because



40 Updated statistics obtained by Al- Haq in preparation of a revised edition of Al- Haq,

Water for One People Only: Discriminatory Access and ‘Water Apartheid’ in the Occupied

Palestinian Territory, 2013.

41 The water consumption in the opt rates vary depending on location. Information col-

lected by Al- Haq in 2018 indicates that the average water consumption by Palestinians in

2018 is estimated between 73 and 83 litres per capita per day (lpcd).

42 Updated statistics obtained by Al- Haq in preparation of a revised edition of Al- Haq,

Water for One People Only: Discriminatory Access and ‘Water Apartheid’ in the Occupied

Palestinian Territory, 2013.

43 icescr, Article 11.

44 Updated statistics obtained by Al- Haq in preparation of a revised edition of Al- Haq,

Water for One People Only: Discriminatory Access and ‘Water Apartheid’ in the Occupied

Palestinian Territory, 2013.

186 Jarrar

of the insufficient water supply to meet their basic domestic consumption

needs.45 Communities are therefore no longer able to afford to provide drink-ing water for their flocks, particularly during the summer months, forcing

them to abandon their traditions of life and undermining their livelihoods.46

3.2 Loss of Vegetation Cover

While climate change poses a threat to livestock production,47 it has not yet prompted the disappearance of the majority of fertile grazing areas in the South Hebron Hills area, including Masafer Yatta. Notwithstanding, due to restrictions placed by settlers and the idf on Palestinians’ access to available grazing lands, Palestinians have lost most of the vegetation cover in the limited areas of land they are able to access. While the decrease in precipitation has partly contributed to the decline in vegetation cover, the main source of stress causing the degradation of grazing lands remains political and is a direct result

of the occupation.48

Palestinians in Masafer Yatta identified the inability to access grazing areas

as the primary obstacle to adapting to changes in the vegetation cover of acces-sible lands, attributable to the overgrazing of the limited area of rangelands available to Palestinians. Restrictions on access are largely due to Israel’s dec-larations of various areas of the land as so- called nature reserves, closed mil-itary areas, and firing zones. Palestinians in the area have stated that military trainings are more frequent during the spring and productive grazing seasons. During Israeli military trainings, vast areas of agricultural lands are closed off entirely to Palestinian access and use, while nearby areas that are not closed off become extremely dangerous for Palestinians to reach, due to the possi-

bility of being injured by live bullets or grenades used during the trainings.49 Notably, restrictions associated with military trainings are not only limited to military training periods. The explosive remnants left behind by Israeli forces



45 Al- Haq Affidavit No 2013/ 8785, given by Khaled Hamad Nawaj’a, 59, resident of Sysiya

(2013).

46 Al- Haq Affidavit No 7081/ 2012, given by Jamil Ahmad Awad, 55, resident of Sadat Al- Tha’la

(2012).

47 Climate change is a global threat to livestock production as it impacts water availability,

biodiversity, animal reproduction, heat stress, and the transmission of livestock diseases.

For the opt, livestock production is identified as one of the most vulnerable sections to

the impacts of climate changes, coupled with the impacts of the Israeli occupation.

48 See also, Conflict and Environment Observatory, Country Brief: Occupied Palestinian

Territories, 26 March 2018.

49 Al- Haq interview in Al- Twaneh village in the South Hebron Hills, 2018. (Name redacted). Adaptation under Occupation: Climate Change Vulnerability 187

on Palestinian lands has made it generally dangerous for Palestinians to even

attempt to reach the grazing areas.50

The degradation of grazing lands available to Palestinians is partly due

to stress induced by the overgrazing of small areas of land available for

Palestinians.51 Palestinians are left with no choice but to engage in negative coping actions, such as overgrazing. When the grazing area is too limited in a region where the primary source of income is livestock production, the land is not given sufficient periods of time to recover. Overgrazing degrades the land, exhausts its vegetation cover, and reduces green cover biomass and grazing capacity, further enhancing desertification, and making the land more liable to erosion. The growth of vegetation cover that is native to the region is key to

avoiding soil runoff and to building soil stability.52

The exhaustion of the vegetation cover has also caused a sharp increase

in the prices of fodder and other types of animal feed, which has rendered Palestinian communities unable to sustainably maintain their livestock flocks, forcing many communities to abandon their traditions of life, which would otherwise have ensured their long- term self- sufficiency, food security, and community- managed adaptation to climate change.

The natural community- led response to the decrease in available rangelands

should be to expand the grazing areas and diversify grazing spatial patterns to avoid over- exhaustion of the vegetation cover in one region, along with cre-ating a balance between the grazing practice and fodder- feeding that would

ensure environmental and economic sustainability.53 Yet, for Palestinians in the South Hebron Hills, community- based responses, practiced formerly for generations, are not achievable due to Israeli- imposed restrictions on access to grazing areas resulting from the declaration of lands as military and firing zones, settler violence and harassment against Palestinian herders.

Overgrazing is a form of negative coping practice to climatic threat, which

coupled with politically induced environmental degradation, will reduce resil-ience, while fostering and increasing vulnerability. Such methods are referred



50 In 2012, Al- Haq documented the case of two Palestinian children who were grazing their

flock in Jinba, in southern Masafer Yatta, who were injured following the explosion of

remnants left by the Israeli forces, only one kilometre away from the residential com-

munity. Al- Haq Affidavit No 2012/ 7067, given by Malek Ahmad Rab’I, 30, resident of Al-

Mowarda village near Yatta city (2012).

51 See also, Roubina Bassous Ghattas, ‘Highlights of Palestinian Habitats,’ This Week in

Palestine, 13 October 2014, page 4.

52 Inter- governmental Panel on Climate Change, AR4 Climate Change 2007: Impacts,

Adaptation, and Vulnerability, 2007.

53 See also Mahmiyat, Overgrazing, 2022.

188 Jarrar

to as ‘maladaptive actions’ or ‘mal- adaptation’.54 In the context of the opt, mal- adaptation may be caused by the implementation of large- scale projects that result in more environmental harm than benefit, further increasing the occupied Palestinian populations vulnerability to climate change. In this case, mal- adaptation could refer to practices that Palestinians are forced to adopt due to restrictions arising from the Israeli occupation, lack of political will to change the status quo, and the absence of genuine choice.

For example, the systematic and deliberate obstruction of the develop-

ment of livestock production in the South Hebron Hills has long been driven by Israeli State policy. A major obstacle in the development of livestock pro-duction, as repeatedly raised by the Masafer Yatta community, is Israel’s Plant

Protection (Damage by Goats) Law of 1950.55 This legislation, prohibited the breeding of black goats which are well adapted to the Mediterranean climate, on grounds that their feeding habits are allegedly harmful to Mediterranean lands. Although the law was introduced in the 1950s, Israeli authorities began to strictly enforce it in Masafer Yatta in the late 1970s, coinciding with the dec-

laration of vast areas of Palestinian land as “Firing Zone 918”.56 Palestinians interviewed have observed that the law has been disproportionately enforced against Palestinian herders, while Israeli settlers often get away with keeping and breeding their black goats, suggesting that the protection of Mediterranean lands is only a pretext.

In 2017, the Israeli Parliament adopted a bill proposed by a Palestinian

Member, Jamal Zahalka, to repeal the aforementioned piece of legislation. In his proposal to the Knesset, Zahalka argued:

The Plant Protection Act of 1950 … claims that the breeding of goats

should be restricted because they are harmful to Mediterranean lands.

We believe that the law is a racist law that was legislated for political

reasons and aims to eliminate one of the main sources of livelihood for



54 Maladaptive actions, also known as maladaptation, refer to actions that may cause unin-

tended increase in climate risks and vulnerability to climate change. In the case of the

opt, Palestinians’ engagement in maladaptive actions are largely caused by restrictions

imposed by the Israeli occupation. See also Inter- governmental Panel on Climate Change,

Global Warming of 1.5 °C, An IPCC Special Report on the Impacts of Global Warming of 1.5

°C Above Pre- Industrial Levels and Related Global Greenhouse Gas Emission Pathways, in

the Context of Strengthening the Global Report to the Threat of Climate Change, Sustainable

Development, and Efforts to Eradicate Poverty, 2019.

55 Israel, Plant Protection (Damage by Goats) Law (1950).

56 Al- Haq interview in Khallat Al- Dabe’ in Masafer Yatta, 2018. (Name Redacted). Adaptation under Occupation: Climate Change Vulnerability 189

a large section of the Bedouin Arabs [of the Palestinian people] in the

Naqab.57

The second and third reading of the proposed bill, were finally approved by the General Assembly of the Knesset on 8 May 2018, not in response to Zahalka’s concerns, but on the grounds that new evidence reveals the black goats’ graz-

ing of undergrowth may help in preventing wild fires.58

3.3 Restrictions on Construction and the Constant Threat of Demolitions

As the Occupying Power, Israel bears responsibilities for the rights and well-

being of the protected Palestinian population.59 Contrary to its legal obliga-tions, Israel continues its effort to drive Palestinians from their most fertile lands. In 2013, an Independent UN Fact- finding Mission on the Implications of Israeli Settlements concluded that “[t] he denial of water is used to trigger displacement, particularly in areas slated for settlement expansion, especially since these [Palestinian] communities are mostly farmers and herders who

depend on water for their livelihoods”.60

In Masafer Yatta, as is the case in the rest of Area C, the Israeli Civil

Administration has long engaged in the practice of denying Palestinians per-mits for the construction or rehabilitation of any type of structures, including

water infrastructure, animal sheds, public clay ovens (taboun),61 and road con-struction. Consequently, any structure built by Palestinians without a permit

from the Israeli occupying authorities, may be at risk of demolition.62

In Masafer Yatta, soil erosion could be prevented by the construction of sim-

ple stone terraces (also known as retaining walls), an agricultural method prac-ticed by the Palestinian people on their ancestral lands for generations. Stone terraces are also used as a form of small- scale water harvesting tool to be used



57 ‘Final ratification: Abolition of the Law Restricting the Herding of Black Goat Herds,’

[Arabic] Knesset, 8 May 2018. See also, Majd Kayya, ‘The Day We Were Eaten Like Black

Goats’, The Nakba Files, 2014.

58 ‘Black Goat’ to Thrive Again in Israel’, Arutz Sheva, 23 November 2017.

59 Hague Regulations, Article 43.

60 unhrc, Report of the Independent International Fact- Finding Mission to Investigate the

Implications of the Israeli Settlements on the Civil, Political, Economic, Social and Cultural

Rights of the Palestinian People Throughout the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including

East Jerusalem, a/ hrc/ 22/ 63, 7 February 2013, para 88.

61 Al- Haq, Plight of Palestinian Bedouin Depicts Impacts of Illegal Israeli Occupation and

Practices in Palestinian Territory, 17 December 2014.

62 B’Tselem, Israeli Military Tightens Travel Restrictions on Masafer Yatta in Attempt to Drive

Palestinians Out, 4 February 2018.

190 Jarrar

for rain- fed agriculture, on which the Palestinian people have long relied on as a source of livelihood and a means of subsistence. Water harvesting is one of the oldest and most used adaptation tools by Palestinians to combat water scarcity. However, according to residents interviewed in Masafer Yatta, “[e] ven the stone terraces have been demolished […] Only stone terraces constructed before 1948 are allowed to stay and they need to be reconstructed […] But if we

try to renovate them, they would immediately be demolished”.63

Restrictions on building obstructs adaptation to extreme weather events in

relation to livestock production, including the implementation of small- scale adaptation measures to heat waves and extremely cold weathers. Palestinian construction is necessary to strengthen the structure of animal sheds, includ-ing adding material to shield from hail, rainfall, winds and sun exposure. Like all other structures, animal sheds are at risk of demolition and stop- work orders, and remain under constant threat of destruction by the Israeli occupy-

ing authorities in all areas of the South Hebron hills and Masafer Yatta.64

3.4 Settler Violence

For Israeli settlers residing in illegal Israeli settlements surrounding the South Hebron Hills, larger areas of grazing land with sufficient vegetation cover are available for small- scale Israeli farmers who, with the protection of the Israeli armed forces, have been able to illegally settle on the land for years. As such, Israeli settlers are able to enjoy access to lands that have been sustainably grazed by the indigenous Palestinian population for generations.

Coercion created by the Israeli occupation is also exacerbated by the vio-

lence and harassment to which Palestinian farmers and herders are exposed to at the hands of Israeli settlers. One resident has described how three masked settlers attacked him as he was herding sheep, and beat him on his head with a

rock.65 Another, farmer was thrown to the ground by a settler from Mitzpe Yair, who had stopped his car to throw rocks at sheep, while a female settler filmed

the incident from their car.66 These acts of intimidation and physical violence

are carried out with impunity.67



63 Al- Haq interview in Halaweh in Masafer Yatta, 2018. (Name Redacted).

64 Al- Haq Affidavit No 7081/ 2012, given by Jamil Ahmad Awad, 55, resident of Sadat Al- Tha’la

(2012).

65 Al- Haq Affidavit No 2013/ 8839, given by Muhammad Jibril Hoshiya, 35, resident of Khirbet

Al- Markaz in Masafer Yatta (2013).

66 Al- Haq Affidavit No 10470/ 2015, given by Jibreen Musa Abu A’ram, 55, resident of

Qawawees near Yatta city (2015).

67 See also B’Tselem, The South Hebron Hills, 1 January 2013.

Adaptation under Occupation: Climate Change Vulnerability 191

4 Protection of Palestinian Resources and Environment in

International Law

Natural resources and the environment are protected under international law. Article 55 of the Hague Regulations provides that the Occupying Power:

[S] hall be regarded only as administrator and usufructuary of public

buildings, real estate, forests, and agricultural estates belonging to the

hostile State, and situated in the occupied country. It must safeguard

the capital of these properties, and administer them in accordance with

the rules of usufruct.68

According to the rules of usufruct, Israel, may only use the natural resources within the opt to the extent that it does not exploit these resources in a way

that would undermine their capital, or lead to their depletion.69 In addition, the destruction of “real or personal property belonging individually or col-

lectively to private persons, or to the State, or to other public authorities”,70 including natural resources, further violates Articles 53 of the Fourth Geneva Convention, which explicitly prohibits such destruction, unless rendered abso-lutely necessary for military operations. Such destruction amounts to a war

crime and grave breach of the Fourth Geneva Convention under Article 147.71

The occupied population’s public property, including its natural resources,

must not be administered or utilised for the sole benefit and economic gain of the Occupying Power’s own population, and must be used for the benefit of the occupied population. Acts exceeding the rules of usufruct may constitute

the crime of pillage,72 under the Rome Statute of the International Criminal

Court.73 See further Chapter 13, Power, on the crime of pillage.

The protection of natural resources and the natural environment in occu-

pied territory are provided for under Articles 35(3) and 55 of Additional



68 Hague Regulations, Article 55.

69 For more detailed analysis, refer to Al- Haq, Annexing Energy – Exploiting and Preventing

the Development of Oil and Gas in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, 5 December 2015,

pages 94– 95.

70 Fourth Geneva Convention, Article 53.

71 Rome Statute, Article 8(2)(a)(iv).

72 Fourth Geneva Convention, Article 33; Hague Regulations, Articles 28, 47. Pillage, as a

prohibited act, is also reflected in customary international humanitarian law. See icrc,

Customary International Humanitarian Law, Volume i: Rules (cup 2010) Rule 49.

73 Rome Statute, Article 8(2)(b)(xvi).

192 Jarrar

Protocol i to the Geneva Conventions of 1977.74 Article 35(3) prohibits the Occupying Power, and other parties to conflict, from “employ[ing] methods or means of warfare which are intended, or may be expected, to cause wide-spread, long- term and severe damage to the natural environment”.

Additionally, the right to self- determination of the Palestinian people

encompasses the right to exercise permanent sovereignty over natural wealth and resources, a peremptory norm of international law giving rise to erga omnes obligations on all States. This right entitles the Palestinian people to “freely dispose of their natural wealth and resources”, including land and water,

and in no case may they be deprived of their own means of subsistence.75 The right of the Palestinian people to self- determination, including to perma-

nent sovereignty over natural wealth and resources,76 is widely recognized by the international community and has been reaffirmed in countless UN

General Assembly resolutions,77 UN Security Council resolutions,78 and by the

International Court of Justice.79

Israel’s continued deprivation of the right of the Palestinian people to

self- determination, through restrictions on Palestinians’ access to and use of their own land and natural resources amounts to a violation of Israel’s obliga-tions under international human rights law to respect, protect, and fulfil the rights of all Palestinians subject to their effective control. In addition, Israel has obligations to ensure Palestinians’ rights to adequate food, adequate hous-ing, water, the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health, and an adequate standard of living, amongst numerous other fundamental rights owed to the Palestinian people and necessary for their full development.

Finally, the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples provides

explicit recognition of indigenous peoples’ right “to the lands, territories and resources which they have traditionally owned, occupied or otherwise used



74 The 1977 Additional Protocol i to the Geneva Conventions of 1949, which Israel, the

Occupying Power, has not ratified, is applicable to the opt, to the extent that it reflects

customary international humanitarian law.

75 iccpr, Article 1(2).

76 The right to permanent sovereignty over natural wealth and resources is constitutive

of customary international law. See icj, Armed Activities on the Territory of the Congo

(Democratic Republic of the Congo v Uganda) (Judgment) icj Reports 168 (2005), para 244.

77 See for example unga Resolution 25 (24 March 2014) and unga Resolution 58 (22

December 2003).

78 unsc Resolution 242 (22 November 1967).

79 icj, Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory

(Advisory Opinion) icj Reports 136 (2004) para 122.

Adaptation under Occupation: Climate Change Vulnerability 193

or acquired”,80 and enshrines the right of indigenous peoples, including the Palestinian people, “to own, use, develop and control the lands, territories and resources that they possess by reason of traditional ownership or other tradi-

tional occupation or use, as well as those which they have otherwise acquired”.81 The Declaration further provides that “[i] ndigenous peoples have the right to the conservation and protection of the environment and the productive capac-

ity of their lands or territories and resources”.82 While the declaration generally applies to indigenous persons in already colonised territory, the indigenous people of Palestine (that is, the entirety of the Palestinian people) represent a sui generis in that the colonisation is still active and ongoing. The examples provided in this chapter illustrate how Israel has systematically deprived the indigenous Palestinian people of their means of subsistence, including the right to protection of the environment and to adapt to climate change.

4.1 International Environmental Law: The Paris Agreement The protection of environment during occupation is enshrined in the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development. Although non- binding, it affirms in Principle 24 that:

[W] arfare is inherently destructive of sustainable development. States

shall therefore respect international law providing protection for the

environment in times of armed conflict and cooperate in its further

development, as necessary.83

A recent legal framework under which rights to climate change adapta-

tion are outlined is the Paris Agreement,84 reached in December 2015 at the 21st Conference of the Parties, referred to as cop 21, to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, to which both Palestine and Israel are States signatories. The Paris Agreement entered into force on 4 November 2016 and is universally legally binding to all signatory parties, with no reservations permit-

ted.85 Although the Paris Agreement makes no specific references to situations



80 Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, adopted by through unga 61/ 295 (13

September 2007), Article 26(1).

81 Ibid., Article 26(2).

82 Ibid., Article 29(1).

83 Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, 13 June 1996, Principle 24.

84 COP21, Paris Agreement under the United Nations Framework on Climate Change, 4

November 2016.

85 Ibid., Article 27.

194 Jarrar

of armed conflict or belligerent occupation, it does include multiple references to States Parties’ responsibilities to reduce climate change vulnerability and strengthen resilience to the impacts of climate change in climatically vulner-

able areas,86 and as such, clearly applies to situations of armed conflict and occupation, including the opt.

In particular, Article 2(b) of the Paris Agreement calls for the enhancement

and implementation of the Convention on Climate Change, including the objective to strengthen global responses to climate change threats by “increas-ing the ability to adapt to the adverse impacts of climate change and to foster climate resilience and low greenhouse gas emissions development, in a man-

ner that does not threaten food production”.87 Article 7 requires, that States Parties’ establish a global goal aiming at reducing climate vulnerabilities of climatically vulnerable communities, as well as the necessity to consider indig-enous and traditional knowledge in efforts related to climate change adapta-

tion.88 The Agreement outlines that:

Parties should, when taking action to address climate change, respect,

promote and consider their respective obligations on human rights, the

right to health, the rights of indigenous peoples, local communities,

migrants, children, persons with disabilities and people in vulnerable sit-

uations and the right to development.

Additionally, the Paris Agreement contains several provisions that make ref-erence to climate vulnerabilities. These references can be interpreted to cover situations where persons are vulnerable because the effect of climate change may have a magnifying impact on other factors that could lead to climate- related migration, or in the context of Palestine, the indirect displacement of protected persons. References to vulnerability in the Paris Agreement include Article 7(1), which provides:

Parties hereby establish the global goal on adaptation of enhancing

adaptive capacity, strengthening resilience and reducing vulnerability to

climate change, with a view to contributing to sustainable development

and ensuring an adequate adaptation response.89



86 Ibid., Articles 2, 7, 9, 8, 10 and 11.

87 Ibid., Article 2(b).

88 Ibid., Article 7.

89 Ibid., Article 7(1).

Adaptation under Occupation: Climate Change Vulnerability 195

In addition, Article 7(9) of the Agreement stipulates that:

Each Party shall, as appropriate, engage in adaptation planning pro-

cesses and the implementation of actions, including the development

or enhancement of relevant plans, policies and/ or contributions, which

may include [...] (c) [t] he assessment of climate change impacts and vul-

nerability, with a view to formulating nationally determined prioritized

actions, taking into account vulnerable people, places and ecosystems.90

It is worth noting that amongst commentators there is wide scepticism around the effectiveness of international environmental law due to the absence of adequate enforcement mechanisms relevant to State Parties’ obligations, par-

ticularly obligations relevant to the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions.91 Consequently, international environmental law may seem inherently weak in general, but the Paris Agreement in particular is perceived to have “carried

this weakness further”,92 as it lacks compliance mechanisms.93 Nevertheless, the Paris agreement re- emphasises obligations that are binding under existing international law.



5 Conclusion

Communities in the opt, particularly in Area C of the West Bank, experience the magnified impacts of climate change due to Israel’s discriminatory policies and practices. While adapting to climate change, Palestinians living in envi-ronmentally and politically vulnerable areas, simultaneously endure coercive environments created by Israel to drive Palestinian displacement and forcible transfer. Future climate change projections for the opt entail an increase in annual temperatures and a decline in rainfall. Consequently, the urgent need for proper climate change adaptation will continue to rise.

Israel’s practices of displacement and dispossession of the occupied

Palestinian population is demonstrated by its practice of systematically target-ing the resources necessary to maintain the livelihood of Palestinians in gen-eral, and herding and farming communities, in particular. Exploitation of and



90 Ibid., Article 7(9).

91 See UN Environment Programme, Environmental Rule of Law: First Global Report, 2019.

92 See Richard Falk, ‘Voluntary International Law and the Paris Agreement’, Wordpress, 16

January 2016.

93 Ibid.

196 Jarrar

control over natural resources has been central to build, sustain and develop Israel’s illegal settlement enterprise.

Water and agriculture are two of the sectors with high vulnerability to cli-

mate change, and adaptation options associated with them require access to and the exercise of rights of self- determination. Israel’s prolonged occupation of the Palestinian territory therefore constitutes the major cause for the exac-erbation of climate change impacts on the opt, as well as the deterioration of the standard of living for Palestinian communities relying on land and natural resources for their subsistence. As such, adaptation to climate change will not be possible for Palestinians, without the genuine realisation of the collective right to self- determination and permanent sovereignty over natural resources.

As previously established, natural resources and the environment are pro-

tected under international law, including international humanitarian law, inter-national human rights law, and international environmental law. Accordingly, Israel, as Occupying Power, must uphold its responsibility by refraining from causing environmental damage to the environment and to natural resources. Further, Israel must act in accordance with its responsibilities under Article 7, Paris Agreement on Climate Change, which affirms States Parties’ responsibili-ties to reduce climate vulnerabilities of vulnerable populations, and to respect, promote and consider their human rights obligations when taking action to address climate change.

Finally, Third States must respect and ensure respect for the Geneva

Conventions, including negative obligations on Third States to “neither encour-age, nor aid or assist in violations of the Conventions by Parties to a conflict” and positive obligations, to do “everything reasonably in their power to prevent

and bring such violations to an end”.94



Acknowledgement

The late Suha Jarrar was a Senior Legal Researcher at Al- Haq. She drafted a report of the same name for Al- Haq, published in 2019. Al- Haq kindly granted permission for the report to be used as the basis for this edited and updated chapter.



94 icrc, Commentary on the First Geneva Convention: Convention (I) for the Amelioration of

the Condition of the Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field (cup 2016); ilc, ‘Report

of the International Law Commission on the Work of its Fifty- Third Session’, 2(2) Yearbook

of the International Law Commission (2001).





Part 2




Legal Responsibilities and Accountability



∵





chapter 9


Israel’s Impunity from Peremptory Norms

John Dugard



The year 2001 was a momentous year for Palestine. It saw the intensification of the Second Intifada that had been ignited by Ariel Sharon’s visit to the Haram al- Sharif on 28 September 2000. It was also a momentous year for international law, as that year saw the adoption of the International Law Commission’s Draft Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts, which marked the endorsement of the notion that international law distinguishes between ordinary breaches of international law and serious breaches of inter-national law that violate peremptory norms of general international law, also

known as norms of jus cogens.1 Of course, the notion of a set of higher norms or peremptory norms was not new. There was support for such norms in judicial decisions such as the International Court of Justice in the Barcelona

Traction case,2 and in the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties.3 But it was the 2001 Draft Articles on States Responsibility by the International Law Commission that drew a sharp normative distinction between “ordinary” breaches and “serious” breaches of international law that affected the interna-tional community as a whole, and imposed obligations on all member States of this community to take concerted efforts to bring such breaches of interna-tional law to an end; to refuse to recognise as lawful the consequences of such

a breach of international law; and to deny aid or assistance to the wrongdoer.4 Since then, it has been accepted that international law comprises a two- tier system that distinguishes between the response required of States to ordinary international wrongs and wrongs characterised as peremptory norms.

The notion that international law comprises a two- tier system draws support

from the four 1949 Geneva Conventions on the laws of war, which are binding on all States in the world, including Israel. Article 1 of the Geneva Conventions



1 ilc, ‘Report of the International Law Commission on the Work of its Fifty- Third Session’, 2(2)

Yearbook of the International Law Commission (2001), page 20.

2 icj, Case Concerning the Barcelona Traction, Light, and Power Company, Limited (Judgement)

icj Reports 3 (1970), para 32.

3 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, Article 53.

4 ILC, ‘Report of the International Law Commission on the Work of its Fifty- Third Session’, 2(2).

Yearbook of the International Law Commission (2001), Articles 40– 41.



© John Dugard, 2023 | DOI:10.1163/9789004503939

200 Dugard

provides that States Parties “undertake to respect and to ensure respect” for the Conventions “in all circumstances”. According to the 2016 updated com-mentary on the First Geneva Convention, Article 1, that is common to all four Geneva Conventions, obliges States to abstain from encouraging, aiding or assisting violations of the conventions and to take proactive steps to bring the

violation of the conventions to an end.5 Significantly, the basic rules of inter-national humanitarian law are included among the list of peremptory norms

recognised by the International Law Commission.6 This means that grave

breaches of the Geneva Conventions7 enjoy a superior status that require all States to take steps to ensure that they are not violated.

Israel is a serial and serious violator of international law. It has been a

wrongdoing State since its inception, but its wrongdoing has intensified since the occupation of the Palestinian territory in 1967. It has violated the most important human rights treaties to which it is a party, notably the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the International Covenants on Civil and Political Rights and Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the Convention against Torture, and the Convention on the Rights of the Child. It has also violated the principal international human-itarian law treaty applicable to the situation of occupation, namely the Fourth Geneva Convention. Israel’s objection, that the Fourth Geneva Convention

does not apply in the opt,8 has been dismissed by both the bodies monitoring

it,9 the International Committee of the Red Cross and the International Court

of Justice.10 Israel has also violated the fundamental principles of customary international humanitarian law prohibiting the excessive and disproportion-

ate use of force and violence against civilians.11 Many of Israel’s violations of international law constitute violations of peremptory norms.



5 icrc, Commentary on the First Geneva Convention: Convention (i) for the Amelioration of

the Condition of the Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field (cup 2016) 48.

6 ilc, ‘Report of the International Law Commission on the Work of its Seventy- First

Session’, 2(2) Yearbook of the International Law Commission (2019).

7 See Fourth Geneva Convention, Article 147. This should be read with Additional Protocol

ii, Article 85.

8 Mazen Qupty, ‘The Application of International Law in the Occupied Territories as

Reflected in the Judgments of the High Court of Justice in Israel’ in Emma Playfair (ed),

International Law and the Administration of Occupied Territories (oup 1992) 101– 119.

9 See icj, Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian

Territory (Advisory Opinion) icj Reports 136 (2004), para 97.

10 Ibid., paras 90– 113.

11 See unhrc, Report of the United Nations Fact- Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict, a/

hrc/ 12/ 48, 25 September 2009; unhrc, Report of the Detailed Findings of the Independent

Commission of Inquiry Established Pursuant to Human Rights Council Resolution S- 21/ 1, a/ Israel’s Impunity from Peremptory Norms 201

This chapter will first examine Israel’s violation of peremptory norms in the

opt. It will then consider the manner in which the international community responded to apartheid South Africa’s violation of such norms and whether it is fair to compare Israel’s occupation of Palestine with apartheid South Africa. Thereafter it will address the failure of the international community, the United Nations, the European Union, and individual States to confront Israel and to hold it accountable for its wrongdoings. Finally, the question will be asked and answered whether this amounts to a grant of impunity for crimes that violate peremptory norms.



1 Israel’s Violation of Peremptory Norms

Peremptory norms have recently received the attention of the International Law Commission. In 2019, the ilc adopted a set of Draft Conclusions on the Peremptory Norms of General International Law (jus cogens) which have been

transmitted to States for comment and observation.12 Conclusion 2 adopts the definition of peremptory norms contained in Article 53 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties as a norm of general international law which is “accepted and recognized by the international community of States as a whole as a norm from which no derogation is permitted and which can be modified only by a subsequent norm of general international law having

the same character”.13 Conclusion 3 adds that these norms “reflect and protect fundamental values of the international community” and are “hierarchically superior to other rules of international law and are universally applicable”. The annex attached to the ilc Draft Conclusions on Peremptory Norms provides a non- exhaustive list of peremptory norms that the ilc has “previously referred

to as having that status”.14 This list includes the prohibitions on aggression, genocide, crimes against humanity, the basic rules of international humanitar-ian law, racial discrimination and apartheid, slavery, torture, and the right of self- determination.



hrc/ 29/ crp.4, 24 June 2015; unhcr, Report of the Detailed Findings of the Independent

International Commission of Inquiry on the Protests in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,

a/ hrc/ 40/ crp.2, 18 March 2019.

12 ilc, ‘Report of the International Law Commission on the Work of its Seventy- First

Session’, 2(2) Yearbook of the International Law Commission (2019), Annex.

13 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, Article 53.

14 Ibid., Conclusion 23.

202 Dugard

Although there have been serious suggestions that Israel’s 2014 military

offensive “Operation Protective Edge” against the occupied Gaza Strip, which resulted in the killing of 1,492 civilians and the wounding of some 10,000,

might have constituted the crime of genocide,15 this crime will not be exam-ined in the context of Israel’s actions. Nor will the crime of slavery be consid-ered. There are no suggestions that Israel has committed this crime.

There is evidence that Israel has violated all the other peremptory norms

listed by the ilc. At this time, it is necessary to refrain from drawing absolute conclusions about Israel’s culpability. Although there is strong evidence that Israel has committed certain crimes that violate peremptory norms, this evi-dence might successfully be challenged by Israel, or some justifiable defence offered. So, at this stage it constitutes prima facie proof only. Nevertheless, sufficient evidence of these crimes has been provided to warrant a political response from States and the United Nations or to justify an investigation by the International Criminal Court or national courts charged with the task of making such determinations. What follows is simply an account of the accusa-tions that Israel has committed crimes involving the violation of peremptory norms and an overview of the evidence that supports these accusations.

1.1 The Crime of Aggression

The crime of aggression, defined in UN General Assembly resolution 3314 (xxix) of December 1974 and Article 8bis of the Rome Statute adopted by the 2010 Review Conference in Kampala, Uganda, includes “an annexation by the use of force of the territory of another State or part thereof”. It also includes the invasion or attack by the armed forces of a State of the territory of another State, the bombardment by the armed forces of a State against the territory of another State or the blockade of the ports or coasts of a State by the armed forces of another State.

Article 1(a) of UN General Assembly resolution 3314 (xxix) provides in

an “explanatory note” that the term “State” is used in this definition “without prejudice to questions of recognition or whether a State is a Member of the United Nations”. Although this explanatory note does not appear in Article 8bis of the Rome Statute, it is clearly intended to give effect to resolution 3314 (xxix) as it is expressly referred to in Article 8bis. The consequence of this explanatory note is that Palestine must be accepted as “another State” for the purpose of the definition of aggression. In any event, Palestine is today widely



15 Russell Tribunal on Palestine, Russel Tribunal on Palestine – Emergency Session on Gaza,

2014, pages 35– 37.

Israel’s Impunity from Peremptory Norms 203

accepted as a State, having been recognised by some 138 States, accepted by the

UN General Assembly as a “non- member observer State”,16 admitted to une-sco, the International Criminal Court, the Permanent Court of Arbitration, the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, and has become a party to all the important human rights and humanitarian law conventions. Further support for the statehood of Palestine is to be found in the February 2021 decision of the icc Pre- Trial Chamber which held that Palestine, as a State Party to the Rome Statute, qualified as a State for the purposes of Article 12(2)

(a) of the Rome Statute.17

The first question to consider is whether Israel’s annexation of East

Jerusalem in its Basic Law of 198018 constitutes an act of aggression. There can be no question that this annexation was the consequence of the use of force on the part of Israel in the Six- Day War of 1967, and that force was used against

another State, be it Palestine or Jordan. John Quigley explains in Chapter 1, that Israel was first to resort to force. In any case, annexation of the territory of another State is clearly unlawful whether it occurs after a legal or illegal use of force. UN Security Council resolution 242 of 22 November 1967 drew no such distinction in emphasising “the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by war” and the UN General Assembly Declaration on Principles of International Law Concerning Friendly Relations and Co- operation among

States in Accordance with the Charter of the United Nations of 197019 likewise declares that “[n] o territorial acquisition resulting from the threat or use of force shall be recognized as legal”.

That the annexation of East Jerusalem was unlawful was confirmed by the

UN Security Council in resolutions 476 and 478 which declare the annexation of Jerusalem to be null and void, a finding that has been endorsed by the UN

General Assembly in several resolutions20 and affirmed by the International Court of Justice in its advisory opinion on the Legal Consequences of the

Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory.21 Such a finding of illegality underscores the conclusion that even if Israel acted in self- defence



16 unga Resolution 67/ 19 (4 December 2012).

17 icc, Situation in Palestine, Pre- Trial Chamber i, Decision on the ‘Prosecutor’s Request

Pursuant to Article 19(3) for a Ruling on the Court’s Territorial Jurisdiction in Palestine’,

icc- 01/ 18- 143, 5 February 2021, paras 94– 102 and 109.

18 Israel, Basic Law: Jerusalem Capital of Israel (31 July 1980).

19 unga Resolution 2625 (xxv) (24 October 1970).

20 See for example unga Resolution 36/ 226 (17 December 1981).

21 icj, Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory

(Advisory Opinion) icj Reports 136 (2004), para 75.

204 Dugard

in 1967, its annexation of East Jerusalem remains an unlawful annexation and hence an act of aggression.

Israel’s annexation of East Jerusalem in 1980 is a case of de jure annexation.

Its de facto annexation of large parts of Area C must also be considered as an act of aggression. The seizure of some ten per cent of Palestinian territory by the construction of the Wall in Palestinian territory is an unequivocal act of annexation distinguishable in name only from the formal annexation of East

Jerusalem.22 Further, Israel’s repeated invasions, bombardment, and blockade of the Gaza Strip all fall within the definition of aggression. These attacks have been launched without justification and conducted in a wholly disproportion-ate manner, as evidenced by several international independent fact- finding

missions.23

1.2 Crimes against Humanity Article 7 of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, which aims to codify the customary law prohibition on crimes against humanity, provides that crimes against humanity means:

[A] ny of the following acts when committed as part of a widespread or

systematic attack directed against any civilian population, with knowl-

edge of the attack:

(a) Murder; […]

(d) Deportation or forcible transfer of population;

(e) Imprisonment or other severe deprivation of physical liberty in vio-

lation of fundamental rules of international law;

(f) Torture; […]



22 See the statement by the International Court of Justice that “[t] he Court considers that

the construction of the wall and its associated regime create a ‘fait accompli’ on the

ground that could well become permanent, in which case, and notwithstanding the char-

acterization of the wall by Israel, it would be tantamount to de facto annexation”. Ibid.,

para 121. There is no doubt that the Wall has today, some fifteen years later, effectively

annexed the area between the Wall and the Green Line.

23 unhrc, Report of the United Nations Fact- Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict, a/ hrc/

12/ 48, 25 September 2009; unhrc, Report of the Detailed Findings of the Independent

Commission of Inquiry Established Pursuant to Human Rights Council Resolution S- 21/ 1, a/

hrc/ 29/ crp.4, 24 June 2015; unhcr, Report of the Detailed Findings of the Independent

International Commission of Inquiry on the Protests in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,

a/ hrc/ 40/ crp.2, 18 March 2019.

Israel’s Impunity from Peremptory Norms 205

(h) Persecution against any identifiable group or collectivity on polit-

ical, racial, national, ethnic, cultural, religious, gender … or other grounds that are universally recognized as impermissible under international law in connection with any act referred to in this para-graph or any crime within the jurisdiction of the Court; […]

(j) The crime of apartheid;

(k) Other inhumane acts of a similar character intentionally causing

great suffering or serious injury to body or to mental or physical health.

Israel’s actions in the West Bank and Gaza Strip qualify as crimes within the meaning of the above definition. These include murder in the intentional kill-

ing of protesters along the Gaza Strip border in the Great March of Return,24

the foreseeable killing of civilians in “Operation Cast Lead” (2008– 2009),25

“Operation Protective Edge” (2014),26 and Operation “Guardian of the Walls” (2021). Further, there are the extra- judicial killing of suspected militants in tar-geted assassinations and the collateral killing of bystanders in such operations; the forcible transfer of the Palestinian population through the destruction of

homes, evictions, appropriation of land for settlements and other measures;27 the imprisonment of some 5,000 Palestinians each year for political crimes following trial before military courts that fail to comply with international fair-

trial standards;28 the arbitrary detention of thousands of administrative detain-ees without any trial whatsoever and the inhuman and degrading treatment of prisoners; the systematic torture of detainees; the application of a system of apartheid; and the persecution of the Palestinian people as an identifiable



24 See unhcr, Report of the Detailed Findings of the Independent International Commission

of Inquiry on the Protests in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, a/ hrc/ 40/ crp.2, 18

March 2019.

25 See unhrc, Report of the United Nations Fact- Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict, a/

hrc/ 12/ 48, 25 September 2009.

26 See unhrc, Report of the Detailed Findings of the Independent Commission of Inquiry

Established Pursuant to Human Rights Council Resolution S- 21/ 1, a/ hrc/ 29/ crp.4, 24

June 2015.

27 Between 1 January 2009 and 1 January 2022, around 12,000 Palestinians were forcibly dis-

placed in this way in the West Bank. See ocha, Demolition System, 5 January 2022.

28 This number fluctuates between around 4,400– 7,000 over the past ten years. According

to Addameer, a total of 4,600 Palestinian political prisoners were incarcerated in Israeli

prison in January 2022. Addameer, Statistics, 5 January 2022. 206 Dugard

group by the severe deprivation of their fundamental civil and political rights

and social, economic and cultural rights.29

These acts have been committed as part of a widespread and systematic

attack directed against a civilian population, as evidenced by the multiple

commission of acts in pursuance of Israel’s policies,30 and by the fact that civil-ians have suffered disproportionately from Israel’s actions. That Israel and its agents have had knowledge of the nature and consequences of their actions,

which they have committed with deliberate intent, is beyond doubt.31

Crimes against humanity have recently received the attention of the

International Law Commission. In 2019, the ilc adopted a set of draft articles on this subject that have been referred to States for comment and observa-

tion.32 Articles 3 and 4 declare that States undertake to “prevent and to punish crimes against humanity” and to employ legislative, administrative, and judi-cial means to achieve this goal, in cooperation with other States and interna-tional organisations.

1.3 The Basic Rules of Humanitarian Law The two most basic rules of international humanitarian law in an armed conflict are the principle of distinction, which requires parties to distinguish between military objectives and the civilian population and to refrain from indiscriminate attacks that fail to make such a distinction, and the principle of proportionality, which requires parties to a conflict to avoid or minimise col-lateral excessive damage to civilians. In its operations “Cast Lead”, “Protective Edge” and “Guardian of the Walls”, and in its response to the protests along the Gaza Strip border as part of the Great March of Return, Israel has flagrantly violated these two principles as shown by the disproportionate number of civilians killed and wounded in these military operations. Three fact- finding



29 See further on these crimes, John Dugard, Confronting Apartheid, A Personal History of

South Africa, Namibia and Palestine (Jacana 2018) Chapters 26– 29.

30 See Rome Statute, Article 7(2)(a); Elements of Crimes, Introduction and Article 7.

31 unhrc, Report of the United Nations Fact- Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict, a/ hrc/

12/ 48, 25 September 2009; unhrc, Report of the Detailed Findings of the Independent

Commission of Inquiry Established Pursuant to Human Rights Council Resolution S- 21/ 1, a/

hrc/ 29/ crp.4, 24 June 2015; unhcr, Report of the Detailed Findings of the Independent

International Commission of Inquiry on the Protests in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,

a/ hrc/ 40/ crp.2, 18 March 2019.

32 ilc, ‘Report of the International Law Commission on the Work of its Seventy- First

Session’, 2(2) Yearbook of the International Law Commission (2009). Israel’s Impunity from Peremptory Norms 207

missions established by the UN Human Rights Council vividly testify to these

violations.33

The rules governing the occupation of territory acquired in an armed con-

flict also rank among the basic rules of humanitarian law. Israel has violated several of the most fundamental rules of the law of occupation. It has de jure annexed East Jerusalem and de facto annexed the area between the Wall built in the occupied Palestinian territory and the 1949 armistice border, the interna-tional community’s recognised delineation between Israel and Palestine, com-

prising some ten per cent of Palestinian territory.34 The former annexation has

been condemned by the Security Council,35 and the latter by the International

Court of Justice.36 Israel’s settlement enterprise involving the transfer of some 700,000 Israeli settlers into the West Bank and East Jerusalem violates not only

the Fourth Geneva Convention,37 and customary international law,38 but it

also violates the prohibition on colonisation.39 Finally, the prolonged nature of the occupation coupled with Israel’s declared intention of annexing more parts of the West Bank and its refusal to negotiate a withdrawal from occupied Palestine in good faith, provide evidence of violation of this peremptory norm.

In its 2004 advisory opinion on the Legal Consequences of the Construction

of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, the International Court of Justice held, that Israel had violated certain obligations under international human-itarian law which constituted obligations erga omnes – that is, obligations

belonging to the category of peremptory norms.40



33 unhrc, Report of the United Nations Fact- Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict, a/ hrc/

12/ 48, 25 September 2009; unhrc, Report of the Detailed Findings of the Independent

Commission of Inquiry Established Pursuant to Human Rights Council Resolution S- 21/ 1, a/

hrc/ 29/ crp.4, 24 June 2015; unhcr, Report of the Detailed Findings of the Independent

International Commission of Inquiry on the Protests in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,

a/ hrc/ 40/ crp.2, 18 March 2019. In May 2021, the UN Human Rights Council established

an Independent International Commission of Inquiry to investigate all alleged violations

of international humanitarian law and all alleged violations and abuses of international

human rights law leading up to and since 13 April 2021, including “Operation Guardian of

the Walls” and underlying root causes. unhrc Resolution S- 30/ 1 (27 May 2021).

34 See Fourth Geneva Convention, Article 47.

35 unsc Resolutions 476 (30 June 1980) and 478 (20 August 1980).

36 icj, Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory

(Advisory Opinion) icj Reports 136 (2004), para 75.

37 Fourth Geneva Convention, Article 49(6).

38 icrc, Customary International Law Volume 1: Rules (cup 2005) 462.

39 See Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.

unga Resolution 1514(xv) (14 December 1960).

40 icj, Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory

(Advisory Opinion) icj Reports 136 (2004), paras 155– 157.

208 Dugard

1.4 Torture

The torture of Palestinians suspected of engaging in resistance to the occupa-tion is an inherent part of the apparatus of occupation. Although the Supreme Court of Israel sought to restrain the use of torture of detainees during interro-

gation in 1999,41 this practice continues.42 Mental torture in the form of sleep deprivation, exposure to persistent noise, humiliation, and threats to harm

family members persist, as does physical torture.43 In 2016, the UN Committee against Torture documented its concerns regarding torture in its concluding

observations on Israel.44 And more recently, in October 2019, four UN Special Rapporteurs expressed their concern about reports of the brutal torture of a

Palestinian detainee.45

1.5 Racial Discrimination and Apartheid The ilc treats the prohibition on racial discrimination and apartheid as a sin-gle peremptory norm in its Draft Conclusions on Peremptory Norms. There is, however, a material difference. Racial discrimination is prohibited by both the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination and customary international law, but it does not feature as a core crime in the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. Both per-secution and apartheid do, however, appear as aggravated species of racial dis-crimination in the definition of crimes against humanity. Only apartheid will be discussed here.

The crime of apartheid is defined in Article 7(2)(h) of the Rome Statute

as including inhumane acts similar to those listed in the definition of crimes against humanity (that is, murder, forcible transfer, arbitrary imprisonment, torture and persecution) committed in the context of an institutionalised regime of systematic oppression and domination by one racial group over any other racial group, with the intention of maintaining that regime.



41 hcj 5100/ 94, Public Committee against Torture v State of Israel (6 September 1999). See

further Chapter 11, Kiswanson.

42 See for example UN Committee against Torture, Concluding Observations on the Fifth

Periodic Report of Israel, cat/ c/ isr/ co/ 5, 3 June 2016, paras 14 and 30; Michael Sfard, The

Wall and the Gate, Israel Palestine and the Legal Battle for Human Rights (Henry Holt and

Company 2018) Chapter 4.

43 See also Chapter 7, Francis; Chapter 11, Kiswanson; Chapter 12, Darcy.

44 UN Committee against Torture, Concluding Observations on the Fifth Periodic Report of

Israel, cat/ c/ isr/ co/ 5, 3 June 2016.

45 Four UN Special Rapporteurs have expressed concern about the apparent torture of Samer

Al- A’rbeed. ohchr, ‘Israel Must Uphold Obligation to Prevent Torture and Investigate

Claims Over Samer Al- A’rbeed, Say UN Experts’, 10 October 2019.

Israel’s Impunity from Peremptory Norms 209

Israel’s policies in the West Bank including East Jerusalem (and possibly the

Gaza Strip46) meet the requirements for the crime of apartheid.47 First, two different racial groups reside in the territory – some 2.7 million Palestinians and around 700,000 Jewish settlers. The different identities of these groups are determined by their ancestry, descent, language, religion, and national origin and not by their skin colour. Second, Israel has, as shown above, committed the inhumane acts listed in the definition of crimes against humanity. Third, the settler group, aided and abetted by the Israel Defence Forces, constitute the dominant racial group. The primary function of the Israeli civil and military authorities responsible for enforcing the occupation is to maintain a system of unequal and discriminatory separation, in which Jewish settlers are privileged above Palestinians. The inhumane acts described above, are committed as part of a systematic and institutionalised oppressive regime designed to entrench the domination of Jewish settlers. This regime, like the apartheid regime of South Africa, is founded on a discriminatory ideology that has its roots in the Israeli legal system, which entitles persons of Jewish race or descent to supe-

rior rights and privileges.48 The situation is well described by Israel’s leading human rights lawyer, Michael Sfard:

[I] t is hard to look at the way Israel controls the West Bank, with separate

legal and administrative systems governing Palestinians and Israelis, and

with all local resources used to benefit one group at the expense of the

other, without being reminded of a legal term from the not- so- distant

past. A person would have to be unconscious not to pick up the whiff of

apartheid everywhere there is a settlement. Israel has created not only

an occupation that has persisted for generations but also a regime where

one group oppresses and discriminates against the other for the sole pur-

pose of preserving its control and supremacy.49



46 See Al Mezan, The Gaza Bantustan – Israeli Apartheid in the Gaza Strip, 29 November 2021.

47 See further Chapter 3, Reynolds.

48 See unhrc, Report of the United Nations Fact- Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict, a/

hrc/ 12/ 48, 25 September 2009, para 206; John Dugard and John Reynolds, ‘Apartheid,

International Law and the Occupied Palestinian Territory’, 24 European Journal of

International Law (2013) 867; Virginia Tilley (ed), Beyond Occupation, Apartheid,

Colonialism, and International Law in the Occupied Palestinian Territories (Pluto

Press 2012).

49 Michael Sfard, The Wall and the Gate, Israel Palestine and the Legal Battle for Human Rights

(Henry Holt and Company 2018) 126– 127.

210 Dugard

Israel’s system of apartheid is today the subject of scrutiny by the International Criminal Court which is conducting an investigation into alleged crimes by

Israelis – including the crime of apartheid.50 The monitoring committee of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination has recently found that the inter- State complaint lodged by Palestine against Israel for violation of this convention on the basis of Israel’s racially discriminatory practices and policies, and its implementation of the

policy of apartheid, is admissible.51 This complaint will now be examined by a specially appointed ad hoc Conciliation Commission in terms of Article 12 of the convention.

1.6 Self- determination

It is today recognised by all nations that the Palestinian people enjoy the right of self- determination in terms of which a people have the right to determine their own destiny. It is not necessary to describe the full import of this right. Suffice it to say that independent statehood is the ultimate aspiration of a people in the pursuit of self- determination. The fulfilment of this right has been thwarted mainly, but not only, by Israel which has used its full might and political resources to prevent Palestinians from achieving this goal. Israel has orchestrated a campaign aimed at limiting the number of States that recognise Palestine as a State and blocked its admission to membership of the United Nations. In 2004, the International Court of Justice identified Israel’s construc-tion of a wall in the Palestinian territory, as the violation of an obligation erga

omnes, to respect the right of the Palestinian people to self- determination.52 The Pre- Trial Chamber of the International Criminal Court has also recognised

the right of the Palestinian people to self- determination.53 A fortiori the denial and obstruction of statehood must be seen as a gross violation of the right of self- determination.



50 See State of Palestine, Referral by the State of Palestine Pursuant to Articles 13(a) and 14 of

the Rome Statute, 15 May 2018.

51 The Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination decided on 20 May 2021 that

the inter- State communication by the State of Palestine against Israel is admissible. UN

Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, Decision on the admissibility of

the inter- State communication submitted by the State of Palestine against Israel, cerd/ c/

103/ r.2, 20 May 2021.

52 icj, Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory

(Advisory Opinion) icj Reports 136 (2004), paras. 155– 156.

53 icc, Situation in Palestine, Pre- Trial Chamber, Decision on the ‘Prosecutor’s Request

Pursuant to Article 19(3) for a Ruling on the Court’s Territorial Jurisdiction in Palestine’,

icc- 01/ 18- 143, 5 February 2021, paras 121– 122.

Israel’s Impunity from Peremptory Norms 211

2 The Response of the International Community of Nations to

Apartheid in South Africa

The apartheid regime of South Africa was responsible for the violation of sev-eral of the above peremptory norms. Its racist and discriminatory practices and policies violated the prohibitions on racial discrimination and apartheid, crimes against humanity, torture, and self- determination. These violations, however, took place when the notion of peremptory norms was still in its infancy and the establishment of an International Criminal Court with juris-diction to try such crimes was a pipe dream.

Consequently, South Africa’s conduct was repeatedly condemned as a

violation of the human rights provisions in the UN Charter and customary international law governing human rights, racial discrimination, torture, and

self- determination.54 As South Africa had taken care not to become a party to any human rights treaty, it was necessary to claim that these norms were recognised by States as part of international custom. Little attempt was made to categorise these actions as international crimes or violations of peremptory norms. Despite this fact, the response of the international community was comprehensive and severe.

The question of apartheid appeared regularly on the agenda of the UN

General Assembly from 1952 to 1994 and on that of the UN Security Council after 1960, following the killing of demonstrators at Sharpeville, when it rec-ognised that, if continued, apartheid “might endanger international peace and

security”.55 During this time numerous resolutions of condemnation of apart-heid were adopted and measures for bringing an end to the policy of apartheid

were imposed.56



54 See John Dugard, Max du Plessis, Tiyanjana Maluwa, and Dire Tladi, Dugard’s International

Law: A South African Perspective (Juta 2018) 706– 716.

55 unsc Resolution 134 (1 April 1960).

56 See for example unsc Resolution 134 (1 April 1960); unsc Resolution 181 (7 August

1963); unsc Resolution 182 (4 December 1963); unsc Resolution 191 (18 June 1964); unsc

Resolution 311 (4 February 1972); unsc Resolution 417 (3 October 1977); unsc Resolution

418 (4 November 1977); unsc Resolution 473 (13 June 1980); unsc Resolution 543 (29

November 1983); unsc Resolution 560 (12 March 1985); unsc Resolution 569 (26 July

1985); unsc Resolution 602 (25 November 1987). The UN General Assembly adopted res-

olutions condemning apartheid annually from 1952 to 1994. See John Dugard, Max du

Plessis, Tiyanjana Maluwa, and Dire Tladi, Dugard’s International Law: A South African

Perspective (Juta 2018) 706– 714.

212 Dugard

2.1 The Sanctions of Non- recognition and Non- rendering of Aid Article 41 of the ilc Draft Articles on States Responsibility requires States to refuse to recognise as lawful a situation created by a serious breach of a peremptory norm and to withhold aid or assistance from a State that seeks to

maintain such a situation. This provision, which gives effect to State practice57 and echoes the finding of the International Court of Justice in the 1971 opinion on the Legal Consequences for States of Continued Presence of South Africa in

Namibia (South West Africa)58 is of particular importance to the present analy-sis, as it prescribes the measures to be taken by States to resist the violation of peremptory norms. The manner in which the United Nations and the interna-tional community upheld these norms in respect of South Africa is of special relevance to the question of whether the international community is willing to apply the same standards to Israel.

2.1.1 Withholding of Aid and Assistance for the Maintenance of

Apartheid

The international community lost no opportunity to condemn apartheid, both multilaterally and unilaterally, in South Africa. It went well beyond the obliga-tion to withhold aid and assistance in its positive efforts to end apartheid. Both the UN General Assembly and UN Security Council took measures that sought to bring pressure on the South African apartheid regime to abandon apartheid.

The UN General Assembly called in 1962 on States to terminate diplomatic

relations with South Africa, to close their ports to all vessels flying the South African flag, to refuse landing and passage facilities to South African aircrafts,

and to boycott all South African goods.59 This recommendation was repeated every year and States were in addition requested to suspend cultural, educa-

tional, and sporting exchanges with South Africa.60 After an attempt to exclude South Africa from the United Nations had failed in the Security Council as a result of vetoes cast by France, the United Kingdom and the United States, the President of the UN General Assembly ruled that South Africa could no longer

participate in the UN General Assembly because of its racial policies.61

57 ilc, ‘Report of the International Law Commission on the Work of its Fifty- Third Session’,

2(2) Yearbook of the International Law Commission (2001), pages 114– 115.

58 icj, Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of South Africa in Namibia

(South West Africa) Notwithstanding Security Council Resolution 276 (1970) (Advisory

Opinion) icj Reports 16 (1971), paras 123– 126, 133.

59 unga Resolution 1761 (xvii) (6 November 1962).

60 See for example unga Resolution 39/ 72 (13 December 1984).

61 See DJ van Vuuren, ‘South Africa’s Foreign Policy and International Practice – 1975’, 1 South

African Yearbook of International Law (1975) 162, 217– 222.

Israel’s Impunity from Peremptory Norms 213

The UN Security Council recommended in 1963 the imposition of an arms

embargo,62 and in 1977 it adopted a mandatory resolution under Chapter vii of

the UN Charter, directing States to impose an arms embargo on South Africa.63 In 1985, the UN Security Council recommended the suspension of new invest-ment and guaranteed export loans in South Africa, the prohibition of all sales of computer equipment that might be used by the army and the police, and restric-

tions on sporting and cultural relations.64 The Security Council also demanded

the release of political prisoners65 and the lifting of a state of emergency.66

Other organisations and States followed the example of the United Nations.

The Organization of African Unity, the Commonwealth, and the European Community imposed different sanctions on South Africa, and individual States imposed economic and diplomatic restrictions on South Africa, culmi-nating in the US Comprehensive Anti- Apartheid Act of 1986, which imposed limited economic sanctions on South Africa and suspended the landing rights

of South African Airways on US territory.67

2.1.2 Non- recognition

The United Nations consistently applied the principle of non- recognition to South Africa’s Bantustans designed to further the policy of apartheid by the creation of “independent” States for South Africa’s different tribal groups.

When the first Bantustan, Transkei, was granted “independence” in 1976, the

UN General Assembly condemned this conferment of so- called independence as “invalid” on the ground that it was designed to consolidate the “inhuman policies of apartheid”, and called upon States to deny any form of recogni-

tion to it.68 This call was endorsed by the UN Security Council.69 The United Nations responded in similar fashion to the conferment of “independence”

on Bophuthatswana,70 Venda71 and Ciskei.72 The UN General Assembly and

62 unsc Resolutions 181 (7 August 1963) and 182 (4 December 1963).

63 unsc Resolution 418 (4 November 1977).

64 unsc Resolution 569 (26 July 1985).

65 unsc Resolutions 181 (7 August 1963), 182 (4 December 1963), 191 (18 June 1964), 311 (4

February 1972), 417 (31 October 1977), 473 (13 June 1980), 560 (12 March 1985).

66 unsc Resolution 569 (12 March 1985).

67 See United States Comprehensive Anti- Apartheid Act of 1986 (1987) 26 International

Legal Materials 111.

68 unga Resolution 31/ 6A (26 October 1976).

69 unsc Resolutions 406 (25 May 1977) and 407 (25 May 1977).

70 unga Resolution 32/ 105N (14 December 1977).

71 unga Resolution 34/ 93G (12 December 1979); Security Council, Note by the President of

the Security Council, S/ 13549, 21 September 1979.

72 Security Council, Note by the President of the Security Council, S/ 14794, 15 December 1981. 214 Dugard

UN Security Council made it clear that the creation of Bantustan “States” vio-lated a number of peremptory norms such as systematic racial discrimination,

apartheid and self- determination.73

As a result of these calls for non- recognition, no State apart from South

Africa recognised any of the “independent” Bantustans as independent States. States applied this policy of non- recognition consistently and thoroughly throughout the apartheid era. Consequently, it was easy for these territories to be re- absorbed into South Africa after the abandonment of apartheid in 1994. This experience was rightly construed as a victory for the United Nations pol-icy of non- recognition.



3 Is It Fair to Use the South African Precedent as a Guide to the

Response of the International Community to Israel’s Violations of

Peremptory Norms?

Since the fall of apartheid in South Africa, accusations have been directed at several States that they apply apartheid. Israel is, however, the State which most frequently stands accused of applying apartheid in the opt. Israeli apartheid, particularly in the opt, has been carefully analysed and compared to South African apartheid and Israel is the only State to be accused of committing this

crime before the International Criminal Court,74 and the Committee on the

Elimination of Racial Discrimination.75 Consequently, it would be reason-able to expect that the United Nations, international organisations and States would respond in the same way that they responded to apartheid South Africa. Indeed, it might be expected that a more severe response would follow, given the number of peremptory norms violated, in addition to the prohibition on apartheid and the fact that, by any measurement, Israel’s crimes exceed those of apartheid South Africa.



73 See John Dugard, Recognition and the United Nations (Grotius Publications 1987) 98– 108;

unga Resolution 31/ 6A (1976); Security Council, Note by the President of the Security

Council, S/ 14794, 15 December 1981.

74 State of Palestine, Referral by the State of Palestine Pursuant to Articles 13(a) and 14 of the

Rome Statute, 15 May 2018.

75 UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, Decision on the Admissibility

of the Inter- State Communication Submitted by the State of Palestine Against Israel, cerd/

c/ 103/ r.2, 20 May 2021.

Israel’s Impunity from Peremptory Norms 215

Considerations of space do not permit a comprehensive comparison of

apartheid in South Africa and occupied Palestine.76 Suffice it to say, that while there are differences, the two systems share many common features. In some respects, apartheid in South Africa was worse but in many respects Israel’s conduct is more egregious. Israel’s system of apartheid that has accompa-nied its occupation, has seen more deaths and destruction. More Palestinians have been imprisoned for political crimes, more Palestinians have been held in administrative detention, more homes have been destroyed for punitive or administrative reasons, more children have been killed or injured, and more civilians have been killed in security operations. Torture has been used by both Israeli and South African security forces but the killing of political oppo-nents by targeted assassinations has been perfected by Israel. Both systems of apartheid have imposed heavy restrictions on freedom of movement, but South Africa never excluded blacks from public roads. South Africa reserved parks and beaches for exclusive white use but never built a wall to separate blacks and whites. South Africa built separate schools and hospitals for blacks, but Israel has not built any such amenities for Palestinians – leaving this to international donors. No black community in South Africa was subjected to a blockade and carefully calculated restrictions on foodstuffs. And so on. Of course, it is unfortunate for Israel that new technology and increased surveil-lance by fact- finding missions, television cameras and video recordings have recorded and uncovered Israel’s violations of international law. The world is a much smaller place than it was thirty years ago.

South Africa’s apartheid was deeply humiliating. The subjugation of blacks

to whites, and the exclusion of blacks from public life and public amenities, left psychological scars on millions. Palestinians are likewise humiliated but in a different manner. The denial of rights enjoyed for centuries by the Palestinian people by an Occupying Power bent on seizing Palestinian land and erasing the Palestinian presence from these lands has been, and continues to be, an immeasurably humiliating experience.



4 The Response of the International Community to Israel’s Crimes

States of the West have taken the lead in the construction of a world order in which respect for self- determination, human rights and humanitarian law

76 See John Dugard, Confronting Apartheid, A Personal History of South Africa, Namibia and

Palestine (Jacana 2018); Virginia Tilley (ed), Beyond Occupation, Apartheid, Colonialism,

and International Law in the Occupied Palestinian Territories (Pluto Press 2012). 216 Dugard

are an integral part. This means that they bear a heavy responsibility for the adoption of a system which recognises the hierarchy of peremptory norms and which gives effect to these values. It is therefore largely the response of these nations to Israel’s violation of peremptory norms that informs and deter-mines the commitment of the international community to the acceptance and enforcement of a two- tier system of international justice.

4.1 The United Nations

The United Nations, with 193 member States, is representative of the interna-tional community as a whole. This community voice is reflected in resolutions of the plenary body of the organisation, the General Assembly. General Assembly resolutions that assert the right of self- determination of the Palestinian peo-ple and condemn Israel’s violation of fundamental human rights constitut-ing peremptory norms give voice to the concerns of the world community. But these resolutions, like the resolutions adopted by the UN Human Rights Council, are mere recommendations. The real power of the United Nations is to be found in the UN Security Council, empowered to take legally binding decisions, and the Secretariat responsible for implementing decisions of the UN Security Council and recommendations of the UN General Assembly. It is these two bodies that have provided protection to Israel and ensure that it is not exposed to the kind of action that was taken against South Africa for apply-ing apartheid and violating human rights.

On the one hand, the record of the UN Security Council on Israel is not con-

sistently bad. Over the years there have been a number of notable resolutions that have shaped the legal framework of Israel’s occupation of the Palestinian territory. Here, one thinks in particular of UN Security Council resolution 242 of 1967, which provides for the withdrawal of Israeli forces from territories occupied in the Six- day War and affirms the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by war; UN Security Council resolution 478 of 1980, which con-demns Israel’s purported annexation of Jerusalem and calls on States not to recognise this act of annexation; and UN Security Council resolution 2334 of 2016, that reiterates that Israel’s establishment of settlements in the opt is a flagrant violation of international law and calls upon States to distinguish between the territory of Israel and the opt. These resolutions apply the princi-ple of non- recognition to any attempt on the part of Israel to acquire territory occupied in 1967, to Israel’s purported annexation of East Jerusalem and to settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory.

On the other hand, the UN Security Council has not demonstrated a deter-

mination to compel Israel to desist from its de jure or de facto acquisition of Palestinian territory or to respect the rules of human rights law or international Israel’s Impunity from Peremptory Norms 217

humanitarian law. It has obstructed Palestine’s right of self- determination by

rejecting its membership of the United Nations.77 The Security Council has failed to impose an arms embargo on Israel as it did in the case of South

Africa,78 or to recommend sanctions of the kind it recommended against

South Africa.79 The failure of the UN Security Council to condemn Israel’s violations of peremptory norms, is nowhere more apparent than in its abject silence on most of Israel’s attacks on the Gaza Strip, and its timid resolution on “Operation Cast Lead” which refused to condemn Israel’s invasion of the

territory.80 The absence of measures to punish Israel for its repeated violations of peremptory norms or to take measures to prevent such violations, can only be construed as rendering aid or assistance to Israel.

The response of the UN Security Council to the 2004 International Court

of Justice advisory opinion on the Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory and its response to the 1971 advi-sory opinion of the same court on the Legal Consequences for States of the

Continued Presence of South Africa in Namibia (South West Africa)81 illustrates

its double standard. The UN Security Council endorsed the latter opinion,82 and proceeded to use it as a guide to the resolution of the conflict in Namibia. In stark contrast, the UN Security Council has virtually ignored the 2004 opin-ion on the Wall. It did not endorse the opinion and has only briefly referred to it in passing in UN Security Council resolution 2334. Here it asserts the illegal-ity of settlements with no mention of the fact that the icj advisory opinion on the Wall held settlements to be unlawful. The preamble of UN Security Council resolution 2334 simply recalls that opinion in a paragraph reaffirming Israel’s obligation under the Fourth Geneva Convention. Nor has the Quartet done any

better. It too has only mentioned the opinion in passing.83 To make matters



77 In 2011 Palestine applied for membership of the United Nations. UN Security Council,

Report of the Committee on the Admission of New Members Concerning the Application of

Palestine for Admission to Membership in the United Nations, s/ 2011/ 705, 11 November 2011.

78 unsc Resolution 418 (4 November 1977).

79 unsc Resolution 569 (26 July 1985).

80 unsc Resolution 1860 (8 January 2009).

81 icj, Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of South Africa in Namibia

(South West Africa) Notwithstanding Security Council Resolution 276 (1970) (Advisory

Opinion) icj Reports 16 (1971).

82 unsc Resolution 301 (20 October 1971).

83 The Quartet has only issued one statement on the icj advisory opinion on the Wall. Middle

East Quartet, Statement by Middle East Quartet, sg/ 2091, 23 September 2004. See also John

Dugard and Annemarieke Vermeer- Kunzli, ‘The Elusive Allocation of Responsibility to

Informal Organizations: The Case of the Quartet on the Middle East’ in Maurizio Ragazzi,

Responsibility of International Organizations (Martinus Nijhoff 2013) 261, 264. 218 Dugard

worse, the UN Security Council has allowed the Quartet, the body charged with the task of furthering peace in the Middle East, to let it sink into oblivion.

It is common knowledge that the UN Secretariat has been infiltrated with

bureaucrats sympathetic to Israel. This became clear when I was Special Rapporteur on the Human Rights Situation in the Occupied Palestinian Territories from 2001 to 2008. Senior UN officials were open in their opposition

to the advisory proceedings before the International Court of Justice,84 and the Office of the UN Legal Adviser advised the UN Secretary- General that he was not legally required to support the opinion, as it was not a binding legal

opinion and was not addressed to the UN Secretariat85- an unconvincing deci-sion that took no account of the strong body of opinion that the UN Secretary-

General was bound to comply with advisory opinions of the icj.86

4.2 States

States are primarily responsible for the failure of the international community to take action of the kind contemplated by Article 41 of the ilc Draft Articles on States Responsibility in relation to Israel’s occupation of the Palestinian territory. That is, to cooperate to bring to an end any serious breach of an obli-gation arising under a peremptory norm, to refuse to recognise as lawful a sit-uation created by a serious breach of such an obligation, and not to render aid or assistance in maintaining such a situation.

In resolutions of the United Nations and other international organisations,

and in both multilateral and unilateral practice, States have not gone beyond calls for peace in the Middle East, an end to occupation and settlement con-struction, recognition of Palestine’s right of self- determination, approval of a two- State solution to the conflict and non- recognition of Israel’s claims to sov-ereignty over territories occupied in 1967. Resolutions and practice of this kind echo resolutions of the United Nations during the first decade of apartheid which called on South Africa to observe its obligations under the human rights

provisions of the Charter,87 and suggested strategies that might be adopted by

the apartheid regime to achieve reconciliation between the races.88 In 1962,

84 In a meeting with Kiernan Prendergast, Under Secretary- General for Political Affairs, on

29 October 2004, he informed me that “we do not think the icj Opinion was a good idea”.

85 See John Dugard, ‘Advisory Opinions and the Secretary- General with Special Reference to

the 2004 Advisory Opinion on the Wall’ in Laurence Boisson de Chazournes and Marcelo

Kohen (eds), International Law and the Quest fort its Implementation, Liber Amicorum Vera

Gowlland– Debbas (Brill Publishers 2010) 403, 408.

86 Ibid., pages 409– 412.

87 unga Resolution 917(x) (6 December 1955).

88 unga Official Records (9th Session 1954), UN Doc a/ 2719, 90– 92.

Israel’s Impunity from Peremptory Norms 219

the UN General Assembly changed its approach and began to request member States to take action against South Africa in order to compel it to abandon apartheid, including by terminating diplomatic relations with and boycotting

South African goods.89 In 1963 and 1964, the UN Security Council called on

States to cease supplying arms to South Africa,90 a call that was converted into

a mandatory arms embargo in 1977.91 In 1985, the UN Security Council called for the suspension of new investments in South Africa and the suspension of

guaranteed export loans.92 States have yet to endorse such action in the polit-ical organs of the United Nations or in their dealings with Israel. They have not taken meaningful action to compel Israel to desist from its violations of peremptory norms.

States have made attempts to withhold recognition of Israel’s annexation of

East Jerusalem and the legality of settlements and the Wall built in Palestinian territory. But these gestures of non- recognition have been both half- hearted and ineffective. The United Nations, and western States in particular, have made little attempt to bring Israel’s annexation of East Jerusalem to an end. The de facto acquiescence in Israel’s unlawful action on the part of western States is demonstrated by its contrasting vigorous response to Russia’s annex-ation of the Crimea. Despite that this annexation was preceded by a referen-dum in the Crimea in favour of annexation and was condemned only by the

UN General Assembly,93 the European Union, the United States, Canada, and Australia have imposed sanctions on Russian individuals and businesses. Even less attempt has been made to sanction Israel for its de facto annexation of some ten per cent of Palestinian land in the West Bank by the construction of the Wall and its unlawful construction of settlements. Futile efforts have been made to prohibit the import of goods from settlements but there has been no suggestion of economic sanctions against Israel, Israeli businesses, or Israeli businesspersons.

Western States have failed to take unilateral action to compel compli-

ance with peremptory norms on the part of Israel as many States did against



See also John Dugard, ‘Apartheid: A Case Study in the Response of the International

Community to Gross Violations of Human Rights’ in Irwin Cotler and F Pearl Eliadis

(eds), International Human Rights Law: Theory and Practice (Canadian Human Rights

Foundation 1992) 301.

89 unga Resolution 1761 (xvii) (6 November 1962).

90 unsc Resolution 181 (7 August 1963); unsc Resolution 183 (11 December 1963); unsc

Resolution 191 (18 June 1964).

91 unsc Resolution 418 (4 November 1977).

92 unsc Resolution 569 (26 July 1985).

93 unga Resolution 68/ 262 (27 March 2014).

220 Dugard

apartheid South Africa. To cite but one example; in 1986 the United States adopted the Comprehensive Anti- Apartheid Act, which imposed economic

sanctions on South Africa.94 Nor have States prosecuted Israeli officials for grave breaches of the Geneva Conventions (which include many peremptory

norms) as they are required to do.95 On the contrary, some western States (such as the United Kingdom) have amended their laws to afford immunity from prosecution to such persons.

In summary, States, particularly western States, have rendered aid and assis-

tance to Israel in its violation of peremptory norms by continuing to supply arms to, and engage in trade with Israel. Moreover, even when they have not done this, they have acquiesced in Israel’s crimes in a way which can only be interpreted as complicity.



5 Conclusion

States do not acquiesce in Israel’s violation of peremptory norms for reasons of fact or law. They accept most of the facts upon which allegations of the violation of peremptory norms are based. They accept that Israel has unlaw-fully annexed East Jerusalem, that Israel has unlawfully seized ten per cent of the West Bank by constructing a wall within Palestinian territory, that there are some 700,000 illegal settlers in the West Bank and East Jerusalem, that Israel prevents Palestinians from exercising their right of self- determination, that hundreds of Palestinians are imprisoned without trial, that the security forces employ methods of torture and that thousands of Palestinian civilians have been killed or maimed in disproportionate military offensives that fail to distinguish between combatants and civilians. (They do, however, blindly deny the existence of apartheid in occupied Palestine despite all the evidence to support this). Similarly States accept that Israel has unlawfully violated peremptory norms. Attempts are made by States to justify Israel’s attacks on the Gaza Strip but, by and large, they acknowledge the disproportionality of such actions and the failure to distinguish between civilian and military tar-gets. No attempt is made to argue that the construction of the Wall and set-tlements is legal, or that preventive detention, demolition of homes or torture



94 ‘United States: Comprehensive Anti– Apartheid Act of 1986’, 26 International Legal

Materials (1987) 79.

95 In terms of the Fourth Geneva Convention, Articles 146 and 147 and Additional Protocol

i, Article 85.

Israel’s Impunity from Peremptory Norms 221

can be justified in law. Moreover, there is agreement that Palestinians are in law entitled to the right of self- determination.

The reasons States make no attempt to hold Israel responsible for its illegal

actions are uncomplicated.96 Holocaust guilt on the part of countries such as Germany, the Netherlands and France; fear of being labelled as anti- Semitic, an accusation that will destroy politicians and public figures; the power and bribes of pro- Israel lobbies; and the fear of offending the United States, with the economic consequences that this entails. These are the reasons for refusing to hold Israel accountable, but they are not good reasons. Clearly, they provide no justification for failing to comply with international law.

It is interesting to compare the way the international community’s response

to South Africa’s violations of human rights law positively strengthened the growth and development of international law with the negative impact of the international community’s response to Israel’s violation of peremptory norms.

New rules of treaty and customary law to promote human rights, racial

equality and self- determination evolved as a result of international oppo-sition to apartheid in South Africa. Treaties such as the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination and the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid, were adopted to assist opposition to race discrimination in South Africa. The prohibition on interference in the domestic affairs of States enshrined in Article 2(7) of the UN Charter, was substantially weakened by a succession of resolutions condemning apartheid. The non- recognition of States created in violation of international law was given new meaning by the non- recognition of the Bantustan States. International humanitarian law was rewritten to con-fer prisoner- of- war status on combatants belonging to national liberation

movements.97 South Africa’s six appearances before the International Court of Justice over Namibia provided the court with the opportunity to formulate new rules on self- determination and human rights. Apartheid succeeded per-versely in injecting new notions of respect for human rights, racial equality, and self- determination into an international legal order that in 1945 had few developed rules on these subjects.

The international community’s response to Israel has the exact opposite

effect. It has raised questions about the commitment of States, particularly western States, to some of the most fundamental prohibitions of international law – on aggression, torture, race discrimination and apartheid, arbitrary

96 John Dugard, Confronting Apartheid, A Personal History of South Africa, Namibia and

Palestine (Jacana 2018) 261– 264.

97 See Additional Protocols i and ii.

222 Dugard

imprisonment, the harmful treatment of civilians in armed conflict and the suppression of self- determination. The failure of States to take measures, col-lectively or unilaterally, to hold Israel accountable for its violation of a host of peremptory norms has weakened respect for human rights and humanitarian law. It has brought international law into disrepute and given rise to cynicism about the respect States have for international law. At the same time, it has destroyed the notion of a two- tier system of international law that elevates certain norms reflecting the most fundamental values of contemporary civil-isation to a higher status, whose violation is to be enforced by the concerted action of nations. Western States have placed the determination to protect Israel at all costs above respect for international law.





chapter 10


Third State Responsibility versus Sanctions

in Regulating Trade with Illegal Settlements

at the EU

Manuel Devers and Tom Moerenhout



Sovereignty, territorial integrity, and the right to self- determination are the corner stones of modern public international law. Consequentially, belliger-ent occupation and annexation are among the gravest threats to international peace and stability. As such, illegal settlements in occupied territories are not only a thorn in one specific conflict but can also be a thorn in the perceived authority of public international law altogether. The practice of transferring an occupier’s civilian population into an occupied or annexed territory, in sup-port of its own national interests shows a clear and deliberate disregard for international law.

Third States’ muted reaction to settler transfer signals that the fundamental

territoriality principle of international law is not so fundamental after all. In other words, if State practice in international law is about the practices that follow a sense of international legal obligation, then State non- practice is a demonstration of the absence of a sense of international legal obligation, ren-dering the social justice aspect of international law powerless and leaving the discipline reduced to its roots of bilateralism. There is no greater symbol of the latter than Third States trading with an occupier’s illegal settlements in occu-pied or annexed territories.

This chapter will explain why ending trade with illegal settlements such as

those of Israel in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem and the occupied Syrian Golan, and those of Morocco in Western Sahara, is not a sanction under international law or European Union law. Part 1 will discuss how the practice of illegal settlements triggers Third States’ responsibilities. It will highlight that trading with illegal settlements violates the legal duties of non- recognition and non- assistance, which are self- executing duties and not sanctions. Part 2 will elaborate on how the prohibition on settlement trade is not a sanction, but a trade measure under EU law as well. It will also reference recent caselaw that confirms this position and thereby helps protect the integrity of inter-national law since States can use sanctions to pick and choose who to apply international law to, which ultimately undermines international law. Part 3



© Manuel Devers and Tom Moerenhout, 2023 |

224 Devers and Moerenhout

will present the implications of understanding settlement trade as a general measure, rather than, incorrectly, as a sanction. Part 4 will address EU law and practice in dealing with trade with settlements. It will set out the inconsistency in the practice of the European Commission and discuss legal trends towards prohibiting settlement trade as a trade measure. It will also highlight a recent European Citizens Initiative, in relation to which the European Commission recognised that stopping trade with illegal settlements as a general measure indeed constitutes a trade measure.



1 Settlements as Breaches of Jus Cogens Norms

The prohibition of trading with illegal settlements under international law is relatively straightforward and relies on two steps: first, the confirmation that settlements breach peremptory norms of international law, and second, the confirmation that the duties of non- recognition and non- assistance include a trade prohibition.

Based on Article 49 of the Fourth Geneva Convention and Article 8 of the

Rome Statute, illegal settlements can be defined as settlements within an occupied territory that civilians of the Occupying Power are transferred into, and whose presence in and transfer to the occupied territory is facilitated – directly or indirectly – by the Occupying Power. The settlements in the occu-pied Palestinian territory fulfil this definition and they breach at least three peremptory norms of international law: the right to self- determination and the prohibition on the acquisition of territory by force, fundamental norms of international humanitarian law, and the prohibition against apartheid.

Importantly, while individually, each of those three dimensions likely con-

firm the jus cogens violations of illegal settlements in occupied or annexed ter-ritories, the combined violations undisputedly pass the threshold of finding a

violation of peremptory norms of international law.1 In its advisory opinion on the Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, the International Court of Justice only relied on the first two dimen-sions to determine the applicability of the duties of non- recognition and non- assistance in the case of the Wall, and it is ipso facto equally sufficient to

conclude it in case of settlements in occupied territories.2



1 Tom Moerenhout, ‘The consequence of the UN Resolution on Israeli Settlements for the

EU: Stop Trade with Settlements’, ejil:Talk!, 4 April 2017.

2 icj, Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory

(Advisory Opinion) icj Reports 136 (2004), paras 157.

Sanctions in Regulating Trade with Illegal Settlements 225

1.1 The Right to Self- determination and Prohibition on the Acquisition

of Territory by Force

Illegal settlements violate the right to self- determination and can constitute de facto acquisition of territory through the use of force. This view finds support in several UN Security Council resolutions on Israel’s occupation of Palestine that confirm the inadmissibility of settlements and the acquisition of terri-

tory by force.3 The peremptory characters of the right to self- determination and the prohibition on the acquisition of territory were affirmed by the International Law Commission when drafting the ilc Draft Articles on States

Responsibility4 and Draft Conclusions on Peremptory Norms of General

International Law (jus cogens).5 They emphasise the quintessence of the ter-ritoriality principle in contemporary international law. The war crimes listed in the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court also includes grave breaches of the 1949 Geneva Conventions, including extensive destruction and appropriation of property that is not justified by military necessity and carried out unlawfully. The icc war crimes definition further criminalises the transfer of the Occupying Power’s civilian population into the occupied territory, the

destruction or seizure of enemy’s property, and pillage.6

1.2 Fundamental Norms of International Humanitarian Law Illegal settlements violate fundamental norms of international humanitarian law, which the ilc Draft Articles on States Responsibility consider as having jus cogens character. These fundamental norms of international humanitar-ian law include a prohibition of population transfer to occupied territories

under the Fourth Geneva Convention.7 In its advisory opinion on the Wall, the International Court of Justice confirmed that those fundamental humanitar-ian norms had an erga omnes character and were to “be observed by all States” because “they constitute intransgressible principles of international customary

law” and are “fundamental to the respect of humanity”.8 It appears to us that the main reason the icj did not explicitly call them jus cogens norms was for reasons of judicial economy, in other words they did not make determinations

3 See for example unsc Resolution 2334 (23 December 2016).

4 ilc, ‘Report of the International Law Commission on the Work of its Fifty- Third Session’, 2(2)

Yearbook of the International Law Commission (2001), page 248.

5 ilc, ‘Report of the International Law Commission on the Work of its Seventy- First Session’,

2(2) Yearbook of the International Law Commission (2019).

6 Rome Statute, Article 8.

7 Fourth Geneva Convention.

8 icj, Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory

(Advisory Opinion) icj Reports 136 (2004), paras 157.

226 Devers and Moerenhout

on matters that they were not asked to determine. Many legal scholars,9 how-

ever, as well as icj judges Bedjaoui,10 Weeramantry,11 and Koroma,12 have explicitly concluded that these fundamental humanitarian norms are either jus cogens in statu nascendi or jus cogens.

1.3 Prohibition of Apartheid

Illegal settlements can also involve the crime of apartheid. The ilc Draft

Articles on States Responsibility13 have characterised the prohibition of apart-heid as a key jus cogens norm. The crime of apartheid is also recognised as a crime against humanity in the Rome Statute of the International Criminal

Court.14 The prohibition of apartheid is encompassed in the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid of

1973 and Additional Protocol i of 1977.15

In the European Journal of International Law, John Dugard and John

Reynolds scrupulously set forward the argument and legal evidence that the situation in the West Bank, including Israel’s settlement enterprise, meet the definition of apartheid in the International Convention on the Suppression

and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid.16 The UN Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia similarly confirmed in a report that Israeli set-

tlements constitute apartheid.17 This report was censored by Israel and the

US and led to the resignation of escwa’s head, Rima Khalaf.18 The existence



9 See for example Andrea Bianchi, ‘Human Rights and the Magic of Jus Cogens’, 19(3)

European Journal of International Law (2008) 491; Vincent Chetail, ‘The Contribution

of the International Court of Justice to International Humanitarian Law’ 85(850)

International Review of the Red Cross (2003) 235, page 251.

10 See Declaration of President Bedjaoui to icj, Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear

Weapons icj Reports 226 (1996).

11 See Dissenting Opinion of Judge Weeramantry to icj, Legality of the Threat or Use of

Nuclear Weapons icj Reports 226 (1996).

12 Dissenting Opinion of Judge Koroma to icj, Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear

Weapons icj Reports 226 (1996).

13 ilc, ‘Report of the International Law Commission on the Work of its Fifty- Third Session’,

2(2) Yearbook of the International Law Commission (2001), page 112.

14 Rome Statute, Article 7.

15 Additional Protocol i, Article 85.

16 John Dugard and John Reynolds, ‘Apartheid, International Law, and the Occupied

Palestinian Territory’ 24(3) The European Journal of International Law (2013) 867.

17 UN Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia, Israeli Practices towards the

Palestinian People and the Question of Apartheid, e/ escwa/ ecri/ 2017/ 1, March 2017.

18 Richard Falk, ‘The Inside Story on our UN Report Calling Israel an Apartheid State’, The

Nation, 22 March 2017.

Sanctions in Regulating Trade with Illegal Settlements 227

of apartheid has also been recognised by several rights groups, including

Amnesty International.19



2 Trade and the Duties of Non- recognition and Non- assistance

When peremptory norms are breached, as is the case in relation to Israeli set-tlements in occupied Palestine, Third States have the responsibility not to recognise as lawful a situation created by it, nor to render aid or assistance

in maintaining that situation.20 These duties are commonly referred to as the duties of non- recognition and non- assistance. Trade with illegal settlements violates both duties.

2.1 Trade with Settlements as a Violation of the Duty of Non- recognition

The fundamental prohibition of the transfer of the Occupying Power’s own civilian population ipso facto implies an equally strong prohibition on the eco-

nomic activity of transferred civilians for the benefit of the Occupying Power.21

In the icj advisory opinion22 on South Africa’s continued presence in Namibia of 1971, the court recognised the duty of non- recognition and confirmed that States should abstain from economic or other relationships with the violating

State on behalf of or concerning the violation (in this case Namibia).23 When the Occupying Power regulates the export of products from its illegal settle-ments, it takes a claim on that territory. And since the import of products from illegal settlements by Third States is a legal act, such trade constitutes implicit recognition because it recognises the Occupying Power’s claim over the



19 Amnesty International, Israel’s Apartheid Against Palestinians: Cruel System of Domination

and Crime Against Humanity, February 2022. See further Chapter 5, Reynolds.

20 ilc, ‘Report of the International Law Commission on the Work of its Fifty- Third Session’,

2(2) Yearbook of the International Law Commission (2001), Article 41.

21 Tom Moerenhout, ‘The Obligation to Withhold from Trading in Order Not to Recognize

and Assist Settlements and their Economic Activity in Occupied Territories’, 3(2) Journal

of International Humanitarian Legal Studies (2012) 344.

22 Up until today, the icj has mentioned the duty of non- recognition only twice. Both times

were in the context of territorial occupation: once in the 1971 advisory opinion on The

Legal Consequences for States of the Continued presence of South Africa in Namibia and

once in the 2004 advisory opinion on the Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall

in the Occupied Palestinian Territory.

23 icj, Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of South Africa in Namibia

(South West Africa) Notwithstanding Security Council Resolution 276 (1970) (Advisory

Opinion) icj Reports 16 (1971) para 124.

228 Devers and Moerenhout

exportation of illegal settlement goods and services from illegal settlements from an annexed or occupied territory.

2.2 Trade as a Violation of the Duty of Non- assistance The agreement establishing the World Trade Organization explicitly refers to the economic benefits of liberalised trade, stating that “raising standards of liv-ing, ensuring full employment and a large and steadily growing volume of real income and effective demand, and expanding the production of and trade in

goods and services”.24 Trading with illegal settlements gives those settlements economic support. This constitutes concrete help to the maintenance of the

unlawful situation.25 Both the UN Office of the High Commission for Human

Rights26 and the UN Human Rights Council27 have recognised that the encour-agement of economic activity in Israeli settlements has been a reason for set-tlement expansion. It was also implicitly recognised in UN Security Council resolution 465 from 1980, that called upon all States “not to provide Israel with any assistance to be used specifically in connection with settlements in the

occupied territories”.28



3 The Duties of Non- recognition and Non- assistance versus

Sanctions

The duties of non- recognition and non- assistance under international law are identified by their customary and self- executing characteristics. All (non- injured) States have the duty not to recognise and assist a violation of

a peremptory norm of international law by another State.29 Whereas these duties safeguard the interests of the international community, the duties of non- recognition and non- assistance do not require collective action or the involvement of any particular international body such as the United Nations



24 Marrakesh Agreement establishing the World Trade Organization, 15 April 1994.

25 Helmut Aust, Complicity and the Law of State Responsibility (cup 2011).

26 ohchr, Israeli Settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territory including East Jerusalem

and the Occupied Syrian Golan, a/ 71/ 335, 24 August 2016.

27 unhrc, Report of the Independent International Fact- Finding Mission to Investigate the

Implications of the Israeli Settlements on the Civil, Political, Economic, Social and Cultural

Rights of the Palestinian People throughout the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including

East Jerusalem, a/ hrc/ 22/ 63, 7 February 2013.

28 unsc Resolution 465 (1 March 1980).

29 Ian Brownlie, Principles of Public International Law (oup 2003). Sanctions in Regulating Trade with Illegal Settlements 229

Security Council acting under Chapter vii. Instead, they are directly binding

to each individual State.30

Sanctions are different from the above-mentioned duties. Sanctions are

intended to support foreign policy interests and they are limited in duration and disappear once a conflict is resolved, political determination dwindles, or the timeframe in the decision on sanctions expires. The duties apply when-ever there is a violation of peremptory norms. Sanctions are a policy option for individual UN Member States or the UN Security Council. The duties are a legal obligation on the collection of States, regardless of the position of the UN Security Council. The logic is clear: if we have duties of non- recognition and non- assistance to protect the most fundamental norms of international law then we cannot condition their application on UN Security Council action. This is because the UN Security Council is governed by the short- term domes-tic and political interests of its Member States, with five of them holding a veto. This is radically opposite to the raison d’être of the duties of non- recognition and non- assistance. In the EU guidelines on the implementation and evalua-tion of restrictive measures (sanctions) in the framework of the EU Common Foreign and Security Policy, the EU recognises that sanctions are intended to “bring about a change in policy or activity by the target country, part of coun-try, government, entities or individuals, in line with the objectives set out in the

cfsp Council Decision”.31 This again, shows why sanctions are different from the duties with respect to illegal settlements. The objective is not a change of policy in one or the other country, the objective is to ensure that there will be no trade, ever, with any illegal settlements in any occupied territory.

Finally, and most importantly, sanctions constitute a positive obligation,

whereas the duties consist of negative obligations. The duties mandate States not to recognise via diplomatic relations, treaties, economic relations related to the violation, and so forth. The duties do not require positive action on

behalf of the States.32 In this regard, the duties can be considered as duties of



30 Dissenting Opinion of Judge Weeramantry in icj, Case Concerning East Timor (Portugal

v Australia) (Judgement) icj Reports 90 (1995); Martin Dawidowicz, ‘The Obligation of

Non- Recognition of an Unlawful Situation’ in James Crawford, Alain Pellet and Simon

Olleson (eds), The Law of International Responsibility (oup 2010) 677– 686.

31 General Secretariat of the Council, Guidelines on Implementation and Evaluation of

Restrictive Measures (Sanctions) in the Framework of the EU Common Foreign and Security

Policy, 5664/ 18, 4 May 2018, page 5.

32 Andrea Gattini, ‘A Return Ticket to ‘Communitarisme’, Please’ 13(5) The European Journal

of International Law (2002) 1191.

230 Devers and Moerenhout

active abstention.33 Not trading with illegal settlements is one such negative obligation. States should withhold from trading with settlements, as this type of trade should not have existed in the first place and represents, in a consis-tent reading of international public law, an error in international economic relations. The fact that there is trade is an issue of non- compliance.



4 Settlement Trade and EU Law

The European Union “is bound […], when exercising its powers, to observe

international law in its entirety”.34 In that context, there is little doubt that the EU must not recognise or assist situations arising from serious breaches of

international law.35 Besides, respecting international law and human rights,

including international humanitarian law,36 is also one of the EU’s core objec-tives on the international scene, pursuant to Articles 3(5) and 21 of the Treaty on the European Union. However, despite the EU’s stated commitments to international law, the approach of the European Commission toward settle-

ment trade remains incoherent and deceptive (see Section 4.1). Given the massive scale of the problem, the adoption of a binding legal act is the only way forward to ensure the effective enforcement of EU’s international obli-gations and objectives. Analysed through the lens of EU law, the regulation of settlement trade confirms that banning it is a trade measure in favour of occupied peoples and not an economic sanction against Occupying States

(Section 4.2).



33 Stefan Talmon, ‘The Duty Not to “Recognize as Lawful” a Situation Created by the Illegal

Use of Force or Other Serious Breaches of a Jus Cogens Obligation: An Obligation with-

out Real Substance?’ in Christian Tomuschat and Jean- Marc Thouvenin (eds), The

Fundamental Rules of the International Legal Order (Brill Publishers 2006) 99– 125.

34 ecj, Western Sahara Campaign UK, c- 266/ 16, 27 February 2018, para 47.

35 ecj, Organisation Juive Européenne, Vignoble Psagot Ltd v Ministre de l’Economie et des

Finances, c- 363/ 18, 12 November 2019, para 48. It refers explicitly to para 120 of the

2004 icj advisory opinion on the Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the

Occupied Palestinian Territory.

36 Updated European Union Guidelines on Promoting Compliance with International

Humanitarian Law, 2009/ C 303/ 06, 15 December 2009, page 12. These guidelines state

that the “European Union is founded on the principles of liberty, democracy, respect for

human rights and fundamental freedoms and the rule of law. This includes the goal of

promoting compliance with ihl”.

Sanctions in Regulating Trade with Illegal Settlements 231

4.1 The Deceptive Approach of the European Commission toward

Settlement Trade: The Examples of Occupied Palestine and

Western Sahara

Before assessing the benefit of banning settlement trade in favour of the occu-pied population, this section will present case studies on the EU’s response to trade with occupied territories of Palestine and Western Sahara.

4.1.1 Data on Settlement Trade with the European Block Although the European Commission claims to have no “detailed statistics on

goods imported from Israeli settlements to the EU”,37 figures transmitted to the World Bank in 2012 indicate that exports of illegal settlement goods from

occupied Palestine to the EU had reached the value of 300 million US dollars.38 In 2015, the European External Action Service had also estimated that settle-

ment trade amounted to 300 million euros approximately.39 By comparison, in 2020, the amount of Palestinian exports under the 1997 EU- plo Association

Agreement40 did not exceed 26 million euros.41 Consequently, taking the num-bers of settlers illegally based in occupied Palestine, “in per capita terms, the

EU imports at least 100 times more per settler than per Palestinian”.42 Even

though there is not an official list of products on sale in the EU,43 it appears

that settlement goods exported to the EU ranges from industrial products44 to



37 Answer by the European Commission to Parliamentary Question e- 001227/ 2020 (7 July

2020). One can wonder whether the lack of mechanism to collect data on imports from

the Israeli settlements is consistent at all with unsc Resolution 2334 (2016), para 5. How

can the European Union “distinguish, in [its] relevant dealings, between the territory of

the State of Israel and the territories occupied since 1967” if the European Commission

has no reliable data on settlement trade to begin with.

38 World Bank, Fiscal Crisis, Economic Prospects: The Imperative for Economic Cohesion in the

Palestinian Territories, Economic Monitoring Report to the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee, 23

September 2012, page 13.

39 EU European External Action Service, Fact Sheet, 11 November 2015, page 4.

40 Euro- Mediterranean Interim Association Agreement on Trade and Cooperation Between

the European Community, of the one Part, and the Palestine Liberation Organization

(plo) for the Benefit of the Palestinian Authority of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, of

the Other Part, 2 June 1997.

41 European Commission, European Union Trade in goods with Occupied Palestinian Territory,

10 May 2022, page 3.

42 Christian Aid, Cordaid, Diakonia et al., Trading Away Peace: How Europe Helps Sustain

Illegal Israeli Settlements, 30 October 2012, page 21.

43 Answer by the European Commission to Parliamentary Question e- 007241/ 16 (13

January 2017).

44 See the facts raised in ecj, Firma Brita GmbH v Hauptzollamt Hamburg- Hafen, C- 386/ 08,

25 February 2010, para 30.

232 Devers and Moerenhout

agricultural products that are mislabeled on a large scale as originating in the

internationally- recognised territory of Israel.45

Regarding Western Sahara, exports of “Moroccan” goods from the occupied

Sahrawi territories to the EU consist exclusively of two kinds,46 namely agricul-

tural products47 and fishery products.48 According to European Commission official data, exports of agricultural products from occupied Western Sahara

amounted to 64,000 tons in 2016,49 for a value worth of 65 million euros.50 As for fishery products, they consist of fish caught in the Sahrawi waters by Moroccan and EU fleets that are processed on land in the occupied territo-ries. In 2016, 141 Moroccan fish processing companies were authorized by the European Commission to export “their” products to the European market for

an estimated value of 240 million euros.51 Since then, the value of such exports has only kept growing. In 2019, a total of 59,400 tons of agricultural products

were exported from Western Sahara for a total value of 69,80 million euros.52 Regarding fishery products, exports from Western Sahara to the EU in 2019

reached a total value of 434 million euros.53 Lastly, in 2020, exports of agricul-tural products increased by 1,3 percent, representing a total value of 79,5 mil-

lion euros,54 while exports of fishery products amounted to 412 million euros.55



45 Agricultural Guiding and Awareness Society et al., Farming Injustice – International Trade

with Israeli Agricultural Companies and the Destruction of Palestinian Farming, February

2013, page 15.

46 For phosphates exports from Western Sahara world- wide, see Western Sahara Resource

Watch, P for Plunder, Morocco’s Exports of Phosphates from Occupied Western Sahara, 2021.

Apparently, the last EU company – based in Lithuania – stopped importing phosphates

from occupied Western Sahara in 2016. There was a shipment in 2021 to Estonia, but it

transited to be processed in Russia. See Western Sahara Resource Watch, First EU Imports

of Conflict Minerals in 5 years, 2 November 2021.

47 Western Sahara Resource Watch and Emmaus Stockholm, Label and Liability: How the EU

Turns a Blind Eye to Falsely Stamped Agricultural Products Made by Morocco in Occupied

Western Sahara, 2012.

48 Western Sahara Resource Watch, Above the Law – How the EU, Blatantly, Imports Fish

Products from Occupied Western Sahara, Ignoring its Own Court of Justice, 2020.

49 European Commission, Commission Staff Working Document, swd(2018) 346 final, 11 June

2016, page 16.

50 Ibid., page 2.

51 Ibid., page 20.

52 European Commission, Commission Staff Working Document, swd(2020) 404 final, 23

December 2020, page 8.

53 Ibid., page 10.

54 European Commission, Commission Staff Working Document, swd(2021) 431 final, 22

December 2021, page 4.

55 Ibid., page 5.

Sanctions in Regulating Trade with Illegal Settlements 233

Hence, “Moroccan” exports of goods from the occupied Sahrawi territories

represent on average a total value of half a billion euros per year. All exports from occupied Western Sahara enter the European market with Moroccan

documents and are systemically mislabeled as being of “Moroccan” origin.56 By comparison, due to harsh living conditions, there are no exports at all from the liberated part of Western Sahara. Instead, while trading approxi-mately 500 million euros per year in illegal settlement goods, the European Commission provided nine million euros in humanitarian assistance in 2022 to Sahrawi refugees based in camps in the southwest of Algeria closed to the

Mauritanian border.57

4.1.2 The “Cosmetic” Measures of the European Commission on

Settlement Trade

As regards Western Sahara, EU political institutions never bothered to pre-serve appearances. In 1995, after the conclusion of the 1991 Settlement Plan and the cease- fire between Morocco and the polisario Front, the European Commission began registering three Moroccan authorised establishments in

Dakhla and El Aaiún, allowing them to export fishery products to the EU.58

Their number increases from time to time.59 Today, 172 Moroccan authorised

establishments are currently based in occupied Western Sahara.60 Besides, in 2016, the European Commission acknowledged that all agricultural and fishery products originating in occupied Western Sahara benefitted de facto from pref-erential tariff treatment under the 2000 EU- Morocco Association Agreement

since its entry into force.61 This practice was so entrenched that Eurostat

56 Western Sahara Resource Watch and Emmaus Stockholm, Label and Liability: How the EU

Turns a Blind Eye to Falsely Stamped Agricultural Products Made by Morocco in Occupied

Western Sahara, 2012.

57 See European Commission’s European Civil Protection and Humanitarian Aid Operations

webpage on “Algeria”.

58 Commission Decision 95/ 30/ EC of 10 February 1995 Laying Down Special Conditions

Governing Imports of Fishery and Aquaculture Products Originating in Morocco, Official

Journal of the European Communities 1995, L 042, 24 February 1995, pages 37, 40, and 43.

59 See for instance Commission Decision 96/ 459/ EC of 4 July 1996 Amending Decision 95/ 30/

EC Laying Down Specific Conditions for Importing Fishery Products from Morocco, Official

Journal of the European Communities 1996, L 191, page 48. Commission Decision 97/ 581/

EC of 25 July 1997 Amending Decision 95/ 30/ EC Laying Down Special Conditions Governing

Imports of Fishery and Aquaculture Products Originating in Morocco, Official Journal of the

European Communities 1997, L 237, page 26.

60 European Commission, Commission Staff Working Document, swd(2021) 431 final, 22

December 2021, page 18.

61 European Commission, Commission Staff Working Document, swd(2018) 346 final, 11 June

2016, page 6.

234 Devers and Moerenhout

considered deleting the code “eh” – which is the country code for Western

Sahara in its databases.62 The scale of violation of the rule of law became even more evident when EU political institutions resisted the recognition by the

ecj of the separate and distinct status of Western Sahara.63 In an unprecedent move, the Council of the European Union and the European Parliament con-

cluded new agreements64 explicitly covering the occupied Sahrawi territories

with Morocco acting in its “sovereign” capacity.65

By contrast, the position of the European Union on Palestine appears to be

much clearer: “[a] ll settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory, includ-

ing East Jerusalem, are illegal under international law”.66 Yet, “[p]roducts orig-

inating from the settlements in these occupied territories can enter the EU”.67 Hence, instead of prohibiting imports of settlement goods which would be the expected consequence of the illegality of settlements under international law, the European Commission has developed a differentiation policy to distin-guish “between the territory of the State of Israel and the territories it occupies

since June 1967”,68 in its dealings with Israel. Regarding settlement products,

this policy consists of three types of measures.69

Firstly, from 2001, the European Commission published several notices

to EU importers70 to clarify that settlement products could not benefit from

62 European Commission, Summary Report of the 206th Meeting of the Origin Section of

the Custom Code Committee held in Brussels, from 15 to 16 July 2013, taxud/ 3334914/ 13, 18

October 2013, page 18.

63 ecj, Council of the European Union v Front Populaire pour la Libération de la Saguia- el-

hamra et du Rio de Oro (Front Polisario), c- 104/ 16 P, 21 December 2016, para 92.

64 See for the instance Council Decision (EU) 2019/ 217 of 28 January 2019 on the Conclusion

of the Agreement in the Form of an Exchange of Letters between the European Union and

the Kingdom of Morocco on the Amendment of Protocols 1 and 4 to the Euro- Mediterranean

Agreement Establishing an Association between the European Communities and their

Member States, of the One Part, and the Kingdom of Morocco, of the Other Part, Official

Journal of the European Union 2019, L 34, page 1.

65 Kate Bolongaro, ‘Morocco Offers Fish for Land’, politico, 18 April 2018.

66 See for instance European Commission, Answer to Parliamentary Question E- 002738/ 17

(21 June 2017).

67 European Commission, Answer to Parliamentary Question E- 000007/ 20 (12 May 2020).

68 European Commission, Answer to Parliamentary Question E- 001696/ 17 (17 May 2017).

69 For a full and detailed account of EU’s differentiation policy, including withdraw of

financial support and treaty practice, see European Council on Foreign Relations,

Differentiation Tracker.

70 Notice to Importers – Imports from Israel into the Community, Official Journal of the

European Communities 2001, C 328, page 6; Notice to importers — Imports from Israel

into the Community, Official Journal of the European Union 2005, C 20, page 2; Notice to

importers — Imports from Israel into the EU, Official Journal of the European Communities

2012, C 232, p. 5.

Sanctions in Regulating Trade with Illegal Settlements 235

preferential tariff treatment under the 1995 ec- Israel Association Agreement,71

as later on confirmed by the ecj in the Brita case.72 Second, from 2013 onwards, the European Commission modified several implementing legal acts to insert a specific definition of the notion of “State of Israel” within the meaning of EU law as to exclude occupied Palestine from it for the purpose of applying EU

secondary legislation.73 Lastly, the European Commission in 2015, published an “Interpretative Notice on indication of origin of goods from the territories

occupied by Israel since June 1967”,74 so that the labelling of products from the settlements bear the indications of their territory of origin and of their

place of provenance,75 in line with EU consumers law protection and market-

ing standard.76

From the outside, these measures may appear as a step in the right direction.

However, at a closer look, they fall severely short of meeting EU’s obligations of non- recognition and non- assistance. As regards the exclusion of settlement products from the scope of the 1995 ec- Israel Association Agreement, the Commission has immediately faced a practical problem: how to exclude set-tlement products from preferential tariff treatment without identifying those goods in the first place? Consequently, it concluded a technical arrangement

71 Euro- Mediterranean Agreement Establishing an Association Between the European

Communities and Their Member States, of the One Part, and the State of Israel, of the Other

Part, Official Journal of the European Communities 2000, L 147, page 3.

72 ecj, Firma Brita GmbH v Hauptzollamt Hamburg- Hafen, C- 386/ 08, 25 February 2010,

para 52.

73 See for instance Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 594/ 2013 of 21 June 2013

Amending Implementing Regulation (EU) No 543/ 2011 as Regards Marketing Standards

in the Fruit and Vegetables Sector and Correcting that Implementing Regulation, Official

Journal of the European Union 2013, L 170, page 43. After recalling that “[f] or the sake of

market transparency and in accordance with public international law, it should be clar-

ified that the territorial coverage of the certificates is limited to the territory of the State

of Israel excluding the territories under Israeli administration since June 1967, namely the

Golan Heights, the Gaza Strip, East Jerusalem and the rest of the West Bank”, Regulation

(EU) No 594/ 2013 provides for the insertion of the following footnote in Regulation (EU)

No 543/ 2011: “Commission’s approval under Article 15 is given to fruit and vegetables orig-

inating within the State of Israel, excluding the territories under Israeli administration

since June 1967, namely the Golan Heights, the Gaza Strip, East Jerusalem and the rest

of the West Bank”. For the detailed list of implementing acts, see European Council on

Foreign Affairs, Differentiation Tracker.

74 Interpretative Notice on Indication of Origin of Goods from the Territories Occupied by Israel

since June 1967, Official Journal of the European Union 2015, C 375, page 4.

75 For example “product from the West Bank (Israeli settlement)”.

76 In 2019, the ecj confirmed this interpretation as regards EU consumer law. See ecj,

Organisation Juive Européenne, Vignoble Psagot Ltd v Ministre de l’Economie et des

Finances, c- 363/ 18, 12 November 2019.

236 Devers and Moerenhout

with Israel in 2004,77 requiring Israeli authorities to ensure that the place of provenance is indicated on the export documents of all goods placed under their control, whether they originate in Israel or in the illegal settlements. This ensures that European customs authorities can distinguish between settlement products and goods originating in Israel by using a “list of non- eligible loca-

tions” provided to them.78 In short, the European Commission has first had to recognise Israeli settlements under the 2004 technical arrangement to be able to exclude them from the scope of application of the Association Agreement,

even though it claims that the EU does not recognise Israeli settlements.79

The labelling of Israeli settlement products is flawed and limited. First,

except for cosmetics, labelling does not apply to non- food/ industrial goods.80 Second, labelling transfers the onus from the European Commission to the EU

Member States Market Surveillance Authorities,81 the latter being unable to

ensure effective implementation.82 Lastly, the labelling of settlement products only concerns their conformity with EU marketing standards but avoids the question of their legality. Respect for peremptory norms of international law is reduced to a matter of personal choice of EU consumers who may decide whether and to what extent the fundamental rights of a people living under foreign occupation deserve protection. That is clearly not how international law is intended to work.

Concerning the adoption of implementing acts defining the “State of Israel”

for the purpose of EU law, their very utility could be questioned.83 In any event,



77 The full text of the technical arrangement remains so far unpublished.

78 The European Commission refused at first to publish the list of non- eligible locations.

The list is now available online at a European Commission site on taxation and customs.

79 European Commission, Answers to Parliamentary Questions e- 2427/ 05 (29 August

2005) and p- 5212/ 06 (21 December 2006). “In order to eliminate any possibility that the

Community may be construed as having acquiesced to the Israeli practice, the technical

arrangement provides that it ‘is without prejudice to the positions of the parties to the

Association Agreement concerning the application of that Agreement’”.

80 European Commission, Answers to Parliamentary Questions e- 000244/ 2013 (11

March 2013).

81 European Commission, Answers to Parliamentary Questions p- 000918/ 20 (11 March

2013). “The control and enforcement of the correct implementation of EU rules regarding

indication of origin is the primary responsibility of the Member States”.

82 For instance, in the wine sector, the European Middle East Project concluded that only

10 percent of the settlement wines on sale in the EU in 2020 had a correct or partially

correct labelling. See European Middle East Project, Waiting for Enforcement – Origin

Indication of Israeli Settlement Wines on Sale in the EU, February 2020.

83 The notion of “State of Israel” within the meaning of EU law should be already interpreted

in accordance with international law as excluding occupied Palestine without the need

for special legal acts providing for an explicit exclusion. See by analogy ecj, Council of the Sanctions in Regulating Trade with Illegal Settlements 237

this type of measure clearly violates the EU’s obligation of non- assistance. In this regard, the estimated value of settlement imports to the European market necessarily raises the question of the EU’s contribution to the maintenance

of economic activities in the Israeli settlements.84 It also points to a legal gap under EU law that calls for the adoption of a proper regulation of settle-ment trade.

4.2 Prohibiting Settlement Trade under EU Law: A Trade Measure in

Favour of Occupied Peoples and Not an Economic Sanction against

Occupying States

The European Commission has declared several times that the EU does not

consider taking sanctions against Israel in relation to settlements85 because it considers that its policy is best served by “diplomacy” and “constant engage-

ment at all levels with Israeli authorities”.86 The EC even excluded “to propose

import controls on products emanating from the West Bank”.87 Is it correct, however, to place sanctions and import controls on the same footing? Would a ban of settlement products constitute a trade measure or an economic sanc-tion? In the first scenario, the Common Commercial Policy could constitute the adequate legal basis under Article 207 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union. Otherwise, the measure would have to be adopted under the framework of the Common Security Foreign Policy. In terms of decision- making process, the ccp and the cfsp present significant differ-ences. In the case of the ccp, the EC proposes the adoption of legal acts to the

Council of the EU and the European Parliament acting as co- legislators.88 In

the Council, the vote only requires a qualified majority of Member States.89 To the contrary, the adoption of cfsp measures is decided by the Council of



European Union v Front Populaire pour la Libération de la Saguia- el- Hamra et du Rio de Oro

(Front Polisario), c- 104/ 16 P, 21 December 2016, para 114.

84 See also General Court of the European Union, Front Populaire pour la Libération de la

Saguia- el- Hamra et du Rio de Oro (Front Polisario) v Council of the European Union and

European Commission, t- 512/ 12, 15 December 2015, para 231. Here the chamber said that,

“if the European Union allows the export to its Member States of products originating in

that other country which have been produced or obtained in conditions which do not

respect the fundamental rights of the population of the territory from which they origi-

nate, it may indirectly encourage such infringements or profit from them”.

85 See for example European Commission, Answers to Parliamentary Questions e- 011028/ 14

(21 April 2015), e- 006144/ 14 (16 September 2014) and e- 015646/ 2015 (26 February 2016).

86 European Commission, Answer to Parliamentary Questions e- 011113/ 13 (13 December 2013).

87 European Commission, Answer to Parliamentary Questions e- 012580/ 13 (21 January 2013).

88 tfeu Article 207 conjunction with Article 294.

89 teu, Article 16; tfeu, Article 238.

238 Devers and Moerenhout

the EU alone, on its own motion, through unanimity.90 If the cfsp decision bears a commercial component, the High Representative and the European Commission intervene after its adoption to jointly propose to the Council the adoption of the EU implementing regulation based on 215 tfeu. The European

Parliament is only informed of the adoption of the measure.91

From an international law perspective, the solution seems straightforward.

First, non- recognition and non- assistance differ from UN or any other sanc-

tions (see Section 2 above).92 Since international sanctions and countermea-

sures are implemented by the Council of the EU via cfsp measures,93 the obligation to not trade with settlements should – by subtraction – be enforced though the ccp. Second, the very subject matter of the obligation not to trade with settlements deriving from non- recognition and non- assistance is trade, making settlement trade a ccp issue per se. Of course, the legal order of the EU is autonomous from international law and has its own approach that must be taken as a starting point, but the content of that legal order does remain bound by international law, particularly by jus cogens which sits at the apex of the pyramid of legal hierarchy. In this regard, even though the type of interna-tional act or obligation to implement may play a role, the decisive elements to ascertain the legal basis of a given EU measure is the “aim and content of that

measure”94 and its “legal framework”.95 In the case of a measure prohibiting settlement trade, part of the challenge lies in the potential overlap between

the fields and objectives of the csfp and the ccp.96



90 teu, Article 24.

91 tfeu, Article 215.

92 Théodore Christakis, ‘Les Conflits de Sécession en Crimée et dans l’est de l’Ukraine et le

Droit International’, 3 Journal du Droit International (2014) 23. See in particular page 38.

93 ilc, ‘Report of the International Law Commission on the Work of its Fifty- Third Session’,

2(2) Yearbook of the International Law Commission (2001), pages 138– 139, listing the restric-

tive measures adopted by the Council of the EU against Argentina during the Falkland

Islands (Malvinas) crisis and those against Serbia during the war in ex- Yugoslavia as exam-

ples of “collective measures” under Article 54. See also page 96, footnote 349, referring to

the “measures taken by the Council of the European Union against Burma/ Myanmar in

view of ‘severe and systematic violations of human rights in Burma’” as an example of

“Measures taken by States or international organizations other than an injured State or

organization” under Article 57.

94 ecj, Commission v Council (Agreement with Armenia), c- 180/ 20, 2 September 2021, para 32.

95 ecj, Hungary v Parliament and Council, c- 156/ 21, 16 February 2022, para 108.

96 This question is all the more fundamental that Article 40 of the teu contains a mutual

non- affectation clause which is designed to ensure the implementation of the cfsp does

not impinge upon the application of the procedures and the extent of the powers of EU

institutions applicable in the fields of non- cfsp EU external policies and vice- versa. The

objective is to avoid for instance that EU Member States use cfsp as a legal basis to adopt Sanctions in Regulating Trade with Illegal Settlements 239

Regarding the ccp, it is settled caselaw that “an EU act falls within that pol-

icy if it relates specifically to such trade in that it is essentially intended to promote, facilitate or govern such trade and has direct and immediate effects

on it”.97 By comparison, following a reading of Article 23 of the Treaty of the European Union, in conjunction with Article 21 of the teu, csfp objectives

have a “wide scope”.98 They include for instance, “the preservation of peace

and the strengthening of international security”99 and the objectives of consol-idating and supporting “human rights and the principles of international law”,

which are amongst those “traditionally”100 assigned to the cfsp. Given the fun-damental character of norms giving rise to Third State responsibility, one may argue that not trading with settlements pursues a cfsp objective. However, objectives laid down in Article 21 of the teu are horizontal and transversal,

and apply to all EU policies,101 especially to the ccp.102 In fact, it is easy to find trade regulations based on Article 207 of the tfeu that nonetheless pursues

cfsp objectives.103

It also happens often that measures are based on the cfsp first, but that the

legal basis is changed to the ccp as the perception of the issue evolves.104 For instance, a cfsp measure targeting a specific country can be used as a direct

a trade measure disguised as a sanction to preclude the European Parliament for being

involved in the decision- making process. Serving as a bridge between cfsp objectives and

EU actions involving economic measures, Article 215 tfeu is the counterpart under the

tfeu of the mutual non- affectation clause contained in Article 40 teu. This repartition

of labour explains why pesc decisions with an economic component always come along

implementing regulations based on Article 215 tfeu.

97 ecj, Opinion 3/ 15 (Free Trade Agreement with Singapore), 16 May 2017, para 61.

98 ecj, PJSC Rosneft Oil Company v Her Majesty’s Treasury and Others, c- 72/ 15, 28 March 2017,

para. 88.

99 ecj, Commission v Council (Proliferation of small arms and light weapons), c- 91/ 05, 20 May

20 May 2005, para 84.

100 Advocate General Bot opinion delivered on 31 January 2012, European Parliament v Council

of the European Union, c- 130/ 10, para 63; Advocate General Bot opinion delivered on 30

January 2014, European Parliament v Council of the European Union, c- 658/ 11, para. 87.

101 teu, Article 21(3) teu.

102 tfeu, Article 207(1).

103 See for example Regulation (EU) 2021/ 821 of the European Parliament and of the Council

of 20 May 2021 Setting Up a Union Regime for the Control of Exports, Brokering, Technical

Assistance, Transit and Transfer of Dual- use Items (Recast), Official Journal of the European

Union 2021, L 206, page 1.

104 For the evolution of the legal basis on dual- use goods from the cfsp to the ccp see Tamara

Perišin and Sam Koplewicz, ‘The Nexus Between the CCP and the CFSP’ in Michael Hahn

and Guillaume Van der Loo (eds), Law and Practice of the Common Commercial Policy –

The First 10 Years After the Treaty of Lisbon (Brill Publishers 2021) 402– 415. In particular,

pages 404– 406.

240 Devers and Moerenhout

source of inspiration for a general measure under the ccp.105 As for the case-law, the ecj ruled in the past that domestic measures pursuing national foreign and security policies of EU Member States can fall within the scope of the ccp

since they affect the trade relations of the EU,106 which is an exclusive compe-

tence.107 Regarding the articulation between the ccp and the csfp as an EU common policy, the caselaw is still under construction. However, the court has already ruled that the test of the predominant legal basis applies to the rela-

tions between the csfp and the ccp.108 Accordingly, if an EU legal act mainly pursues ccp objectives but contains a csfp component, it can be based solely on Article 207, tfeu if the ccp objective is predominant whereas the cfsp

component is incidental.109 It follows that whether an EU measure regulating settlement trade must be based on the cfsp or the ccp is a question of propor-tion and modalities, rather than a matter of principle. In this respect, several elements indicate that the ccp would constitute the adequate legal basis.

First, even though the ccp is mainly aimed at fostering trade relations

with third countries, it can be used as a legal basis for measures restricting or

prohibiting international trade.110 Second, there already exists EU legislation



105 See for example European Commission, Proposal for a Regulation of the European

Parliament and of the Council on the Import of Cultural Goods, com/ 2017/ 375 final – 2017/

0158 (cod), 13 July 2017, page 3. “Currently, there are no common rules regarding the

import of cultural goods from third countries, except Council Regulation (ec) No 1210/

2003 of 7 July 2003 concerning certain specific restrictions on economic and financial

relations with Iraq and Council Regulation (EU) No 36/ 2012 concerning restrictive mea-

sures in view of the situation in Syria, which provide for a prohibition of trade in cultural

goods with these countries. The initiative aims to complement those two measures and

also the existing EU legislation on the export of cultural goods (Regulation (ec) No 116/

2009)”.

106 ecj, Fritz Werner Industrie- Ausrüstungen GmbH v Federal Republic of Germany, c- 70/ 94,

17 October 1995, paras 10– 11; ecj, Criminal Proceedings Against Peter Leifer, Reinhold Otto

Krauskopf and Otto Holzer, c- 83/ 94, 17 October 1995, paras 7– 13; ecj, The Queen, ex parte

Centro- Com Srl v HM Treasury and Bank of England, c- 124/ 95, 14 January 1997, paras 24–

27. Hence, national prohibitions to export dual- use goods to third countries are a trade

restriction that affect the exclusive competence of the EU and can only be justified on the

ground of the public policy exception.

107 tfeu, Article 3(1)(e).

108 See for example ecj, Commission v Council (Agreement with Kazakhstan), c- 244/ 17, 4

September 2019, paras 37– 38.

109 To the contrary, if the ccp and cfsp objectives/ components are inextricably intertwined,

the adoption of two distinct legal acts will be necessarily since the procedures laid down

for each legal act are incompatible with each other. See for instance ecj, Commission v

Council (Proliferation of Small Arms and Light Weapons), c- 91/ 05, 20 May 2005, para 108.

110 ecj, European Commission v Council of the European Union, c- 137/ 12, 22 October 2013, para

69. “[A] ban on the export of illicit devices to the European Union concerns the defence Sanctions in Regulating Trade with Illegal Settlements 241

based on the ccp that regulates trade in goods originating in conflict zones,

such as “blood diamonds”111 or certain precious metals.112 In the same manner, in 1986, prior to the limited jurisdiction conferred to the Palestinian Authority under the Oslo Accords, the EU adopted a regulation applicable to imports for

the occupied Palestinian territory.113 Despite the clear sensitivity of the politi-cal context, the regulation was based on the ccp alone. Third, in 2018, the Irish Parliament pushed for the adoption of a bill prohibiting the import of settle-ment goods and services from occupied territories. The main argument from the European Commission for opposing it was that such a bill would interfere

with the EU’s exclusive competence on trade.114 This is in complete contra-diction with EU Regulation 2015/ 478 of the European Parliament and of the Council on Common Rules for Imports, which confirms that the regulation on imports “shall not preclude the adoption or application by Member States of prohibitions, quantitative restrictions or surveillance measures on the ground

of public morality, public policy or public security”.115 This provision has given



of the European Union’s global interests and falls, by its very nature, within the ambit of

the common commercial policy”.

111 Council Regulation (EC) No 2368/ 2002 of 20 December 2002 Implementing the Kimberley

Process Certification Scheme for the International Trade in Rough Diamonds, Official

Journal of the European Communities 2002, L 358, page 28.

112 Regulation (EU) 2017/ 821 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 May 2017

Laying Down Supply Chain Due Diligence Obligations for Union Importers of Tin, Tantalum

and Tungsten, their Ores, and Gold Originating from Conflict- affected and High- risk

Areas, Official Journal of the European Union 2017, L 130, page 1. On the definition of

“state of armed conflict” within the meaning of Regulation (EU) 2017/ 821 in accordance

with the 1949 Geneva Convention, see Commission Recommendation (EU) 2018/ 1149 of 10

August 2018 on Non- binding Guidelines for the Identification of Conflict- affected and High-

risk Areas and Other Supply Chain Risks under Regulation (EU) 2017/ 821 of the European

Parliament and of the Council, c/ 2018/ 5367, Official Journal of the European Union 2018, L

208, page 94. See in particular page 98.

113 Council Regulation (EEC) No 3363/ 86 of 27 October 1986 on the Tariff Arrangements Applicable

to Imports into the Community of Products Originating in the Occupied Territories, Official

Journal of the European Union 1986, L 306, page 103; Council Regulation (EEC) No 1134/

91 of 29 April 1991 on the Tariff Arrangements Applicable to Imports into the Community of

Products Originating in the Occupied Territories and Repealing Regulation (EEC) No 3363/

86, Official Journal of the European Union 1991, L 112, p. 1.

114 European Commission, Answers to Parliamentary Questions p- 011312/ 10, e- 000047/ 11

(7 February 2011) and p- 000081- 19 (14 February 2019). See also European Commission,

Letter to the Clerk to the Joint Committee, Select Committee on Foreign Affairs and Trade and

Defence of the Leinster House, 5 June 2019, Ref. Ares (2019)3638770 – 06/ 06/ 2019.

115 Regulation (EU) 2015/ 478 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 March 2015

on Common Rules for Imports, Official Journal of the European Union 2015, L83/ 16, 27

March 2015.

242 Devers and Moerenhout

way to other Member State initiatives to regulate trade with illegal settlements in Finland and Belgium. Finally, according to the caselaw of the ecj, on the one hand, occupied territories have a separate and distinct status from that

of Occupying States.116 And, on the other hand, occupied peoples are Third

Parties to EU- relations with occupiers.117

Due to this distinction, a measure prohibiting settlement trade from occu-

pied territories could not be constructed as targeting Occupying Powers, since the notion of “country” within the meaning of Article 215, tfeu – which is the legal basis to implement the economic part of cfsp decisions of the Council – cannot be interpreted, as a matter of EU law, as including the sovereign terri-tory of an Occupying State and the territory it occupies. In the same manner, a product originating in an occupied territory does not originate from the ter-ritory of the Occupying State. Therefore, a ban on settlement goods does not affect goods produced by the Occupying State in its own sovereign territory since settlement goods do not originate in its sovereign territory but in the ter-ritory that it occupies. Besides, if a ban on settlement products may have some adverse effects on occupiers as any other measures implementing EU’s obliga-

tions of non- recognition and non- assistance,118 the degree of inconveniency

116 ecj, Council of the European Union v Front Populaire pour la Libération de la Saguia- el-

hamra et du Rio de Oro (Front Polisario), c- 104/ 16 P, 21 December 2016, para 114, para 92; ecj,

Western Sahara Campaign UK, c- 266/ 18, 27 February 2018, paras 62– 63; ecj, Organisation

Juive Européenne, Vignoble Psagot Ltd v Ministre de l’Economie et des Finances, C- 363/ 18, 12

November 2019, paras 31 and 34– 35.

117 ecj, Council of the European Union v Front Populaire pour la Libération de la Saguia- el-

hamra et du Rio de Oro (Front Polisario), c- 104/ 16 P, 21 December 2016, para 106. “In the light

of that information [i.e. that the Sahrawi people enjoy the right to self- determination and

independence and that the polisario Front is their UN- recognised representative], the

people of Western Sahara must be regarded as a ‘third party’ within the meaning of the

principle of the relative effect of treaties, as stated in substance by the Advocate General

in point 105 of his Opinion. As such, that third party may be affected by the implementa-

tion of the [2000 EU- Morocco] Association Agreement in the event that the territory of

Western Sahara comes within the scope of that agreement, without it being necessary to

determine whether such implementation is likely to harm it or, on the contrary, to benefit

it. It is sufficient to point out that, in either case, that implementation must receive the

consent of such a third party. In the present case, however, the judgment under appeal

does not show that the people of Western Sahara have expressed any such consent”. See

ecj, Firma Brita GmbH v Hauptzollamt Hamburg- Hafen, C- 386/ 08, 25 February 2010,

para 52.

118 See for example the answer to Petition No 1269/ 2014 by U. L. (German), “on the ban

on imports of eggs and poultry products from Israel”, 29 September 2015, before the

Committee on Petitions of the European Parliament, in which the European Commission

clarifies that the EU’s refusal to recognize certification delivered by Israeli authorities

to poultry products and eggs originating in the settlements is not a sanction but only Sanctions in Regulating Trade with Illegal Settlements 243

falls short of meeting the threshold of coercion of a sanction. In this sense, the EU has already adopted measures based on the ccp having the effect of prohi-bitions in trade towards certain cases of prolonged occupation. For instance, the European Council adopted in 2004 a regulation based on the ccp estab-

lishing a license import system on certain steel products from Moldova.119

It is a fact that Moldova’s steel industry is concentrated in Transnistria,120 a region occupied by the Russian Federation. When asked about the deliber-ate refusal of the Moldovan authorities to issue export licenses for products from Transnistria to European importers, the Commission emphasised the

virtues of this regulation.121 Later, in 2008, the Council adopted on the basis of the ccp, a regulation providing for autonomous trade preferences for the Republic of Moldova, de facto restricting exports from Transnistria unless com-panies settled in the occupied region registered with the Chisinau Chamber of

Commerce.122 However, those measures were never perceived or described as sanctions against Russia for its occupation of Transnistria.

In a similar way, after the accession of the Republic of Cyprus to the

European Union, the European Council adopted Regulation (ec) No 866/



derives from the “correct application of existing EU law” in line with the principle of

non- recognition.

119 Council Regulation (EC) No 1762/ 2004 of 24 September 2004 on Administering of the Double-

checking System Without Quantitative Limits in Respect Of the Export of Certain Steel

Products from the Republic of Moldova to the European Community, Official Journal of the

European Union 2004, L 315, p. 1.

120 Esther Barbé and Benjamin Kienzle, ‘Security Provider or Security Consumer: The European

Union and Conflict Management’, 12 European Foreign Affairs Review (2007) page 529.

“[T]he Commission and Moldova agreed on 29 October 2004 that the Community’s com-

petent authorities would grant import licenses to certain Moldovan steel products only

if they had received previously a special export license issued by the central Moldovan

authorities. Since Moldova’s steel production is concentrated in its breakaway region

Transnistria, this ‘double- check- system’ has the potential to weaken the economic base

that sustains Transnistria’s quasi- independence and to force Transnistrian steel produc-

ers to collaborate with the central Moldovan authorities”.

121 European Commission, Answer to Parliamentary Question P- 3129/ 04 (5 January 2005).

“This agreement can be expected to provide an additional incentive to the Transnistrian

self- proclaimed leadership to engage in discussions with the internationally recognised

Moldovan Government”.

122 European Parliament, Workshop – to the Vilnius Summit: the EU’s trade relations with

Moldova and the South Caucasus, 2014, page 27. “While the Transnistria conflict seems

still far away from resolution, over the last years at the economic level Transnistrian enter-

prises have effectively profited from access to the EU market. Their companies that reg-

istered with the Chisinau authorities have been treated as producing goods of ‘Moldovan

origin’. This allowed considerable exports from Transnistria to flow into the EU market”.

244 Devers and Moerenhout

2004123 (the so- called “Green Line Regulation”) governing the movement of persons, goods and services across the Green Line. As regards goods in the northern part of Cyprus occupied by Turkey, those goods can enter the rest of

territory of the EU only through a limited list series of “crossing points”,124 if they are “accompanied by a document issued by the Turkish Cypriot Chamber of Commerce, duly authorised for that purpose by the Commission in agree-

ment with the Government of the Republic of Cyprus”.125 Subsequently, “tak-

ing full account”126 of the EU’s obligation of non- recognition, the Commission proposed the adoption of a second regulation, allowing for direct trade between the northern part of Cyprus and the customs territory of the Union,

exclusively based on the common commercial policy.127 This analysis was rejected by the Council’s Legal Service because the northern part of Cyprus is not a third country to the EU but an integral part of the territory of an EU Member State. However, while the Legal Service undertook a detailed analysis

of the appropriate legal basis,128 at no point did it consider that the measure proposed by the Commission intended to regulate direct trade between the EU and the occupied part of Cyprus and could be analysed as a sanction against Turkey, falling within the scope of the cfsp.

123 Council Regulation (EC) No 866/ 2004 of 29 April 2004 on a Regime under Article 2 of Protocol

No 10 of the Act of Accession, Official Journal of the European Union 2004, L 161, page 128.

124 European Commission, Answer to Parliamentary Question E- 3262/ 2005 (21 November

2005). “[T] here has been no trade of goods from or produced in the northern part of

Cyprus to Member States other than Cyprus via the green line”.

125 Council Regulation (EC) No 866/ 2004 of 29 April 2004 on a Regime under Article 2 of Protocol

No 10 of the Act of Accession, Official Journal of the European Union 2004, L 161, Article

4(5). See also Commission Decision 004/ 604/ EC of 7 July 2004 on the Authorisation of the

Turkish Cypriot Chamber of Commerce According to Article 4(5) of Council Regulation (EC)

No 866/ 2004, Official Journal of the European Union 2004, L 272, page 12.

126 European Commission, Answer to Parliamentary Question E- 4868/ 2010 (11 November

2010). “The United Nations (UN) Security Council Resolutions 541 and 550 referred to

by the Honourable Member call upon all states not to recognise any Cypriot state other

than the Republic of Cyprus. The duty not to recognise the so- called ‘Turkish Republic

of Northern Cyprus’ has been understood by the European Court of Justice (ecj) as an

obligation not to accept any official document required by ec law for import or export

which has been issued by ‘trnc’ authorities. (Anastasiou i, c- 432/ 92). When drafting the

proposals for both the Green Line Regulation (Council Regulation No 866/ 2004) and the

Direct Trade Regulation the Commission took the above-mentioned ecj judgment and

UN Security Council resolutions fully into account […]”.

127 European Commission, Proposal for a Council Regulation on Special Conditions for Trade

with Those Areas of the Republic of Cyprus in which the Government of the Republic of

Cyprus Does not Exercise Effective Control, com (2004) 466 final – 2004/ 0148 (acc), 7 July

2004, page 3. “The legal basis for this Regulation can only be Article 133 ec”.

128 Council of the EU, Opinion of the legal service, 11874/ 04, 11874/ 04, 25 August 2004, pages 2– 4. Sanctions in Regulating Trade with Illegal Settlements 245

Amongst the practice of the EU, at the time of writing, the only counter-

example is Crimea. In 2014, the Council adopted the Decision 2014/ 386/

cfsp,129 implemented by Regulation (EU) No 692/ 2014,130 which bans imports originating in Crimea/ Sevastopol into the EU, except for goods checked by

the Ukraine authorities and granted a certificate of origin.131 However, it is not conclusive for several reasons. First, this measure has been adopted “in response to the illegal annexation of Crimea and Sevastopol” but does not apply to the other occupied Ukrainian territories. Therefore, it constitutes a political reaction designed to send a strong signal to the Russian annexation of Crimea and Sevastopol rather than an economic measure aiming at regulating

settlement trade – a feature that is typical of sanctions.132 Second, the Council decision to ban imports from Crimea and Sevastopol was made after several

sanctions against Russia targeting individuals/ entities133 and specific sectors

of the Russian economy.134 Considering this legal framework, the decision

129 Council Decision 2014/ 386/ CFSP of 23 June 2014 Concerning Restrictions on Goods Originating

in Crimea or Sevastopol, In Response to the Illegal Annexation of Crimea and Sevastopol,

Official Journal of the European Union 2014, L 183, page 70.

130 Council Regulation (EU) No 692/ 2014 of 23 June 2014 concerning restrictions on the

import into the Union of goods originating in Crimea or Sevastopol, in response to the

illegal annexation of Crimea and Sevastopol, Official Journal of the European Union 2014,

L 183, page 9.

131 Ibid., Article 3(a); Council Decision 2014/ 386/ CFSP of 23 June 2014 Concerning Restrictions

on Goods Originating in Crimea or Sevastopol, In Response to the Illegal Annexation of

Crimea and Sevastopol, Official Journal of the European Union 2014, L 183, Article 2.

132 “In general terms, restrictive measures are imposed by the EU to bring about a change in

policy or activity by the target country […] in line with the objectives set out in the cfsp

Council Decision”. See Council of the European Union, Guidelines on Implementation and

Evaluation of Restrictive Measures (Sanctions) in the Framework of the EU Common Foreign

and Security Policy, 4 May 2018, para 4. See also para 5: to the contrary, EU sanctions “do

not have an economic motivation”.

133 Council Decision 2014/ 119/ CFSP of 5 March 2014 Concerning Restrictive Measures Directed

Against Certain Persons, Entities and Bodies in View of the Situation in Ukraine, Official

Journal of the European Union 2014, L 66, page 26; Council Regulation (EU) No 208/ 2014

of 5 March 2014 Concerning Restrictive Measures Directed Against Certain Persons, Entities

and Bodies in View of the Situation in Ukraine, Official Journal of the European Union 2014,

L 66, page 1.

134 Council Decision 2014/ 145/ CFSP of 17 March 2014 Concerning Restrictive Measures in

Respect of Actions Undermining or Threatening the Territorial Integrity, Sovereignty and

Independence of Ukraine, Official Journal of the European Union 2014, L 78, page 16;

Council Regulation (EU) No 269/ 2014 of 17 March 2014 Concerning Restrictive Measures In

Respect of Actions Undermining or Threatening the Territorial Integrity, Sovereignty and

Independence of Ukraine, Official Journal of the European Union 2014, L 78, page 6. See

further Council Decision 2014/ 512/ CFSP of 31 July 2014 Concerning Restrictive Measures

In View of Russia’s Actions Destabilising the Situation in Ukraine, Official Journal of the 246 Devers and Moerenhout

can be seen as one measure in a package- deal of sanctions justifying a global approach to the legal basis as a matter of consistency and efficiency. To the contrary, it would have been incoherent to adopt targeted sanctions on Russia but to continue to accept EU imports from Crimea and Sevastopol at the same time. Therefore, the choice of the csfp appears to be circumstantial and corre-sponds to a specific moment in time. It does not constitute a precedent inval-idating the analysis that settlement trade can be regulated on the basis of the ccp. In any event, if the ban on imports from Crimea and Sevastopol qualifies as a sanction, it is because it singles out Russia as an Occupying State, amongst other occupiers. This could be considered as problematic, because using it as a sanction allows the EU to pick and choose when to withhold trade from ille-gal settlements, rather than having a general rule to prohibit it, regardless of whether the occupying force is an ally of the EU or not. A permanent and gen-eral regulation applicable to all situations of military occupation – current and future – regardless the occupier, would constitute a trade measure and not an economic sanction.

4.3 The European Commission’s Decision to Register the European

Citizens’ Initiative on Settlement Trade: The Way forward for the

Adoption of a Trade Measure

In July 2019, in order to challenge the EU’s inaction, a group of EU citizens submitted to the European Commission a European Citizens’ Initiative asking

for a ban on settlement goods based on the ccp.135 The European Citizens’ Initiative is a novelty introduced by the Lisbon Treaty in 2009. Following from Article 11(4), teu, this mechanism allows for EU Citizens to invite the European Commission, “to submit any appropriate proposal on matters where citizens consider that a legal act of the Union is required for the purpose of implementing the Treaties”. The European Citizens’ Initiative bears a funda-mental character under EU law. Whereas democracy is one of the founding



European Union 2014, L 229, page 13; Council Regulation (EU) No 833/ 2014 of 31 July 2014

Concerning Restrictive Measures In View of Russia’s Actions Destabilising the Situation in

Ukraine, Official Journal of the European Union, 2014, L 229, page 1.

135 The specific petition text was: “The Commission, as Guardian of the Treaties, has to

ensure consistency of Union’s policy and compliance with fundamental rights and inter-

national law in all areas of EU law, including ccp. It must propose legal acts to prevent EU

legal entities from both importing products originating in illegal settlements in occupied

territories and exporting to such territories, in order to preserve the integrity of the inter-

nal market and to not aid or assist the maintenance of such unlawful situations”.

Sanctions in Regulating Trade with Illegal Settlements 247

values of the EU,136 the eci “concern[s] the right of citizens to participate in

the democratic life of the [EU]”137 by conferring on them “a right comparable

to that held […] by the Parliament and the Council”138 to request the European Commission to submit any appropriate proposal for a legal act.

In practical terms, EU citizens can use the eci to suggest concrete legal

changes in any field where the European Commission has the power to pro-pose new legislation, for instance in areas including the environment, agri-culture, or international trade. The eci must be launched by at least seven

EU citizens from seven different Member States.139 Once the Initiative has been registered, it must gather the support of at least one million EU citizens

with a minimum threshold reached in a least seven EU countries.140 If so, the European Commission is obliged to consider in- depth the measure pro-posed by the eci. As in case of requests by the Parliament and the Council, the European Commission remains free to decide whether or not to propose a

new legal act.141 It must though justify its decision, which is subject to judicial

review.142

Regarding the registration of the eci, the European Commission “shall reg-

ister the initiative if none of the parts of the initiative manifestly falls outside the framework of the Commission’s powers to submit a proposal for a legal

act of the Union for the purpose of implementing the Treaties”.143 Here the

notion of “powers” is two- folded.144 On the one hand, the subject- matter of the measure proposed by the eci must fall within the competences of the EU. On the other hand, it must concern a domain where the European Commission



136 ecj, Patrick Grégor Puppinck and Others v Commission, C- 418/ 18 P, 19 December 2019,

para 64.

137 ecj, Alexios Anagnostakis v Commission, c- 589/ 15 P, 12 September 2017, para 24.

138 ecj, Patrick Grégor Puppinck and Others v Commission, c- 418/ 18 P, 19 December 2019,

para 61.

139 Regulation (EU) 2019/ 788 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 April 2019

on the European Citizens’ Initiative, Official Journal of the European Union 2019, L 130,

Article 5(1).

140 Ibid., Article 3(b).

141 teu, Article 17 (2).

142 ecj, Patrick Grégor Puppinck and Others v Commission, c- 418/ 18 P, 19 December 2019,

para 96; General Court of the European Union, European Citizens’ Initiative One of Us v

Commission, t- 561/ 14, 23 April 2018, paras 68– 101.

143 Regulation (EU) 2019/ 788 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 April 2019 on

the European Citizens’ Initiative, Official Journal of the European Union 2019, L 130, Article

6(3)(c).

144 General Court of the European Union, Balázs- Árpád Izsák and Attila Dabis v Commission,

t- 529/ 13, 10 May 2016, para 59.

248 Devers and Moerenhout

holds the power of initiative to propose a legal act. At the stage of the reg-istration, the European Commission has no margin of appreciation at all. It

must register the Initiative “to the extent”145 that it does not manifestly fall outside its competences whereas it has no general and inherent power but

is only “entitled”146 by EU law to refuse registration. Besides, the question as to whether the measure proposed by the eci falls within the framework of the Commission’s powers, is “essentially a question of the interpretation and

application of the relevant provisions of the Treaties”.147 It means that it is not necessary to ascertain that proof has been provided of all the factual elements relied on by the organisers or that the reasoning behind the Initiative is ade-quate. The European Commission must confine itself to examining whether, “from an objective point of view”, the proposed measure by the eci “envisaged

in the abstract” could be adopted on the basis of the treaties.148 Therefore, in

a similar fashion to principles applicable to the choice of legal basis,149 the Commission must only take into consideration “the subject matter and objec-

tives of the proposed eci”150 to decide on its registration.

In the case of the eci proposing a ban on settlement goods, the European

Commission considered that the proposed measure was a sanction, even if it had previously argued that the draft Irish bill on the same subject was

impeding on its exclusive competence.151 Accordingly, since it has no compe-tence to propose the adoption of cfsp decisions to the Council of the EU, it found that the measure proposed by the eci fell outside the framework of its powers and refused to register it. In reaction, the organisers of the Initiative

145 ecj, Alexios Anagnostakis v Commission, c- 589/ 15 P, 12 September 2017, para 26.

146 Ibid., para 50.

147 ecj, Balázs- Árpád Izsák and Attila Dabis v Commission, c- 420/ 16 p, 7 March 2019, para 61.

148 Ibid., para 62.

149 Ibid., para 67.

150 Ibid., para 45.

151 Commission Decision (EU) 2019/ 1567 of 4 September 2019 on the Proposed Citizens’ Initiative

Entitled ‘Ensuring Common Commercial Policy Conformity with EU Treaties and Compliance

with International Law, Official Journal of the European Union 2019, L 241, page 12. “A legal

act covering the subject matter of the proposed citizens’ initiative could only be adopted

on the basis of Article 215 tfeu. (6) However, a prerequisite for a legal act to be adopted

on the basis of Article 215 tfeu is a [csfp] decision adopted [by the Council of the EU]

in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title v of the Treaty on European Union which pro-

vides for the interruption or reduction, in part or completely, of economic and financial

relations with the third country concerned. The Commission does not have the power to

submit proposals for such a decision. In the absence of a corresponding decision adopted

in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title v of the Treaty on European Union, the Commission

does not have the power to submit a proposal for a legal act to be adopted on the basis of

Article 215 tfeu”.

Sanctions in Regulating Trade with Illegal Settlements 249

successfully challenged the refusal of the European Commission before the European Court of Justice. On 12 May 2021, the EU General Court found that the European Commission grossly failed its obligation to state reasons for its

refusal152 because it neither explained why the ccp could not be used as a legal

basis,153 nor why the proposed measure “had to be categorized necessarily and

solely”154 as a sanction.

After the ruling of the court, due to the obligation of EU institutions to

implement judgements155 with regards to the grounds of annulment,156 the European Commission could no longer escape considering the merits of the

ccp as a legal basis for banning settlement products. On 8 September 2021,157 as expected, it reassessed its refusal and reversed its initial decision. Referring to the above- mentioned caselaw of the ecj, the European Commission found that a measure requiring “import and export prohibitions or restrictions vis- à- vis territories that are occupied under international law” would have a “spe-

cific link with international trade”.158 Since the measure proposed by the eci was “intended to govern in a general manner EU international trade, without targeting any specific country or territory”, it “would fall within the scope

of Article 207, tfeu even if it pursues foreign policy objectives”.159 In other words, the European Commission confirmed that the measure proposed by the eci mainly pursues a ccp objective whereas its cfsp component remains incidental at best. In line with the distinction between Third State responsi-bility and sanctions under international law, prohibiting settlement trade is a trade measure under EU law and not a sanction.



152 General Court of the European Union, Tom Moerenhout and Others v Commission, T-

789/ 19, 12 May 2021, para 38. “[I] t is clear that the statement of reasons provided by the

Commission in the contested decision […] does not make it possible to understand the

reasoning for the choice of that legal basis”.

153 Ibid., para 34.

154 Ibid., para 38.

155 tfeu, Article 266.

156 See for example ecj, CM Eurologistik GmbH v Hauptzollamt Duisburg and Grünwald

Logistik Service GmbH (GLS) v Hauptzollamt Hamburg- Stadt, c- 283/ 16, 28 January 2016,

para 49.

157 Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2021/ 1484 of 8 September 2021 on the Request for

Registration of the European Citizens’ Initiative Entitled ‘Ensuring Common Commercial

Policy Conformity with EU Treaties and Compliance with International Law’ Pursuant to

Regulation (EU) 2019/ 788 of the European Parliament and of the Council, Official Journal of

the European Union 2021, L 328, page 1.

158 Ibid.

159 Ibid. The European Commission also confirmed that the Initiative “neither manifestly

abusive, frivolous or vexatious, nor manifestly contrary to the values of the Union”.

250 Devers and Moerenhout

As emphasised by the ecj, “the particular added value of the eci mecha-

nism resides not in certainty of outcome, but in the possibilities and oppor-tunities that it creates for [EU] citizens to initiate debate on policy within the EU institutions without having to wait for the commencement of a legislative

procedure”.160 Future will tell if the eci on settlement trade receives support from at least millions of EU citizens across Europe. In any case, the registration of the Initiative is already an important achievement given the implications of the recognition of settlement trade as a trade issue.

By accepting to register the Initiative, the Commission has acknowledged

that it has the competence to act. This acknowledgement raises serious ques-tions about the EU’s lack of reaction. It means that for all these past years the Commission has limited itself to ineffective measures where it could have proposed that the Council of the EU and the Parliament adopt a meaning-ful regulation on settlement trade. In light of the EU’s obligations of non- recognition and non- assistance under international law, the powers of the European Commission over settlement trade even imply that it has the duty to act against settlement products.

Moreover, csfp measures require unanimity amongst EU Member States

within the Council. By comparison, ccp measures are adopted according to the “qualified majority” rule, meaning that 55 percent of EU countries must vote in favour – in other words 15 out of 27 – representing at least 65 percent

of the total EU population. Therefore, absence of unanimity161 on settlement trade is no longer a valid excuse for not acting.

As a last note, the European Parliament co- legislates with the Council on

matters relating to the ccp. As the expectations grow amongst the public opin-

ion,162 the acknowledgement of settlement trade as a trade issue will allow



160 ecj, Patrick Grégor Puppinck and Others v Commission, c- 418/ 18 P, 19 December 2019,

para 70.

161 See by way of comparison, European Commission, Answer to Parliamentary Question

E- 000890/ 17 (5 April 2017). “The suspension of the EU- Israel Association Agreement is a

step that cannot be taken without the unanimous decision of all Member States. Political

engagement and dialogue are the most effective ways to convey our concerns”.

162 Advocate General Hogan, opinion delivered on 13 June 2019, Organisation Juive

Européenne, Vignoble Psagot Ltd v Ministre de l’Economie et des Finances, c- 363/ 18, para 52.

“[A] dherence to the requirements of international law is regarded by many — and not

just by a limited cadre of experts specialising in the field of international law and diplo-

macy — as playing a vital role in the maintenance of international peace and security and

as a harbinger of justice in an otherwise unjust world. This is perhaps especially true in

the context of the citizens of the Union who, even within the lifetime of some, witnessed

the destructive impact of brute force in an era where some countries had come to believe Sanctions in Regulating Trade with Illegal Settlements 251

for greater scrutiny by the European Parliament. By unlocking Article 207 as a legal basis, the eci on settlement trade has helped to pave the way for the adoption – better sooner than later hopefully – of a regulation which satisfies the EU’s obligations of non- recognition and non- assistance.



5 Conclusion

It is clear under international law that the act of trading with illegal settlements recognises and assists breaches of peremptory norms of international law. Withholding trade with illegal settlements is therefore a customary and self- executing obligation under the duties of non- recognition and non- assistance. These are vastly different from sanctions, which are intended to support for-eign policy interests and are limited in duration and disappear once a conflict is resolved, political determination dwindles, or the timeframe in the decision on sanctions expires. Rather, not trading with illegal settlements is a rule that follows from the quintessential objective of international public law to safe-guard international peace and stability.

In the EU too, as a result of judicial proceedings around a European

Citizens Initiative, the European Commission has now recognised that hav-ing a general rule to stop trade with illegal settlements once and for all, is not a sanction, but a trade measure. This law is needed to implement duties of non- recognition and non- assistance and given the exclusive competence of the European Commission over trade, it is the European Commission that must propose the law. However, where EU law and jurisprudence develops in the right direction, the politics of the European Commission are more incon-sistent than ever before, regardless of its explicit acknowledgment that it has the competence to enact trade measures that are intended to protect interna-tional law.

If the European Commission continues not to act and therefore violate its

obligations under international law, even if it has clarified that it has the man-date to do so, then Member States can, and should, act unilaterally. They can and should do this to comply with their own obligations of non- recognition and non- assistance under international law. Within EU law, Member States can do so by relying on the Common Rules on Imports, which permit Member



that international law was simply an empty promise to the oppressed and vulnerable of

the world and that it could be disregarded with impunity”.

252 Devers and Moerenhout

States to implement import prohibitions for reasons of public policy and pub-

lic morality.163



163 Regulation (EU) 2015/ 478 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 March 2015 on

Common Rules for Imports, Official Journal of the European Union 2015, L 83, Article 24(2)

(a).





chapter 11


Palestine, Israel, and the International

Criminal Court

Nada Kiswanson



The Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court announced the initiation

of a long- awaited investigation in the Situation in the State of Palestine1 on 3

March 2021.2 This announcement followed a decision by Pre- Trial Chamber i, finding that the icc has territorial jurisdiction over the Palestinian territory occupied in 1967, namely the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and the

Gaza Strip.3 Because the icc can only exercise complementary jurisdiction, the opening of an investigation has put the spotlight on the potential for account-ability through domestic mechanisms. There are two Israeli domestic avenues theoretically available to Palestinians in the opt that seek to obtain justice or bring violations to an end: the Israeli military justice system and the Israeli High Court of Justice. This chapter will examine these mechanisms, unearth the level of impunity afforded Israelis that commit crimes against Palestinians, and highlight the merits of an icc investigation in the Situation in Palestine as the only available avenue for criminal accountability.

This chapter is divided into three distinct but connected parts. The first part

will present the developments in the Situation in Palestine at the icc. The sec-ond part will introduce the Rome Statute’s complementarity framework. It will then analyse the Israeli High Court of Justice’s approach to international law and discuss the structural, substantive, and procedural characteristics of the Israeli military justice system. The third and final part will present the icc as the only international judicial institution mandated to investigate, prosecute, and punish Israelis responsible for committing war crimes and crimes against



1 Hereinafter Situation in Palestine.

2 icc Office of the Prosecutor, Statement of ICC Prosecutor, Fatou Bensouda, Respecting an

Investigation of the Situation in Palestine, 3 March 2021.

3 icc, Situation in Palestine, Pre- Trial Chamber i, Decision on the ‘Prosecution Request

Pursuant to Article 19(3) for a Ruling on the Court’s Territorial Jurisdiction in Palestine’, icc-

01/ 18- 143, 5 February 2021.



© Nada Kiswanson, 2023 | DOI:10.1163/9789004503

254 Kiswanson

humanity on the Palestinian territory. It will also provide an overview of Rome Statute crimes relevant to Israel’s practices and policies in Palestine.



1 Developments in the Situation in Palestine at the icc

The International Criminal Court was not established to absolve States of their primary duty to investigate, prosecute, and punish individuals responsible for criminal conduct. The complementarity principle on which the Rome Statute rests, expects of States that they exercise primary jurisdiction over crimes com-mitted by their nationals, or over their territory. The court will only exercise jurisdiction when a State is unable or unwilling to do so, with the aim of end-

ing impunity.4 Crucially, the icc’s complementary jurisdiction is restricted to

Rome Statute crimes that are committed after 1 July 20025 on the territory of

a State Party,6 or of a State accepting the jurisdiction of the court by declara-

tion.7 The court may exercise jurisdiction following a referral by a State Party or

the UN Security Council, or upon the initiative of the icc Prosecutor.8

The State of Palestine submitted a declaration accepting the jurisdiction of

the icc pursuant to Article 12(3) of the Rome Statute on 1 January 2015 “for the purpose of identifying, prosecuting and judging authors and accomplices within the jurisdiction of the Court committed in the occupied Palestinian ter-

ritory, including East Jerusalem, since June 13, 2014”.9 The following day, the State of Palestine deposited an instrument of accession to the Rome Statute with the UN Secretary- General in his function as depository of multilateral

treaties.10 On 16 January 2015, the icc Prosecutor opened a preliminary exam-

ination into the Situation in Palestine11 and the Rome Statute entered into force



4 The preamble of the Rome Statute recalls that the icc is “determined to put an end to

impunity” and that “it is the duty of every State to exercise its criminal jurisdiction over

those responsible for international crimes”. It also emphasises that the icc “shall be com-

plementary to national jurisdictions”. See also Rome Statute, Articles 1 and 17.

5 Rome Statute, Article 11.

6 Rome Statute, Article 12(2)(a).

7 Rome Statute, Article 12(3).

8 Rome Statute, Article 13.

9 State of Palestine, Declaration Accepting the Jurisdiction of the International Criminal

Court, 31 December 2014.

10 UN Secretary- General, Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, Rome, 17 July 1998,

State of Palestine: Accession, Depository Notification, c.n.13.2015.treaties- xviii.10, 6

January 2015.

11 The former icc Prosecutor, Luis Moreno Ocampo opened a preliminary examination

into the Situation in Palestine in 2009 following the deposit of an Article 12(3) declaration Palestine, Israel, and the International Criminal Court 255

for the State of Palestine on 1 April 2015.12 Additionally, the State of Palestine referred the Situation in Palestine to the Prosecutor on 22 May 2018, pursuant

to Articles 13(a) and 14 of the Rome Statute.13

The icc Prosecutor completed the preliminary examination after five

years. She concluded that an investigation was warranted since, in her view, all the criteria were satisfied, but requested a preliminary ruling from Pre- Trial Chamber i on the icc’s territorial jurisdiction in Palestine, pursuant to

Article 19(3) of the Rome Statute.14 Indicating her awareness of the political environment in which an investigation would be carried out, the Prosecutor explained that such an unusual ruling was necessary “to facilitate a cost- effective and expeditious conduct […] on the soundest legal foundation,

including by ensuring State cooperation”.15 The Pre- Trial Chamber issued its decision on 5 February 2021 after hearing from the State of Palestine, vic-tims and an unprecedented number of amici curiae, including States Parties, on matters ranging from the status of the State of Palestine before the icc Assembly of States Parties, bilateral and multilateral statehood recognition, potential constraints placed by the Oslo Accords on the icc’s potential exer-

cise of jurisdiction, sovereignty, and non- cooperation.16 Pre- Trial Chamber i confirmed that Palestine is a State Party to the Rome Statute, that it is the State on the territory of which the conduct in question occurred, and that the icc’s



by the Minister of Justice of the Government of Palestine on 22 January 2009. The sub-

sequent preliminary examination opened on 16 January 2015 was founded on a new

and separate Article 12(3) declaration, enabled by the UN General Assembly’s vote that

accorded Palestine non- member observer State status. See icc Office of the Prosecutor,

The Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, Fatou Bensouda, Opens a Preliminary

Examination of the Situation in Palestine, 16 January 2015; icc Office of the Prosecutor,

Situation in Palestine, 3 April 20212.

12 UN Secretary- General, Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, Rome, 17 July 1998,

State of Palestine: Accession, Depository Notification, c.n.13.2015.treaties- xviii.10, 6

January 2015.

13 State of Palestine, Referral by the State of Palestine Pursuant to Articles 13(a) and 14 of the

Rome Statute, 15 May 2018.

14 icc, Situation in Palestine, Prosecution Request Pursuant to Article 19(3) for a Ruling on

the Court’s Territorial Jurisdiction in Palestine, icc- 01/ 18, 22 January 2020; and icc Office

of the Prosecutor, Statement of ICC Prosecutor, Fatou Bensouda, on the Conclusion of the

Preliminary Examination of the Situation in Palestine, and Seeking a Ruling on the Scope of

the Court’s Territorial Jurisdiction, 20 December 2019.

15 icc, Situation in Palestine, Prosecution Request Pursuant to Article 19(3) for a Ruling on

the Court’s Territorial Jurisdiction in Palestine, icc- 01/ 18, 22 January 2020, para 20.

16 See for example Al- Haq, Review Paper: Arguments Raised in Amicus Curiae Submissions in

the Situation in the State of Palestine Before the International Criminal Court, 2020. 256 Kiswanson

territorial jurisdiction does extend, as the Prosecutor had asserted, to the ter-ritories occupied by Israel since 1967, consisting of the West Bank, including

East Jerusalem, and the Gaza Strip.17 A month after the Chamber’s decision, the icc Prosecutor announced that she had opened an investigation into the

Situation in Palestine.18

The icc Prosecutor is under an obligation to notify all States Parties, as

well as other States that would normally exercise jurisdiction over the crimes

concerned, of the initiation of an investigation.19 Within one month of such notification, a State may inform the court that it is investigating the criminal

conduct in question and request the Prosecutor to defer to its investigation.20 Importantly, the Rome Statute only accommodates requests for deferral of investigations of persons, and not requests for deferral of the entire situa-

tion.21 There is no information suggesting that either the State of Palestine or the State of Israel have made deferral requests of persons under Article 18(2).

In the absence of Article 18 deferral requests and in light of the Prosecutor’s

conclusions and the Pre- Trial Chamber ruling, there are no substantive or pro-cedural reasons why the icc Prosecutor should not investigate the Situation in Palestine and pursue all persons criminally responsible for the commission of Rome Statute crimes in the opt. All relevant Rome Statute criteria that safeguard the sovereignty and primary jurisdiction of States (see for example Articles 12, 13, 17, 18, and 53) are satisfied.



2 Israel’s Unwillingness and Inability to Investigate and Prosecute

Israelis

Israel is not a party to the Rome Statute and the court cannot therefore investi-gate and prosecute crimes committed on Israel’s territory unless the UN Security Council uses its powers to refer the situation in Israel to the Prosecutor under Article 13(b). Individual Israelis can however be investigated, prosecuted, and



17 icc, Situation in Palestine, Pre- Trial Chamber i, Decision on the ‘Prosecution Request

Pursuant to Article 19(3) for a Ruling on the Court’s Territorial Jurisdiction in Palestine’,

icc- 01/ 18- 143, 5 February 2021, disposition.

18 icc Office of the Prosecutor, Statement of ICC Prosecutor, Fatou Bensouda, Respecting an

Investigation of the Situation in Palestine, 3 March 2021.

19 Rome Statute, Article 18(1).

20 Rome Statute, Article 18(2).

21 In specifying that “the Prosecutor shall defer to the State’s investigation of those persons”,

Article 18(2) of the Rome Statute limits deferrals to persons over which the State itself has

or is investigating with respect to criminal acts under the Rome Statute.

Palestine, Israel, and the International Criminal Court 257

punished at the icc for Rome Statute crimes that they commit on the territory of the State of Palestine, which is an icc State Party, based on the icc’s juris-

dictional rules described above.22 That the location of the commission of the crime dictates the scope of the icc’s jurisdiction, rather than the nationality

of the perpetrator, flows from the notion of State sovereignty.23 As Kai Ambos recalls, a “State has plenary jurisdiction over persons, property and conduct occurring on its territory, subject only to obligations or the limitations imposed by international law” and no such rule prohibits a State to extend its jurisdic-

tion to the icc.24 In other words, the icc is respecting a State’s sovereignty and international law when it exercises jurisdiction over nationals of non- States Parties for Rome Statute crimes committed on the territory of a State Party. It

is certainly not “overreaching its jurisdiction”.25

The reality is that by virtue of the occupation, Israel has access to the

territory of another sovereign State. Israeli civilians and armed forces are either intermittently or permanently present in the territory of the State of Palestine and Israel controls its indigenous Palestinian population. Moreover, as is alleged in part 3 of this chapter, Israelis commit crimes in the opt. These crimes are not sporadic and rare but widespread and systematic, and they stem from policies and plans put in place by the State of Israel. The State of Israel consequentially finds itself confronted with the prospect of its nationals being brought before the icc.

The Rome Statute does not generate specific legal obligations for non-

State Parties such as Israel.26 Nonetheless, because the State of Israel is a “State which has jurisdiction” within the meaning of Article 17, and a “State which, taking into account the information available, would normally exer-cise jurisdiction over the crimes concerned” for the purpose of Article 18(1) and (2), Israel has before it three options for dealing with the crimes the icc

22 Rome Statute, Articles 12(2)(a) and 13(a) and (c).

23 Ibid.

24 Kai Ambos (ed), Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court: Article- by- Article

Commentary (Beck/ Hart 2022) 817– 818.

25 Ibid.

26 See for example Article 86 of the Rome Statute that obliges States Parties to cooperate

fully with the icc. It does not mention non- State Parties. Notwithstanding, Israel’s status

as non- State Party does not affect its obligations arising from its status as party to other

treaties. Consider, for example, Israel’s obligations under Article 146 of the Fourth Geneva

Convention to search for and bring persons that are alleged to have committed, or to

have ordered to commit, grave breaches. Or Israel’s obligation to investigate persons for

which a reasonable basis exists to believe that they committed torture and submit them

for prosecution, in accordance with inter alia Articles 5, 7, and 12 of the UN Convention

against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. 258 Kiswanson

Prosecutor alleges its nationals have committed: genuinely investigate, and where appropriate prosecute and punish Israelis for international crimes; accept the possibility of Israelis being brought before the icc; or obstruct the

course of justice.27

Article 17(1) of the Rome Statute sets out three situations that will render a

case inadmissible at the icc under Article 19. The first is where the case is being

genuinely investigated or prosecuted by a State that has jurisdiction over it.28 The second is where the case has been investigated by a State that has jurisdic-tion but it has decided not to prosecute, unless that decision resulted from an

inability or unwillingness to genuinely prosecute.29 The third situation arises

when a person has already been tried for the same conduct elsewhere.30 The ne bis in idem rule does not bar the icc from exercising jurisdiction if the pro-

ceedings were for the purpose of shielding the person.31 Or otherwise, "were not conducted independently and impartially in accordance with the norms of due process and conducted in a manner which, in the circumstances, was

inconsistent with the intent to bring a person to justice.32 Indicia that serve to assist the icc in determining whether a State is unwilling include institutional deficiencies, procedural irregularities, longstanding knowledge of crimes with-out action, number of investigations opened, the investigation of persons up the hierarchy, the evidence collected, and rapport between suspected persons

and the authorities when the authorities are not independent.33 The lack of

penal legislation and procedures can also indicate inability.34 The court will also consider whether there has been unjustified delay which in the circum-

stances is inconsistent with an intent to bring a person to justice.35

There are two Israeli domestic avenues that Palestinians in the opt can

attempt to access in order to seek remedy. These are the Israeli military justice system and Israel’s Supreme Court sitting as the Israeli High Court of Justice. The hcj only exercises a judicial review function. It cannot itself investigate, prosecute, or punish Israelis within the meaning of Articles 17 and 19 of the



27 Rome Statute, Article 17.

28 Rome Statute, Article 17(1)(a).

29 Rome Statute, Article 17(1)(b).

30 Rome Statute, Article 17(1)(c).

31 Rome Statute, Article 20(3)(a).

32 Rome Statute, Article 20(3)(b).

33 icc Office of the Prosecutor, Informal Expert Paper: The Principle of Complementarity in

Practice, 2003, Annex 4.

34 Ibid.

35 Rome Statute, Article 17(2)(b).

Palestine, Israel, and the International Criminal Court 259

Rome Statute.36 An assessment of the hcj’s practice is relevant only in that it gauges the robustness of the Israeli judiciary vis- à- vis the policies and conduct of the State of Israel, including its military arm in the opt, and the potential for Palestinians to broadly enjoy and exercise their fundamental rights to truth, justice, and reparation. Such an assessment can also shed light on the involve-ment of the government and judiciary in acts by Israeli citizens that could amount to Rome Statute crimes.

The next section will demonstrate that: (a) the Israeli hcj has relied on a

matrix of incoherent dissections and distortions of international law and the concepts of non- enforceability and non- justiciability, to refrain from restrain-ing Israel and Israelis, (b) there are valid reservations to be made as to the hcj’s independence and impartiality when called upon to order a remedy for harm that Israelis or the State of Israel cause Palestinians, (c) Israel’s Military Advocate General is not an independent authority and it cannot be expected to open and carry out investigations into allegations of misconduct by Israeli soldiers in accordance with international standards, (d) the Israeli military jus-tice system does not investigate or prosecute the Israelis most responsible for Rome Statute crimes, (e) the Israeli military justice system does not investigate all incidents where the use of force resulted in the deprivation of Palestinian life, (f) preliminary examinations and investigations by the military justice sys-tem span several years and are unduly delayed, (g) domestic investigations are inadequate, and (h) Israeli legislation does not prohibit the transfer of Israeli civilians into the occupied territory and the hcj effectively promotes it.

2.1 Israel’s Supreme Court

Israel’s Supreme Court is a court of appeal of decisions of lower courts and

also a High Court of Justice. The hcj is a court of first and last instance,37 com-petent to deal with “matters in which it sees a need to grant a remedy for the sake of justice and which are not within the jurisdiction of another court or

tribunal”.38 The hcj, which is made up of Israeli citizens and sits as the highest

court of the Occupying Power,39 applies Israeli law and international obliga-tions that it considers binding upon Israel.



36 See Israel, Basic Law: The Judiciary (8 March 1984), Article 15.

37 David Kretzmer and Yaël Ronen, The Occupation of Justice, The Supreme Court of Israel

and the Occupied Territories (oup 2021) 14– 15.

38 Israel, Basic Law: The Judiciary (8 March 1984), Article 15(c).

39 Noam Sohlberg, who serves as an Israeli Supreme Court judge, is a known settler. He resides

inside the opt. See for example Uri Misgav, ‘The Israeli Justice Who Violates International

Law Every Time He Comes Home’, Haaretz, 10 June 2016; ‘Beinisch: I Regret the Sohlberg 260 Kiswanson

Vast numbers of petitions have been brought before the hcj in an attempt to

have it judicially review the legality of Israel’s practices and policies under the

applicable international law over the course of the occupation.40 Palestinians are not permitted to participate in the election of the members of the Israeli legislature or executive and they have no influence over the enactment of laws that the Supreme Court interprets and rules upon.

Like other domestic courts, Israel’s Supreme Court is created by and forms

an integral part of the State in which it sits. And like other domestic courts, Israel’s Supreme Court derives legitimacy and authority from laws drafted and enacted by elected politicians. These laws reflect the interests, ambitions, and outlooks of these politicians and their constituents. In this case, these are

Israeli politicians and Israeli citizens.41

The hcj’s caselaw on some of the most charged issues that have been

brought before it demonstrates that the hcj is attentive to, and indeed influ-enced by, the Israeli environment in which it operates. Its decisions refer to its position in and connection with the State of Israel, as well as its concern for the

Israeli society that it serves.42



Family’s Suffering’, The Jerusalem Post, 21 February 2012; Ben Hartman, ‘Mizrahi Jew,

Settler Among Supreme Court Appointees’, The Jerusalem Post, 9 January 2012.

40 Ibid. See also hcj 7015/ 02, Ajuri et al. v IDF Commander et al. (30 September 2002). In

this decision the hcj said, that the, “Supreme Court, when sitting as the High Court of

Justice, exercises judicial review over the legality of the discretion exercised by the mil-

itary commander. [...] In exercising this judicial review, we do not appoint ourselves as

experts in security matters. We do not replace the security considerations of the military

commander with our own security considerations. We do not adopt any position with

regard to the manner in which security matters are conducted [...]”.

41 In the view of Martin Shapiro and Alec Stone Sweet, domestic courts are “first and fore-

most political actors and agencies”. Martin Shapiro and Alec Stone Sweet, On Law, Politics

and Judicialization (oup 2002) 3.

42 See for example hcj 390/ 79, Izat Muhamed Mustafa Dweikat v The Government of Israel

et al. (19 October 1979). The judgement reads: “with regards to the justiciability of this

matter, that the issue of the settlements was ‘disputed among the government of Israel

and other governments and that it may come up in the crucial international negotiations

in which the government of Israel is involved’. In the interim, the intensity of the contro-

versy has not subsided; it has rather intensified among the Israeli public internally, and

this time it was also reflected in the very resolution to establish a civilian community in

Elon Moreh, which was adopted by a majority of the government of Israel. This is thus

a profound issue which is currently stirring up emotions among the public […] In this

instance, we have appropriate sources for ruling and we have no need to and indeed must

not, when sitting to pronounce judgement, involve our personal views as citizens of a

country. Yet, there is still grave concern that the court would appear to be abandoning

its proper place and descending into the arena of public debate and that its ruling will

be applauded by some of the public and utterly, vehemently rejected by others”. See also Palestine, Israel, and the International Criminal Court 261

Eyal Benvenisti has identified three main approaches to international law

that are relied upon by national courts to accommodate national interests. The first approach is to narrowly interpret domestic legislation that imports inter-national law to limit courts’ opportunities to intervene. The second is to inter-pret the law so as not to upset the government’s interests. The third approach is to avoid deciding on the legal issue by invoking various legal doctrines such

as non- enforceability and non- justiciability.43 Israel’s Supreme Court, sitting as the High Court of Justice, is no exception. As will become evident below, all three of Benvenisti’s identified approaches have been employed by Israel’s hcj when ruling on petitions related to Israel’s practices and policies in the opt. The Supreme Court’s reliance on these approaches, its composition and connection to Israel, its role and position in Israel, and the ability of Israel to amend the laws and procedures that empower and maintain it, all raise serious concerns about the hcj’s independence and impartiality when it deals with issues relating to Palestinians living under Israel’s occupation. The UN Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories expressed in 2016 its fear that the “separation of powers between the judiciary and execu-tive branches in Israel is increasingly narrowing, potentially affecting the inde-

pendence of the judiciary and the decisions of the courts in Israel”.44



Concurring Opinion of Judge Goldberg in the Bargil case. Judge Goldberg writes that

the “petitioners have the right to place a ‘legal mine’ on the Court’s threshold, but the

Court does not have to step on a mine that may destroy its foundations, which are the

public trust in it”. hcj 4481/ 91, Bargil et al. v Government of Israel et al. (25 August 1993),

Concurring Opinion by Eliezer Goldberg. See also hcj 5100/ 94, Public Committee against

Torture v Israel (6 September 1999). Here the hcj said, that, “[d] eciding these applica-

tions weighed heavy on this Court. True, from the legal perspective, the road before us is

smooth. We are, however, part of Israeli society. Its problems are known to us and we live

its history. We are not isolated in an ivory tower. We live the life of this country. We are

aware of the harsh reality of terrorism in which we are, at times, immersed. The appre-

hension that our decision will hamper the ability to properly deal with terrorists and ter-

rorism, disturbs us. We are, however, judges. We demand that others act according to the

law. This is equally the standard that we set for ourselves”.

43 Eyal Benvenisti, ‘Judicial Misgivings Regarding the Application of International Law: An

Analysis of Attitudes of National Courts’, 4(2) European Journal of International Law

(1993) 159, page 161.

44 unhrc, Report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the

Human Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories, a/ 71/

352, 23 August 2016, para 64.

262 Kiswanson

2.1.1 Non- enforceability and Non- justiciability According to Israel’s High Court of Justice, international law must be incorpo-rated into Israeli domestic law to be enforceable. The only exception is custom-

ary international law, which it considers can be enforced on Israel regardless.45 There are two main consequences to this approach; first, it allows the hcj the discretion to decide what rules are part of customary international law. Based on its assessment, it can exclude from its judicial review international law rules and norms that are otherwise relevant and applicable to Israel’s occupation. Second, it permits Israel to evade its international legal obligations by failing to incorporate the corresponding international law.

The full significance of this interpretation has come to the fore in petitions

submitted to the hcj on the legality of Israeli settlements and the transfer of Palestinians under Articles 49(1) and 49(6) of the Fourth Geneva Convention. Israel has not incorporated the Fourth Geneva Convention into Israeli law and the hcj does not accept that these prohibitions are part of customary interna-tional law, and therefore the HCJ has concluded that they are not enforceable

on Israel.46 This “non- enforceability construct” does not give due regard to the applicability of the Fourth Geneva Convention to a situation of belligerent occupation, as set out in Article 2, and the duties that it places on Israel as a High Contracting Party and Occupying Power.

Non- justiciability is another method used by the hcj to constrain its own

powers to adjudicate. That doctrine was put to use in the Bargil v Government of Israel case, in which the petitioners challenged the legality of settlements. hcj judge Meir Shamgar held in the judgement that:

[T] his petition should be denied, for it is defective in that it relates to ques-

tions of policy within the jurisdiction of other branches of a democratic

45 David Kretzmer and Yaël Ronen, The Occupation of Justice, The Supreme Court of Israel

and the Occupied Territories (oup 2021) 61.

46 In regard to Article 49(1) of the Fourth Geneva Convention, see hcj 698/ 80, Qawasmi

v Minister of Defence (4 December 1980), hcj 785/ 87 ‘Abed Al- ‘Afou v IDF Commander

in the West Bank (10 April 1988), and hcj 606/ 78 Ayoub v Minister of Defence (15 March

1979) cited in David Kretzmer and Yaël Ronen, The Occupation of Justice, The Supreme

Court of Israel and the Occupied Territories (oup 2021) 68. In regard to Article 49(6) of

the Fourth Geneva Convention, see hcj 390/ 79, Izat Muhamed Mustafa Dweikat v State

of Israel et al. (19 October 1979). In the opinion of Chief Justice Landau, the issue of set-

tlements is also non- justiciable. He said, “[i] t is better if matters that by their very nature

pertain to the international political plane are dealt with only on that plane” and there-

fore, “albeit the petitioner complaint is generally justiciable in court since property rights

of the individual are involved, this particular aspect of the matter should be regarded as

non- justiciable”.

Palestine, Israel, and the International Criminal Court 263

Government, and it raises an issue whose political elements are domi-

nant and clearly overshadow all its legal fragments. The overriding nature

of the issue raised in the petition is blatantly political. The unsuitability

of the questions raised in the petition for a judicial determination by the

High Court of Justice derives in the present case from a combination of

three aspects that make the issue unjusticiable: intervention in questions

of policy that are in the jurisdiction of another branch of Government,

the absence of a concrete dispute and the predominantly political nature

of the issue.47

By invoking the doctrines of non- justiciability and non- enforceability, the hcj has relieved itself of the task of striking down the formally sanctioned Israeli policy to promote Israeli Jewish settlement in the West Bank. In the process, it has given Israeli governments carte blanche to pursue its settlement policy fear-lessly. The cost of the High Court of Justice’s approach is borne by Palestinians, who have no other avenue to legally challenge Israel’s colonisation of Palestine at the domestic level.

2.1.2 Government- Accommodating Interpretations National courts can also accommodate government- interests and their constituencies by decontextualising, narrowly interpreting, convoluting or

applying select laws.48 Israel’s High Court of Justice masterfully applies these techniques. By way of example, the hcj has decided in several cases that there is no justification for Palestinians building houses without securing a permit from Israeli authorities – even if the planning policy makes it impossible for them to obtain it. The court accepts that the planning system instituted by Israel is appropriate and therefore concerns itself only with the minutia of

its structures, regulations and “remedies”.49 In stark contrast, the UN refers to

Israel’s planning regime as “discriminatory and restrictive”.50 The High Court

47 hcj 4481/ 91, Bargil et al. v Government of Israel et al. (25 August 1993).

48 See Eyal Benvenisti, ‘Judicial Misgivings Regarding the Application of International

Law: An Analysis of Attitudes of National Courts’, 4(2) European Journal of International

Law (1993) 159.

49 See David Kretzmer and Yaël Ronen, The Occupation of Justice, The Supreme Court of Israel

and the Occupied Territories (oup 2021) 286; B’Tselem, Fake Justice, 2019, pages 26– 32;

B’Tselem, He Looked for Justice, but Behold, Oppression: The Supreme Court Sitting as the

High Court of Occupation, December 2019, page 20.

50 ocha, Most Palestinian Plans to Build in Area C Not Approved, 22 June 2021; see also

unhrc, UN Expert Condemns Israel’s Repeated Demolition of Palestinian Bedouin Property,

12 July 2021. Over the past 20 years, 94 percent of applications for building permits were

denied in Area C. unhrc, Report of the Independent International Fact- Finding Mission to 264 Kiswanson

of Justice’s review of Israel’s planning policy disregards entirely the inter-

national law prohibition against the destruction of Palestinian property.51 Consequently, the hcj recently rejected a petition challenging the destruc-tion of property in the Khan Al Ahmar community in the occupied West Bank, located about two kilometres from the Kfar Adumim settlement. Khan Al Ahmar is home to 32 families and has a school built by an Italian organisa-tion that serves 150 children. Most Palestinians in Khan Al Ahmar are refugees expelled in 1948 from territory that became part of the State of Israel. Israel plans to build settlements on Khan Al Ahmar lands, that will eventually split the West Bank in half. On 24 May 2018, the hcj ruled that there was no jus-tification for it to intervene in the decision to execute the demolition orders. The hcj found support for its interpretation in its own caselaw on the dem-

olition of settlement outposts.52 Judge Isaac Amit explained the following in the majority decision:

I am not oblivious to the fact that the aforementioned judgments con-

cerned Jewish settlement on land privately owned by Palestinians,

whereas the matter herein concerns Palestinian settlement on privately

owned Palestinian land (even if the land has allegedly been expropri-

ated). Nevertheless, a final and conclusive judgment remains a final and

conclusive judgment and the military commander has an obligation to

take reasonable, equitable action to have it enforced, whether the illegal

construction was carried out by Israeli or Palestinian residents of Judea

and Samaria.53



Investigate the Implications of the Israeli Settlements on the Civil, Political, Economic, Social

and Cultural Rights of the Palestinian People throughout the Occupied Palestinian Territory,

including East Jerusalem, a/ hrc/ 22/ 63, 7 February 2013, paras 69 – 71; ocha, “Lack of

Permit” Demolitions and Resultant Displacement in Area C, May 2008. Only 13 percent of

East Jerusalem is zoned for Palestinian construction, while 35 percent has been allocated

to Israeli settlements. Lack of building permits in the city potentially places 100,000

Palestinian residents at risk of displacement. ocha, Record Number of Demolitions,

Including Self- Demolitions, in East Jerusalem in April 2019, 14 May 2019.

51 Hague Regulations, Article 23(g). See also Fourth Geneva Convention, Article 53. The lat-

ter Article prohibits the destruction by the Occupying Power of “real or personal property

belonging individually or collectively to private persons, or to the State, or to other public

authorities, or to social or cooperative organizations […] except where such destruction

is rendered absolutely necessary by military operation”.

52 hcj 5193/ 18, Residents’ Committee of the Village of Khan Al- Ahmar v IDF Commander in the

West Bank (5 September 2018).

53 Ibid.

Palestine, Israel, and the International Criminal Court 265

Due to international pressure and political interventions, Israel is still to exe-cute many of the outstanding demolition orders. The situation in Khan Al Ahmar drew the attention of former icc Prosecutor, Fatou Bensouda. She said that the Prosecution continues to “keep a close eye on the developments on the ground”, and warned that it would “not hesitate to take any appropriate action” within the confines of the Prosecution’s mandate under the Rome

Statute while respecting the principle of complementarity.54

The hcj decision in the Public Committee against Torture v Israel case offers

another example of the HCJ’s government accomodating interpretations. The hcj ruled in that case that while torture and other forms of cruel and inhuman treatment during interrogation are prohibited under domestic law, and that the law is consistent with international treaties in this regard, the necessity defence is available to Israeli agents who apply “physical interroga-tion methods” during “ticking bomb” situations. In the same breath, the hcj noted that Israel’s Attorney General “can establish guidelines regarding cir-cumstances in which investigators shall not stand trial, if they claim to have

acted from ‘necessity’”.55 As will be discussed further in Part 3, the hcj was thus “prepared to presume […] that if a [General Security Service] investiga-tor – who applied physical interrogation methods for the purpose of saving human life – is criminally indicted, the ‘necessity defense’ is likely to be open

to him in the appropriate circumstances”.56 What constitutes “ticking- bomb” situations and “physical interrogation methods” is decided upon by the Israeli agents involved in the interrogation. The Attorney General’s interpretation of those elusive concepts becomes relevant only after the method has been

applied.57

Two refusals to open criminal investigations into alleged torture were

brought before the hcj in 2012 and 2017 respectively. In Abu Ghosh, the peti-tioner asserted that he had been tortured and that the necessity defence can-not be invoked for that. The hcj confirmed that the necessity defence cannot be invoked for the use of torture but held that the acts that constitute torture are context specific. The hcj paved the way towards a rejection of the petition by holding that the petitioner had not proved he had been tortured (the Israeli



54 icc Office of the Prosecutor, Statement of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal

Court, Fatou Bensouda, Regarding the Situation in Palestine, 17 October 2018.

55 hcj 5100/ 94, Public Committee against Torture v Israel et al. (6 September 1999).

56 Ibid., para 34.

57 David Kretzmer and Yaël Ronen, The Occupation of Justice, The Supreme Court of Israel

and the Occupied Territories (oup 2021) 362– 363.

266 Kiswanson

Security Agency denied it had tortured him) and that what may be consid-ered torture by an international body may not be considered torture in another

context.58

In the Tbeish case the Israeli authorities admitted to employing special

interrogation methods, but the hcj did not consider they amounted to tor-ture and conveniently omitted to consider the prohibition against cruel and inhuman treatment. The hcj confirmed in this case that “resort to the neces-sity defence did not depend on the imminence of the danger materialising, (as implied in the very term ‘ticking bomb’), but on the immediacy of the need to obtain information that would frustrate a bomb, which may or may not exist,

from exploding at some time in the fairly near future”.59

The UN Committee against Torture disagrees with the hcj’s above-

mentioned findings and interpretations. It reaffirmed in its 2016 concluding observations on Israel the absolute and non- derogable nature of the prohibi-tion against torture and expressed concern about the necessity defence con-

tained in Israeli penal law that can be used in torture cases.60

2.2 The Israeli Military Justice System Not a single high- level Israeli civilian or member of the Israeli Defence Forces has been held responsible for committing crimes against Palestinians since the foundation of the State of Israel. Israel has also failed to make any con-certed effort to hold to account lower- level, or even mid- level, soldiers who commit crimes against Palestinians. In a damning report, the UN Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Protests in the Occupied Palestinian Territory stated that:

[T] he Government of Israel has consistently failed to meaningfully

investigate and prosecute commanders and soldiers for crimes and

violations committed against Palestinians or to provide reparation to

victims in accordance with international norms. Scarce accountabil-

ity measures arising out of Operations Cast Lead and Protective Edge

and public comments by high- ranking public officials cast doubt over

the State’s willingness to scrutinize the actions of military and civilian

leadership who drafted, approved and supervised the implementation

58 hcj 1265/ 11, Public Committee against Torture v Attorney General (6 August 2012); see also

David Kretzmer and Yaël Ronen, The Occupation of Justice, The Supreme Court of Israel

and the Occupied Territories (oup 2021) 368.

59 Ibid., page 369.

60 UN Committee against Torture, Concluding Observations on the Fifth Periodic Report of

Israel, cat/ c/ isr/ co/ 5, 3 June 2016, para 14.

Palestine, Israel, and the International Criminal Court 267

of the rules of engagement governing the actions of Israeli forces at the

demonstrations.61

Data compiled by Yesh Din shows that 430 complaints were filed with the Military Advocate General Corps, the body in charge of investigating Israeli soldiers, during the period 2017– 2018, with many of them submitted by human

rights organisations and Israel Police.62 Of these, 168 concerned shooting inci-

dents of which 68 resulted in fatalities.63 By the end of 2018, a staggering 80 per-

cent of the complaints had been closed without an investigation.64 The 430 complaints mentioned do not include complaints of harm against Palestinians in the context of the Great March of Return.

In response to complaints concerning the Great March of Return, the UN

Commission on the 2018 protests revealed in 2019 that “criminal investigations were opened in only five cases, including the deaths of four children” and that its findings “suggest strongly that other killings and gunshot injuries appeared

factually similar and therefore also warrant criminal investigation”.65 As of 2021, only one indictment had been filed and inquiries into 95 fatalities were closed without an investigation while 140 complaints were still under review,

years after the incidents occurred.66

In relation to Israel’s 2014 offensive, “Operation Protective Edge”, Al Mezan,

a human rights organisation based in the Gaza Strip, filed 122 criminal com-plaints with the mag. As of 2020, a total of 72 were closed without criminal investigation and 18 criminal investigations were opened. In total, 15 of the 18 were subsequently closed and only three remained under investigation, nearly

eight years after the commission of the alleged crimes.67

In the rare instances where a lower- level soldier is prosecuted for harm

inflicted on Palestinians, they receive meagre punishments that are not



61 unhcr, Report of the Detailed Findings of the Independent International Commission of

Inquiry on the Protests in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, a/ hrc/ 40/ crp.2, 18 March

2019, para 111.

62 Yesh Din, Law Enforcement on Israeli Soldiers Suspected of Harming Palestinians and Their

Property, November 2019, page 3.

63 Ibid., page 4.

64 Ibid., page 7.

65 unhcr, Report of the Detailed Findings of the Independent International Commission of

Inquiry on the Protests in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, a/ hrc/ 40/ crp.2, 18 March

2019, para 108.

66 Yesh Din, Killing Time – Updated Figures, April 2021, 21 June 2021.

67 Al- Haq, Al Mezan, Addameer et al, Joint Submission to the United Nations Rapporteur on

the Situation of Human Rights in the Palestinian Territories Occupied Since 1967, Mr Michael

Lynk, on Accountability, 31 May 2020, para 82.

268 Kiswanson

commensurate with the gravity of the crime committed. For example, Israeli soldier Elor Azaria was video recorded executing Abed al- Fattah al- Sharif, who

lay motionless and injured on the ground.68 He was convicted of manslaughter and sentenced to only sixteen months imprisonment despite the Israeli judge

stating that he had not expressed any remorse.69 Elor Azaria was released from

prison after nine months.70 In another case, an Israeli military court found two undisclosed Israeli soldiers guilty of using a nine- year old Palestinian boy as a human shield during the 2008– 2009 offensive on the Gaza Strip. The two soldiers were demoted to the rank of sergeant and received a suspended three- month sentence for separating the child from his mother and forcing him at

gunpoint to open bags suspected of containing booby- trapped bombs.71

The impunity afforded Israelis is the result of persistent design flaws in the

military justice system responsible for investigating and holding Israeli soldiers to account for wrongdoing. Commenting on recent reforms of the Israeli mil-itary justice system, the UN Independent Commission of Inquiry on the 2014 Gaza Conflict said it was “concerned about a number of procedural, structural and substantive shortcomings, which continue to compromise Israel’s ability

to adequately fulfil its duty to investigate”.72 Relatedly, the UN Human Rights Committee lamented in its 2022 observations on Israel the lack of updated information on investigations into human rights violations allegedly commit-ted during the “Operation Cast Lead” of 2008– 09, “Operation Pillar of Defence” of 2012, and “Operation Protective Edge” of 2014. It called on Israel “to impar-tially and thoroughly investigate all allegations of human rights violations

committed” during these military operations.73

Israel’s military justice system revolves around the Military Advocate

General, mag Corps, military courts, and the Military Police Criminal

Investigations Division.74 The military justice system is responsible for

68 Peter Beaumont, ‘Israeli Soldier is Filmed Shooting Dead Wounded Palestinian Attacker’,

The Guardian, 24 March 2016.

69 ‘Elor Azaria Gets 18 Months for Killing Palestinian’, Aljazeera, 21 February 2017.

70 ‘Israeli Soldier Filmed Killing Palestinian Released from Prison’, Aljazeera, 8 May 2018.

71 Human Rights Watch, Israel: Soldiers’ Punishment for Using Boy as ‘Human Shield’

Inadequate, 26 November 2010.

72 unhrc, Report of the Detailed Findings of the Independent Commission of Inquiry

Established Pursuant to Human Rights Council Resolution S- 21/ 1, a/ hrc/ 29/ crp.4, 24

June 2015, para 618. See also unhrc, Report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli

Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the

Occupied Territories, a/ 73/ 360, 29 September 2021.

73 UN Human Rights Committee, Concluding Observations on the Fifth Periodic Report of

Israel, ccpr/ c/ isr/ co/ 5, 30 March 2022, para 23.

74 See idf webpage titled “Military Advocate General’s Corps”.

Palestine, Israel, and the International Criminal Court 269

investigating, prosecuting, and trying Israeli soldiers for criminal miscon-duct. Military justice systems are not ipso facto inappropriate. What matters is whether the procedures, structures, and laws that make up the system are compatible with international laws and standards. An investigation needs to be assessed against its effectiveness and to be effective, it must be adequate,

prompt, and thorough.75 It must also be carried out by independent author-

ities,76 in an impartial manner.77 These requirements apply to investigations

into criminal conduct during an armed conflict.78

2.2.1 Constricting Investigation Policies The principal problem marring the Israeli military justice is its constricting investigation policies, according to which investigations into the killing and

mistreatment of Palestinians are not the norm.79

Indeed, in August 2016, the mag Corps announced that it “continues to

examine and investigate claims regarding allegations of exceptional incidents” and that these allegations were referred on behalf of Palestinian residents of the Gaza Strip and allegations from the media or internal idf operational

reports.80 In respect of Palestinians killed in the West Bank, the latest policy mandates the opening of an investigation into “every case of the death of a Palestinian resident as a result of operations by the idf forces in the West Bank, except in ‘cases where it is clear that the operations during which the

Palestinian inhabitant was killed were of real combat nature’”.81



75 ECtHR, Armani Da Silva v The United Kingdom, Judgement, 30 March 2016, paras 230– 238;

ECtHR, Mustafa Tunç and Fecire Tunçv Turkey, Judgement, 14 April 2015, paras 169, 172,

178; and ECtHR, Ramsahai et al. v the Netherlands, Judgement, 15 May 2007, paras 323– 324.

76 ECtHR, Armani Da Silva v The United Kingdom, Judgement, 30 March 2016, paras 232;

ECtHR, Isayeva v Russia, Judgement, 24 February 2005, para 211; see also ECtHR, Abuyeva

et al. v Russia, Judgement, 2 December 2010, paras 242– 243.

77 ECtHR, Mustafa Tunç and Fecire Tunçv Turkey, Judgement, 14 April 2015, para 169; and

ECtHR, Enukidze and Girgvliani v Georgia, Judgement, 26 April 2011, para 243.

78 icrc, Guidelines on Investigating Violations of International Humanitarian Law: Law,

Policy, and Good Practice, 16 September 2019, para 34.

79 The Public Commission to Examine the Maritime Incident of 31 May 2010, Israel’s

Mechanisms for Examining and Investigating Complaints and Claims of Violations of the

Laws of Armed Conflict According to International Law, Second Report, February 2013,

page 321.

80 idf Military Advocate General, Decisions of the IDF Military Advocate General Regarding

Exceptional Incidents that Allegedly Occurred during Operation ‘Protective Edge’, Update

No. 5, 24 August 2016. Emphasis added.

81 The Public Commission to Examine the Maritime Incident of 31 May 2010, Israel’s

Mechanisms for Examining and Investigating Complaints and Claims of Violations of the 270 Kiswanson

These Israeli policies are concerning for three main reasons. First, they do

not acknowledge that the State has a duty under international law to investi-gate every killing of a person caused by its use of force and that such investiga-tions are necessary to secure the rights and freedoms of those within a State’s

effective control.82 The ECtHR confirmed in Al- Skeini v The United Kingdom that “[a] rmed conflict and occupation do not discharge the State’s duty to

investigate and prosecute human rights abuses”.83 Conversely, Israel’s policy in the West Bank presumes that there was no wrongdoing because the Palestinian was killed in so- called operations of “real combat nature”. Accordingly, the UN Human Rights Committee underlined recently that Israel must ensure investi-gations into all incidents involving excessive use of force by the Israeli Security

Forces.84 Second, the Israeli military justice system appears to require individ-uals, organisations, or media to encourage it to act before it will do so. The duty to investigate must not be made dependant on the proactiveness of others. This was made clear by the European Court of Human Rights when it stated that:

[W] hatever mode is employed, the authorities must act of their own

motion once the matter has come to their attention. They cannot leave it

to the initiative of the next- of- kin either to lodge a formal complaint or

to take responsibility for the conduct of any investigative procedures.85

Finally, Israel’s policies suggest that Israeli authorities are predisposed to view the killing of Palestinians by Israelis in a vacuum. This predisposition, coupled with the impunity described in Part 2.2., point to a lack of pattern analysis otherwise necessary to uncover systemic unlawful conduct and establish the

involvement of higher- level persons, such as commanders.86



Laws of Armed Conflict According to International Law, Second Report, February 2013,

pages 320– 321.

82 The general legal prohibition of arbitrary killing by agents of the State would be ineffec-

tive in practice if there existed no procedure for reviewing the lawfulness of the use of

lethal force by State authorities. The obligation to protect the right to life under this pro-

vision, read in conjunction with the State’s general duty under Article 1 of the Convention

to “secure to everyone within their jurisdiction the rights and freedoms defined in [the]

Convention”. ECtHR, Al- Skeini et al. v The United Kingdom, Judgement, 7 July 2011, para 163.

See also McCann et al. v The United Kingdom, Judgement, 27 September 1996, para 161.

83 ECtHR, Al- Skeini et al. v The United Kingdom, Judgement, 7 July 2011, para 93.

84 UN Human Rights Committee, Concluding Observations on the Fifth Periodic Report of

Israel, 30 March 2022, para 27. Emphasis added.

85 Ibid., para 165.

86 See for example B’Tselem, Whitewash Protocol: The So- called Investigation of Operation

Protective Edge, September 2016.

Palestine, Israel, and the International Criminal Court 271

2.2.2 Multiple and Contradictory Roles of the Military Advocate General

The mag is a commander of the idf vested with powers to legislate – “as he

instructs the idf on what is permitted and what is not permitted in warfare”;87 to execute – as he “directs the military’s operative legal counselling ahead of

and during hostilities”;88 and to enforce – as he decides to launch an investiga-

tion.89 The mag Corps, which falls under the mag, also offers free of charge legal advice and representation to soldiers under investigation or standing

trial, in the military justice system.90

In 2007, the enforcement and advisory roles of the mag Corps were sep-

arated and assigned to different entities within the mag Corps. The Military Prosecution department of the mag is, according to the idf website, “tasked with overseeing all investigations and conducting all prosecutions of alleged misconduct by idf soldiers occurring in the context of operational activity, including alleged mistreatment of detainees, looting, abuse of authority, or the use of force in a manner not conforming with idf rules and regulations (which

incorporate the law of armed conflict)”.91

One of the main reasons for why the Israeli military justice system does not

meet international standards is the multiple and parallel powers of the mag. The international standard of independence demands that individuals poten-tially implicated in violations should not have any supervisory role, whether indirect or direct, over those who conduct the investigation. There must exist a “lack of hierarchal or institutional connection but also a practical indepen-

dence”.92 This ensures that “where formal independence has been established,

actual independence” exists.93 However, the 2007 restructuring of the mag

87 Eyal Benvenisti, The Duty of the State of Israel to Investigate Violations of the Law of Armed

Conflict, Expert Opinion submitted to the Public Commission to Examine the Maritime

Incident of 31 May 2010, Israel’s Mechanisms for Examining and Investigating Complaints

and Claims of Violations of the Laws of Armed Conflict According to International Law,

13 April 2011, page 24 cited in B’Tselem, The Occupation’s Fig Leaf: Israel’s Military Law

Enforcement System as a Whitewash Mechanism, May 2016, page 27.

88 Ibid.

89 Ibid.

90 idf webpage on “The idf Military Justice System”.

91 Ibid.

92 See for example ECtHR, Armani Da Silva v The United Kingdom, Judgement, 30 March

2016, para 232; Inter- American Court of Human Rights, Favela Nova Brasília v Brazil,

Preliminary Objections, Merits, Reparations and Costs, Judgement, 16 February 2017;

ECtHR, Isayeva v Russia, Judgement, 24 February 2005, para 211. See also UN Principles

on the Effective Prevention and Investigation of Extra- legal, Arbitrary and Summary

Executions, 24 May 1986.

93 unhrc, Report of the Special Rapporteur on Extrajudicial, Summary, or Arbitrary

Executions, Philip Alston, a/ hrc/ 8/ 3, 2 May 2008, para 36. 272 Kiswanson

Corps did not affect the mag’s powers or rectify the hierarchical relationship between the mag, mag Corps officers, Attorney- General, and the Chief of Staff. The mag’s opinion is binding upon the army, since “it determines, for

the idf and its agencies, the current legal position”.94 Moreover, “an officer in the mag Corps, with the exception of the Military Defender, is subordinate in carrying out his or her duties solely to the mag, and not to the military com-

mander to whom he provides legal service”.95 This is also true for the military

advocates in various jurisdiction districts who also answer solely to the mag.96 As such, the mag remains the gatekeeper in Israel’s military justice system – the critical lever in the mag Corps’ chain of command.

The mag’s contemporaneous powers have been heavily criticised by UN

experts. In 2010, a UN committee of independent experts recalled that the mag advised on the same strategy, objectives, and policy underlying Israel’s operation in the Gaza Strip, that the UN Fact- Finding Mission on the Gaza

Conflict condemned.97 Noting the 2007 restructuring of the mag Corps, the subsequent UN Independent Commission of Inquiry on the 2014 Gaza Conflict described the mag’s powers as a “central failing of the investigation system” and pointed to his regular participation in cabinet meetings around the 2014

hostilities.98

2.2.3 Insufficient Civilian Oversight As explained, the mag occupies a powerful role within the Israeli military justice system and can set the course for justice for Palestinians. It is there-fore imperative that authorities have oversight over the mag. Israel’s Public Commission to Examine the Maritime Incident of 31 May 2010, also referred to



94 The Public Commission to Examine the Maritime Incident of 31 May 2010, Israel’s

Mechanisms for Examining and Investigating Complaints and Claims of Violations of the

Laws of Armed Conflict According to International Law, Second Report, February 2013,

page 281.

95 Ibid., page 282.

96 Ibid.

97 unhrc, Report of the Committee of Independent Experts in International Humanitarian

and Human Rights Laws to Monitor and Assess Any Domestic, Legal, or Other Proceedings

Undertaken by Both the Government of Israel and the Palestinian Side, in Light of General

Assembly Resolution 64/ 254, Including the Independence, Effectiveness, Genuineness of

these Investigations and their Conformity with International Standards, a/ hrc/ 15/ 50, 23

September 2010, para 54.

98 unhrc, Report of the Detailed Findings of the Independent Commission of Inquiry

Established Pursuant to Human Rights Council Resolution S- 21/ 1, a/ hrc/ 29/ crp.4, 24 June

2015, para 619.

Palestine, Israel, and the International Criminal Court 273

as the Turkel Commission, presents Israel’s High Court of Justice and Attorney General as having oversight over the mag and as being in a position to correct

it.99 There are several problems with that portrayal; the hcj is an institution to which persons who believe themselves to have suffered harm may turn. They can only do so on their own initiative and with their own funding, based on information that is at the disposal of mag Corps and the military, but not the victim. Israel’s hcj does not possess proprio motu powers to judicially review

decisions by the mag.100 When, nonetheless, given the opportunity to inter-

vene, the hcj has been evasive.101 Adalah, a human rights organisation and legal centre in Israel, petitioned Israel’s Supreme Court in 2007 on the need to open criminal investigations into incidents relating to Israel’s operations

“Rainbow” and “Days of Penitence” in Rafah in the Gaza Strip in 2004.102 Four years after the petition was filed, the hcj issued a decision that highlighted its reluctance to intervene in decisions taken by the mag. It stated that:

[T] he principle of maximal restraint in judicial intervention in the deci-

sions of the executive authority in regard to investigation and criminal

indictment is deeply embedded in the judicial tradition of this court.

Like the attorney general, the prerogative given to the chief military

prosecutor on the question of whether to order the initiation of criminal

proceedings is very broad [...] In accordance with this view, intervention

in the professional decisions of the chief military prosecutor is rare, and

should occur only in very exceptional circumstances.103

The hcj thus concluded that criminal investigations are not always an appro-priate tool of review, before rejecting the petition on grounds that it had been



99 The Public Commission to Examine the Maritime Incident of 31 May 2010, Israel’s

Mechanisms for Examining and Investigating Complaints and Claims of Violations of the

Laws of Armed Conflict According to International Law, Second Report, February 2013,

pages 313– 318.

100 B’Tselem, The Occupation’s Fig Leaf: Israel’s Military Law Enforcement System as a

Whitewash Mechanism, May 2016, page 29.

101 unhrc, Report of the Detailed Findings of the Independent Commission of Inquiry

Established Pursuant to Human Rights Council Resolution S- 21/ 1, a/ hrc/ 29/ crp.4, 24 June

2015, para 623.

102 Adalah, Demanding Criminal Investigations for Killings and Extensive Home Demolitions in

Rafah, Gaza in 2004.

103 hcj 3292/ 07, Adalah et al. v The Attorney General (8 December 2011) cited in Adalah, Case

Review: The State’s Obligation to Investigate Suspected Grave Violations of International

Law Committed in the Gaza Strip during the 2004 Military Operations ‘Rainbow’ and ‘Days

of Penitence’, February 2012, page 3.

274 Kiswanson

submitted too late. Adalah has aptly noted that the time in which the petition

was filed should not affect the State’s ongoing duty to investigate.104 Another problem with the Turkel Commission’s portrayal of the Supreme Court as an oversight mechanism is that the hcj rarely disagrees with the mag whenever it does consider the merits of a petition. After reviewing hcj cases concerning decisions by the mag, the UN Fact- Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict in 2014 held that in “the majority of cases, the High Court of Justice has approved, in principle, the policy set by the mag, and has rarely overturned a decision by

the mag”.105

Israel’s Attorney General appears equally intent on not intervening in the

mag’s exercise of its powers. Eyal Benvenisti has noted that the Attorney General “eschews its duty” by fully and broadly delegating his powers to the

mag.106 In any case, the mag and Attorney General “routinely consult one another on policymaking as well as decisions in cases considered to be of

importance”.107 It is for this reason, inappropriate to place the Attorney General in a position of oversight in relation to the mag.

2.2.4 Undue Delay

The success of an investigation hinges on the integrity and evidentiary value of evidential material. Its integrity and value may be compromised if it is not collected and examined within a certain time. A “prompt response by the authorities in investigating a use of lethal force” is also, according to the ECtHR, “essential in maintaining public confidence in their adherence to the rule of law and in preventing any appearance of collusion in or tolerance of

unlawful acts”.108

That said, whether an investigation is prompt and reasonably expeditious

depends on the context. The ECtHR brought attention to this in Jelić v Croatia when it accepted that an “investigation could initially have encountered



104 Ibid., page 4.

105 unhrc, Report of the Detailed Findings of the Independent Commission of Inquiry

Established Pursuant to Human Rights Council Resolution S- 21/ 1, a/ hrc/ 29/ crp.4, 24 June

2015, para 623.

106 Eyal Benvenisti, The Duty of the State of Israel to Investigate Violations of the Law of Armed

Conflict, Expert Opinion submitted to The Public Commission to Examine the Maritime

Incident of 31 May 2010, Israel’s Mechanisms for Examining and Investigating Complaints

and Claims of Violations of the Laws of Armed Conflict According to International Law,

13 April 2011, page 25 cited in B’Tselem, The Occupation’s Fig Leaf: Israel’s Military Law

Enforcement System as a Whitewash Mechanism, May 2016, page 28.

107 Ibid., page 29.

108 ECtHR, Al- Skeini et al. v The United Kingdom, Judgement, 7 July 2011, para 167. Palestine, Israel, and the International Criminal Court 275

certain objective difficulties due to war and post- war situation” but rejected

“the authorities’ inactivity for long subsequent periods”.109 Despite “the undeniable complexity of the present case, which concerns not only the iso-lated event of the killing of the applicant’s husband, but also concerns the investigation and prosecution of those responsible for the killing of a number of other individuals”, and the number of war crimes cases prosecuted simul-taneously, the ECtHR held that “political and social stakes relied on by the Government cannot by themselves justify the manner in which the investi-gation was conducted where leads given to the prosecuting authorities con-cerning the identification of direct perpetrators have not been thoroughly

followed”.110

This chapter has provided many examples of the lack of Israeli investiga-

tions, let alone prompt investigations. It suffices to recall that incidents of alleged violations during “Operation Cast Lead” (2008– 2009), “Operation Protective Edge” (2014), and the Great March of Return (2018), have been

excessively sluggish. A fact acknowledged by Israel’s State Comptroller.111

2.2.5 Inadequate Investigations An investigation cannot be effective unless it is adequate. According to the ECtHR, “this means that it must be capable of leading to the establishment of the facts, a determination of whether the force used was or was not justi-fied in the circumstances and of identifying and – if appropriate – punishing

those responsible”.112 Similarly, the icrc has established that an investigation must be effective insofar as it should be capable of enabling a determination of whether there was a violation of international humanitarian law, of identifying the individual and systemic factors that caused or contributed to an incident,

and of laying the ground for any remedial action that may be required.113 Armed conflicts can pose challenges to an investigation, but under no circumstance



109 ECtHR, Jelić v Croatia, Judgement, 12 June 2014, para 92. See also paras 91 and 93.

110 Ibid., para 94.

111 Israel State Comptroller, Operation “Protective Edge”, IDF Activity from the Perspective of

International Law, Particularly with Regard to Mechanisms of Examination and Oversight

of Civilian and Military Echelons, March 2018, pages 121– 122, 127, 159– 162; Yesh Din, Killing

Time – Updated Figures, April 2021, 21 June 2021.

112 See for example ECtHR, Armani Da Silva v The United Kingdom, Judgement, 30 March

2016, para 233; see also Inter- American Court of Human Rights, Vereda La Esperanza v

Colombia, Judgement, 31 August 2017, para 185.

113 icrc, Guidelines on Investigating Violations of International Humanitarian Law: Law,

Policy, and Good Practice, 16 September 2019, para 32. 276 Kiswanson

does the existence of an armed conflict relieve the State of its obligation to

effectively investigate.114

The jurisprudence of regional human rights courts and icrc guidance pro-

vide a treasure- trove of examples of what constitutes an adequate investiga-tion, including: an autopsy in the case of a dead body that “provides a complete and accurate record of injury and an objective analysis of the clinical find-

ings, including the cause of death”,115 the timely collection of statements from

all witnesses,116 the collection of other physical and documentary evidence

(for example photographs and bullet analysis),117 an obvious line of inquiry

and stringent scrutiny,118 access by the victim’s family to the investigation



114 The UN Special Rapporteur on Extrajudicial, Summary or Arbitrary Executions has

expressed sympathy for the inability of a State to, for example, carry out an autopsy of a

body when hostile forces control the scene of a shooting but emphasised that an inves-

tigation is never allowed to be “reduced to a mere formality”. See UN Commission on

Human Rights, Civil and Political Rights, Including the Questions of Disappearances and

Summary Executions, Extrajudicial, Summary or Arbitrary Executions, Report of the Special

Rapporteur, Philip Alston, Philip Alston, e/ cn.4/ 2006/ 53, 8 March 2006, para 36.

115 ECtHR, Armani Da Silva v The United Kingdom, Judgement, 30 March 2016, para 233.

The European Court of Human Rights observed in the Salman v Turkey case “that the

autopsy examination was of critical importance in determining the facts surrounding

Agit Salman’s death. The difficulties experienced by the Commission in establishing

any of those facts, elements of which were still disputed by the parties before the Court,

derives in a large part from the failings in the post- mortem medical examination. In par-

ticular, the lack of proper forensic photographs of the body and the lack of dissection and

histopathological analysis of the injuries and marks on the body obstructed the accu-

rate analysis of the dating and origin of those marks, which was crucial to establishing

whether Agit Salman’s death had been provoked by ill- treatment in the twenty- four hours

preceding his death”. ECtHR, Salman v Turkey, Judgement, 27 June 2000, para 106. See

also Principles on the Effective Prevention and Investigation of Extra- legal, Arbitrary and

Summary Executions, para 12.

116 ECtHR, Tanrikulu v Turkey, Judgement, 8 July 1999, paras 109– 110.

117 The European Court of Human Rights found that the investigation in the Gül et al. v

Turkey case was ineffective since “[t] here was no attempt to find the bullet allegedly fired

by Mehmet Gül at the police officers, which was their primary justification for shooting

him. There was no proper recording of the alleged finding of two guns and a spent car-

tridge inside the flat, which was also relied on by the police in justifying their actions. The

references in the police statements on this point were vague and inconsistent, rendering

it impossible to identify which officer had found each weapon. No photograph was taken

of the weapons at the alleged location. While a test was carried out on the Browning

weapon to show that it had been recently fired, there was no testing of Mehmet Gül’s

hands for traces that would link him with the gun. Nor was the gun tested for prints.”

ECtHR, Gül et al. v Turkey, Judgement, 14 December 2000, para 89.

118 In Enukidze and Girgvliani the European Court of Human Rights reiterated that “when a

suspicious death has been inflicted at the hands of a State agent, particularly stringent Palestine, Israel, and the International Criminal Court 277

procedure to the extent necessary to safeguard their legitimate interests,119 a

sufficient element of public scrutiny,120 and expertise.121

As has been detailed above, relevant Israeli authorities rarely open criminal

investigations into the alleged misconduct of Israeli soldiers. Publicly available

information on the few investigations122 conducted, paint a troubling picture of inadequacy; numerous reports demonstrate that Israeli authorities do not

keep the victims and their families123 continuously and regularly informed about the progress and status of assessments/ examinations, investigations,

and further proceedings. Years may pass before such information is shared.124 It has also been documented that the complainants are not sufficiently informed of how the investigation was conducted and that generic reasons are given as

to why a decision not to open an investigation is taken.125 Vague, unreasoned



scrutiny must be applied by the relevant domestic authorities to the ensuing investiga-

tion. Otherwise, the State risks instilling a sense of impunity in its agents, by appearing

to tolerate their life- threatening acts, which could open the way to more wanton crimes

such as that committed in the present case”. ECtHR, Enukidze and Girgvliani v Georgia,

Judgement, 26 April 2011, para 277. See also ECtHR, Kolevi v Bulgaria, Judgement, 5

November 2009, para 201; ECtHR, Anguelova v Bulgaria, Judgement, 13 June 2002, paras

143– 144; ECtHR, Mahmut Kaya v Turkey, Judgement, 28 March 2000, paras 107– 108;

and Inter- American Court of Human Rights, Favela Nova Brasília v Brazil, Preliminary

Objections, Merits, Reparations and Costs, Judgement, 16 February 2017.

119 ECtHR, Armani Da Silva v The United Kingdom, Judgement, 30 March 2016, para 235; Inter-

American Court of Human Rights, Vereda La Esperanza v Colombia, Judgement, 31 August

2017, para. 215.

120 ECtHR, Hugh Jordan v The United Kingdom, Judgement, 4 May 2001, para 109.

121 Principles on the Effective Prevention and Investigation of Extra- legal, Arbitrary and

Summary Executions, para 11; icrc, Guidelines on Investigating Violations of International

Humanitarian Law: Law, Policy, and Good Practice, 16 September 2019, para 79.

122 The UN Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Protests in the opt

found in 2019 that so- called fact- finding assessments that are intended to filter the

incidents subsequently formally investigated, risk replacing criminal investigations

in effectuality. This “brings into serious question whether the current Israeli system

meets international investigation standards”. unhcr, Report of the Detailed Findings

of the Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Protests in the Occupied

Palestinian Territory, a/ hrc/ 40/ crp.2, 18 March 2019, para 725.

123 Ibid. In many instances, complaints are submitted to the relevant Israeli mechanisms on

victims’ behalf by human rights organisations.

124 B’Tselem, Three Years Since Operation Cast Lead: Israeli Military Utterly Failed to Investigate

Itself, 18 January 2012.

125 See for example UN Secretary- General, Human Rights Situation in the Occupied

Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, Report by the Secretary General, a/ hrc/ 24/

30, 22 August 2013, para 8; Al Mezan, Gaza 3 Years On: Impunity over Accountability, Israel’s

Unwillingness to Investigate Violations of International Law in the Gaza Strip, 28 August 278 Kiswanson

decisions make it tremendously difficult for complainants to challenge deci-sions and protect their interests.

In addition, severe shortcomings in the collection and scrutiny of relevant

material have been identified. Israel’s State Comptroller found in his audit report from 2018 on “Operation Protective Edge” that the so- called fact- finding

mission assessments,126 intended to furnish the mag with relevant informa-tion for its determination on the opening of investigations, did not provide the mag with the “full factual foundation for the purpose of formulating

opinion”.127 The State Comptroller noted that documents were missing from

the reports128 and that the fact- finding assessment mechanism did not carry

out its work in an orderly fashion and with prior preparation.129 The State Comptroller also found that “at the time of the completion of the interim draft, August 2015, the debriefing teams did not question civilians, and it is possible that they did not take advantage of a very extensive range of possible evidence

that would have assisted in processing of the debriefing”.130 B’Tselem noted the same deficiencies from the mag’s responses to its complaints; that decisions to investigate are based on “incomplete information and an extenuating read-ing of the circumstances of the incident”, that external evidence is rarely col-

lected, and that investigations rely on soldiers’ accounts of the incidents.131 For example, it appears that foreign correspondents that witnessed the egregious airstrike incident that killed four Palestinian children from the Bakr family as

they played football on the Gaza beach in July 2014 were not interviewed.132 The mag Corps decided to close the investigation into the killing of the chil-dren on 11 June 2015.



2017, page 4; B’Tselem, The Occupation’s Fig Leaf: Israel’s Military Law Enforcement System

as a Whitewash Mechanism, May 2016, page 25.

126 Fact- finding mission assessments were established in relation to complaints related to

“Operation Protective Edge”.

127 Israel State Comptroller, Operation “Protective Edge”, IDF Activity from the Perspective of

International Law, Particularly with Regard to Mechanisms of Examination and Oversight

of Civilian and Military Echelons, March 2018, page 152.

128 Ibid., page 153.

129 Ibid., page 164.

130 Israel State Comptroller, Operation “Protective Edge”, IDF Activity from the Perspective of

International Law, Particularly with Regard to Mechanisms of Examination and Oversight

of Civilian and Military Echelons (March 2018), page 158.

131 B’Tselem, The Occupation’s Fig Leaf: Israel’s Military Law Enforcement System as a

Whitewash Mechanism, May 2016, page 24.

132 See for example Anshal Pfeffer, ‘An Eyewitness Account of the Attack that Killed Four

Children on Gaza Beach’, Haaretz, 16 July 2014.

Palestine, Israel, and the International Criminal Court 279

When the mag Corps do interview witnesses, the responsible investigators

seemingly lack the skills needed to appropriately engage with victims and col-lect their statements, with no documents providing that investigators undergo

training on these aspects in particular.133

In 2018, the Israeli human rights organisation Yesh Din published examples

of inadequate investigations into alleged misconduct by Israeli soldiers and police officers in the occupied West Bank. It found that police officers and sol-diers were not questioned as part of an investigation and that the military or

police unit present at the scene were not identified.134 Predictably, only three investigations into complaints against Israeli soldiers opened in 2017– 2018

resulted in an indictment.135



3 Rome Statute Crimes Relevant to Israel’s Occupation

The icc has jurisdiction over crimes against humanity, war crimes, genocide

and aggression.136 In her Article 19(3) request for a ruling on jurisdiction of 2020, the icc Prosecutor submitted to the Pre- Trial Chamber that a reasonable basis existed to believe that war crimes have been, or are being, committed in

the opt.137 Regarding the conduct of the idf, the icc Prosecutor mentioned in

particular war crimes committed during the 2014 hostilities in the Gaza Strip,138 including wilful killing and wilfully causing serious injury to body or health and intentionally directing an attack against objects or persons using the distinc-

tive emblems of the Geneva Convention.139 The icc Prosecutor’s request also



133 B’Tselem, The Occupation’s Fig Leaf: Israel’s Military Law Enforcement System as a

Whitewash Mechanism, May 2016, page 18.

134 Yesh Din, “We were Unable to Locate the Perpetrator”, December 2018.

135 Yesh Din, Law Enforcement on Israeli Soldiers Suspected of Harming Palestinians and Their

Property, November 2019.

136 Rome Statute, Article 5. The ICC’s exercise of jurisdiction over the crime of aggression is

subject to the conditions set out in Articles 15bis and ter of the Rome Statute.

137 icc, Situation in Palestine, Prosecution Request Pursuant to Article 19(3) for a Ruling on

the Court’s Territorial Jurisdiction in Palestine, icc- 01/ 18, 22 January 2020, para 2.

138 This is when Israel launched the military operation “Protective Edge”, killing 2,251 and

injuring more than 11,200 Palestinians over the course of 51 days. ocha, Key Figures on

the 2014 hostilities, 23 June 2015. See also Al- Haq, Divide and Conquer, A Legal Analysis of

Israel’s 2014 Military Offensive Against the Gaza Strip, 2015.

139 icc, Situation in Palestine, Prosecution Request Pursuant to Article 19(3) for a Ruling on

the Court’s Territorial Jurisdiction in Palestine, icc- 01/ 18, 22 January 2020, para 94. The

Prosecution also mentioned war crimes believed to be committed by Palestinian armed

groups, such as wilful killing and the use of human shields.

280 Kiswanson

mentioned Israel’s transfer of Israeli civilians under Article 8(2)(b)(viii),140 and the shooting of Palestinian civilians as part of the Great March of Return demon-

strations.141 As underscored by the icc Prosecutor, the crimes specified were

merely illustrative.142 Tellingly, in her annual reports on the progress of pre-liminary examinations the icc Prosecutor had previously mentioned the dem-olition of Palestinian property and eviction of Palestinian residents from their

homes in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem,143 attacks against civilian

objects and infrastructure in the Gaza Strip,144 and ill- treatment of Palestinians

arrested, detained and prosecuted in the Israeli military court system.145 The icc Prosecutor had also previously stated that her office had “received informa-tion regarding the purported establishment of an institutionalised regime of systematic discrimination that allegedly deprives Palestinians of a number of

their fundamental human rights”.146 The icc Prosecutor can, and should, also investigate crimes against humanity and other war crimes such as pillage.

Part 1 of this chapter has explained that the icc can exercise jurisdiction

over the territory of the State of Palestine under the Rome Statute, including over Israelis who commit crimes there, and the second part has underscored that violations of international law as well as acts that may constitute inter-national crimes committed in Palestine go unpunished, demonstrating that cases at the icc will be admissible. What sets the icc apart from other courts and human rights bodies is that the icc is the first and only independent international criminal court capable of investigating, prosecuting, and pun-ishing Israelis and Palestinians for Rome Statute crimes committed in the opt. Furthermore, the Rome Statute is the first treaty to comprehensively criminal-ise many of the grave acts that have come to characterise Israel’s occupation of Palestine and its subjugation of Palestinians.

Consider Israel’s transfer of around 700,000 Israeli civilians to the opt

including East Jerusalem147, now living in nearly 300 settlements that control

140 Ibid., para 95.

141 Ibid., para 96.

142 Ibid., paras 99– 100.

143 icc Office of the Prosecutor, Preliminary Examination Report 2017, 4 December 2017, para

62; icc Office of the Prosecutor, Preliminary Examination Report 2015, para 69.

144 icc Office of the Prosecutor, Preliminary Examination Report 2016, para 129; icc Office of

the Prosecutor, Preliminary Examination Report 2015, para 67.

145 icc Office of the Prosecutor, Preliminary Examination Report 2016, para 133; icc Office of

the Prosecutor, Preliminary Examination Report 2015, para 71.

146 icc Office of the Prosecutor, Preliminary Examination Report 2017, 4 December 2017,

para 63.

147 ohchr, ‘UN Experts Say Israeli Settlement Expansion “Tramples” on Human Rights Law’,

3 November 2021. Online information from B’Tselem provides that 620,000 Israeli settlers Palestine, Israel, and the International Criminal Court 281

approximately 40 percent of the opt and more than 60 percent of Area C.148 Article 8(2)(b)(viii) of the Rome Statute lists the “transfer, directly or indirectly, by the Occupying Power of parts of its own civilian population into the terri-tory that it occupies”, as a serious violation of the laws and customs of war in an

international armed conflict and a war crime.149 This act was prosecuted in the Nuremberg trial of major war criminals as the “colonization by Germans”, with reference made to the related expulsion of the native populations of Poland

and the Soviet Union.150 The Nuremburg trial judgement remarked that Heinrich Himmler did not plan to “Germanize the East in the old sense, that is to teach the people there the German language and the German law, but to see

to it that only people of purely Germanic blood live in the East”.151 The transfer of the civilian population into the occupied territory by the Occupying Power was prohibited under Article 49(6) of the Fourth Geneva Convention about two years after the Nuremburg trial judgement was delivered. The inclusion of settler transfer in the Rome Statute was supported by most States during the drafting of the Rome Statute with only Israel requesting that it be excluded

from the statute.152 Israel went so far as to declare that it would have been in

favour of the Rome Statute had it not included the article on settler- transfer.153 The reference to “directly or indirectly” in Article 8(2)(b)(viii) and the corre-sponding elements of the crime affirm that the definition of this crime does not require that the Occupying Power forcibly transfers its civilian popula-tion into the occupied territory. Nor must the Occupying Power organise the

transfer.154

Israeli settlements continuously expand and connect to achieve the unin-

terrupted presence and movement of settlers in the West Bank and to link them to Israel. These settlements force Palestinians into increasingly smaller and fewer areas that are physically detached, and in so doing consolidate Israel’s control over the opt and frustrate the basic principle of temporariness



resided in the otp by the end of 2017. According to the Palestinian Central Bureau of

Statistics, 688,000 Israeli settlers reside in the opt as of 2019.

148 B’Tselem, Settlements, 16 January 2019.

149 Rome Statute, Article 8(2)(b)(viii).

150 United States Military Tribunal, Trial of the Major War Criminals, 1946, 22 Law Reports of

the Trials of War Criminals (1948), page 480.

151 Ibid.

152 William Schabas, The International Criminal Court: A Commentary on the Rome Statute

(oup 2016) 273– 274.

153 Ibid., pages 273– 274.

154 Ibid., page 274; Elements of Crimes, Article 8(2)(b)(viii).

282 Kiswanson

of occupation.155 That the State of Israel plays a leading role in the construc-tion of settlements and settler- transfer is not contentious. For example, Israel issues public calls for tenders for the construction of housing units in the West Bank, allocates millions for the construction of settlements, “legalises” settle-

ments, and appropriates land on which they are built.156 A UN Independent International Fact- Finding Mission to Investigate the Implications of the Israeli Settlements accordingly told the Human Rights Council in 2013 that Israeli governments “openly led and directly participated in the planning, construc-

tion, development, consolidation and/ or encouragement of settlements”.157

Israel recently justified Israeli Jewish settlement in the opt in a proceeding

before Israel’s Supreme Court concerning the Settlements Regularization Law for Judea and Samaria. During that proceeding, State representatives argued that Jewish settlement in the West Bank fulfils the values of Zionism, that the contested law is justified by its political, national and social purposes, that it is the “natural right” of Jewish Israelis to live in the opt, and that the military com-

mander is not subject to international law.158 The Settlements Regularization Law for Judea and Samaria allowed Israel to expropriate Palestinian private land and retroactively “legalise” settlements that had not received prior formal government approval.

The transfer of Palestinians from occupied territory is also a crime under

the Rome Statute. Their transfer is caused by a myriad of measures: the revo-

cation of residency permits, destruction of property,159 appropriation of lands,



155 See for example ohchr, UN Experts Say Israeli Settlement Expansion ‘Tramples’ on

Human Rights Law, 3 November 2021; UN Secretary- General, Israeli Settlements in the

Occupied Palestinian Territory, Including East Jerusalem, and the Occupied Syrian Golan,

Report of the Secretary- General, a/ 76/ 336, 23 September 2021; icc Office of the Prosecutor,

Preliminary Examination Report 2015, 12 November 2015, para 68; unhrc, Report of the

Independent International Fact- Finding Mission to Investigate the Implications of the Israeli

Settlements on the Civil, Political, Economic, Social and Cultural Rights of the Palestinian

People Throughout the Occupied Palestinian Territory, Including East Jerusalem, a/ hrc/

22/ 63, 7 February 2013, para 20; and icj, Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall

in the Occupied Palestinian Territory (Advisory Opinion) icj Reports 136 (2004), paras 83,

120– 122.

156 Ibid.

157 unhrc, Report of the Independent International Fact- Finding Mission to Investigate the

Implications of the Israeli Settlements on the Civil, Political, Economic, Social and Cultural

Rights of the Palestinian People Throughout the Occupied Palestinian Territory, Including

East Jerusalem, a/ hrc/ 22/ 63, 7 February 2013, para 20.

158 See Adalah, The Responses of the Government of Israel and the Attorney General in the

Settlements Regularization Law Case, January 2018.

159 More than 12,000 Palestinians have been displaced because of the demolition of more

than 8,000 structures in the last eleven years. The overwhelming majority of these Palestine, Israel, and the International Criminal Court 283

and the construction of settlements and of the Wall.160 Settler violence and the deprivation of necessities of life also create harsh, coercive living condi-

tions that trigger the displacement and effective transfer of Palestinians.161 Palestinians in the Gaza Strip are displaced during military offensives that put Palestinians’ lives at immediate and real risk. Coupled with the extensive destruction of residential areas, these military offensives result in transfers

that cannot be considered temporary.162

The icc has jurisdiction over the war crime of deportation or transfer of

all or parts of the occupied population within or outside the occupied terri-

tory,163 and the crime against humanity of “forced displacement of the persons concerned by expulsion or other coercive acts from the area in which they are

lawfully present, without grounds permitted under international law”.164 The war crime of transfer pursuant to Articles 8(2)(b)(viii) and 8(2)(a)(vii) relate to protected persons. Persons that find themselves in the hands of an Occupying Power of which they are not nationals, as do Palestinians living in Palestine,

are protected under Article 4 of the Fourth Geneva Convention.165



displacements took place in Area C where most Israeli settlements are located. ocha,

Breakdown of Data on Demolition and Displacement in the West Bank, 28 December 2021.

While the number of Israeli settlers continues to increase in East Jerusalem, at least one

third of Palestinian homes lack Israeli- issued building permits – potentially placing over

100,000 Palestinian residents of East Jerusalem at risk of displacement. ocha, Occupied

Palestinian Territory, Humanitarian Facts and Figures 1967– 2017, 2017, page 14; Human

Rights Watch, A Threshold Crossed: Israeli Authorities and the Crime of Apartheid and

Persecution, 27 April 2021, page 183.

160 Around 14,500 Palestinians had been displaced by the Wall by 2014. Internal Displacement

Monitoring Centre, Palestine – A Policy of Displacement and Dispossession Amid Renewed

Conflict, 27 October 2014.

161 For example, more than 70 percent of Palestinian communities in Area C are not con-

nected to the water network. ocha, Occupied Palestinian Territory, Humanitarian Facts

and Figures 1967– 2017, 2017, page 18. See also Chapter 15, Farah and Abdallah.

162 At the height of so- called “Operation Guardian of the Walls” in May 2021, 113,000 inter-

nally displaced Palestinians sought shelter and protection at unrwa schools or with

hosting families. Of these, 8,250 remain displaced six months afterwards because their

houses were destroyed or so severely damaged that they are uninhabitable. ocha, Gaza

After the May Escalation, 3 November 2021. In another example, 22,000 Palestinians were

still displaced nearly four years after “Operation Protective Edge”. ocha, 22,000 people in

the Gaza Strip Still Internally Displaced from the 2014 Hostilities, 5 April 2018.

163 Rome Statute, Articles 8(2)(b)(viii) and 8(2)(a)(vii).

164 Rome Statute, Articles 7(1)(d) and 7(2)(d).

165 Fourth Geneva Convention, Article 4.

284 Kiswanson

The Rome Statute crimes of transfer and deportation apply irrespective of

whether persons move across State borders.166 Furthermore, the crime against humanity of forcible transfer has been interpreted by an icc Pre- Trial Chamber and Trial Chamber as an “open- conduct crime” that can be the result of mul-

tiple different conducts that amount to expulsion or other coercive acts.167 In Prosecutor v Bosco Ntaganda, the Trial Chamber further clarified that what needs to be demonstrated is “that there was a genuine lack of choice on the

part of the individuals transferred”.168

As to the requirement of lawful presence in the area from which the pop-

ulation is deported or transferred, this does not translate into a requirement of legal residence under domestic laws and procedures. As the Trial Chamber noted in the above-mentioned case, supported by the jurisprudence of the UN Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia and the commentary to Additional Protocol ii:

The requirement of ‘lawful presence’ does not mean that the victim must

have had legal residence in the area. Indeed, this protection extends to

individuals who, for whatever reason, have come to live in a community,

including internally displaced persons who have established temporary

homes after being uprooted from their original communities.169

The rationale is that “the prohibition against forcible transfer is intended to protect the right of individuals to remain in their homes or communities

unhindered”.170 Whether or not the local authorities recognise the local popu-lation’s presence is irrelevant. As is the question whether the affected persons are the formal owners of the homes that they occupy and are displaced from. Any other reading of the above decision would facilitate the displacement of persons, as opposed to protect them.



166 Articles 7(1)(d) and 8(2)(a)(vii) apply to the transfer of persons to “another location”

and Article 8(2)(b)(viii) applies to transfer within or outside the occupied territory. See

Elements of Crimes, Articles 7(1)(d), 8(2)(a)(vii), and 8(2)(b)(viii).

167 icc, Prosecutor v Bosco Ntaganda, Trial Chamber vi, Judgement, icc- 01/ 04- 02/ 06, 8

July 2019, para 1047; icc, Prosecutor v William Samoei Ruto et al., Pre- Trial Chamber ii,

Decision on the Confirmation of Charges Pursuant to Article 61(7)(a) and (b) of the Rome

Statute, icc- 01/ 09- 01/ 11, 23 January 2012, para 24.

168 icc, Prosecutor v Bosco Ntaganda, Trial Chamber vi, Judgement, icc- 01/ 04- 02/ 06, 8 July

2019, para 1056.

169 Ibid., para 1069.

170 Ibid.

Palestine, Israel, and the International Criminal Court 285

Torture and other inhumane acts are also examples of Rome Statute crimes

alleged to be committed in Palestine against Palestinians. Such acts could fall within the meaning of Articles 7(1)(f) and (k) (torture and other inhuman acts as crimes against humanity), 7(1)(g) (rape or any other form of sexual violence as a crime against humanity), 8(2)(a)(ii) (torture and inhuman treatment as a war crime), Article 8(2)(a)(iii) (wilfully causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or health as a war crime), 8(2)(b)(xxi) (committing outrages upon personal dignity as a war crime), and 8(2)(b)(xxii) (torture or inhuman treatment as a war crime).

It is well- known that Israel resorts to torture and other inhuman treatment

during the interrogation and detention of Palestinians. Israel’s position during the first decades of its occupation that its agents did not use torture during

interrogation171 was dispelled by Israel’s Commission of Inquiry into Methods of Investigation of the General Security Service regarding Hostile Terrorist Activity in 1987 when it uncovered the use of "physical pressure” interrogation

techniques.172 The Israeli government responded to the report that:

[S] o long as these practices did not deviate from the guidelines that existed

in the service at the time of the interrogation (and generally speaking,

they did not deviate from the guidelines), the interrogator who employed

such measures can justly claim, on the basis of paragraph 24 (1) (a) of the

Penal Code, that he was obeying the orders of his superiors, and that these

orders were not clearly illegal, and that he had reason to believe that he

was acting in order to extract necessary information on the terrorist activ-

ity of an organization which the suspect was suspected of belonging to.173



171 Human Rights Watch, Torture and Ill- treatment, Israel’s Interrogation of Palestinians from

the Occupied Territories, 1994, pages 48– 49.

172 The Landau commission’s informal name refers to one of its members, namely the for-

mer President of Israel’s Supreme Court, Moshe Landau. The Landau commission uncov-

ered the use of torture by Israeli agents and found that perjury became an unchallenged

norm relied on by Israeli agents when called to testify before military courts. Rather than

restraining the use of torture and similar measures, the Landau commission proposed

that torture be legitimised. It said, that, “[measures] should principally take the form of

non- violent psychological pressure through a vigorous and extensive interrogation, with

the use of stratagems, including acts of deception. However, when these do not attain

their purpose, the exertion of a moderate measure of physical pressure cannot be avoided.

gss interrogators should be guided by setting clear boundaries in this matter, in order to

prevent the use of inordinate physical pressure arbitrarily administered by the interro-

gator”. Cited in Human Rights Watch, Torture and Ill- Treatment, Israel’s Interrogation of

Palestinians from the Occupied Territories, 1994, pages 50– 54.

173 Ibid., page 50.

286 Kiswanson

Torture techniques and other unlawful measures that Israeli agents are known to have used against Palestinian adults and minors in custody include forced body contortions (such as the “frog” and “banana” positions), sexual abuse, beatings, and sleep deprivation. These techniques are frequently applied

across Israeli prisons and detention facilities.174 The UN Committee against Torture noted in its most recent concluding observations on Israel, in 2016, that it remains concerned at allegations that Israeli Agency interrogators resort to methods that are contrary to the Convention against Torture, such as stress positions and sleep deprivation. It also underscored concerns about informa-tion received on the lack of accountability for torture and ill- treatment and stated that none of the hundreds of complaints submitted to Israel’s Inspector for Complaints against Israel Security Agency interrogators have resulted in

prosecution.175 The Public Committee against Torture in Israel reported in 2016, that out of 1,000 complaints examined between 2001 and March 2016, not a single criminal investigation into the alleged use of torture of Palestinians by

an interrogator of the Israeli Security Agency has been opened.176

It is also important to mention the crimes against humanity of perse-

cution and apartheid under Articles 7(1)(h) and (j) of the Rome Statute, both of which are relevant to Israel’s conduct in the opt. A detailed exam-ination of these crimes is not possible in this chapter due to space con-straints but advanced, careful and detailed analyses on these crimes

have been carried out by local human rights organisations Al- Haq,177 Al



174 See for example Addameer, Addameer Collects Hard Evidence on Torture and Ill- Treatment

Committed against Palestinian Detainees at Israeli Interrogation Centers, 23 December

2019; Addameer, The Systematic Use of Torture and Ill- treatment at Israeli Interrogation

Centers, Cases of Torture Committed at the al- Mascobiyya Interrogation Center, 23 January

2020; Public Committee against Torture in Israel, Independent Report to the UN Committee

against Torture Towards Review of the Fifth Periodic Report on Israel, 1 March 2016; Hamoked

and B’Tselem, Backed by the System: Abuse and Torture at the Shikma Interrogation

Facility, December 2015; Hamoked and B’Tselem, Absolute Prohibition, The Torture and Ill-

treatment of Palestinian Detainees, May 2007; Public Committee against Torture in Israel,

Back to a Routine of Torture: Torture and Ill- Treatment of Palestinian Detainees During

Arrest, Detention and Interrogation, September 2001- April 2003, 1 June 2003.

175 UN Committee against Torture, Concluding Observations on the Fifth Periodic Report of

Israel, cat/ c/ isr/ co/ 5, 3 June 2016, para 30.

176 Public Committee against Torture in Israel, Independent Report to the UN Committee

against Torture Towards Review of the Fifth Periodic Report on Israel, 1 March 2016.

177 See for example Al- Haq, Addameer, and Habitat International Coalition, Entrenching and

Maintaining an Apartheid Regime over the Palestinian People as a Whole, January 2022; Al-

Haq, Badil, the Palestinian Centre for Human Rights et al., Joint Parallel Report to CERD on

Israel’s 17th- 19th Periodic Reports, 10 November 2019.

Palestine, Israel, and the International Criminal Court 287

Mezan,178 B’Tselem,179 and Yesh Din180 as well as international organisations

Human Rights Watch181 and Amnesty International.182 The International Human Rights Clinic of Harvard Law School and Addameer also published a joint report on apartheid finding that “Israel’s actions in the occupied West Bank are in breach of the prohibition of apartheid and amount to the crime

of apartheid under international law”.183 Their lengthy reports, as well as





Chapter 5 by John Reynolds and Chapter 9 by John Dugard, present a con-vincing web of practices and policies that deprive Palestinians of their funda-mental human rights and substantiate the existence of a sophisticated system of institutionalised racial discrimination. The UN Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights in the Palestinian Territories Occupied Since 1967, Michael Lynk, echoed the highlighted reports and their findings in his final report to the unhrc. Lynk concluded that, “[w] ith the eyes of the interna-tional community wide open, Israel has imposed upon Palestine an apartheid


reality in a post- apartheid world”.184



4 Conclusion

It is astonishing that Israelis have not been held criminally responsible for the conduct detailed in this chapter, especially because the international commu-nity agrees that the conduct as such is heinous and must not go unpunished. The impunity afforded Israelis at the domestic level is, however, not unex-pected considering the deficiencies of the Israeli military justice system and



178 Al Mezan, The Gaza Bantustan, Israeli Apartheid in the Gaza Strip, November 2021. Al

Mezan focuses its report on apartheid “experienced by all Palestinian people, is specif-

ically visited upon the two million Palestinians living in the Gaza Strip”.

179 B’Tselem, A Regime of Jewish Supremacy from the Jordan River to the Mediterranean

Sea: This is Apartheid, 12 January 2021.

180 Yesh Din, The Israeli Occupation of the West Bank and the Crime of Apartheid: A Legal

Opinion, June 2020.

181 Human Rights Watch, A Threshold Crossed: Israeli Authorities and the Crime of Apartheid

and Persecution, 27 April 2021.

182 Amnesty International, Israel’s Apartheid Against Palestinians: Cruel System of Domination

and Crime Against Humanity, 1 February 2022.

183 International Human Rights Clinic, Harvard Law School and Addameer, Apartheid in

the Occupied West Bank: A Legal Analysis of Israel’s Actions, Joint Submission to the United

Nations Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Occupied Territory,

Including East Jerusalem, and Israel, 28 February 2022.

184 unhrc, Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights in the Palestinian

Territories Occupied Since 1967, Michael Lynk, a/ hrc/ 49/ 87, 21 March 2022. 288 Kiswanson

the Israeli Supreme Court’s view of justice, described at length herein. It is also not surprising considering the international community’s exceptionalistic response to Israel. Indeed, States have either frequently opted to observe in silent acquiescence the mistreatment of Palestinians or actively intervened to thwart efforts that seek to ensure that Palestinians enjoy their rights to truth,

justice, and reparation.185

Despite the brutality of Israel’s lengthy belligerent occupation, the violence

that permeated the establishment of the State of Israel in 1948,186 and the large number of active hostilities and uprisings over more than half a century, too little has been done to vindicate Palestinian victims and grant them remedy, while much has been done to shield Israeli perpetrators. There is no doubt that the icc’s investigation in the Situation in Palestine challenges this modus operandi. It also tests the international community’s commitment to the icc, the universality of rights and norms, and the icc’s fair application of the law in

accordance with international standards and human rights law”.187

At the risk of otherwise shaking the foundations of the international legal

order and international law and ignoring victims’ suffering, the international community must support the unparalleled opportunity that the icc offers to end impunity, irrespective of where it reigns and whoever it involves, including in Palestine and Israel.



185 Then British Prime Minister Boris Johnson wrote after the Pre- Trial Chamber decision

was delivered that the United Kingdom “oppose the icc’s investigation into war crimes

in Palestine” and that the investigation “gives the impression of being a partial and prej-

udicial attack on a friend and ally of the UK’s”. Oliver Holmes, ‘Palestine condemns Boris

Johnson for opposing icc Israel investigation”, The Guardian, 15 April 2021. German

Foreign Minister Heiko Maas tweeted that their view remains unchanged: “the court has

no jurisdiction because of the absence of the element of Palestinian statehood required

by international law”. Stephan Talmon, ‘Germany Publicly Objects to the International

Criminal Court’s Ruling on Jurisdiction in Palestine’, German Practice in International Law,

11 February 2021. Similarly, the US Secretary of State Antony J. Blinken stated that it “firmly

opposes and is deeply disappointed” by the Prosecutor’s decision to open an investiga-

tion, and that the Pre- Trial Chamber did not, “resolve the serious legal questions arising

from any exercise of territorial jurisdiction in this matter”. U.S. Department of State, ‘The

United States Opposes the icc Investigation into the Palestinian Situation’, 3 March 2021.

See also a review of States’ interventions during the Article 19 proceedings in the Situation

in Palestine. Al- Haq, Review Paper: Arguments Raised in Amicus Curiae Submissions in the

Situation in the State of Palestine Before the International Criminal Court, 2020.

186 See for example Chapter 16, Hammarberg.

187 See Rome Statute, Article 21(3).





chapter 12


Private Sector Responsibility for the Treatment

of Palestinian Prisoners and Detainees in Light

of the Law and Policy of the International

Criminal Court

Shane Darcy



1 Introduction*

In 2019, USA Today ran a story on the various scandals associated with the global

security firm G4S.1 The feature described how international investors, includ-ing the United Methodist Church and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, had divested from the company because of accusations that it was “complicit

in war crimes”.2 In particular, the company had equipped Israeli prisons and provided services at checkpoints in the Occupied Palestinian Territory where

the rights of Palestinians were infringed.3 With the increasing presence of pri-vate military and security companies in contemporary armed conflicts, it is not uncommon for the staff of such companies to be connected in some way with aspects of the capture, detention and possibly even the mistreatment of pris-

oners and detainees.4 Where abuses or human rights violations occur, not only might companies suffer reputational damage and lose investment or business opportunities, but the criminal responsibility of individual directors, officials or other employees, or of the company itself, may arise if the acts in question



1 Brett Murphy, Nick Penzenstadler and Gina Baron, ‘Show of Force: The Pulse Nightclub

Shooting and Other G4S Scandals’, USA Today, 1 November 2019.

2 Ibid.

3 Ibid.

4 See generally Lindsey Cameron and Vincent Chetail, Privatizing War: Private Military and

Security Companies under Public International Law (cup 2013); Simon Chesterman, From

Mercenaries to Market: The Rise and Regulation of Private Military Companies (oup 2009);

Emanuela- Chiara Gillard, ‘Business Goes to War: Private Military/ Security Companies and

International Humanitarian Law’, 88(863) International Review of the Red Cross (2006) 525.



© Shane Darcy, 2023 | DOI:10.1163/9789004503939_

290 Darcy

amount to crimes under applicable national or international law,5 and if the

nature of their involvement gives rise to criminal liability.6

While the concept of complicity in international crimes is frequently

invoked in the context of corporate accountability,7 there has been relatively limited application of international criminal law by judicial bodies to the activities of companies during armed conflict to date. Nonetheless, the princi-pal treaty of international criminal law, the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, can be brought to bear on the actions of individual company officers or employees, even though the treaty does not address the criminal lia-

bility of corporations themselves.8 Some precedents for such individual crimi-nal responsibility can be found in the caselaw of the post- World War ii period

and in a number of national jurisdictions.9 Moreover, well- substantiated find-ings of corporate complicity in international crimes may serve an important deterrent purpose, even in the absence of formal adjudication of corporate criminal conduct by a court or tribunal.

This chapter will explore the legal responsibility for private sector indi-

viduals and enterprises in the context of the reported violations of human rights committed against Palestinian prisoners and detainees. It does so in light of the law and policy of the International Criminal Court, given the ongoing investigation by the icc Prosecutor into the Situation in the State of Palestine. This chapter will begin by outlining which violations might amount to international crimes within the jurisdiction of the icc. It then turns to the involvement of private companies in such activities and assesses whether such involvement might give rise to criminal liability under the Rome Statute. This is done by examining applicable modes of criminal liability under the Statute,



5 See for example Nicky Woolf, ‘Former Blackwater Guards Sentenced for Massacre of

Unarmed Iraqi Civilians’, The Guardian, 13 April 2015; Wolfgang Kaleck and Miriam Saage-

Maaβ, ‘Corporate Accountability for Human Rights Violations Amounting to International

Crimes’, 8 Journal of International Criminal Justice (2010) 699.

6 See generally Alan Reed and Michael Bohlander (eds), Participation in Crime: Domestic and

Comparative Perspectives (Routledge 2013).

7 See for example James G Stewart, Corporate War Crimes: Prosecuting the Pillage of Natural

Resources (Open Society Justice Initiative 2011); International Commission of Jurists, Report

of the Expert Legal Panel on Corporate Complicity in International Crimes, 2008; Danielle

Olson, ‘Corporate Complicity in Human Rights Violations Under International Criminal

Law’, 1(1) International Human Rights Law Journal (2015).

8 See generally William Schabas, ‘Enforcing International Humanitarian Law: Catching the

Accomplices’, 83 (842) International Review of the Red Cross (2001) 439.

9 See Anita Ramasastry ‘Corporate Complicity: From Nuremberg to Rangoon: An Examination

of Forced Labor Cases and Their impact on the Liability of Multinational Corporations’, 20

Berkeley Journal of International Law (2002) 91.

The Treatment of Palestinian Prisoners and Detainees 291

in particular the concept of aiding and abetting. In light of prosecutorial policy at the icc, which is said to focus on “those who bear the greatest responsibil-

ity” for the most serious crimes,10 it is asked whether corporate actors are to be considered the most appropriate targets in this particular context when turn-ing to international criminal justice mechanisms. Regardless, the invocation of international criminal law even without any formal denunciation may prove effective at prompting business enterprises to alter their complicit behavior.



2 Treatment of Palestinian Detainees and Prisoners

The United Nations and civil society reports have shown consistent evidence of human rights violations committed against Palestinians detained or impris-oned by Israel, and at times against individuals detained by the Palestinian Authority and Palestinian armed groups. Israel is bound by relevant rules of international humanitarian law, human rights law and international criminal law, both in the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and the Gaza

Strip and in Israel itself.11 In 2014, the UN Human Rights Committee expressed its concern at reports of Israel’s “use of torture and other ill- treatment in the State party’s detention facilities, including widespread, systematic and institu-

tionalized ill- treatment of Palestinian children”.12 The UN Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights in the Palestinian Territories Occupied Since 1967 has referred to “serious, ongoing concerns” raised by Israel’s policies and practices relating to prisoners and detainees. These include:

[D] etention without charge and other forms of arbitrary detention, such

as Israel’s misuse of administrative detention; torture and other forms of

ill, inhumane and humiliating treatment; coerced confessions; solitary



10 icc Office of the Prosecutor, Report on Prosecutorial Strategy, 14 September 2006, page 5.

11 Theodor Meron, ‘The West Bank and the Application of International Humanitarian

Law on the Eve of the Fiftieth Anniversary of the Six- Day War’, 111(2) American

Journal of International Law (2017) 357; Shane Darcy and John Reynolds, ‘An Enduring

Occupation: The Status of Gaza from the Perspective of International Humanitarian Law’,

15(2) Journal of Conflict and Security Law (2010) 211; Orna Ben- Naftali, Michael Sfard and

Hedi Viterbo, The ABC of the OPT: A Legal Lexicon of the Israeli Control Over the Occupied

Palestinian Territory (cup 2018).

12 UN Human Rights Committee, Concluding Observations on the Fourth Periodic Report of

Israel, ccpr/ c/ isr/ co/ 4, 21 November 2014, para 15. See also UN Committee Against

Torture, Concluding Observations on the Fifth Periodic Report of Israel, cat/ c/ isr/ co/ 5, 3

June 2016.

292 Darcy

confinement, including of children; denial of equality of arms; denial of

visits by family members and icrc; denial of access to legal representa-

tion; unacceptable conditions in prisons and detention centres; lack of

access to required health care, at times amounting to medical neglect;

and denial of access to education, including for children.13

B’Tselem has reported ongoing impunity regarding such human rights vio-lations and the absence of criminal investigations in 700 complaints against

Israeli security agents.14 The UN Human Rights Committee has been “par-ticularly concerned that no preliminary investigations by the Inspector for Complaints against the Israel Security Agency have led to judicial proceedings

against alleged perpetrators”.15 Legislation has been passed in Israel to permit the force- feeding of Palestinian prisoners and detainees that go on hunger

strike.16 A group of UN experts expressed their alarm at the use of “enhanced interrogation techniques” in violation of “the universal prohibition of torture

and ill- treatment”.17

The Palestinian Authority, as well as Palestinian armed groups, have also

been accused of ill- treating detainees in violation of human rights standards and international humanitarian law. According to Human Rights Watch, both the Palestinian Authority and Hamas have detained critics as a form of

punishment and to deter other Palestinians from engaging in activism.18 In such instances of detention, “security forces routinely taunt, threaten, beat,

and force detainees into painful stress positions for hours at a time”.19 The UN Independent Commission of Inquiry on the 2014 Gaza Conflict also received reports of torture of Palestinians detained by the Hamas authorities in the



13 unhrc, Report of the UN Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights in the

Palestinian Territories Occupied Since 1967, Richard Falk, Richard Falk, a/ hrc/ 23/ 21, 3 June

2013, para 31.

14 B’Tselem, Failure to Investigate Alleged Cases of Ill- treatment and Torture, 1 January 2011.

15 UN Human Rights Committee, Concluding Observations on the Fourth Periodic Report of

Israel, ccpr/ c/ isr/ co/ 4, 21 November 2014, para 15.

16 See Diaa Hadid, ‘Palestinian Prisoner’s Case Tests Israeli Force- Feeding Law’, New York

Times, 11 August 2015.

17 ohchr, ‘Israel Must End Impunity for Torture and Ill- Treatment – UN Experts’, 8

February 2021.

18 Human Rights Watch, Two Authorities, One Way, Zero Dissent; Arbitrary Arrest and Torture

Under the Palestinian Authority and Hamas, 2018, page 1. See further Al- Haq, Prevention of

Torture; Monitoring, Documentation and Means of Confrontation, 2020.

19 Ibid.

The Treatment of Palestinian Prisoners and Detainees 293

Gaza Strip and accused of collaboration with Israel, although it was, “unable to

verify these allegations” in the particular circumstances.20

From the perspective of international criminal law, the immediate ques-

tion which arises is whether such violations of fundamental guarantees of humanitarian law and human rights amount to international crimes. The Rome Statute of the icc comprises the most comprehensive articulation of

international crimes to date in international law.21 It is directly applicable in the Palestine context given the accession by the State of Palestine to the treaty in 2015, and the confirmation of the initiation of an investigation by the Prosecutor in March 2021, following a lengthy preliminary examination and a

jurisdictional decision of Pre- Trial Chamber i.22 The court has jurisdiction over crimes committed on the territory, or by the nationals of the State of Palestine at least. Given the nature of Israel’s belligerent occupation of Palestine, the two relevant categories of international crimes are war crimes and crimes against humanity. Beginning with war crimes, as set out in Article 8 of the Rome Statute, it seems apparent that the treatment of Palestinian prisoners and detainees described above could fall within the definition of “torture or inhuman treatment” or “[w] ilfully causing great suffering, or serious injury to

body or health”.23

Other relevant war crimes might include denial of fair trial rights to prison-

ers of war or other protected persons, as well as the grave breach of unlawful deportation or transfer, given that Palestinian prisoners and detainees are very

often held in prisons within Israel.24 While the latter war crime could be said to take place on the territory of a State Party of the Rome Statute (State of Palestine), the other crimes mentioned may create a jurisdictional question which will need to be answered, in that they are alleged to take place at times on the territory of a non- State Party (Israel). Regarding the detention of chil-dren, the Rome Statute does not address this directly, focusing only on con-

scription or enlistment of child soldiers as offences specific to children.25



20 unhrc, Report of the Detailed Findings of the Independent Commission of Inquiry

Established Pursuant to Human Rights Council Resolution S- 21/ 1, a/ hrc/ 29/ crp.4, 24 June

2015, para 497.

21 Rome Statute, Article 8.

22 See icc, Situation in Palestine, Pre- Trial Chamber i, Decision on the ‘Prosecution Request

Pursuant to Article 19(3) for a Ruling on the Court’s Territorial Jurisdiction in Palestine’,

icc- 01/ 18- 143, 5 February 2021.

23 Rome Statute, Article 8(2)(a)(ii) and (iii).

24 Rome Statute, Article 8(2)(a)(vii). See also Rome Statute, Article 8(2)(b)(viii), which

applies specifically to occupied territory.

25 Rome Statute, Article 8(2)(b)(xxvi).

294 Darcy

Crimes against humanity as a category of crimes are also relevant in this

context. Under Article 7 of the Rome Statute, crimes against humanity con-sist of certain acts “committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against any civilian population, with knowledge of the attack”. Such acts include torture and “[o] ther inhumane acts of a similar character inten-tionally causing great suffering, or serious injury to body or to mental or phys-

ical health”.26 Especially relevant in the context of the imprisonment and detention of Palestinians is “[i]mprisonment or other severe deprivation of

physical liberty in violation of fundamental rules of international law”.27 The Rome Statute also includes the crime against humanity of apartheid, which is defined as inhumane acts committed in the context of “an institutionalized regime of systematic oppression and domination by one racial group over

another and committed with the intention of furthering that regime”.28 Israel’s

treatment of the Palestinians can be characterised as a situation of apartheid.29

Applying the category of crimes against humanity would require demon-

stration that the particular acts were directed against a civilian population as part of a widespread and systematic attack. For the crime of imprisonment and severe deprivation of liberty, consideration would need to be given as to whether prisoners and detainees are detained in violation of applicable inter-national law, such as the 1949 Geneva Conventions and applicable human rights standards. The UN International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia has understood imprisonment in this context as meaning “arbitrary impris-onment, that is to say, the deprivation of liberty of the individual without due process of law, as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against

a civilian population”.30 Given the jurisdictional question concerning crimes against nationals of a State Party committed on the territory of non- State Party,



26 Rome Statute, Article 7(1)(f) and (k).

27 Rome Statute, Article 7(1)(e).

28 Rome Statute, Article 7(1)(j).

29 See John Dugard and John Reynolds, ‘Apartheid, International Law, and the Occupied

Palestinian Territory’ 24(3) European Journal of International Law (2013) 867; B’Tselem,

A Regime of Jewish Supremacy from the Jordan River to the Mediterranean Sea: This is

Apartheid, 12 January 2021; Al- Haq, The Legal Architecture of Apartheid, 12 April 2021;

Human Rights Watch, A Threshold Crossed: Israeli Authorities and the Crimes of Apartheid

and Persecution, 27 April 2021; UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination,

Concluding Observations on the Combined Seventeenth to Nineteenth Reports of Israel,

cerd/ c/ isr/ co/ 17– 19, 12 December 2019, para 23.

30 icty, Prosecutor v Kordić and Čerkez, Trial Chamber, Judgement, Case No. it- 95/ 14/ 2- t, 26

February 2011, para 302.

The Treatment of Palestinian Prisoners and Detainees 295

it might be asked if it is sufficient that the overall attack take place on the terri-

tory of the State Party or if the crime was commenced on that territory.31

The possibility that international crimes have been committed against

detained Palestinians is certainly on the radar of the icc. In the 2018 and 2019 reports on preliminary examinations, the icc Office of the Prosecutor made no explicit reference to the treatment of Palestinian prisoners or detainees by Israeli authorities but did state that her office had received “allegations that Palestinian security and intelligence services in the West Bank have commit-ted the crime against humanity of torture against civilians held in detention

centres under their control”.32 While these reports do not provide an exhaus-tive list of the offences which might be pursued by the Prosecutor – there is a pointed reference in both to “other alleged crimes” which may require future

assessment33 – the documents do provide a significant indication of the subject- matter that may form the basis of future prosecutions.

The Office of the Prosecutor has placed a strong emphasis on crimes associ-

ated with the unlawful settlements in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and the disproportionate and indiscriminate use of force by Israeli forces in

the Gaza Strip, as well as various alleged offences by Palestinian groups.34 This approach is also evident in the icc Prosecution’s 2020 report on preliminary examinations which, while also noting that the Palestine preliminary examina-tion is completed, makes specific mention of the denial of fair and regular trial and of torture or inhumane treatment by members of Hamas and Palestinian

armed groups.35 In her March 2021 statement summarising the findings of the Palestine preliminary examination, where again there is no specific reference to potential crimes associated with detention of Palestinians by Israel, the Prosecutor explained that:



31 On the question of jurisdiction in relation to the crime against humanity of deportation

before the International Criminal Court, see icc, Pre- Trial Chamber i, Decision on the

‘Prosecution’s Request for a Ruling on Jurisdiction under Article 19(3) of the Statute’, icc-

RoC46(3)- 01/ 18, 6 September 2018.

32 icc Office of the Prosecutor, Report on Preliminary Examination Activities 2018, 5 December

2018, para 272. See also icc Office of the Prosecutor, Report on Preliminary Examination

Activities 2019, 5 December 2019, para 222.

33 Ibid.

34 icc Office of the Prosecutor, Report on Preliminary Examination Activities 2018, paras

269– 281; Office of the Prosecutor, Report on Preliminary Examination Activities 2019, 5

December 2019, paras 220– 226. See also Michael Kearney, ‘On the Situation in Palestine

and the War Crime of Transfer of Civilians into Occupied Territory’, 28(1) Criminal Law

Forum (2018) 1.

35 icc Office of the Prosecutor, Report on Preliminary Examination Activities 2020, 14

December 2020, para 221.

296 Darcy

[T] he crimes identified above are illustrative only. The Prosecutor’s inves-

tigation will not be limited only to the specific crimes that informed the

assessment at the preliminary examination stage. The Office will be able

to expand or modify the investigation with respect to the acts identified

above or other alleged acts, incidents, groups or persons and/ or to adopt

different legal qualifications, so long as the cases identified for prosecu-

tion are sufficiently linked to the situation.36

The icc Prosecutor enjoys a considerable degree of discretion in the choice of potential cases, but must meet the Rome Statute’s admissibility require-

ments, including gravity.37 Potential crimes against detained Palestinians by Israeli authorities have not been referred to by the Prosecutor to date, but that does not exclude their prosecution. These would likely be considered should the crime of apartheid, the relevance of which has been acknowledged by the

Prosecutor, be treated as a feasible candidate for prosecution.38

It is not possible in this chapter to undertake the further analysis required to

determine if each of the elements of these crimes might be satisfied in the case in hand. For present purposes, it suffices that a prima facie case can be made that the treatment of Palestinian prisoners and detainees entails breaches of international law that may amount to international crimes falling within the jurisdiction of the icc. The next section turns to consider the extent to which business enterprises are implicated in such activities and whether criminal lia-bility might arise in this particular context.



3 Involvement of Corporate Entities

The role of the corporate sector in the Israeli occupation of the opt has been highlighted by United Nations bodies and civil society organisations in recent years. For example, the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights in the Palestinian Territories Occupied Since 1967 discussed the role played by business entities in the occupation, noting that there are a



36 icc Office of the Prosecutor, Situation in Palestine – Summary of Preliminary Examination

Findings, 3 March 2021, para 11.

37 On case selection and prioritisation by the Prosecutor, see icc Office of the Prosecutor,

Policy Paper on Case Selection and Prioritization, 15 September 2016.

38 See icc Office of the Prosecutor, Report on Preliminary Examination Activities 2018, para

271; icc Office of the Prosecutor, Report on Preliminary Examination Activities 2019, 5

December 2019, para 222.

The Treatment of Palestinian Prisoners and Detainees 297

“wide range of companies that have linked their business operations to Israel’s

settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory”.39 According to the UN Independent International Fact- Finding Mission on Israeli Settlements estab-lished by the United Human Rights Council, “private entities have enabled, facilitated and profited from the construction and growth of the settlements,

either directly or indirectly”.40 The Mission recommended that “[p] rivate com-panies must assess the human rights impact of their activities and take all necessary steps – including by terminating their business interests in the set-tlements – to ensure they do not have an adverse impact on the human rights

of the Palestinian people”.41

In 2016, the UN Human Rights Council requested the UN Office of the

High Commissioner for Human Rights to establish a database of busi-nesses involved in settlement activity based on a recommendation of the

Independent International Fact- Finding Mission on Israeli Settlements.42 Following a delay caused by disputes over the working methods, the UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights reported in 2020 on the data-base, naming 112 business enterprises, mostly Israeli, implicated in unlawful

settlement activity.43 According to the UN Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights in the Palestinian Territories Occupied Since 1967, Michael Lynk, the database comprises “an important initial step towards accountability

and the end to impunity”.44 Since its publication, a lack of sufficient funding

has threatened the regular updating of the database.45



39 unhrc, Report of the UN Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights in the

Palestinian Territories Occupied Since 1967, Richard Falk, A/ 67/ 150, 19 September 2012,

para 37.

40 unhrc, Report of the Independent International Fact- Finding Mission to Investigate the

Implications of the Israeli Settlements on the Civil, Political, Economic, Social and Cultural

Rights of the Palestinian People throughout the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including

East Jerusalem, a/ hrc/ 22/ 63, 7 February 2013, para 96.

41 Ibid., para 117.

42 unhrc Resolution 31/ 36 (20 April 2016).

43 See ohchr, Database of All Business Enterprises Involved in the Activities Detailed in

Paragraph 96 of the Independent International Fact- Finding Mission to Investigate the

Civil, Political, Economic, Social and Cultural Rights of the Palestinian People Throughout

the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, a/ hrc/ 43/ 71, 12 February

2020. See also Valentina Azarova, ‘Business and Human Rights in Occupied Territory: The

UN Database of Business Active in Israel’s Settlements’, 3(2) Business and Human Rights

Journal (2018) 187.

44 ohchr, ‘UN Expert Applauds Database, Says Israeli Settlements Deprive Palestinians

‘Land Base for Genuine State and Viable Economy’’, 14 February 2020.

45 Tovah Lazaroff, ‘UN Lacks Funds to Update its Settlement ‘Black List’’, The Jerusalem Post,

18 March 2021.

298 Darcy

The Independent International Fact- Finding Mission on Israeli Settlements

emphasised the role of companies which supply material and equipment used in the construction, expansion and associated infrastructure, but also noted that the activities of companies providing security services and surveillance equipment for the settlements or businesses therein also gave rise to human

rights concerns.46 The latter companies are those most likely to be connected in some way with the treatment of those Palestinians imprisoned and detained by the Israeli authorities. The activities of private entities in Israeli settlements is in keeping with a trend over recent decades where there has been a marked increase in the use of private firms by Israel in the context of security, polic-

ing and criminal justice.47 The Supreme Court of Israel did, however, strike down legislation seeking to establish a privately run prison in Israel as being

contrary to human rights.48 No concerted examination has been undertaken to date of the potential involvement of business enterprises in violations of human rights attributable to the Palestinian Authority or other Palestinian groups.

The most prominent security services provider to have been active in Israel

and Palestine is G4S, the global private security company, which formed after a merger of two major British and Danish security companies and has oper-ated in Israel and Palestine as G4S Israel. The company has frequently been accused of profiting from Israeli settlement activity and from the ill- treatment

of Palestinian prisoners and detainees.49 According to the 2012 report of the UN Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights in the Palestinian Territories Occupied Since 1967, G4S Israel:

[P] rovides resources and equipment for Israeli checkpoints. The com-

pany also provides security services to businesses in settlements,

46 unhrc, Report of the Independent International Fact- Finding Mission to Investigate the

Implications of the Israeli Settlements on the Civil, Political, Economic, Social and Cultural

Rights of the Palestinian People throughout the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including

East Jerusalem, A/ HRC/ 22/ 63, 7 February 2013, para 96.

47 See for example Shir Lever, The Privatisation of Israeli Security (Pluto Press 2017); Lior Volinz,

‘Crafting and Reinforcing the State Through Security Privatization: Territorialisation as a

Public- Private State Project in East Jerusalem’, 29(9) Policing and Society (2019) 1077.

48 See Barak Medina, ‘Constitutional Limits to Privatization: The Israeli Supreme Court

Decisions to Invalidate Prison Privatization’, 8(4) International Journal of Constitutional

Law (2010) 690.

49 See for example Diakonia International Humanitarian Law Resource Centre, Securing

Injustice: Legal Analysis of G4S Israel Operations in Occupied Palestinian Territory,

November 2013; Who Profits, The Case of G4S: Private Security Companies and the Israeli

Occupation, March 2011.

The Treatment of Palestinian Prisoners and Detainees 299

including security equipment and personnel to shops and supermarkets

in the West Bank settlements of Modi’in Illit, Ma’ale Adumim and Har

Adar and settlement neighbourhoods of East Jerusalem.50

In addition to activities related to Israel’s illegal settlements, G4S has been involved in “the provision of systems and personnel directly related to the detention or imprisonment of Palestinians, within and outside occupied terri-

tory”.51 Reports describe how the company provided “peripheral security sys-tems”, including closed circuit television, and has fitted out control rooms in a

number of Israeli prisons.52 G4S Israel has also provided scanning equipment and staff for checkpoints in the West Bank, where Palestinians have often been

detained.53

The involvement by G4S in Israel’s security activities, including in the set-

tlements, and its prison system, prompted strong public criticism from civil society organisations and activists, who have drawn on the language of human rights and international law. One group of prominent social justice campaign-ers, which included Archbishop Desmond Tutu, stated that:

G4S helps the Israeli Prison Service to run prisons inside Israel that hold

prisoners from occupied Palestinian territory, despite the Fourth Geneva

Convention prohibition of the transfer of prisoners from occupied ter-

ritory into the territory of the occupier […] Through its involvement in

Israel’s prison system, G4S is complicit in violations of international law

and participates in Israel’s use of mass incarceration as a means by which

to dissuade Palestinians from protesting Israel’s systematic human rights

abuses.54

Several members of the United Kingdom parliament called for G4S to “end its complicity” with such violations and to “terminate its contracts with facilities



50 unhrc, Report of the UN Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights in the

Palestinian Territories Occupied Since 1967, Richard Falk, A/ 67/ 150, 19 September 2012,

para 48.

51 Diakonia International Humanitarian Law Resource Centre, Securing Injustice: Legal

Analysis of G4S Israel Operations in Occupied Palestinian Territory, November 2013, page 4.

52 Ibid., page 15.

53 Ibid., page 16.

54 Rupert Neate, ‘Desmond Tutu Tells G4S to Stop Supplying to Israel Prisons’, The Guardian,

4 June 2014.

300 Darcy

where children suffer routine physical and verbal abuse”.55 The allegations of G4S involvement in Israel’s actions seem to have been levelled against the com-pany itself for its contribution to systematic violations by Israeli authorities, rather in relation to specific acts attributable to individual company employ-ees. Whether complicity in a legal sense arises for present purposes requires a consideration as to whether the contribution by G4S Israel gives rise to liability under international criminal law, whether for the company itself or for individ-ual directors, officers or employees.



4 Corporate Complicity and International Criminal Law

Given its traditional focus on States, international law has been slow to deal with corporations and other non- State actors, despite it becoming increasingly

clear that the activities of such entities can harm human rights.56 International criminal law, for its part, has been almost exclusively concerned with natu-ral persons that are accused of having engaged in international crimes. An attempt to include corporate criminal responsibility in the Rome Statute did not succeed because of claimed concerns over complementarity and the

requirements of consistency in corresponding domestic legislation.57 Despite the exclusion of criminal liability of corporations themselves under the Rome Statute, international criminal law has begun to address corporate criminal

liability in other contexts.58 A provision on corporate criminal liability was successfully included in the Protocol on Amendments to the Protocol on the Statute of the African Court of Justice and Human Rights, although the instru-

ment is yet to enter into force.59 The proposed binding business and human rights instrument and an ilc draft convention on the prevention and pun-ishment of crimes against humanity contemplate that States would provide for the liability of legal persons in their domestic legal systems for relevant



55 ‘G4S Must End Its Complicity in Israel’s Abuse of Child Prisoners’, The Guardian, 4

June 2014.

56 See generally Andrew Clapham, Human Rights Obligations of Non- State Actors (oup 2006).

57 See Joanna Kyriakakis, ‘Corporations and the International Criminal Court: The

Complementarity Objection Stripped Bare’, 19(1) Criminal Law Forum (2008) 115.

58 See Nadia Bernaz, ‘Corporate Criminal Liability under International Law: The NEW TV

S.A.L. and Akbhar Beirut S.A.L. Cases at the Special Tribunal for Lebanon’, 13(2) Journal of

International Criminal Justice (2015) 313.

59 Protocol on Amendments to the Protocol on the Statute of the African Court of Justice

and Human Rights, 2014.

The Treatment of Palestinian Prisoners and Detainees 301

international crimes.60 Leaving aside the prospective contribution of these initiatives to corporate accountability, the past prosecution of individuals for business activities connected with international crimes offers a valuable precedent.

A handful of World War ii cases, and some more recent national cases,

demonstrate that individual employees or directors may be criminally liable

if complicit in international crimes.61 In United Kingdom v Tesch, the supplier of Zyklon B was condemned for violating the laws of war for having supplied gas, knowing that it would be used for extermination in the Nazi concentration

camps.62 In the trial of leading German industrialists, an emphasis was put on the need for knowledge of the use to which Zyklon B, which one of their com-panies manufactured, was being put: “neither the volume of production nor the fact that large shipments were destined for concentration camps would alone be sufficient … to conclude … that those who knew had knowledge of

criminal purpose”.63 These trials occurred in a context where there were hun-dreds of prosecutions by the victorious Allies, but they serve as useful prece-dents for considering criminal responsibility of corporate actors.

Given the jurisdictional limits of the icc, the focus here must be on the crim-

inal responsibility of individual employees or company officers. Companies themselves cannot generally be prosecuted at the international level at pres-ent, although both civil and criminal liability for international crimes may

arise at the national level.64 In terms of individual criminal responsibility under international criminal law, persons may be liable not only for having physically perpetrated crimes, but also for having committed crimes through or with other persons, or for having ordered, planned, instigated, solicited or



60 See Open- Ended Intergovernmental Working Group on a Binding Treaty on Business and

Human Rights, Third Revised Draft, 17 August 2021; ilc, ‘Report of the International Law

Commission on the Work of its Seventy- First Session’ 2(2) Yearbook of the International

Law Commission (2019), Article 6(8).

61 Wim Huisman and Elies van Sliedregt, ‘Rogue Traders: Dutch Businessman, International

Crimes and Corporate Complicity’, 8 Journal of International Criminal Justice (2010) 803.

62 British Military Court, Trial of Bruno Tesch and Two Others (The Zyklon B Case), 1– 8 March

1946, 1 Law Reports of the Trials of War Criminals (1947), pages 101– 102.

63 United States Military Tribunal, Trial of Carl Krauch and Twenty- Two Others (The I.G.

Farben Trial), 1947– 1948, 10 Law Reports of the Trials of War Criminals (1949), page 24.

64 See Gwen Skinner, Robert McCorquodale and Olivier de Schutter, The Third Pillar;

Access to Judicial Remedies for Human Rights Violations by Transnational Business, (The

International Corporate Accountability Roundtable, core and European Coalition for

Corporate Justice 2013); Jennifer Zerk, Corporate Liability for Gross Human Rights Abuses;

Towards a Fairer and More Effective System of Domestic Law Remedies, Report Prepared for

the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, 2013. 302 Darcy

induced the commission of international crimes.65 Military and civilian supe-riors may be criminally responsible for the crimes of subordinates which they

knew or should have known about and failed to prevent or punish.66 In the case of potential crimes against Palestinian prisoners and detainees, and cor-porate complicity therein, aiding and abetting as a mode of criminal liability found in the Rome Statute is the most appropriate. According to Article 25(3) (c) of the Statute, a person may be criminally liable for a crime in the Court’s jurisdiction if the person, “[f] or the purpose of facilitating the commission of such a crime, aids, abets or otherwise assists in its commission or its attempted

commission, including providing the means for its commission”.67

Aiding and abetting is treated as the most relevant form of criminal liability

in the context of corporate complicity in human rights abuses. It was the only mode of criminal liability specifically mentioned in the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights, which were endorsed by the UN Human Rights

Council in 2011.68 The Guiding Principles offer an explanation of what aiding and abetting entails:

The weight of international criminal law jurisprudence indicates that the

relevant standard for aiding and abetting is knowingly providing practi-

cal assistance or encouragement that has a substantial effect on the com-

mission of a crime.69

The icc has not tried or convicted any individual for international crimes using this form of criminal liability, although it did address the elements of aiding

and abetting in the context of offences against the administration of justice.70 A considerable caselaw has also emerged from the other international criminal



65 Rome Statute, Article 25.

66 Rome Statute, Article 28.

67 See generally Sarah Finnin, Elements of Accessorial Modes of Liability: Article 25(3)(b) and

(c) of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (Martinus Nijhoff 2012); Oona

Hathaway et al., ‘Aiding and Abetting in International Criminal Law’, 104 Cornell Law

Review (2019) 1593.

68 unhrc Resolution 17/ 4 (6 July 2011).

69 Special Representative of the Secretary- General on the Issues of Human Rights

Transnational Corporations and Other Business Enterprises, Report of the Special

Representative of the Secretary- General on the Issues of Human Rights Transnational

Corporations and Other Business Enterprises, John Ruggie, Guiding Principles on Business

and Human Rights: Implementing the United Nations “Protect, Respect and Remedy”

Framework, a/ hrc/ 17/ 31, 21 March 2011a/ hrc/ 17/ 31, 21 March 2011, page 17.

70 icc, Prosecutor v Bemba et al., Trial Chamber vii, Judgement, icc- 01/ 05- 01/ 13, 19 October

2016, paras 85– 86.

The Treatment of Palestinian Prisoners and Detainees 303

tribunals on aiding and abetting genocide, crimes against humanity and war

crimes.71

Liability under Article 25(3)(c) of the Rome Statute “implies a lower degree

of blameworthiness” for accessories compared to both co- perpetrators and instigators, given that those who co- perpetrate exercise joint control over the commission of a crime, whereas an accessory “merely contributes to or

otherwise assists in an offence committed by the principal perpetrator”.72 An instigator prompts the commission of an offence, while the accessory’s con-tribution “hinges on the determination of the principal perpetrator to execute

the offence”.73 Leaving aside the divergence in the caselaw of the ad hoc tri-bunals around the question of whether aid or assistance must be specifically

directed to the commission of crimes,74 more generally it is considered that

the contribution made by an accessory should be substantial,75 although it need not be essential or a sine qua non for the commission of the crime, and it

must be knowingly made.76 An icc Trial Chamber has emphasised causality in this context, stating that the contribution must have “furthered, advanced or

facilitated” the commission of the relevant offence.77 Examples of aiding and abetting in the case law of the various international tribunals have included

the supply of arms and ammunition, military training and resources.78

For aiding and abetting, knowledge is considered the required mens rea

standard, rather than “intent and knowledge”, which is the general standard

set out in the Rome Statute.79 The Rome Statute also sets out in Article 25 that assistance must have been provided “for the purpose” of the commission of



71 See Ines Peterson, ‘Open Questions Regarding Aiding and Abetting Liability in

International Criminal Law: A Case Study of icty and ictr Jurisprudence’, 16(4)

International Criminal Law Review (2016) 565.

72 icc, Prosecutor v Bemba et al., Trial Chamber vii, Judgement, icc- 01/ 05- 01/ 13, 19 October

2016, paras 85– 86.

73 Ibid.

74 See icty, Prosecutor v Perišić, Appeals Chamber, Judgement, it- 04- 81- a, 28 February

2013; icty, Prosecutor v Šainović et al., Appeals Chamber, Judgement, it- 05- 87- a, 23

January 2014.

75 icc, Prosecutor v Lubanga, Trial Chamber, Judgement, Case No. icc- 01/ 04- 01/ 06, 14 March

2012, para 997.

76 See icty, Prosecutor v Tadić, Appeals Chamber, Judgement, it- 94- 1- a, 15 July 1999, paras

172– 229.

77 icc, Prosecutor v Bemba et al., Trial Chamber vii, Judgement, icc- 01/ 05- 01/ 13, 19 October

2016, para 94.

78 See for example scsl, Prosecutor v Taylor, Trial Chamber, Judgement, scsl- 03- 1- T, 26

April 2012.

79 Rome Statute, Article 30.

304 Darcy

the crime in question. This constitutes an “enhanced mens rea requirement”, which “goes beyond the ordinary mens rea standard encapsulated in Article 30 of the Statute and penalises such assistance only if a higher subjective element

is satisfied on the part of the accessory”.80 What this means is that the acces-sory must intend to facilitate the commission of the offence, although it is not necessary to show intent on the part of the accessory that the offence itself

be committed.81 There has been some disagreement amongst United States courts adjudicating civil suits under the Alien Torts Statute over whether knowledge and a substantial contribution are required for aiding and abetting, or whether purpose is needed, in that an accomplice purposefully provided

the assistance.82 The purpose of, say, selling weapons and ammunition to an armed group would more likely be to make a profit, rather than to contribute

to the commission of war crimes,83 although it is also conceivable that such an action could also serve both or indeed other purposes. Absent the requirement of purpose, it is clear that ostensibly neutral business activity may give rise to complicity in international crimes, if the above- mentioned criteria of aiding and abetting are met.

Returning to the case of G4S Israel, there is no available evidence that indi-

vidual company officers or employees were involved in the planning or direct-ing of Israeli policies or practices towards Palestinian prisoners and detainees. Their contribution would seem to be more peripheral, given that reports have referred to providing security systems for Israeli prisons and equipment for checkpoints. In terms of aiding and abetting, the considerable publicity around the activities of G4S Israel may have put individuals on notice that their activ-ities are somehow implicated in potential criminal acts, and thus help to sat-isfy the knowledge requirement. It is not clear, however, that the contribution as described is substantial enough to generate criminal responsibility under prevailing standards of international criminal law. Such questions should fall to be determined by a judicial body, but in a sign of the limited avenues for



80 icc, Prosecutor v Bemba et al., Trial Chamber vii, Judgement, icc- 01/ 05- 01/ 13, 19 October

2016, para 94.

81 Ibid., para 97.

82 Compare for example United States Court of Appeal for the District of Columbia Circuit,

John Doe v Exxon Mobil Corporation, 8 July 2011 with United States Court of Appeals for

the Second Circuit, The Presbyterian Church of Sudan v Talisman Energy, Inc., 2 October

2009. The scope for litigation under the Alien Torts Statute has been narrowed in

Supreme Court of the United States, Kiobel v Royal Dutch Petroleum Ltd., 596 U.S. (2013)

and Supreme Court the United States, Nestle USA, Inc. v. Doe et al., 593 U.S. (2021).

83 Robert Cryer et al., An Introduction to International Criminal Law and Procedure (cup

2014) 374.

The Treatment of Palestinian Prisoners and Detainees 305

corporate accountability at the international level they have instead been considered by an “independent review” commissioned by the company itself and before the United Kingdom National Contact Point established under the oecd Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises.

The summary of the “independent review” commissioned by G4S of its

activities in Israel and Palestine concluded that, “there is no case against G4S

on the grounds of complicity with alleged war crimes committed by Israel”.84 Notwithstanding legitimate questions that may be raised regarding the inde-pendence of the experts, given they were directly commissioned by the com-

pany to conduct this assessment,85 this conclusion seems justified, at least in the context of the imprisonment, detention and treatment of Palestinians, if the question of complicity is viewed through a strict international criminal law lens. That said, the analysis lacked accuracy at times, such as when hold-ing that, “[i] t is very difficult to see how the legal requirements of contribu-

tion, knowledge and intent could be met”,86 given that a showing of intent is not required, at least as far as aiding and abetting is concerned. The review concluded that while there are, “clearly human rights failings in some parts of Israel’s security system, […] G4S’ role is far removed from their immediate

causes and impact”.87 It also bears noting that the G4S commissioned indepen-dent review focused on the potential complicity of the company itself, rather than individual employees. Nevertheless, the standard needed to be met under international criminal law for criminal liability on the basis of aiding and abet-ting does not seem to be met in this particular case, unless evidence were to emerge of a more substantial contribution by individual employees or com-pany officers to potential crimes against Palestinian prisoners and detainees.

G4S was also the subject of a complaint and investigation under the oecd

Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises by the United Kingdom’s National Contact Point. The complaint found some “technical inconsistencies” with the specific obligations of the company, but not “any broad failure by G4S to

respect the human rights of people on whose behalf the complaint is made”.88



84 See Hugo Slim and Guglielmo Verdirame, Human Rights Review of G4S Israel: Human

Rights Report and Legal Opinion – Summary of Independent Review, 2 June 2014, page 2.

85 See for example, Palestinian Human Rights Organizations Council et al., Joint Letter to UN

Secretary General: Terminate Contracts with G4S, 10 September 2015.

86 Business and Human Rights Resource Center, Human Rights Review of G4S Israel; Human

Rights Report and Legal Opinion, 2 June 2014, page 2.

87 Ibid.

88 UK National Contact Point for the oecd Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises, Lawyers

for Palestinian Human Rights (LPRH) & G4S PLC: Final Statement after Examination of

Complaint, March 2015, page 3.

306 Darcy

Although the National Contact Point found that there were “adverse human rights impacts associated with the facilities and locations referred to”, it con-cluded that none of the information reviewed “suggested that G4S staff or

equipment play a direct part in these impacts”.89 Nonetheless, the company was found to be in technical violation as it could have done more to “address

human rights impacts”, despite not being the cause of them.90 While the con-cept of aiding and abetting under international criminal law was not applied by the National Contact Point, its findings indicate a more peripheral form of complicity rather than involvement that might attract criminal liability.

A failure to meet the technical requirements for liability under international

criminal law neither points to an absence of wrongdoing nor insulates busi-ness enterprises from other repercussions for their association with abuses of human rights. International criminal law, like its national counterpart, imposes strict standards and is not always the most appropriate tool for addressing the various ways in which corporate actors may be implicated in human rights vio-lations or international crimes. More nuance can be found elsewhere, such as

in the approach of truth commissions or peoples’ tribunals.91 The South Africa Truth and Reconciliation Commission, for example, held an institutional hear-ing on the role of “business and labour” in violations of human rights commit-ted during the apartheid regime. The Commission’s final report observed that the business sector had been “central to the economy that had maintained the

South African state during the apartheid years”.92 It identified three levels of participation by companies:

Certain businesses, especially the mining industry, were involved in

helping to design and implement apartheid policies. Other businesses

benefited from co- operating with the security structures of the former

state. Most businesses benefited from operating in a racially structured

context.93



89 Ibid., para 41.

90 Ibid., paras 69– 77.

91 See for example, Asa Winstanley and Frank Barat (eds), Corporate Complicity in Israel’s

Occupation: Evidence from the London Session of the Russell Tribunal on Palestine (Pluto

Press 2011).

92 South Africa Truth and Reconciliation Commission, Truth and Reconciliation Commission

of South Africa Report, 1998, vol 6, Section 2, Chapter 5, page 140.

93 Ibid., vol 4, Chapter 2, page 58.

The Treatment of Palestinian Prisoners and Detainees 307

Criminal law may not capture each of these various forms of corporate com-plicity in violations of human rights.

The cumulative effect of the findings of various international organisa-

tions implicating G4S in the violation of the rights of Palestinian prisoners and detainees, the concerted effort of civil society organisations and activists, and the divestment by prominent investors would seem to have prompted the

company to end certain business relationships with the Israeli authorities.94 The Financial Times reported in 2016 that G4S had agreed to sell its Israeli firm,

although it would retain an interest in Israel’s national police training centre.95 G4S claimed that the move was “entirely commercial”, although it was cele-

brated as a victory by the boycott, divestment and sanctions movement.96 The database of companies associated with Israeli settlements prepared by the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights makes no reference to G4S, although

other Israeli security firms are listed.97 The decision by the company to end certain business relationships was certainly not attributable to any formal application of international criminal law, but the invocation of key concepts in this body of law, particularly complicity and international crimes, doubtlessly played a role in highlighting the potential legal risks for companies doing busi-ness with state authorities with a record of violating international law.



5 Conclusion

International criminal law in its current manifestation does not allow for corporations to be prosecuted before the icc. There is no question, however, that individual employees or company officers fall within the jurisdiction of the Court, or that both individuals and companies can face legal sanctions at the national level for involvement in international crimes. Notwithstanding the existence of such jurisdiction, international criminal law imposes particu-larly exacting standards for liability to arise given the seriousness of the sanc-tions that can be imposed, at least for natural persons. In addition to meeting

94 Gill Plimmer, ‘G4S To End Israel Jail Contracts Within Three Years’, Financial Times, 5

June 2014.

95 ‘G4S Agrees to Sell Israel Unit’, Financial Times, 3 December 2016.

96 Ibid. See also Rhiannon Curry, ‘G4S Sells Israeli Arm For £88m’, The Telegraph, 2

December 2016.

97 ohchr, Database of All Business Enterprises Involved in the Activities Detailed in Paragraph

96 of the Independent International Fact- Finding Mission to Investigate the Civil, Political,

Economic, Social and Cultural Rights of the Palestinian People Throughout the Occupied

Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, a/ hrc/ 43/ 71, 12 February 2020, pages 6– 10. 308 Darcy

requisite elements of specific crimes, the requirements of the chosen mode of criminal liability must also be satisfied. Aiding and abetting is an appropriate form of criminal liability in the context of the involvement of corporate actors in criminal activities and requires that an individual knowingly provides prac-tical assistance or encouragement which has a substantial effect on the com-mission of a crime within the icc’s jurisdiction.

A prima facie case can be made for the commission of international crimes

in the context of the treatment of Palestinian prisoners and detainees, by both Israeli and Palestinian authorities, although disproportionately by the former. While corporate entities have been implicated in the ill- treatment by Israel of Palestinian prisoners and detainees, as they have with other facets of Israel’s occupation of Palestinian territory, from the perspective of international crim-inal law, such involvement by business enterprises may not be sufficiently sub-stantial to give rise to criminal liability or to sufficiently catch the attention of the Prosecutor of the icc. Former Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda reiterated that, in the context of the Palestine investigation, her office “focuses its attention on the most notorious alleged offenders or those alleged to be most responsible

for the commission of the crimes”.98 While the Office of the Prosecutor has received submissions regarding corporate complicity in international crimes

in Palestine,99 there has been no indication by the Prosecutor thus far, that the investigation in Palestine will consider pursuing individuals directing, manag-ing or working for corporate entities. Other individuals, including high- ranking persons in the Israeli Prison Service, Israel’s Ministries for Internal Security and Defence, and various Palestinian authorities have greater influence and control over crimes against detained and imprisoned Palestinians.

For companies with business relationships with States or other entities

acting in violation of human rights and international law, the attendant risks

which arise can be “reputational, financial or legal”.100 The risk of legal con-sequences, even if ostensibly limited, can prompt companies to alter their



98 icc Office of the Prosecutor, Statement of ICC Prosecutor, Fatou Bensouda, Respecting an

Investigation of The Situation in Palestine, 3 March 2021.

99 See for example, Al- Haq, Palestinian Human Rights Organisations Submit File to ICC

Prosecutor: Investigate and Prosecute Pillage, Appropriation and Destruction of Palestinian

Natural Resources, 26 October 2018.

100 Special Representative of the Secretary- General on the Issues of Human Rights

Transnational Corporations and Other Business Enterprises, Report of the Special

Representative of the Secretary- General on the Issues of Human Rights Transnational

Corporations and Other Business Enterprises, John Ruggie, Guiding Principles on Business

and Human Rights: Implementing the United Nations “Protect, Respect and Remedy”

Framework, a/ hrc/ 17/ 31, 21 March 2011, page 19.

The Treatment of Palestinian Prisoners and Detainees 309

behavior, whether to avoid legal sanctions, reputational damage, or financial harm. International criminal law has proven a valuable tool in this context. The Dutch construction firm Riwal avoided prosecution for war crimes in the Netherlands, despite charges having been laid in connection with Israel’s con-struction of the Wall in Palestine, as the company had ended its activities in Israel and the opt and thus reduced the risks of repetition, amongst other

reasons cited by the Prosecutor.101 After the Spanish infrastructure business Ferrovial was named in a submission to the icc alleging complicity in crimes against humanity occurring on detention centres on Nauru and Manus Island,

it ended its involvement in such activities.102 International criminal law may be sorely wanting in terms of the successful prosecution of companies or their staff for complicity in international crimes, yet it yields an almost unmatched

symbolic power,103 which appeals to human rights advocates and should con-cern companies linked to wrongdoing in equal measure.



101 The Netherlands National Public Prosecutor’s Office, Bureau of the Chief Prosecutor,

Letter of Dismissal, 13 May 2013, pl- v- 1340.

102 Achiume et al., Communiqué to the Office of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal

Court Under Article 15 of the Rome Statute, The Situation in Nauru and Manus Island: Liability

for Crimes Against Humanity in the Detention of Refugees and Asylum Seekers, 14 February

2017. See Ben Doherty, ‘Amnesty Warns any Company Taking Over Manus and Nauru

Camps Complicit in “Abuse”’, The Guardian, 5 April 2017.

103 See generally, Barrie Sanders, ‘The Expressive Turn to International Criminal Law: A

Field in Search of a Meaning’ (34)2 Leiden Journal of International Law (2019) 851. See

also, Joanna Kyriaksis, ‘Corporations Before International Criminal Courts: Implications

for the International Criminal Justice Project’ 30(1) Leiden Journal of International Law

(2017) 221.





chapter 13


Prosecuting Systematic Economic Exploitation

of Occupied Territory as Pillage

Susan Power



At the Nuremberg Tribunal, two categories of pillage were identified, firstly the theft by soldiers of property for private gain, and secondly, “the organized sei-zure of property undertaken within the framework of a systematic economic

exploitation of occupied territory”.1 It has been suggested that the second cat-egory of pillage did not survive the dolus specialis for pillage in the Elements of Crimes of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, which requires that the perpetrator intended to appropriate the property “for private or personal use”. This chapter will explore whether the icc can prosecute cases of public revenue appropriation as systematic economic exploitation of occu-pied territory. For this purpose, this chapter will examine the prosecution of public acts of property appropriation, directed for public use, such as public monies siphoned from the revenues of the occupied territory and absorbed into the Occupying State’s treasury.



1 Pillaging During Armed Conflict and Occupation

Wars and subsequent belligerent occupations are often driven by the pursuit of resource exploitation, appropriation and pillage by invading belligerents, cru-

sading for their own economic gain.2 During World War i, Germany invaded and occupied Belgium, destroying Belgian industry and using the occupied ter-

ritory, “as a milch cow for its war effort”.3 German industrialists during World War ii, such as Hermann Rochling buoyed by Germany’s economic imperial-

ism,4 encouraged “Hitler to invade the Balkans and leveraged his ties with the

1 icty, Prosecutor v Delalic, Judgement, it- 96- t, 16 November 1998, para 590.

2 Andrea Edoardo Varisco, ‘A Study on the Inter- Relation between Armed Conflict and Natural

Resources and its Implications for Conflict Resolution and Peacebuilding’, 15 Journal of Peace,

Conflict and Development (2010) 43.

3 M Barbara Mulrine, The Price of Honor (Fairleigh Dickinson University Press 2011) 288.

4 Richard V. Pierard, ‘A Case Study in German Economic Imperialism: The Colonial Economic

Committee, 1896– 1914’, 16(2) Scandinavian Economic History Review (1968) 156.



© Susan Power, 2023 | DOI:10.1163/9789004503939_

Prosecuting Systematic Economic Exploitation 311

regime to cherry- pick which factories and mines his firm would take over in

occupied territory”.5

More recently, licensing agreements negotiated between EU Member States

with Morocco to exploit fisheries in the occupied Sahrawi Arab Democratic

Republic,6 or the annexation and absorption of gas deposits into the economic portfolio of Russia during the occupation of Crimea, have been orchestrated

with an intent to deplete the economic subsistence of the occupied territory.7 In 2003, in occupied Iraq, the US and UK- led Coalition Provisional Authority disbursed almost the entirety of the Development Fund for Iraq to foreign contractors for reconstruction, with some 8.8 billion US dollars of Iraq’s sov-

ereign wealth missing and unaccounted for, at the close of the occupation.8 Noting that the practice of organised mass property appropriation and pillage, including the systematic dismantling of the economy of the occupied territory, is common practice during the administration of many contemporary bellig-erent occupations, this chapter will more narrowly examine Israel’s systematic economic exploitation of the Occupied Palestinian Territory as pillage.

A core feature of Israel’s colonisation of the Palestinian territory car-

ried out under the umbrella of military occupation, is the continuing inte-gration of the Israeli and Palestinian economies, including for example,

tax harmonisation under military order primarily for the benefit of Israel.9 Since 1967, Israel has appropriated Palestinian public and private lands for agricultural, industrial and residential settlements colonised by illegally transferred in settlers, while granting exclusive leases to Israeli and interna-

tional corporations to exploit Palestinian national and natural resources.10

These include inter alia leases for agricultural lands,11 the electricity grid,12



5 Erica X. Eisen, ‘The Other Nuremberg Trials, Seventy- Five Years On’, Boston Review, 22

March 2021.

6 European Parliament, ‘EU- Morocco Fisheries Agreement’, Plenary, February 2019.

7 Ariel Cohen, ‘As Russia Closes in on Crimea’s Energy Resources, What is Next for Ukraine?’,

Forbes, 28 February 2019.

8 The Development Fund for Iraq: US Management of Iraq Oil Proceeds and Compliance

with UN Security Council Resolution 1483, Hearing Before the Subcommittee on National

Security, Emerging Threats, and International Relations of the Committee on Government

Reform, House of Representatives One Hundred Ninth Congress, First Session (21

June 2005).

9 Israeli Military Order No 658 (2 June 1976).

10 See Human Rights Watch, Occupation, Inc. How Settlement Businesses Contribute to Israel’s

Violations of Palestinian Rights, 19 January 2016.

11 unctad, The Besieged Palestinian Agricultural Sector, 2015, page 15.

12 David Kretzmer, The Occupation of Justice: The Supreme Court of Israel and the Occupied

Territories (State University of New York Press 2002) 64; Daoud Kuttab, ‘Jerusalem

Electricity Company Crippled by Israel, Palestinian Authority’, Al- Monitor, 16 March 2018. 312 Power

quarries,13 oil,14 gas,15 Dead Sea minerals,16 and water.17 A study concluded by the Don’t Buy into Occupation coalition, examining the profiteering of European financial institutions from Israel’s illegal settlement enterprise found that 672 banks, asset managers, insurance companies, and pension funds, had financial relationships with businesses actively involved in the illegal settle-ments, holding some 141 billion US dollars in shares and bonds with the settle-

ment companies.18 However this type of appropriation of property from the occupied territory for private commercial purpose is a fairly straightforward example of pillage – in other words, the appropriation of the property without

the consent of the owner for personal or private gain.19

Also in 1967, Israel began to harmonise the tax system between the State of

Israel and the opt, creating a single customs union “such that no customs were

imposed on the wares transported inside the single economic unit”.20 This eco-

nomic integration, later coined as “economic annexation” by Eyal Benvenisti,21 ensured that economic changes that took effect in Israel were implemented in the occupied territory, not for the benefit of the occupied population but for the benefit of Israel. According to Benvenisti, “whenever Israeli interests could have been jeopardized by the free flow of goods, services and people, measures

were taken to counter the risks”.22 Over the course of the last 17 years alone, Israel has profited from this “economic integration” to an estimated 47.7 billion US dollars from Palestinian Authority fiscal leakages and losses of Palestinian



13 Al- Haq, somo, Violations Set in Stone, HeidlebergCement in the Occupied Palestinian

Territory, February 2020.

14 Al- Haq, Annexing Energy – Exploiting and Preventing the Development of Oil and Gas in the

Occupied Palestinian Territory, 5 December 2015.

15 Ibid.

16 Al- Haq, Pillage of the Dead Sea: Israel’s Unlawful Exploitation of Natural Resources in the

Occupied Palestinian Territory, 3 September 2012.

17 Israeli Military Order No 92 (7 June 1967); Israeli Military Order No 158 (19 November

1967); Israeli Military Order No 291 (19 December 1968); Israeli Military Order 418 (23

March 1971).

18 Don’t Buy into Occupation, Exposing the Financial Flows into Illegal Israeli Settlements,

2021, page 6.

19 See generally, James Stewart, Open Society Foundations, Why Corporate Pillage is a War

Crime, May 2019; Amnesty International, Think Twice, Can Companies do Business with

Israeli Settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territories while Respecting Human Rights?

2019; The Irish Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence, Displacement and

Demolitions in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, 13 July 2021, page 48.

20 Hamoked, Economic Exploitation of Occupied Territories, 1 November 2009.

21 Eyal Benvenisti, The International Law of Occupation (Princeton University Press

1993) 141– 143.

22 Ibid.

Prosecuting Systematic Economic Exploitation 313

revenues to the Israel treasury.23 Such fiscal leakages and losses have been gen-erated from Israel’s inflated administrative fees to the pa on tax revenues, fiscal leakage from Israeli gathered taxes and operational fees from settlement com-mercial enterprises in Area C, and the deprivation of pa revenues by Israel’s

undervaluation of imports, amongst others.24 Whether the appropriation of public Palestinian revenues as fiscal leakages by Israel and the transfer of such revenues to its public treasury constitutes pillage, is the question to which this chapter now turns.



2 Historical Background

The general prohibition against pillage is set out in Article 47 of the Hague Regulations which provides that “pillage is formally forbidden”. Similarly, Article 33 of the Fourth Geneva Convention states that “pillage is prohibited”. In this vein, the Commentary to the Fourth Geneva Convention broadly out-lines the obligations of the occupier to formally and broadly prevent the pil-lage of private and public property. Accordingly, “[t] he prohibition of pillage is applicable to the territory of a Party to the conflict as well as to occupied territories. It guarantees all types of property, whether they belong to private

persons or to communities or the State”.25 The Rome Statute provides for the war crime of pillage in Articles 8(2)(b)(xvi) and 8(2)(e)(v) for acts of “pillaging of a town or place, even when taken by assault” in armed conflicts of an inter-national and non- international character.

Originally the crime of pillage was conceptualised as inherently private in

character, a crime whereby renegade soldiers during armed conflict plundered

private property for private purposes, effectively property theft.26 These early characteristics of the crime mirrored the laissez faire economic system of the nineteenth century and the Rousseau Portalis doctrine of the public private

divide.27 Whereas public property could be subjected to the use of the invading military, private property was protected albeit subject to minor qualifications

of requisition and confiscation.28 For early conceptions of the crime, public

23 unctad, Economic Costs of the Israeli Occupation for the Palestinian People: Fiscal Aspects,

a/ 74/ 272, 2 August 2019, 17.

24 Ibid., 11– 14.

25 icrc, Commentary: Fourth Geneva Convention Relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons

in Time of War (icrc 1958) Article 33.

26 Robert Cryer, An Introduction to International Criminal Law and Procedure (cup 2014) 298.

27 Roger O’Keefe, The Protection of Cultural Property in Armed Conflict (cup 2006) 13.

28 Ibid.

314 Power

property was largely considered the war booty of the invading belligerent,

while private property was protected and its theft criminalised as pillage.29

The crime of pillage experienced a first seismic shift following the caselaw

of the Nuremberg War Crimes Tribunal, which interpreted the war crime of pillage as appropriation of property from private and public entities. In the Krupp case before the US Military Tribunal at Nuremberg in 1948, six of the accused, officials of the Krupp industrial enterprises occupying high positions in political, financial, industrial and economic circles in Germany, were found guilty of war crimes for, inter alia, the plunder or spoliation of public and pri-

vate property in the territories occupied by Germany.30

By 1957, Von Glahn concluded, “if an occupant seizes any public property in

violation of the Hague Regulations, such seizure is now viewed as a punishable war crime under the provisions of Article 6- b of the Charter of the Nuremberg

War Crimes Tribunal”.31 In this regard, fines, taxation, contributions, requisi-tions and concessions exceeding the rules of usufruct, requisition in violation of the property provisions of the Hague Regulations by the belligerent occu-

pant, may be considered acts of pillage and prosecuted as such.32

The second seismic shift for the crime of pillage at Nuremberg, revolved

around the introduction of a much broader conception of the crime, from petty theft, to the systematic economic exploitation of occupied territory. The Trial Chamber of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia in Delalic summed up the now dichotomous nature of the crime of pillage as comprising firstly “acts of looting committed by soldiers for their private gain” and secondly “the organized seizure of property undertaken within the frame-

work of a systematic economic exploitation of occupied territory”.33

A question mark arose as to whether the latter could be prosecuted at

the icc given the controversial dolus specialis for pillage in the Elements of Crimes, which requires that “the perpetrator intended to deprive the owner

of the property and to appropriate it for private or personal use”.34 The Special Court for Sierra Leone in Prosecutor v Fofana and Kondewa subsequently held obiter that the icc’s dolus specialis in the Elements of Crimes represented “an



29 Ibid.

30 United States Military Tribunal, Trial of Krupp and Eleven Others, 1947– 1948, 10 Law

Reports of the Trials of War Criminals (1949), page 72.

31 Gerhard Von Glahn, The Occupation of Enemy Territory: A Commentary on the Law and

Practice of Belligerent Occupation (University of Minnesota Press 1957) 183.

32 Hague Regulations, Articles 52– 55.

33 icty, Prosecutor v Delalic, Judgement, it- 96- t, 16 November 1998, para 590.

34 Elements of Crimes, Article 8(2)(b)(xvi), War Crime of Pillaging, Element 2. Prosecuting Systematic Economic Exploitation 315

unwarranted restriction” on the Nuremberg strand of crime of pillage – in

other words, the systematic economic exploitation of occupied territory.35



3 Limits on Property Use under Intenational Humanitarian Law

The treatment of property into public and private categories arguably stems from the laissez faire economic doctrine. Laissez faire, the prevailing political- economic doctrine of the nineteenth century, limited the State’s power to

administer the affairs of the private sector.36 The ideology indoctrinated the Hague Regulations, placing private economic life outside the domain of the Occupying Power. The significance of this doctrine is twofold: first it protects private economic interests as the exclusive preserve of the citizen, and sec-ond, it highlights the level of allowable exploitation by the Occupying Power over public or State resources. The concern here, is that while laissez faire was perceived as a preservationist theory according to the economic model of the time, the influence of communism and the emergence of State owned indus-tries, compounded with the mixing of State and private concessions, presented

unforeseen anomalies for occupation law.37 The Hague Regulations remain somewhat stagnant, trapped in the laissez faire ideology which has failed to adapt to the concept of modern economic warfare. The drafters of the Geneva Conventions missed the opportunity to elaborate on the extent of the occu-pants’ administration over public moveable and immoveable property empha-

sising instead the inviolability of private property only.38 The Fourth Geneva Convention narrowly prohibits the destruction of public property in Article 53 and Article 147 and is silent on the administration of public moveable and

immoveable property during occupation.39



35 scsl, Prosecutor v Fofana and Kondewa, Trial Judgement, 2 August 2007, para 160.

36 Julius Stone, Legal Controls of International Conflict (Stevens and Sons Ltd 1954) 727.

37 See generally, Ernst Feilchenfeld, The International Economic Law of Belligerent Occupation

(Carnegie Endowment for International Peace 1942) 12.

38 Fourth Geneva Convention, Article 33.

39 Fourth Geneva Convention, Article 53. “Any destruction by the Occupying Power of real

or personal property belonging individually or collectively to private persons, or to the

State, or to other public authorities, or to social or co- operative organisations, is prohib-

ited, except where such destruction is rendered absolutely necessary by military opera-

tions”; Fourth Geneva Convention, Article 147. “Grave breaches to which the preceding

Article relates shall be those involving any of the following acts … extensive destruction

and appropriation of property, not justified by military necessity and carried out unlaw-

fully and wantonly”.

316 Power

3.1 Public Moveable Property In a non- exhaustive list, Article 53(1) of the Hague Regulations considers cash, funds and realisable securities, depots of arms, means of transport and stores

and supplies as items constituting moveable property.40 Article 53(1) of the Hague Regulations broadly regulates the belligerent’s relationship with public moveable property providing:

An army of occupation can only take possession of cash, funds, and real-

isable securities which are strictly the property of the State, depots of

arms, means of transport, stores and supplies, and, generally, all move-

able property belonging to the State which may be used for military

operations.41

Writing after World War i, Ernst Feilchenfeld highlighted the Article 53(1) practice of warring belligerents seizing property that was never restored to the

occupied territory after the close of hostilities.42 Reflecting on this practice, he determined that, “the present rule may therefore safely be said to be that state

funds are the objects of full appropriation without compensation”.43 However a growing body of international jurisprudence points to a restriction on prop-erty seized under Article 53(1) to be used for military purposes. In cie des Chemins de fer du Nord v German State, 1929– 1930, the Mixed Arbitral Tribunal and Reparation Commission found that a railway exploited for commercial

purposes was outside the terms of Article 53(1).44 In Grilli v Administration of State Railways, 1961, the court ruled that the sale of railway property belonging to the State by the belligerent occupant, did not give effect to a valid transfer of property:

[T] he Hague Regulations did not give an occupant indiscriminate rights

of seizure of the property of the occupied state. Seizure was permitted

for military purposes, not in order to trade with the property. Least of all

was such trade permitted within the occupied territory with the citizens

of the occupied state.45

40 Hague Regulations, Article 53.

41 Ibid.

42 Ernst Feilchenfeld, The International Economic Law of Belligerent Occupation (Carnegie

Endowment for International Peace 1942) 54.

43 Ibid.

44 Tribunaux Arbitraux Mixtes, CIE des Chemins de fer du Nord v German State, 9 Tribunaux

Arbitraux Mixtes 72, Ann Dig, 1929– 1930, page 500.

45 Court of Cassation, Grilli v Administration of State Railways, 20 ilr 429, 1961, page 430. Prosecuting Systematic Economic Exploitation 317

Likewise, in Colorni v Ministry of War, 1950, the court elaborated on the military purpose restriction stating:

The objects may be seized in so far as they serve, or are intended for,

the purpose of warfare or of belligerent operations. They must never be

seized in order to conduct trade with the local inhabitants. The latter

cannot, therefore, rely on Article 53 in order to show their title or on any

ground justifying the acquisition of property in the objects in question.46

Central to these cases is the understanding that moveable property, like the moveable cash revenues belonging to the occupied State and seized under Article 53(1) of the Hague Regulations, may not be exploited for commer-cial gains.

3.2 Mixed Public Property

In terms of differentiating between public and private property especially in mixed funds, the military manuals have employed a number of tests, includ-ing examining the function of property through the beneficial ownership test, the apportionment and predominant interest tests. These tests might also be useful for determining whether a property’s use at the time of appropriation is public or private. In the opt, Israel has built settlements on both public and private Palestinian lands, and is raising taxes and operational fees from com-mercial enterprise located thereon, absorbed into the Israeli public treasury. There may be a possibility that some of the monies appropriated by Israel are private and some public in character.

Unsurprisingly, warring belligerents favour a presumption of public sta-

tus for mixed public and private properties. The UK Ministry of Defence and the Manual of the Law of Armed Conflict, presumes that property of ques-tionable mixed status is public property and cites bank deposits, stores and supplies from contractors as examples of when questionable ownership may

occur, resulting in a public determination of property.47 The United States Army Field Manual on The Law of Land Warfare devised an “apportionment” test and “predominant interest” test to evaluate property of mixed public and



46 Italian Court of Cassation, Colorni v Ministry of War, Ann Dig 419 (No 139) 1950, page 421.

47 UK Ministry of Defence, The Manual of the Law of Armed Conflict (oup 2004) para 11.90.

“Where there is any doubt about whether property found in the possession of the enemy

is public or private, as may occur in the case of bank deposits and stores and supplies

obtained from contractors, it must be considered to be public property unless and until

its private character is clearly shown”.

318 Power

private ownership. The “apportionment” test would separate public property from private property within a mixed fund compensating the private owner

accordingly.48 The “predominant interest” test confers a wholly public charac-terisation on mixed property, in cases where the State rather than the private individual or corporation is subject to greater “economic risk” and to a “sub-stantial portion of the loss” on appropriation of the property by the belligerant

occupant.49 However, there is nothing in the Hague Regulations to suggest that the Occupying Power can assimilate private assets from a heterogeneous prop-erty, merely because the loss suffered by the individual is inferior to the eco-nomic loss of the State. Furthermore, a military manual is only evidentiary of State practice and is merely suggestive rather than constitutive of international

law.50 Feilchenfeld submits, that it is “doubtful” whether, “public direction is sufficient to establish public character” of property but that mixed property may be regarded as public in designation only where the property is “directed and supervised by the State”, and where such relations are “formally fixed for a

considerable period of time”.51



4 Prosecuting Systematic Economic Exploitation as Pillage

The main question raised by this chapter is whether individual criminal lia-bility attaches to the appropriation of the fiscal leakages of the occupied State when those monies are absorbed as public State revenues for the benefit of the Occupying Power’s home economy.

4.1 The Nuremberg Strand

The Nuremberg strand of pillage derives from the leading cases of Krupp, Flick and Krauch on the spoliation of the economy of the occupied State. In the leading case on property exploitation, Krupp and Others, officials from Krupp industrial enterprises were accused of employing complex legal devices



48 The United States Army Field Manual, The Law of Land Warfare (18 July 1956) fm 27– 10,

para 394(b).

49 Ibid.

50 United States Military Tribunal, In re List and Others (Hostages Trial), 1948, 15 International

Law Reports (1951), pages 650– 651. The tribunal considered that, “army regulations are

not a competent source of international law. They are neither legislative nor judicial pro-

nouncements. They are not competent for any purpose in determining whether a funda-

mental principle of justice has been accepted by civilized nations generally”.

51 Ernst Feilchenfeld, The International Economic Law of Belligerent Occupation (Carnegie

Endowment for International Peace 1942) 61.

Prosecuting Systematic Economic Exploitation 319

such as “trusteeship” and forced leases to remove moveable private prop-erty from France, Belgium, the Netherlands, Austria, Yugoslavia, Greece and Russia to Germany to develop the rearmament programme of the German

Government.52 The United States Military Tribunal at Nuremberg concluded:

Just as the inhabitants of the occupied territory must not be forced to

help the enemy in waging the war against their own country or their own

country’s allies, so must the economic assets of the occupied territory not

be used in such a manner.53

In Flick, the US Military Tribunal at Nuremberg examined the German appro-priation of the title to the privately owned Rombach plants in occupied France. The tribunal considered that in addition to appropriating the property, the defendants were further guilty of injuring the French economy:

Regardless of how they obtained the plants, they operated them for three

and a half years in such a manner as to injure the French economy and

promote the German war economy, and this in itself was unlawful under

the Hague Convention and Control Council Law No. 10.54

However, the issue of effects on the economy in the absence of an underlying violation of the Hague Regulations was challenged in the Additional Notes to the Krupp Trial which state that, “[t] here is also some authority for saying that, conversely, if no illegal breach of private property rights has occurred no war crime can be said to have been committed, irrespective of the effects of the

act upon the general economy of the occupied territory of the enemy state”.55 Central to the Krupp reasoning however was that the economic assets of the occupied country should not be used in waging war against it. The tribunal breaks this down into two parts:



52 United States Military Tribunal, Trial of Krupp and Eleven Others, 1947– 1948, 10 Law

Reports of the Trials of War Criminals (1949), page 73.

53 United States Military Tribunal, Trial of Krupp and Eleven Others, 1947– 1948, 10 Law

Reports of the Trials of War Criminals (1949), page 134.

54 United States Military Tribunal, Trial of Friedrich Flick and Five Others, 1947, 9 Law Reports

of the Trials of War Criminals (1949), page 41.

55 United States Military Tribunal, Trial of Krupp and Eleven Others, 1947– 1948, 10 Law

Reports of the Trials of War Criminals (1949), page 161. Emphasis added. 320 Power

Spoliation of private property, then, is forbidden under two aspects: firstly,

the individual private owner of property must not be deprived of it; sec-

ondly, the economic substance of the belligerently occupied territory

must not be taken over by the occupant or put to the service of his war

effort always with the proviso that there are exemptions from this rule

which are strictly limited to the needs of the army of occupation inso-

far as such needs do not exceed the economic strength of the occupied

territory.56

The policy behind economic spoliation was highlighted in Krauch. It was “intended not only to strengthen Germany in launching its invasions and waging its aggressive wars and secure the permanent economic domina-tion by Germany of the continent of Europe, but also to expand the private

empire of the accused”.57 The tribunal found that the accused, officials of ig FarbenIndustrie ag had plundered public and private property, in countries and territories which came under the belligerent occupation of Germany. ig Farben had acquired Boruta dyestuff factories in Poland from the Reich Ministry of Economics and acquired Nordisk Lettmetall factory under a coerced share-

holder takeover.58 The tribunal quoted the Inter- Allied Declaration:

It pointed out that ‘systematic spoliation of occupied or controlled terri-

tory has followed immediately upon each fresh aggression.’ It recited that

such spoliation:

… has taken every sort of form, from open looting to the most cun-

ningly camouflaged financial penetration, and it has extended to every

sort of property – from works of art to stocks of commodities, from bul-

lion and banknotes to stocks and shares in business and financial under-

takings. But the object is always the same – to seize everything of value

that can be put to the aggressors’ profit and then to bring the whole econ-

omy of the subjugated countries under control so that they must enslave

to enrich and strengthen their oppressors.59

The Prosecution in Krauch suggested that pillage was a dual aspect crime:



56 Ibid., page 162.

57 United States Military Tribunal, Trial of Carl Krauch and Twenty- Two Others (The I.G.

Farben Trial), 1947– 1948, 10 Law Reports of the Trials of War Criminals (1949), page 1.

58 Ibid., pages 19 – 21.

59 Ibid., page 45.

Prosecuting Systematic Economic Exploitation 321

The offences of plunder and spoliation alleged in the Indictment have

a double aspect. It is broadly asserted that the crime of spoliation is a

‘crime against the country concerned in that it disrupts the economy,

alienates its industry from its inherent purpose, make it subservient to

the interest of the occupying power, and interferes with the natural con-

nection between the spoliated industry and the local economy.60

The second aspect being that spoliation or pillage is an offense against the right-ful owners of property by taking it from them without their consent, without

regard to their will, or by threats or pressure.61 However the tribunal responded to this strictly within the confines of the Hague Regulations stating, that it could not, “deduce from Articles 46 through 55 of the Hague Regulations any princi-ple of the breadth of application such as is embraced in the first asserted aspect

of the crime of plunder and spoliation”.62 As such, the law prohibiting the crip-pling of the economy of the occupied State is narrowly catered for within the context of the pre- existing Hague law and not as a stand- alone crime.

Notwithstanding, there are clear property crimes underpinning the revenue

appropriations from the opt, including the appropriation of land to construct settlements, the destruction of property, including cultural property, the illegal transfer of the nationals of the Occupying Power into colonise the occupied territory, among others. Further, the Occupying Power can only take possession of cash, funds and realisable securities and other financial deposits belonging to the occupied State, for the purposes of military operations. Taking posses-sion of revenues to inflate the home treasury is clearly a breach of Article 53, Hague Regulations. But can it be prosecuted?

4.2 Pillaging for “Private or Personal Use” The main concern for prosecuting systematic economic exploitation as pil-lage is unquestionably the qualification in element 2 of the icc Elements of Crimes of Article 8(2)(b)(xvi) that “the perpetrator intended to deprive the owner of the property and to appropriate it for private or personal use”. The icc Elements of Crimes of the crime of pillage outline:

1. The perpetrator appropriated certain property.

2. The perpetrator intended to deprive the owner of the property and to

appropriate it for private or personal use.

60 Ibid., page 46.

61 Ibid.

62 Ibid.

322 Power

3. The appropriation was without the consent of the owner.

4. The conduct took place in the context of and was associated with an

international armed conflict.

5. The perpetrator was aware of factual circumstances that established

the existence of an armed conflict.63

At the conference to the Rome Statute, delegations proposed that pillage

represented the taking of civilian property for personal use.64 The appropria-tion of property for “private or personal use” can be either for the perpetrator

themselves, or for “the private use of another person or entity”.65 However, in traditional examples of systematic economic exploitation, as can be seen in the Krupp case, the appropriation of the economic subsistence of the territory put to the war effort of the belligerent, in the eyes of the tribunal amounted to pillage, despite the fact that use of the property was undoubtedly public in nature. Correspondingly, the disbursement of funds from the Development Fund for Iraq for “economic reconstruction” is a public direction of use and arguably beyond the immediate constraint of “private or personal use” on a

cursory reading of element 2 of the icc Elements of Crimes.66 The collection of taxes from settlements, or the appropriation of vat levied on imports into the opt but collected and retained by Israel, may similarly be considered out-side the “private or personal use” qualification.

James Stewart has criticised element 2 of the crime of pillage, arguing that

it would not capture pillage by the army as seen in the Japanese seizure of

oil stocks from Singapore during the World War ii occupation.67 In nv De Bataafsche Petroleum Maatschappij and Others v The War Damage Commission the court had held that, “the seizure and subsequent exploitation by the Japanese armed forces of the oil resources of the appellants was economic

plunder,68 of private property in violation of the laws and customs of war”.69 The oil was used to meet the needs of both civilian and military consumers in



63 Elements of Crimes, Article 8 (2)(b)(xvi), War Crime of Pillaging.

64 Knut Dormann, Elements of War Crimes under the Rome Statute of the International

Criminal Court (cup 2003) 272.

65 icc, Prosecutor v Jean- Pierre Bemba Gombo, Judgement Pursuant to Article 74 of the

Statute, icc- 01/ 05- 01/ 08, 21 March 2016, page 59, para 124.

66 Elements of Crimes, Article 8 (2)(b)(xvi), War Crime of Pillaging, Element 2.

67 James Stewart, Open Society Foundations, Corporate War Crimes: Prosecuting the Pillage

of Natural Resources, May 2019, page 20.

68 Plunder, pillage and spoliation are terms that can be used interchangeably.

69 Singapore Court of Appeal, NV De Bataafsche Petroleum Maatschappij and Others v The

War Damage Commission, Singapore Law Reports, 1956, page 65. Prosecuting Systematic Economic Exploitation 323

territories occupied by Japan, and the home economy.70 However the seizure of property and subsequent exploitation for commercial purposes is a private use of property. In the words of the icc in Prosecutor v Bemba, pillage is also “intended to include situations where the perpetrator did not intend to use the

pillaged items himself or herself”.71 For example, where property appropriated for public purposes such as (the war effort) might later be designated a private

or personal use (for trade).72

A footnote to element 2 explains, “as indicated by the use of the term “pri-

vate or personal use”, appropriations justified by military necessity cannot con-

stitute the crime of pillaging”.73 This “military necessity” exception appears to derive from Article 23(g) of the Hague Regulations, prohibiting parties to the conflict from seizing “the enemy’s property unless such […] seizure be imper-

atively demanded by the necessities of war”.74 However the immediate con-cern lies in the apparent breadth of “military necessity” as a sweeping concept. For example Donia et al. argue, that, “the very mention of military necessity in connection with pillage is arguably unfounded in that it introduces an extra element and permits an evaluation to be made, whereas pillage is prohibited

absolutely”.75

4.2.1 Prosecutor v Katanga

The icc’s first ruling on pillage in Prosecutor v Katanga, established that the pillage of a town or place constitutes a war crime committed when the per-petrator appropriates public or private property without the consent of the owner. Citing a number of icty rulings, Prosecutor v Naletilic and Martinovic, and Prosecutor v Simic, and the icrc Commentary to the Fourth Geneva Convention, the court considered obiter that pillage may include appropria-tion by self- interested combatants, alongside organised and systematic appro-priation of property in occupied territory, giving a considerable nod to the

Nuremberg standard.76 The court considered:

70 Ibid.

71 icc, Prosecutor v Jean- Pierre Bemba Gombo, Judgement pursuant to Article 74 of the

Statute, 21 March 2016, page 59, para 120.

72 Court of Cassation, Grilli v Administration of State Railways, 20 ilr 1961, 429, 430; Italian

Court of Cassation, Colorni v Ministry of War, Ann Dig 419 (No 139), 1950, page 421.

73 Elements of Crimes, Article 8 (2)(b)(xvi), War Crime of Pillaging, Element 2.

74 Hague Regulations, Article 23.

75 José Doria, Hans- Peter Gasser, M Cherif Bassiouni, The Legal Regime of the International

Criminal Court: Essays in Honour of Professor Igor Blishchenko (Martinus Nijhoff Publishers

2009) 529.

76 icc, Prosecutor v Germain Katanga, Judgement Pursuant to Article 74 of the Statute, icc-

01/ 04- 01/ 07, 7 March 2014, para 905.

324 Power

In the opinion of the Chamber, the pillaging of a town or place comprises

all forms of appropriation, public or private, including not only organised

and systematic appropriation, but also acts of appropriation committed

by combatants in their own interest.77

In making a determination on private or personal use, the icc concluded that Ngiti combatants in Bogoro had extensively pillaged roofing sheets from houses, house ware and livestock from the civilian population for essentially personal reasons. The combatants had pillaged for their own self- interest as a form of remuneration and had seized the spoils, using them as they pleased. Based on this evidence the chamber concluded that the acts were intentional

and motivated by private or personal gain.78 Notably, when considering military necessity the court referenced the icty ruling in Prosecutor v Hadžihasanović

and Kubura on whether the property had a “direct military use”.79 However the reference to “direct military use” was merely pinpointed in a footnote and the court did not offer any concrete test as to how it would determine “direct mil-itary use”, which would appear to be a narrower standard than military neces-sity. For example, in nv De Bataafsche Petroleum Maatschappij and Others, the Singapore Court of Appeal previously explained that:

It may be that certain types of raw material or semi- manufactured prod-

ucts, such as cloth for uniforms and leather for boots, which could pos-

sibly be made up into finished articles by army personnel without the

assistance of civilian technicians and outside plant can, without stretch-

ing the meaning of “munitions- de- guerre” unduly, be regarded as having

a sufficiently close connection with direct military use to bring them

within Article 53.80

However, in Hadžihasanović the Trial Chamber of the icty clarified that “household appliances, furniture and clothing do not fall into the category of

property having direct military use”.81 Although seized property not having a



77 Ibid.

78 Ibid., para 952.

79 Ibid., page 356, footnote 2252.

80 Singapore Court of Appeal, NV De Bataafsche Petroleum Maatschappij and Others v The

War Damage Commission, 22 Malayan Law Journal 155, 13 April 1956.

81 icty, The Prosecutor v Enver Hadžihasanović Amir Kubura, Judgement, it- 01- 47- t, 15

March 2006, para 1875.

Prosecuting Systematic Economic Exploitation 325

direct military use may amount to pillage, it then remains to be established whether the property appropriation was for “private or personal use”.

4.2.2 Prosecutor v Jean- Pierre Bemba Gombo In Prosecutor v Jean- Pierre Bemba Gombo, the icc made reference to the Special Court for Sierra Leone’s objection to the requirement that pillaged property be intended for “private or personal use” and noted that the qualifi-cation did not derive from treaty or customary law nor was it expressed in the

jurisprudence of international tribunals.82 Significantly, the court drew on the conjunction “or” in “private or personal use” which it found broadened the use of the pillaged property to include situations where property was not used by

the perpetrator themselves.83 This may include for example, private entities such as corporations. The distinction here is important and relates more to the separation of pillaged property from war booty, which may under certain

circumstances be lawful.84 While the appropriation of public revenues for the treasury of the Occupying Power might not be a private use of property, the conjunctive distinction drawn by the Court in Bemba means that it could potentially be considered “personal”.

The purposes of military necessity can only be invoked “if the laws of armed

conflict provide for it and only to the extent that these laws provide for it”.85 The court explains obiter by way of example, that circumstances pertaining to military necessity are documented in Article 51 of the Hague Regulations on contributions during occupation, and Article 52 and Article 53 of the Hague

Regulations on requisition.86 The identification of Articles 51– 53 are important given that they refer to the laws governing belligerent occupation, in particular the occupant’s administration of the economy of the occupied territory. In this respect, it is important to add, that Article 55 of the Hague Regulations does not explicitly provide for a military necessity exception, and therefore it does not apply the exception of military necessity to the appropriation of public immoveable property and its fruits, which is regulated under the more strin-gent regime of usufruct. Where the belligerent occupant exceeds “the extent

82 icc, Prosecutor v Jean- Pierre Bemba Gombo, Judgement Pursuant to Article 74 of the

Statute, icc- 01/ 05- 01/ 08, 21 March 2016, page 59, para 120.

83 Ibid.

84 For example, under customary international law, “parties to the conflict may seize military

equipment belonging to an adverse party as war booty”. See generally, icrc, Customary

International Humanitarian Law, Volume i: Rules (cup 2010) Rule 49.

85 icc, Prosecutor v Jean- Pierre Bemba Gombo, Judgement Pursuant to Article 74 of the

Statute, icc- 01/ 05- 01/ 08, 21 March 2016, page 61, para 123. Emphasis added.

86 Ibid., page 61, footnote 291.

326 Power

that the laws provide” for requisitions and contributions under Articles 51– 53, this may amount to pillage for the purposes of the Elements of Crimes. For the permanent appropriation of the cash assets and revenues of the occupied territory, not used for military operations, this may amount to an underlying breach of Article 53 of the Hague Regulations.

In Bemba, the Court determined that it would examine the nature, location

and purpose of the pillaged items, and the circumstances of their appropria-tion when considering whether they are appropriated for “private or personal use”. These criteria appear to be borrowed from Article 52(2) of Additional Protocol 1 on the principle of distinction, which assesses the nature, location,

and purpose of the items.87 This brings other problems relating to the specific nuances of the occupation articles, providing for “needs of the army” or “mili-

tary operations”.88 More interestingly, it also appears to denote private or per-sonal use, more generally as the inverse of the “military objectives” test. Using the “nature, location and purpose” considerations to determine “private or per-sonal use” mirrors to a certain extent the function tests employed by military

manuals, to determine the ownership of property (see Section 3.2).89 These are also reminiscent of the 1970’s State immunity cases, which used, for example, purpose, nature and subject matter jurisdiction tests. These tests allowed the property of States in certain contexts to be treated as private for the consider-

ation of State immunities from suit.90 For example, public monies in pension

funds may have a private use.91 Laudably, this key consideration appears to bridge the gap arising from element 2 on “private or personal use”, providing for a more nuanced evaluation pertaining to the nature, location and purpose of the property’s use.



87 Ibid., page 62, para 125. Although Additional Protocol i, has an additional criterion of ‘use’,

the Court did not include ‘use’ into the assessment.

88 See also, James Stewart, Open Society Foundations, Corporate War Crimes: Prosecuting the

Pillage of Natural Resources, page 20.

89 The United States Army Field Manual, The Law of Land Warfare, 18 July 1956, fm 27- 10,

para 394(b).

90 UK Court of Appeal, Trendex Trading Corp v Central Bank of Nigeria [1977]; UK House of

Lords, Holland v Lampen- Wolfe [2000]; England and Wales Court of Appeal, Civil Division,

Yemen v Cardinal Finance Investments Corp [2000]; United States Court of Appeals for the

Second Circuit, Victory Transport v Commisaría General de Abastecimientos y Transportes,

336 F.2d 354 (1964); UK House of Lords, I Congresso del Partido [1981]; Canada Supreme

Court Opinion, United States v The Public Service Alliance of Canada [1993]; Irish Supreme

Court, McElhinney v Williams and her Majesty’s Secretary of State for Northern Ireland

(1995).

91 Ernst Feilchenfeld, The International Economic Law of Belligerent Occupation (Carnegie

Endowment for International Peace 1942) 6, 52.

Prosecuting Systematic Economic Exploitation 327

To conclude, Bemba has clarified that military use refers only to the narrow

circumstances where the laws of armed conflict provide for it. The dolus spe-cialis does not exclude economic spoliation of occupied territory, as exploita-tion beyond the permitted public requisition, confiscation and seizure in the Hague Regulations may be considered personal or private for the purpose of the Elements of Crimes, where the property does not meet the military neces-sity exception and based on an evaluation of its nature, location or purpose. In this respect, when examining whether the use of appropriated revenues and fiscal leakages, the question pivots on whether the use under Article 53 was for military operations. In assessing the perpetrators personal use of the reve-nues, the Court can examine the nature, location, and purpose of the revenues use. One such purpose as previously articulated in the Nuremberg Tribunal, is where the occupier seizes everything of value in the occupied territory to subjugate the country and bring it under its control, to both enslave the occu-pied population and further enrich the Occupying Power. Such tests enable the

court to make these broader contextual examinations.92

4.3 Consent

Finally, the icc Elements of Crimes provide that for pillage, the appropriation

must take place without the owners consent.93 Lack of consent may be evi-dent from coercion or “can be inferred from the absence of the rightful owner

from the place from where property was taken”.94 Coercive acts may include, “withholding licenses, raw materials, the threat of uncertain drastic treatment in peace- treaty negotiations or other effective means of bending the will of the

owners”.95

Article 7 of the Fourth Geneva Convention states that “[n] o special agree-

ment shall adversely affect the situation of protected persons, as defined by the present Convention, nor restrict the rights which it confers upon them”. Similarly, Article 8 provides that “protected persons may in no circumstances



92 United States Military Tribunal, Trial of Carl Krauch and Twenty- Two Others (The I.G.

Farben Trial), 1947– 1948, 10 Law Reports of the Trials of War Criminals (1949), page 45.

93 Elements of Crimes, Article 8(2)(b)(xvi), War Crime of Pillaging, Element 3 requires that

“the appropriation was without the consent of the owner”.

94 icc, Prosecutor v Germain Katanga, Judgement Pursuant to Article 74 of the Statute, icc-

01/ 04- 01/ 07, 7 March 2014, para 954; and icc, Prosecutor v Germain Katanga, Judgement

on the Decision of Charges, icc- 01/ 04- 01/ 07- 717, 14 October 2008, para 337, where Pre-

Trial Chamber i held that looting was committed without the owners’ consent when civil-

ians were in hiding.

95 United States Military Tribunal, Trial of Krupp and Eleven Others, 1947– 1948, 10 Law

Reports of the Trials of War Criminals (1949), page 50.

328 Power

renounce in part or in entirety the rights secured to them by the present Convention”. While Article 47 provides that:

Protected persons who are in occupied territory shall not be deprived,

in any case or in any manner whatsoever, of the benefits of the present

Convention by any change introduced, as the result of the occupation of

a territory, into the institutions or government of the said territory, nor by

any agreement concluded between the authorities of the occupied terri-

tories and the Occupying Power, nor by any annexation by the latter of

the whole or part of the occupied territory.

This prohibition is articulated by the US Military Tribunal at Nuremberg in Krauch, which found that even where there is genuine consent by the repre-sentatives of the occupied population, this does not legitimize the spoliation of property, where it amounts to the disruption of the economy and the alien-ation of industry from its inherent purpose. Furthermore, consent obtained “by threats, intimidation, pressure, or by exploiting the position and power of the military occupant under circumstances indicating that the owner is being induced to part with his property against his will, it is clearly a violation of the

Hague Regulations”.96 Although one could argue that the Oslo Accords essen-tially codified the administrative control that Israel had previously practiced de facto over Palestinian customs, value added taxes, banking, postal service, elec-tricity, and water among others- it is clear that the overall administration has eroded the economic subsistence of the occupied territory with both the State of Israel, public and private commercial enterprises, and international finan-cial institutions profiting from the settlement economy and revenues, which should be directed to the benefit of the occupied population. It is therefore questionable whether the Palestinian Authority could legitimately consent to the denial of humanitarian guarantees protecting the occupied population.



5 Conclusion

Public moveable property title may pass to the belligerent subject to certain conditions, but the appropriation is limited to military purpose and certainly not for the economic aggrandisement of the occupier. While the Special Court



96 United States Military Tribunal, Trial of Carl Krauch and Twenty- Two Others (The I.G.

Farben Trial), 1947– 1948, 10 Law Reports of the Trials of War Criminals (1949), page 47. Prosecuting Systematic Economic Exploitation 329

for Sierra Leone had indicated that the door was closed on prosecuting sys-tematic economic exploitaiton at the icc, this chapter demonstrates that the icc is open to a more expansive interpretation of the Elements of Crimes that would include an analysis of the location, nature and purpose, to ascertain whether the perpetrators intended appropriation of property was for personal use. Broadly speaking, one such purpose might be the systematic economic exploitation of the occupied territory, a purpose that does not have a military objective and which is therefore personal in nature. Provided there is an under-lying international humanitarian law property violation, this opens the door to prosecuting individual Israeliparliamentarians or civil servants complicit in intentionally depriving the Palestinian people of their revenues and economic resources. That policy makers in the State of Israel could be held accountable for acts of systematic economic exploitation is now a real possibility following the Prosecutor’s opening of an investigation into the Situation in the State of Palestine at the icc in 2021.





chapter 14


Criminal Jurisdiction under Occupation: The Oslo

Accords and the icc

Halla Shoaibi and Asem Khalil



On 1 January 2015, the government of the State of Palestine lodged a decla-ration under Article 12(3) of the Rome Statute accepting the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court over crimes committed on the occupied Palestinian territory since 13 June 2014. It also submitted documents of acces-

sion to the Rome Statute to the UN Secretary- General on 2 January 2015.1 Accordingly, the icc Office of the Prosecutor initiated a preliminary examina-tion into the Situation in Palestine, which resulted in the opening of an inves-

tigation.2 Several questions on the scope of the icc’s territorial jurisdiction under Article 12(2)(a) of the Rome Statute have arisen in the context of the opening of the investigation into the Situation in Palestine. This chapter will discuss the effects, if any, of the Oslo Accords on the icc’s jurisdiction in the Situation in Palestine.

This chapter will first elaborate on the concept of jurisdiction in interna-

tional law and how occupation affects the jurisdiction and sovereignty of States. Second, it will address the jurisdiction of the icc over the occupied Palestinian territory. Third, it will examine the Oslo Accords and explain why the agreements do not bar the icc from exercising jurisdiction. Specifically, this chapter will assert that the absence of enforcement jurisdiction does not negate prescriptive jurisdiction, and that a special agreement cannot be con-cluded in violation of the right to self- determination or in contradiction with the State of Palestine’s obligations under the Geneva Conventions.



1 State of Palestine, Declaration Accepting the Jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court, 31

December 2014.

2 icc Office of the Prosecutor, Statement of ICC Prosecutor, Fatou Bensouda, Respecting an

Investigation of the Situation in Palestine, 3 March 2021.



© Halla Shoaibi and Asem Khalil, 2023 | DOI:10.

Criminal Jurisdiction under Occupation 331

1 The Meaning of Jurisdiction in International Law

The term “jurisdiction” refers to the legitimate assertion of authority to affect

legal interests.3 National systems dictate how States exercise jurisdiction and it is generally accepted that a State’s jurisdiction is based on two pillars: territo-riality and nationality. While States may prescribe acts as criminal and adjudi-cate such crimes when committed on their territory, nationality is recognised

as a basis for jurisdiction over extraterritorial acts.4 There are generally three forms of jurisdiction: (i) jurisdiction to prescribe, meaning the ability to make its law applicable to persons and conduct, in other words the right to crimi-nalise conduct, (ii) jurisdiction to adjudicate, meaning the ability to subject natural and legal persons to legal process, (iii) jurisdiction to enforce, that is to induce or compel compliance with a determination reached through exec-

utive and/ or judicial actions.5 States maintain prescriptive jurisdiction even when they are unable to exercise it due to certain limitations derived from cus-tomary or treaty law, such as diplomatic or State immunity, or special agree-ments. The following section will propose that the International Criminal Court asserts territorial jurisdiction on the basis of a State’s prescriptive juris-diction. But first, it will explain the relevance of sovereignty in any assessment on the existence of jurisdiction during occupation.

1.1 Sovereignty as a Reliable Indicator of Jurisdiction during Belligerent

Occupation6

The State of Palestine acceded to the Rome Statute, making the Statute appli-cable in respect of Palestine’s territory. Like all States Parties to the Rome Statute, Palestine is permitted to delegate its jurisdiction to the icc so that it may investigate the situation on Palestine’s territory. Palestine, however, is not required to exercise effective control nor full sovereignty over its territory in



3 Michael P Scharf, ‘The ICC’s Jurisdiction over the Nationals of Non- Party States: A Critique of

the U.S. Position’, 64(1) Law and Contemporary Problems (2001) 71.

4 James Crawford (ed), Brownlie’s Principles of Public International Law (oup 2019) 441– 445.

5 Restatement (Third) of the Foreign Relations Law of the United States § 401 Bases of

Jurisdiction to Prescribe (1987); Diane Marie Amann (ed), Benchbook on International Law

(American Society of International Law 2014) ii.A; Roger O’Keefe, ‘Response: “Quid,” Not

“Quantum”: A Comment on “How the International Criminal Court Threatens Treaty Norms”’,

49(1) Vanderbilt Law Review (2016) 4.

6 The first three paragraphs in this section are taken from first author’s unpublished the-

sis; Halla Shoaibi, ‘Pregnant Women’s Access to Health Care in the Occupied Palestinian

Territory: Application Under the Rome Statute of The International Criminal Court’ (sjd

Thesis) (2015) 105– 106 [unpublished].

332 Shoaibi and Khalil

order to delegate its jurisdiction to the icc. The Rome Statute is clearly man-dated to prosecute crimes occurring in occupied territory. This is indicated, for example, in the case of population transfer in occupied territories under

Article 8(2)(b)(viii).7 Since jurisdiction is based on sovereignty rather than effective control in respect of situations of occupation, one must examine

whether States under occupation maintain sovereignty.8

The fact that Israel occupies the Palestinian territory and asserts effec-

tive control does not undermine Palestinian sovereignty over the same area. International scholars have argued that occupation is “the effective control of a power (be it one or more states or an international organisation, such as the United Nations) over a territory to which that power has no sovereign title,

without the violation of the sovereign of that territory”.9 The sovereignty of an occupied State is not terminated nor suspended, even if the act of occupa-

tion weakens and reduces the sovereign State’s control.10 As such, de jure sov-

ereignty remains vested with the occupied population,11 who have an inherent

7 Rome Statute, Article 12(2)(b)(viii); see icc, Situation in Palestine, Pre- Trial Chamber i,

Decision on the ‘Prosecution request Pursuant to Article 19(3) for a Ruling on the Court’s

Territorial Jurisdiction in Palestine’, icc- 01/ 18- 143, 5 February 2021, para 68. The Pre- Trial

Chamber held that “The Court is currently exercising its jurisdiction in respect of States

Parties who do not have effective control over a significant part of their own territory.

Afghanistan, for example, does not control large parts of its own territory, which remain

under Taliban control. Georgia does not control South Ossetia”.

8 See Yaël Ronen, ‘Israel, Palestine and the icc — Territory Uncharted but Not Unknown’,

12(7) Journal of International Criminal Justice (2014).

9 Emphasis added. Eyal Benvenisti, The International Law of Occupation (oup 2013) 43; see

also David M. Edelstein, Occupational Hazards: Success and Failure in Military Occupation

(Cornell University Press 2008) 3. “Military occupation is the temporary control of a ter-

ritory by a state (or group of allied states) that makes no claim to permanent sovereignty

over that territory”.

10 Yoram Dinstein, The International Law of Belligerent Occupation (cup 2009) 49. “The

main pillar of the law of belligerent occupation is embedded in the maxim that the occu-

pation does not affect sovereignty [...] Undeniably, divested of possession, ‘at least tem-

porarily, the title of the territorial sovereign is considerably weakened and reduced to a

naked title’. Nevertheless, the sovereignty of the displaced sovereign over the occupied

territory is not terminated. Indeed, it is not even suspended […]”. See also John Quigley,

The Statehood of Palestine: International Law in The Middle East Conflict (cup 2010) 219 –

220. For a detailed account on the role of de jure and de facto sovereignty in military occu-

pation see Salvatore Fabio Nicolosi, ‘The Law of Military Occupation and the Role of De

Jure and De Facto Sovereignty’, 31 Polish Yearbook of International Law (2011).

11 Salvatore Fabio Nicolosi, ‘The Law of Military Occupation and the Role of De Jure and

De Facto Sovereignty’, 31 Polish Yearbook of International Law (2011); John Quigley, The

Statehood of Palestine: International Law in The Middle East Conflict (cup 2010) 220;

Morris Greenspan, The Modern Law of Land Warfare (University of California Press

1959) 217; Yoram Dinstein, The International Law of Belligerent Occupation (cup 2009) 49; Criminal Jurisdiction under Occupation 333

right to self- determination.12 Whether or not an occupied population mani-fests de jure sovereignty through the structures and powers of a State is irrele-

vant to their entitlement to such sovereignty.13

The United Nations supports this view. UN General Assembly resolution 43/

177 of 25 December 1988 confirmed “the need to enable the Palestinian peo-

ple to exercise their sovereignty over their territory occupied since 1967”.14 Moreover, UN General Assembly resolution 61/ 19 of 2012 maintained that international recognition to the Palestinian State signifies international recog-nition of the territory belonging to it, within the 1967 borders, even if the exact

borders are not identified.15 In any case, there are no competing formal claims

of sovereignty over the Palestinian territory, except for over East Jerusalem.16

Sovereign title to a territory can be determined through recourse to two

methods. The first method is for a claimant State to show that it lawfully received the territory from a prior sovereign, whether from another State through a treaty of cession or by way of State succession, including decolo-

nisation.17 The second method is for the claimant State to demonstrate “con-tinuous and peaceful display of the functions of State within a given region

is a constituent element of territorial sovereignty”.18 Arguably, current- day Palestine is a successor State of either the Ottoman State or of Palestine under the British Mandate. This chapter will not be discussing this issue, as it is out-

side its scope and comprehensively argued by other writers.19 In any case, the



See also Michail Vagias, ‘The Territorial Jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court –

A Jurisdictional Rule of Reason for the icc?’, 59(1) Netherlands International Law Review

(2012) 43– 64.

12 Salvatore Fabio Nicolosi, ‘The Law of Military Occupation and the Role of De Jure and De

Facto Sovereignty’, 31 Polish Yearbook of International Law (2011) 181– 182.

13 Leslie C Green, ‘Is There a ‘New’ Law of Intervention and Occupation?’, 35(71) Israel

Yearbook on Human Rights (2005) 71; Cherif Bassiouni, ‘Self- determination and the

Palestinians’, 65(4) American Journal of International Law (1971) 32.

14 See unga Resolution 43/ 177 (15 December 1988).

15 unga Resolution 67/ 19 (4 December 2012).

16 Yaël Ronen, ‘Israel, Palestine and the icc – Territory Uncharted but Not Unknown’, 12(7)

Journal of International Criminal Justice (2014); John Quigley, ‘Competing Claims to the

Territory of Historical Palestine’, 59 Guild Practitioner: Los Angeles (2002) 76; see also the

remarks of Ved Nanda, Issa Nakhleh, Yehuda Blum et al., ‘Self Determination: The Case

of Palestine: Remarks’, 82 Proceedings American Journal of International Law (1988) 334,

page 341.

17 Steven R Ratner, ‘Land Feuds and Their Solutions: Finding International Law Beyond the

Tribunal’, 100(4) American Journal of International Law (2006) 310.

18 Ibid.

19 icc, Situation in Palestine, Pre- Trial Chamber i, Public with Public Annex ‘Submissions

Pursuant to Rule 103 (John Quigley)’, icc - 01/ 18, 3 March 2020.

334 Shoaibi and Khalil

State of Palestine’s title to its territory (West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and the Gaza Strip) can be found in the display of its functions as a State within that region. As an example of this, the State of Palestine provides education and health for Palestinians in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, maintains a functioning judicial system, and ratifies treaties in the name of the State.



2 The Source of the International Criminal Court’s Jurisdiction

According to Article 12 of the Rome Statute, the icc may exercise its jurisdic-tion if the crime took place on the territory of a State Party (territorial jurisdic-

tion) or the accused is a national of a State Party (personal jurisdiction).20 The icc’s territorial jurisdiction refers to the reach of the icc’s authority over the

territory of the State Party,21 and includes the land territory of the State Party

and its registered vessels and/ or aircrafts.22 That said, the Rome Statute does not determine the nature, scope, and source of a State Party’s jurisdiction nec-essary for it to delegate jurisdiction to the icc. The Rome Statute also does not provide that its authority is derived exclusively from the act of delegation nor that there must there be a symmetry between the jurisdiction of the icc and the domestic jurisdiction of a State Party.

A convincing argument can be made, however, that it is the delegation of

primary jurisdiction over a specific area that provides the legal basis for the icc’s jurisdiction when either the territorial State or the State of nationality



20 Rome Statute, Article 12(2). “In the case of article 13, paragraph (a) or (c), the Court may

exercise its jurisdiction if one or more of the following States are Parties to this Statute or

have accepted the jurisdiction of the Court in accordance with paragraph 3: (a) The State

on the territory of which the conduct in question occurred or, if the crime was committed

on board a vessel or aircraft, the State of registration of that vessel or aircraft; (b) The State

of which the person accused of the crime is a national”.

21 Michail Vagias, ‘The Territorial Jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court –

A Jurisdictional Rule of Reason for the icc?’, 59(1) Netherlands International Law Review

(2012); icc, Prosecutor v Thomas Lubanga Dyilo, Pre- Trial Chamber, Decision on the

Prosecutor’s Application for a Warrant of Arrest, Article 58, icc- 01/ 04- 01/ 06, 24, 10

February 2006.

22 See Rome Statute, Article 12(2)(a); Michail Vagias, ‘The Territorial Jurisdiction of the

International Criminal Court – A Jurisdictional Rule of Reason for the icc?’, 59(1)

Netherlands International Law Review (2012) 43, page 45. Michail Vagias has argued that

the icc “shall have territorial jurisdiction when a crime is sufficiently closely connected

to the territory of a State Party. The meaning of ‘sufficiently close connection’ would need

to be specified on a case- by- case basis”.

Criminal Jurisdiction under Occupation 335

has consented to the Rome Statute.23 When a State Party possessing territorial jurisdiction delegates its jurisdiction to the icc, the court is handed the power

to act in cases where the State Party could have acted on the national level.24

Another argument can be made that States can delegate the exercise of its

jurisdiction to the icc regardless of how it chooses to exercise such jurisdic-tion on the national level. The test to determine the capacity of the entity in question to delegate jurisdiction, is whether such entity possesses, “an interna-tionally recognized legal authority, and not of the material ability of actually exercising jurisdiction over either the territory in question or over certain indi-

viduals within or outside that territory”.25 To delegate jurisdiction, it is nec-essary for the State to exercise prescriptive jurisdiction, not the jurisdiction

to enforce or to adjudicate.26 A State is able to delegate its prescriptive juris-diction “irrespective of how it chooses to prescribe such jurisdiction domesti-

cally”.27 Hence, accession to the Statute merely authorises the icc to exercise jurisdiction, and does not establish the title for icc jurisdiction.

2.1 The Nemo Dat Quod non Habet Maxim Nemo dat quod non habet is a principle derived from private property law, meaning “one cannot give what one does not have”. This notion gives prior-ity to the owner of the property or goods. For example, if goods were sold by a person who is not their owner and without the consent of the owner, the buyer neither acquires title to the goods (similar to that of the seller who did



23 Shlomit Wallerstein, ‘Delegation of Powers and Authority in International Criminal Law’,

9(1) Criminal Law and Philosophy (2013) 7.

24 Dapo Akande, ‘International Criminal Court over Nationals of Non- Parties: Legal Basis

and Limits’, 1(618) Journal of International Criminal Justice (2003).

25 Yuval Shany, ‘In Defence of Functional Interpretation of Article 12(3) of the Rome

Statute: A Response to Yaël Ronen’, 8(2) Journal of International Criminal Justice (2010)

329, page 339.

26 Salvatore Fabio Nicolosi, ‘The Law of Military Occupation and the Role of De Jure and

De Facto Sovereignty’, 31 Polish Yearbook of International Law (2011); Roger O’Keefe,

‘Response: “Quid,” Not “Quantum”: A Comment on “How the International Criminal

Court Threatens Treaty Norms”’, 49(1) Vanderbilt Law Review (2016) 4.

27 icc, Situation in Palestine, Prosecution Request Pursuant to Article 19(3) for a Ruling on the

Court’s Territorial Jurisdiction in Palestine, icc- 01/ 18, 22 January 2020, para 63. A different

approach is proposed by Carsten Stahn. He takes the view that “[t] he delegation theory

is not the only model to explain icc jurisdiction. According to an alternative model, icc

jurisdiction is not derived from the territorial or national jurisdiction of a specific state,

but grounded in a broader entitlement of states and the international legal community

under international law”. Carsten Stahn, ‘Response: The icc, Pre- Existing Jurisdictional

Treaty Regimes, and the Limits of the Nemo Dat Quod Non Habet Doctrine – A Reply to

Michael Newton’, 49 Vanderbilt Journal of Transnational Law (2016) 447. 336 Shoaibi and Khalil

not acquire title), nor authorisation.28 The nemo dat quod non habet maxim has been used to claim that an entity lacking enforcement and prescription jurisdiction cannot delegate jurisdiction to the icc, as one cannot give what one does not have in the first place. Such an argument presupposes an exact

symmetry between domestic criminal jurisdiction and that of the icc.29 It also presupposes that the icc can extend its jurisdiction only to situations where the entity in question has an identical jurisdiction to that of the icc. Such a presumption is erroneous.

Indeed, the Oslo Accords limited the Palestinian Authority’s ability to exer-

cise criminal jurisdiction over Israeli nationals, but they did not relinquish Palestine’s prescriptive jurisdiction nor have they impeded Palestine’s ability to accede to numerous multilateral treaties. On 10 March 2020, the icc Appeals Chamber authorised the investigation into the Situation in Afghanistan, even though Afghanistan had signed so- called Status of Forces Agreements with the United States, waiving Afghanistan’s criminal jurisdiction over US forces. In this situation, Afghanistan maintained its prescriptive jurisdiction and waived its enforcement jurisdiction in relation to American forces. The icc Appeals Chamber did not view these agreements as relevant to the issue of jurisdic-tion; a State waving or restricting its jurisdiction to adjudicate and enforce does not preclude the icc from extending its jurisdiction. Rather, the Rome Statute deals with limitations to prosecution arising from lack of enforcement jurisdiction under Part 9 of the Rome Statute (issues of cooperation and judi-cial assistance). The Appeals Chamber emphasised the distinction between issues pertaining to its jurisdiction under Part 2 of the Rome Statute, and issues pertaining to pre- existing treaty obligations under Part 9 of the Rome

Statute, which include safeguards with respect to pre- existing obligations.30 The court concluded that the Status of Forces Agreements are not to be dis-cussed as an issue affecting jurisdiction and confirmed the icc’s jurisdiction

in this situation.31

28 Louise Merrett, ‘The Importance of Delivery and Possession in the Passing of Title’, 67(2)

The Cambridge Law Journal (2008).

29 Carsten Stahn, ‘Response: The icc, Pre- Existing Jurisdictional Treaty Regimes, and the

Limits of the Nemo Dat Quod Non Habet Doctrine – A Reply to Michael Newton’, 49

Vanderbilt Journal of Transnational Law (2016) 448.

30 icc, Situation in The Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, Judgment on the ‘Appeal Against

the Decision on the Authorization of an Investigation into the Situation in the Islamic

Republic of Afghanistan’, icc- 02/ 17- 138, 5 March 2020, para 44. In fact, “[t] he raison d’être

for Article 98 [under part 9] is recognition that the Court has and is exercising jurisdiction

with respect to a particular person sought”. Rod Rastan, ‘Jurisdiction’ in Carsten Stahn

(ed), The Law and Practice of the International Criminal Court (oup 2015) 162.

31 Ibid.

Criminal Jurisdiction under Occupation 337

An assessment of the jurisdiction of the icc should primarily be guided

by the objectives of international criminal law, instead of being restricted to mechanical formulas originating in private property law such as the maxim

nemo dat quod non habet.32 International tribunals, especially the icc, aim to achieve justice, end impunity, and resolve to guarantee lasting respect for international justice.



3 The Oslo Accords and the icc33

In 1991, following the first Palestinian uprising (the Intifada), the Palestine Liberation Organization and the Israeli Government commenced peace nego-tiations. The two parties signed the Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-

Government in 199334 and the Israeli- Palestinian Interim Agreement in 1995.35 The plo recognised Israel’s right to exist, and, in return, the Government of Israel recognised the plo as the legitimate representative of the Palestinian

people.36 The agreement established the Palestinian Authority37 for a tran-sitional period that would eventually lead to a permanent resolution and a

viable Palestinian State based on the 1967 borders.38 As an initial step, Israel would transfer its authority in the West Bank and Gaza Strip to the Palestinian Authority in the following five spheres: education and culture, health, social

welfare, taxation, and tourism.39



32 Carsten Stahn, ‘Response: The icc, Pre- Existing Jurisdictional Treaty Regimes, and the

Limits of the Nemo Dat Quod Non Habet Doctrine – A Reply to Michael Newton’, 49

Vanderbilt Journal of Transnational Law (2016) 446.

33 The first four paragraphs in this section are heavily based on the first author’s unpub-

lished thesis; Halla Shoaibi, ‘Pregnant Women’s Access to Health Care in the Occupied

Palestinian Territory: Application Under the Rome Statute of the International Criminal

Court’ (sjd Thesis) (2015) 19– 21 [unpublished].

34 See Oslo i Accord.

35 See Oslo ii Accord.

36 See Letters between Yasser Arafat, Chairman, The Palestine Liberation Organization and

Yitzhak Rabin, Prime Minister of Israel, Israeli- PLO Mutual Recognition, Sept 9, 1993.

37 The Palestinian National Authority was established through the 1993 Declaration of

Principles to govern the Palestinian people in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, for a

transitional period not exceeding five years, leading to a permanent settlement. The

Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza Strip would govern themselves according to the

democratic principles, direct, free and general political elections. See Oslo I Accord.

38 Oslo i Accord, Article i.

39 Ibid., Article vi.

338 Shoaibi and Khalil

The Oslo ii Accord divided the West Bank into Areas A, B, and C,40 with the

pa having complete autonomy over civil and security issues in Area A. In Area B, the pa would maintain civil control, while both the pa and the Government

of Israel would have security control.41 Area C, which includes Israeli settle-

ments, was temporarily designated under the full control of Israel,42 on the basis that the Israeli military would gradually withdraw and transfer all pow-

ers and responsibilities to the pa over a period of time.43 Area C constituted

72 percent of the land of the West Bank at the time of Oslo ii.44 It currently

constitutes around 61 percent of the occupied West Bank.45 The transfer of

Area C to the pa was never implemented.46

Annex iv of Oslo ii Accord, the “Protocol Concerning Legal Affairs”, regu-

lates the judicial and legal work of the pa and grants it criminal enforcement jurisdiction only over offenses committed by Palestinians and/ or non- Israelis

in the “Palestinian Territory”.47 The Protocol defines that territory as the Gaza

Strip and West Bank, except for Area C.48 Offenses committed therein, by

40 See Oslo ii Accord, Map No 1 – First Phase of Redeployment (Areas A and B).

41 See Oslo ii Accord, Article xi; Jill Allison Weiner, ‘Israel, Palestine and the Oslo Accords’,

23 Fordham International Law Journal (1999) 230, pages 245– 246.

42 Oslo ii Accord, Article xi.

43 Ibid., Article x.

44 See Haim Gvirtzman, ‘Maps of Israel interests in Judea and Samaria: Determining the

Extent of the Additional Withdrawals’, 34 Ramat Gan: Begin- Sadat Center for Strategic

Studies (1997).

45 See ocha, Area C Humanitarian Response Plan Fact Sheet, 30 August 2010; Jodi Rudoren,

‘Israel Seeks Army Use of West Bank Area’, New York Times, 24 July 2012; see also Orhan

Niksic, Nur Nasser Eddin and Massimiliano Cali, Area C and the Future of the Palestinian

Economy, (World Bank Publications 2014).

46 The Oslo Accords were temporary interim agreements for a transitional period of five

years beginning in 1994, which should have led to a permanent settlement between Israel

and the Palestinians and the establishment of the Palestinian State in 1999.

47 Oslo i Accord, Article 1.

48 Ibid., Article i, 1 (a). “For the purposes of this Annex, “Territory” means West Bank terri-

tory except for Area C which, except for the Settlements and the military locations, will

be gradually transferred to the Palestinian side in accordance with this Agreement, and

Gaza Strip territory except for the Settlements and the Military Installation Area.” The

Palestinian Authority has jurisdiction in Area C over Palestinians and non- Israelis if they

committed an offense against Palestinians that is not related to Israel’s security, “[i] n addi-

tion, the Council has criminal jurisdiction over Palestinians and their visitors who have

committed offenses against Palestinians or their visitors in the West Bank and the Gaza

Strip in areas outside the Territory, provided that the offense is not related to Israel’s secu-

rity interests”. In the case, the offense was committed against Israel or an Israeli, Israel has

jurisdiction over any crime committed against Israeli or an Israeli in the territory, “[w]

ithout prejudice to the criminal jurisdiction of the Council, and with due regard to the

principle that no person can be tried twice for the same offense, Israel has, in addition to Criminal Jurisdiction under Occupation 339

Israelis or against Israelis, were placed under the sole criminal enforcement jurisdiction of the Israeli justice system. As a result, Palestinian courts are not permitted under the Oslo Accords to enforce its laws on any Israeli citizen, even if the offense is committed against Palestinians or on the “Palestinian Territory”, as defined under the agreement. While Annex iv of the Oslo ii Accord entails a temporary and limited waiver to exert enforcement and adju-dicative jurisdiction, the Oslo Accords do not allude to a relinquishment of Palestinian prescriptive jurisdiction. Notably, limited Palestinian enforcement jurisdiction does not pose an obstacle for the State of Palestine to delegate to the icc the jurisdiction necessary for it to investigate and hold individuals to account, for their perpetration of Rome Statute crimes.

It is within a State’s power to relinquish (temporarily or permanently) its

enforcement and adjudication jurisdiction because jurisdiction stems from State sovereignty. States, including those occupied, retain the power to revoke and delegate authority. In such cases, because the prescriptive jurisdiction of the State remains intact, a State can agree in an international treaty to limit its own adjudication and enforcement jurisdiction. In other words, the plo agree-ing to limit the adjudication jurisdiction of the pa when it comes to Israeli cit-izens not only signals the maintenance of Palestine’s prescriptive jurisdiction, but confirms it. How can Palestine agree to limit its adjudication jurisdiction towards Israeli citizens through an international agreement, if it does not have and maintain the prescriptive jurisdiction to begin with? Moreover, the limita-tion of adjudication jurisdiction towards Israeli citizens does not impact the State of Palestine’s adjudication power towards Palestinian and foreign (non- Israeli) subjects within its territory.

Notably, the idea of an Occupying Power concluding a treaty with the

occupied State that restricts the occupied State from bringing cases and pros-ecuting the Occupying Power’s agents, military personnel and/ or citizens, is

not novel in the international legal realm.49 For example, the United States restricted Iraqi jurisdiction against its military personnel in Iraq, Japan, and



the above provisions of this Article, criminal jurisdiction in accordance with its domestic

laws over offenses committed in the Territory against Israel or an Israeli”.

49 Valentina Azarov and Chantal Melonie, ‘Disentangling the Knots: A Comment on Ambos’

“Palestine, ‘Non- Member Observer’ Status and ICC Jurisdiction”’, ejil: Talk!, 27 May 2014.

“It established the Palestinian Authority (pa) as an interim Palestinian local government,

and merely granted the pa limited capacities in specific domains of daily life. It is com-

mon practice for the foreign military government of an occupied territory to avail itself of

a form of local government by the inhabitants of the occupied territory”.

340 Shoaibi and Khalil

Afghanistan.50 Such limitations in treaties should be viewed as a consequence of occupation, and such consequences should not go beyond their original purpose. That is, to prohibit national occupied courts from prosecuting the

occupier’s agents, but not to prevent the delegation of jurisdiction.51 It cannot be imagined that the icc will not have jurisdiction over cases within a situa-tion of occupation due to a bilateral agreement usually forced upon the occu-pied State. This would be contrary to the icc’s purpose and aim.



4 The Oslo Accords’ Compliance with International Law

According to the Rome Statute, the icc must interpret and apply the appli-cable law, including “where appropriate, applicable treaties and the princi-ples and rules of international law, including the established principles of the

international law of armed conflict”.52 The application and interpretation of the applicable law “must be consistent with internationally recognized human

rights”.53

In accordance with international law, treaties are considered invalid if

they conflict with a peremptory norm. Therefore, the treaty shall be deemed invalid, or at least relevant parts of it must be considered unlawful, where any interpretation and/ or application of the Oslo Accords conflicts with a peremp-tory norm. The following section will posit that self- determination qualifies as a perempory norm and that – by extension – a restriction on Palestinian prescriptive jurisdiction infringes on that right.



50 See Agreement Between the United States of America and the Republic of Iraq on the

Withdrawal of United States Forces from Iraq and the Organization of Their Activities

During Their Temporary Presence in Iraq, 17 November 2008; Treaty of Mutual

Cooperation and Security instituting the similar restrictions on Japanese jurisdiction over

United States nationals, 23 June 1960.

51 Halla Shoaibi, ‘Pregnant Women’s Access to Health Care in the Occupied Palestinian

Territory: Application Under the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court’ (SJD

Thesis) (2015) 106– 110 [unpublished]. As Ronen proposes, if Palestine has sovereignty

to delegate its jurisdiction to the icc, “then the question whether and why Palestine

refrains from exercising its jurisdiction in a specific instance or category of cases, includ-

ing with respect to a particular territory, is no longer one of jurisdiction, but at most of

complementarity for the purpose of admissibility”; Yaël Ronen, ‘Israel, Palestine and

the ICC – Territory Uncharted But Not Unknown’, 12(7) Journal of International Criminal

Justice (2014) 23.

52 Rome Statute, Article 21(1)(b).

53 Rome Statute, Article 21(3).

Criminal Jurisdiction under Occupation 341

4.1 Self- Determination

Article 53 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties provides that:

A treaty is void if, at the time of its conclusion, it conflicts with a peremp-

tory norm of general international law. For the purposes of the present

Convention, a peremptory norm of general international law is a norm

accepted and recognized by the international community of States as a

whole as a norm from which no derogation is permitted and which can

be modified only by a subsequent norm of general international law hav-

ing the same character.54

In its judgement on the Questions Relating to the Obligation to Prosecute or Extradite, the International Court of Justice provided relevant jurisdictional underpinnings of the norms of jus cogens that fall within the premises of Article 53 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties. It established the evidence needed to determine when a norm of general international law has been elevated to a peremptory norm (jus cogens). In that decision, the icj held that the prohibition of torture has become a peremptory norm of general

international law,55 and it grounded its findings on the widespread interna-tional instruments that prohibit torture as a substantiation of State practice

and opinio juris.56

In the case of self- determination, the unanimously adopted UN General

Assembly resolution 2625(xxv) of 1970 regarding the Declaration of Principles

of International Law Concerning Friendly Relations,57 emphasised the impor-tance of self- determination as a principle of international law and imposed a duty upon States to take the necessary measures to promote the realisation of the principle. In considering this principle, Judge Robinson, in his separate opinion in the advisory opinion on Legal Consequences of the Separation of the Chagos Archipelago from Mauritius in 1965, stressed that self- determination is a core principle of international law and cited the prominent international instruments of universal application that embody the peremptory nature of



54 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, Article 53.

55 icj, Questions relating to the Obligation to Prosecute or Extradite (Belgium v Senegal)

(Judgement) icj Reports 422 (2012), para 99.

56 Ibid. See also icj, Legal Consequences of the Separation of the Chagos Archipelago from

Mauritius in 1965 (Advisory Opinion) icj Reports 169 (2019), Separate Opinion of Judge

Robinson.

57 unga Resolution 2625 (24 October 1970); Christine D Gray, International Law and the Use

of Force (oup 2000) 13.

342 Shoaibi and Khalil

the right of self- determination.58 Judge Robinson underlined that norms that emanate from the UN Charter and constitute a purpose of the United Nations, such as self- determination, have earned the characterisation of peremptory

norms by virtue of their normative value.59 He further indicated that the rec-ognition and acceptance of that norm by the international community as a

whole,60 are fundamental features for the identification of norms as jus cogens as established by the icj, in its decision on Armed Activities on the Territory of

the Congo.61

The peremptory characteristic of self- determination was additionally

highlighted in the ILC’s fourth report on peremptory norms of general inter-national law, in which the Special Rapporteur, Dire Tladi, indicated that self-

determination is a peremptory norm.62 Similarly, in the commentary to Article 26 of the Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts, the right to self- determination was recognised by the International Law Commission

as a “clearly accepted and recognised” peremptory norm.63 The caselaw and

other supporting materials above- mentioned,64 not only illustrate that self- determination is customary international law, but more significantly, that it warrants the characterisation of a peremptory norm.



58 Ibid., page 18.

59 icj, Legal Consequences of the Separation of the Chagos Archipelago from Mauritius in 1965

(Advisory Opinion) icj Reports 169 (2019), Separate Opinion of Judge Robinson.

60 unga Resolution 2625 (24 October 1970); Christine D Gray, International Law and the Use

of Force (oup 2000) 22.

61 icj, Reservations to the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of

Genocide (Advisory Opinion) icj Reports 15 (1951), para 23 cited in icj, Case Concerning

Armed Activities on the Territory of the Congo (New Application: 2002) (Democratic Republic

of The Congo v Rwanda) icj Reports 6 (2006), para 64.

62 See ilc, ‘Report of the International Law Commission on the Work of its Seventy- First

Session’, 2(2) Yearbook of the International Law Commission (2019).

63 ilc, ‘Report of the International Law Commission on the Work of its Fifty- Third Session’,

2(2) Yearbook of the International Law Commission (2001), page 85.

64 See also UN Human Rights Committee, General Comment 12: The Right to Self- determination

of Peoples (Article 1), 13 March 1984, para 1. It recognises that self- determination is partic-

ularly important as “its realization is an essential condition for the effective guarantee

and observance of individual human rights and for the promotion and strengthening of

those rights”. The right to self- determination is further reiterated by the icj in its East

Timor case, where it identifies the right to self- determination as an “essential principle of

contemporary international law”. icj, Case Concerning East Timor (Portugal v Australia)

(Judgement) icj Reports 90 (1995), para 29. See further unga Resolutions 67/ 19 (29

November 2012) and 66/ 146 (19 December 2011), that refer to the inalienable right of the

Palestinian people to self- determination.

Criminal Jurisdiction under Occupation 343

Limiting Palestinian perspective jurisdiction and its ability to delegate juris-

diction to the icc risks negating Palestinians’ right to self- determination. If Israeli crimes on Palestinian territory, such as the transfer of Israeli citizens into the occupied territory, are not delegated to the icc, then Palestinians are

precluded from exercising their right to self- determination.65 Although the Oslo Accords do not create a direct obligation to violate a peremptory norm, fulfilling the limitation on delegating jurisdiction over Israeli nationals to the icc would lead to a violation of the norm of the right to self- determination.

4.1.1 The Oslo Accords Shall Not Bar the icc from Exercising

Jurisdiction over Israeli Nationals

Pursuant to Article 21(3) of the Rome Statute, the icc must interpret and apply the applicable law, including the jus cogens norm of self- determination, con-

sistently with internationally recognised human rights.66 William Schabas suggests that “Article 21(3) does not, strictly speaking, provide a new source. Rather, it makes all the applicable law in article 21(3) subject to internationally

recognized human rights”.67 The icc has recalled in several cases that Article

21(3) is part of the process of interpreting the provisions of the Rome Statute.68 When interpreting whether the icc has jurisdiction, it is important that the court does not recognise a treaty that violates peremptory norms.

Therefore, an examination of the effect of the Oslo Accords on the icc’s

jurisdiction over the Palestinian territory must consider whether allowing the Oslo Accords to limit the icc from prosecuting Israeli nationals gives rise to a violation of the norm of the right to self- determination. Indeed, where a conflict exists between a jus cogens norm and another rule of international law, the Rome Statute provisions establishing the court’s jurisdiction and its parameters, must surely be “interpreted and applied” as to be consistent with

65 According to the authors, the continued existence of settlements in the West Bank is one

of the main reasons driving the occupation and hindering Palestinians from exercising

their right to self- determination.

66 Rome Statute, Article 21(3); icc, Prosecutor v Saif Al- Islam Gaddafi, Pre- Trial Chamber

i, Decision on the ‘Admissibility Challenge by Dr Saif Al- Islam Gadafi pursuant to

Articles 17(1)(c), 19 and 20(3) of the Rome Statute’, Judge Perrin de Brichambaut Separate

Concurring Opinion, para 112.

67 William Schabas, The International Criminal Court: A Commentary on the Rome Statute

(oup 2010) 385.

68 See for example icc, Prosecutor v Lubanga Dyilo, Pre- Trial Chamber i, Decision

Establishing General Principles Governing Applications to Restrict Disclosure pursuant

to Rule 81(2) and (4) of the Statute, icc- 01/ 04- 01/ 06- 108, 19 May 2006, para 7. See also

Rebecca Young, ‘‘Internationally Recognized Human Rights’ Before the International

Criminal Court’, 60(1), The International and Comparative Law Quarterly (2011) 189. 344 Shoaibi and Khalil

the peremptory norm.69 Hence, if the Rome Statute limits its own jurisdiction based on provisions in the Oslo Accords and its annexes, it will create a vio-lation of the right to self- determination of the Palestinian people. The effects of the Oslo Accords on the icc jurisdiction should be interpreted in a way to

respect Palestinian self- determination.70

Even if the interpretation of the rule in question does not give rise to a viola-

tion of a peremptory norm but the application of the rule somehow does, then

such application would be contrary to the relevant peremptory norm.71 Hence, resulting in the unlawfulness of the application of the said rule. The obligation of States to respect the right to self- determination may suspend another treaty obligation – in this case, the limitation on the adjudication jurisdiction over Israeli nationals.

4.2 The Oslo Accords Incompatibility with Palestine’s International

Obligations

As a High Contracting Party, Palestine has an obligation to prosecute grave breaches under the Geneva Conventions and customary international law

(such as settlements,72 extensive destruction and appropriation of property,73 and practices of apartheid, and other inhuman and degrading practices involv-

ing outrages upon personal dignity74). The Fourth Geneva Convention con-firms in Articles 7, 8, and 47, that special agreements between the Occupying Power and the occupied population cannot derogate from or deny protected

persons the safeguards of the convention.75 Palestine’s obligation as a High Contracting Party to prosecute grave breaches, including by delegating such



69 See ilc, ‘Report of the International Law Commission on the Work of its Seventy- First

Session’, 2(2) Yearbook of the International Law Commission (2019), pages 146, 198– 199.

70 This was applied for example was applied in ecj, Council of the European Union v Front

Populaire pour la Libération de la Saguia- el- hamra et du Rio de Oro (Front Polisario), c- 104/

16 P, 21 December 2016, paras 88– 114. The court maintained that interpreting the treaty

between the European Commission and Morocco (Liberalisation Agreement) should be

concluded in a way to respect the rule of self- determination which is a “legally enforce-

able right erga omnes and one of the essential principles of international law”. See also

ilc, ‘Report of the International Law Commission on the Work of its Fifty- Third Session’,

2(2) Yearbook of the International Law Commission (2001), page 198.

71 Ibid.

72 Additional Protocol ii, Article 85(4)(a). See also icrc, Customary International

Humanitarian Law Volume 1: Rules (cup 2009) Rule 158.

73 Fourth Geneva Convention, Article 147.

74 Additional Protocol ii, Article 85(4)(c).

75 Fourth Geneva Convention, Articles 7, 8 and 47.

Criminal Jurisdiction under Occupation 345

duty to an international tribunal, takes precedence over any conflicting obliga-tion that arises out of a bilateral treaty.

Furthermore, the icj, in its advisory opinion on Legal Consequences of the

Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, held that Israel vio-lates the erga omnes obligation to respect the right of the Palestinian people to self- determination along with other obligations it has under international

humanitarian law.76 The icj further recalled the advisory opinion on the Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons, in which rules of humanitar-ian law applicable in armed conflict “incorporate obligations which are essen-

tially of an erga omnes character”.77 The icj identified these as obligations to be owed by “states towards the international community as a whole” and

“thus all states can be held to have a legal interest in their protection”.78 Hence, Palestine has an obligation to prosecute grave breaches, especially those of an erga omnes character.

Within the realm of human rights law, the ECtHR in Soering v The United

Kingdom maintained, that, “the object and purpose of the [European Convention on Human Rights] as an instrument for the protection of indi-vidual human beings require that its provisions be interpreted and applied

so as to make its safeguards practical and effective”.79 The ECtHR held that the extradition of the applicant to the United States to stand trial for capi-tal murder would violate Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights, even if such extradition was not explicitly referred to in the general

wording of Article 3.80 Similarly, the Fourth Geneva Convention, as an instru-ment to protect civilians in armed conflict and in times of occupation, should be interpreted so as to make its safeguards effective. The limitation on the State of Palestine from delegating jurisdiction to the icc through a bilateral treaty would violate the obligation of the State of Palestine to prosecute grave



76 icj, Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory

(Advisory Opinion) icj Reports 136 (2004), para 155; Ali Reza Hojatzadeh and Hossein

Sartipi, ‘The Innovation in Concept of the Erga- Omnesisation of International Law’, 2(2)

International Journal of Humanities and Social Science Studies (2015) 189, page 201; see also

Geoffrey R Watson, ‘The “Wall” Decisions in Legal and Political Context’, 99(1) American

Journal of International Law (2005) 16.

77 icj, Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory

(Advisory Opinion) icj Reports 136 (2004), para 157.

78 icj, Case Concerning the Barcelona Traction, Light and Power Company Limited (Belgium v

Spain) (Judgement) icj Reports 3 (1970), para 33.

79 ECtHR, Soering v The United Kingdom, Judgement, 7 July 1989, para 87.

80 Ibid., para 88. Emphasis added. See also Richard B Lillich, ‘The Soering Case’, 85(1)

American Journal of International Law (1991) 138.

346 Shoaibi and Khalil

breaches under the Geneva Conventions, rendering it ineffective and non- practical. Such application would defy the object and purpose of the Geneva

Conventions as well as the object and purpose of the Rome Statute as well.81

The Rome Statute of the icc lists grave breaches as a category of war crimes

under Article 8(2)(a). Grave breaches may overlap with other international

crimes like genocide, crimes against humanity, and torture.82 International crimes, such as those codified in the Rome Statute, are of such importance and concern to the international community, that they give rise to the need

for individual criminal responsibility to end impunity.83 Given the grave nature of Rome Statute crimes, an argument could be made that carrying out the agreement in the Oslo Accords, in a manner which limits the delega-tion of Palestinian jurisdiction to the icc over grave breaches of the Geneva

Conventions and the Rome Statute of the icc, is therefore antithetical.84



5 Conclusion

Amid a long- standing colonial regime, the Israeli government- imposed restric-tions on Palestinian jurisdiction, or exercise thereof, through military acts on the ground and bilateral agreements that arguably resulted in a violation of the Palestinian right to self- determination. This chapter has engaged with



81 Jure Vidmar makes a similar argument with to the prohibition against the extradition

of persons to States where torture is committed. “This means that international law

does not absolutely prohibit extradition to states where torture is commonly practiced

[if states make a promise or diplomatic assurances the person would not be tortured].

Consequently, concluding an extradition treaty with a notorious torture jurisdiction is

not illegal or automatically void under Article 53 of the vclt. It is rather that the prohibi-

tion of torture may suspend the treaty obligation to extradite (where assurances are not

given)”. Jure Vidmar, ‘Rethinking Jus Cogens after Germany v. Italy: Back to Article 53?’, 60

Netherlands International Law Review (2013), page 11.

82 Ward Ferdinandusse, ‘The Prosecution of Grave Breaches in National Courts’, 7(4) Journal

of International Criminal Justice, (2009) 723, pages 724– 725.

83 Dinah Shelton, ‘Normative Hierarchy in International Law’, 100(2) The American Journal

of International Law (2006) 291, page 318; Rome Statute, preamble.

84 Dinah Shelton, ‘Normative Hierarchy in International Law’, 100(2) The American Journal

of International Law (2006) 291, page 318. “It has been clear since the Nuremberg trials

that conforming to or carrying out domestic law is no excuse for breach of international

criminal law; it would seem plausible as well, if unlikely to arise in practice, that a defence

based on carrying out international legal obligations, such as those contained in a bilat-

eral treaty, would fail if those obligations contradict the requirements of criminal law. In

this respect, norms of criminal law would be given supremacy over other international

law in practice”.

Criminal Jurisdiction under Occupation 347

questions arising from the effect of the Oslo Accords on the jurisdiction of the icc – precisely whether the Oslo Accords bar the exercise of the icc’s juris-diction in Palestine. It has argued that Palestine’s agreement to limit its own adjudication and enforcement jurisdiction through a treaty does not negate its prescriptive jurisdiction. The inability of the Palestinian national judicial sys-tem to prosecute Israeli officials who commit international crimes, rather, pro-vides an additional reason for the icc to intervene based on complementarity. Furthermore, any interpretation or application of the Oslo Accords negating Palestinian prescriptive jurisdiction – that is, negating the Palestinian right to self- determination – is a violation of a peremptory norm. Given that Palestine is a High Contracting Party to the Fourth Geneva Convention, it has an obliga-tion to prosecute grave breaches or to delegate such duty to an international tribunal. That duty takes precedence over any conflicting obligation that arises out of a bilateral treaty such as the Oslo Accords.

Although the icc might render possible relief for some victims of Rome

Statute crimes committed on Palestinian territory, it should not be viewed as means for justice for the entire Palestinian people, nor as a means of libera-tion. Palestinian engagement with the icc should consider the risks that come with placing expectations of justice on an international system that was born

within the colonial context of international law.85 With that said, the icc may, and can, expose some crimes committed by Israeli officials, for example per-taining to the war on Gaza or concerning the colonial regime in Palestine, such as settlements and apartheid.



Acknowledgements

The authors of this chapter are grateful for the research assistance and contri-bution of Fuad Massad, Rania Qadi, and Mira Khayyat, and a few other mem-bers of the ‘Junior Palestinian Legal Experts’ network at Birzeit University. This chapter is based on a filed amicus curia submission by the authors to the icc Pre- Trial Chamber on 16 March 2020.



85 See Antony Anghie, Imperialism, Sovereignty and the Making of International Law (cup

2012); John Reynolds, Empire, Emergency and International Law (cup 2018).





chapter 15


Domination, Transformation, and Annexation via

Utilities

Marya Farah and Maha Abdallah



Prior to the Nakba and the establishment of the State of Israel in 1948, Zionist leaders and businessmen understood the importance of controlling water resources and electricity networks in order to create a viable State. Underpinning these plans was the prerequisite dispossession of Palestinians. Israel’s prolonged military occupation of Palestinian territory, administered

through a system of institutionalised racial discrimination and apartheid,1 and the territorial takeover that it has achieved, is an extension of this ideology and strategy.

Over the course of its 55 years as Occupying Power, Israel has instituted

countless policies and practices that seek to control, regulate, and hinder nearly all aspects of Palestinian life, while denying the Palestinian people the right to self- determination and sovereignty over their natural resources. This is perhaps most palpable when considering basic necessities for human life, health and a functioning society such as access to water and electricity. Israel’s administration of the opt and provision of these utilities has enabled it to exploit Palestinian natural resources, hold the Palestinian economy as a

captive market, and establish perilous living conditions for Palestinians,2 to

benefit and expand its settlement enterprise.3 Central to this system are both

1 unhcr, Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights in the Palestinian

Territories Occupied Since 1967, Michael Lynk, a/ hrc/ 49/ 87, 21 March 2022, paras 12– 62; Al-

Haq, The Legal Architecture of Apartheid, 12 April 2021.

2 unctad has outlined issues such as food insecurity and unemployment, amongst others,

that are a result of Israel’s control over the opt as a captive market. unctad, Report on

UNCTAD Assistance to the Palestinian People: Developments in the Economy of the Occupied

Palestinian Territory, unctad/ app/ 2016/ 1, 1 September 2016.

3 Israeli settlements are defined to include “all physical and non- physical structures and pro-

cesses that constitute, enable and support the establishment, expansion and maintenance

of Israeli residential communities” in the opt. See also unhrc, Report of the Independent

International Fact- Finding Mission to Investigate the Implications of the Israeli Settlements on

the Civil, Political, Economic, Social and Cultural Rights of the Palestinian People throughout

the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, a/ hrc/ 22/ 63, 7 February 2013,

para 4.



© Marya Farah and Maha Abdallah, 2023 | DOI:1

Domination, Transformation, and Annexation via Utilities 349

Israeli- State owned and transnational corporations that enable, facilitate and profit from this regime. The foundations of some of these companies are linked to Zionist ambitions that preceded the 1948 Nakba.

In this context, Palestinians are often forced to engage with the same

oppressive discriminatory system and the actors within it, including Israeli authorities, institutions, and businesses, that target, marginalise, and exploit them. This includes situations where Palestinian authorities consent to utility- related projects for settlements in order to ensure Palestinian access to water, electricity, telecommunications and infrastructure is fulfilled, even if partially.

Indeed, Palestinian access to such utilities is subordinate to that of the over

700,000 illegally transferred Israeli settlers in the opt,4 and exemplary of a wider regime of apartheid that Israel has established throughout the territory

under its control.5 Accordingly, utility networks in the opt not only serve and

prioritise settlers, but also benefit Israel’s broader population and economy.6 In doing so, Israel has laid the physical infrastructure for its proverbial “facts on the ground”, entrenching its colonisation and ongoing process of annexation of Palestinian land.

This chapter will explore how Israel has used its authority to administer

the provision of water, electricity, and telecommunications in the West Bank7 to undermine Palestinian life while ensuring that such networks support the viability and growth of settlements, their integration into Israeli territory, and Israel’s unlawful claim of sovereignty. This chapter will first review the obliga-tions of an Occupying Power under international humanitarian law and inter-national human rights law. It will also examine the role and responsibility of businesses in this context. Three case studies focusing on water, electricity and telecommunications are then presented, with the aim of underscoring Israel’s overt decades- long path towards annexation and the critical role played by



4 This figure was reported in January 2020 and includes an estimated 300,000 settlers in East

Jerusalem and an additional 463,353 settlers in the other areas of the West Bank. ap and toi

Staff, ‘West Bank Settlements Report Rapid Growth in 2019’, Times of Israel, 28 January 2020.

5 Amnesty International, Israel’s Apartheid against Palestinians – Cruel System of Domination

and Crime against Humanity, 1 February 2022.

6 B’Tselem, This Is Ours – And This, Too: Israel’s Settlement Policy in the West Bank, March 2021.

7 The geographic scope of this chapter is limited to the West Bank, including East Jerusalem.

The severe context faced by Palestinians in the Gaza Strip in relation to access to utilities,

including due to Israel’s 15- year closure, repeated and deliberate military assaults on infra-

structure, and other policies, is therefore not addressed. The narrow focus is not intended

to add to the imposed political and geographic fragmentation of the Palestinian people, nor

suggest that these sectors are not equally targeted and manipulated in other areas under

Israel’s control.

350 Farah and Abdallah

business enterprises. This chapter is neither exhaustive of the countless Israeli policies and practices targeting each sector nor of other measures used to

transform the opt.8



1 Continuity of Life during Occupation

An Occupying Power’s obligations under international law, in connection with the provision of utilities, include those related to the lives and livelihoods of protected persons as well as the framework in which the territory should be

administered more broadly.9

International humanitarian law seeks to protect civilian populations during

armed conflict, including by prohibiting direct attacks against civilians and civilian objects and by seeking to “ensure adequate conditions of life for the

civilian population”.10 In situations of occupation, an Occupying Power is thus required to restore and ensure public order and safety, and to respect human

life.11 The Fourth Geneva Convention also requires that protected persons

be treated humanely and with respect for their person.12 Accordingly, “acts

impairing individual life or health” are prohibited.13 Additional Protocol i pro-vides further protections towards civilians and civilian objects, including those

necessary for survival.14

These protections are supplemented by international human rights law

which obliges States to promote, protect, and fulfil human rights in a non- discriminatory manner. Similar to international humanitarian law, interna-tional human rights law recognises the inherent dignity of persons, and the

rights to life and health, amongst others.15 Interlinked with these is the right



8 See for example Breaking the Silence, Highway to Annexation – Israeli Road and

Transportation Infrastructure Development in the West Bank, December 2020.

9 This framework includes the Hague Regulations, the Fourth Geneva Convention, certain

provisions of Additional Protocol i, customary international humanitarian law, and inter-

national human rights law.

10 ohchr, Protection of Economic, Social and Cultural Rights in Conflict, 2015, para 4.

11 Hague Regulations, Articles 43 and 46.

12 Fourth Geneva Convention, Article 27.

13 Ibid., icrc, Commentary: Fourth Geneva Convention Relative to the Protection of Civilian

Persons in Time of War (icrc 1958).

14 See Additional Protocol i, Articles 52 and 54. In particular, Article 54(2) refers to objects

including “drinking water installations and supplies”.

15 See for example iccpr, preamble and Articles 10 and 6; icescr, preamble and Article 12;

udhr, Article 3.

Domination, Transformation, and Annexation via Utilities 351

to water.16 The UN Human Rights Committee and the UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights have both recognised access to water as

a key condition for the enjoyment of the right to life with dignity.17 The cescr has also affirmed access to safe and potable water and adequate sanitation as

an underlying determinant for the right to health.18 Moreover, water and elec-

tricity are requisites for the right to an adequate standard of living.19 The UN Human Rights Committee has asserted that, where necessary, States should take measures to ensure access to electricity, amongst other essential goods

and services, in order to protect the right to life.20

Central to the upcoming case studies, the UN Committee on Economic,

Social and Cultural Rights has outlined States’ minimum core obligations under the International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights, alongside the obligation of States to ensure the “progressive realization” of the

rights.21 In situations of occupation, measures taken by the Occupying Power



16 In its General Comment No 15, the UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural

Rights affirmed that the right to water is guaranteed within the icescr. Paragraph 3 of

the General Comment notes that the right “should also be seen in conjunction with other

rights enshrined in the International Bill of Rights, foremost amongst them the right to

life and human dignity”. UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, General

Comment No 15: The Right to Water (Articles 11 and 12), E/ C.12/ 2002/ 11, 20 January 2003. In

2010, the UN General Assembly affirmed the human right to water and sanitation in reso-

lution 64/ 292. See unga Resolution 64/ 292 (8 July 2010).

17 UN Human Rights Committee, General Comment No 36: the Right to Life (Article 6), ccpr/

c/ gc/ 36, 2 November 2018, para 26. cescr, General Comment No 15: The Right to Water

(Articles 11 and 12), e/ c.12/ 2002/ 11, 20 January 2003, para 1.

18 UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, General Comment No 14: The

Right to the Highest Attainable Standard of Health (Article 12), E/ C.12/ 2000/ 4, 11 August

2000, para 11.

19 This includes “adequate food, clothing and housing, and to the continuous improvement

of living conditions”, where adequate housing requires “safe drinking water, energy for

cooking, heating and lighting, sanitation and washing facilities” amongst other neces-

sary services and infrastructure. UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,

General Comment No 4: The Right to Adequate Housing (Article 11), E/ 1992/ 23, 13 December

1991, para 8(b). See also the cedaw, Article 14(2)(h) and crc, Articles 24(2)(c) and 27(3).

20 UN Human Rights Committee, General Comment No 36: The Right to Life (Article 6), ccpr/

c/ gc/ 36, 2 November 2018, para 26.

21 UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, General Comment No 3: The

Nature of States Parties’ Obligations (Article 20), e/ 1991/ 23, 14 December 1990, paras 9–

10. Core obligations in relation to the right to health includes “access to basic shelter,

housing and sanitation, and an adequate supply of safe and potable water”, among oth-

ers. See UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, General Comment No

14: The Right to the Highest Attainable Standard of Health (Article 12), e/ c.12/ 2000/ 4, 11

August 2000.

352 Farah and Abdallah

towards progressive realisation – including by refraining from adopting “ret-

rogressive measures incompatible with core obligations”22 – are reinforced by other prohibitions under international law in regard to its administration of the territory. For example, and especially important in respect to the right to water and the right to adequate housing, the Occupying Power is prohibited from: pillaging; destroying the real or personal property of private persons, the State and other public authorities and social and cooperative organizations, unless required by military necessity; confiscating private property; and as aforementioned, attacking, destroying, removing, or rendering useless “objects indispensable to the survival of the civilian population such as [...] drinking

water installations and supplies and irrigation works”.23

In fulfilling State obligations, the UN Committee on Economic, Social and

Cultural Rights calls on States to take steps towards the realisation of rights,

“including through the adoption of legislative measures”.24 However, both the Hague Regulations and the Fourth Geneva Convention limit the legislative authority of the Occupying Power to cases of necessity (“unless absolutely pre-vented” from respecting “the laws in force in the country”) and where necessary

to fulfil obligations under the Fourth Geneva Convention.25 The commentary to the Fourth Geneva Convention, for example, affirms that certain legisla-tion may be promulgated if “required for the application of the Convention in accordance with the obligations imposed on it by the latter in a number of

spheres: child welfare, labour, food, hygiene and public health”.26 While this exception would include legislation on the provision of water and electricity, changes are not boundless. Regarding situations of occupation, Marco Sassóli



22 UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, General Comment No. 15: The

Right to Water (Articles 11 and 12), e/ c.12/ 2002/ 11, 20 January 2003, para 42.

23 On pillage, see Fourth Geneva Convention, Article 33; Hague Regulations, Article 47.

On property, see Fourth Geneva Convention, Article 53; Hague Regulations, Article 46;

Additional Protocol i, Article 54.

24 icescr, Article 2(1). See also UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,

General Comment No 3: The Nature of States Parties’ Obligations (Article 20), e/ 1991/ 23, 14

December 1990, para 3– 4.

25 Hague Regulations, Article 43; Fourth Geneva Convention, Article 64. Paragraph 2 of

Article 64 of the Fourth Geneva Convention states “The Occupying Power may, how-

ever, subject the population of the occupied territory to provisions which are essential

to enable the Occupying Power to fulfil its obligations under the present Convention,

to maintain the orderly government of the territory, and to ensure the security of the

Occupying Power, of the members and property of the occupying forces or administra-

tion, and likewise of the establishments and lines of communication used by them”.

26 International Committee of the Red Cross, Commentary: Fourth Geneva Convention

Relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War (icrc 1958) 337. Domination, Transformation, and Annexation via Utilities 353

has underscored that the Occupying Power “is not the sovereign – it may intro-duce only as many changes as is absolutely necessary under its human rights obligations and must stay as close as possible to similar local standards and the

local cultural, legal, and economic traditions”.27

Sassóli further clarifies cases of prolonged occupation where legislation

may be necessary for the occupied territory to “evolve”, in contrast to situations

that are aimed at transformation.28 The former could, for example, include legislation related to utilities where advancements have occurred during the course of an occupation, such as internet provision, which the UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights has affirmed States are obliged to pro-

vide access to.29 Utility provision and the development of infrastructure must, however, also be consistent with the role of the Occupying Power as adminis-trator or usufructuary of the public immoveable property, including water and land, and limitations on the use of natural resources by the Occupying Power

more broadly.30

Legislation may be considered beyond the authority of the Occupying Power

if it transforms the institutions or political structures present in the territory,

such as changing a “liberal into a communist economy”31 or alters the demog-

raphy.32 One expert meeting organised by the International Committee of



27 Marco Sassóli, ‘Legislation and Maintenance of Public Order and Civil Life by Occupying

Powers’, 16(4) The European Journal of International Law (2005) 661, page 677.

28 Ibid., page 679.

29 In commenting on Article 15 of the icescr, the UN Committee on Economic, Social

and Cultural Rights noted that States are obliged to eliminate arbitrary limitations on

Internet access and provide access to the Internet. UN Committee on Economic, Social

and Cultural Rights, General Comment No 25: Science and Economic, Social and Cultural

Rights (Article 15 (1) (b), (2), (3) and (4)), e/ c.12/ gc/ 25, 30 April 2020, paras 42 and 45.

Internet access is also central to the fulfilment of the right to freedom of expression.

See UN Human Rights Committee, General Comment No 34: Freedoms of Opinion and

Expression (Article 19), ccpr/ c/ gc/ 34, 12 September 2011, para 12.

30 Natural resources may only be used by the Occupying Power to offset the costs of the

occupation, and in a manner and rate that ensures the safeguarding of the resource.

See unhrc, Human rights Situation in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East

Jerusalem, with a Focus on Access to Water and Environmental Degradation – Report of the

Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights in the Palestinian Territories Occupied

Since 1967, Michael Lynk, a/ hrc/ 40/ 73, 30 May 2019, paras 31– 32: Hague Regulations,

Article 55.

31 Marco Sassóli, ‘Legislation and Maintenance of Public Order and Civil Life by Occupying

Powers’, 16(4) The European Journal of International Law (2005) 661, page 679.

32 The icrc has underscored that “[b] eing only a temporary administrator of occupied terri-

tory, the Occupying Power must not interfere with its original economic and social struc-

tures, organization, legal system or demography”. icrc, Conference of High Contracting 354 Farah and Abdallah

the Red Cross also emphasised “the need to differentiate between full- fledged transformative projects entailing disruptions of sovereignty and smoother changes aimed at getting the basic infrastructure of the occupied society to

work in accordance with the relevant norms of occupation law”.33

As will be illustrated by the following case studies, utility provision and

related infrastructure have been used as a central tool of transformation – obstructing the right to self- determination and permanent sovereignty over natural resources of the occupied population, and creating a coercive envi-ronment for Palestinians, while facilitating the unlawful transfer of Israeli set-tlers into the occupied territory. Indeed, as noted by the former UN Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights in the Palestinian Territories Occupied Since 1967, Michael Lynk, water, electricity, telecommunications and other utilities and infrastructure are indispensable to settlements. According to Lynk, the settlements themselves create “demographic facts on the ground to solidify a permanent presence, a consolidation of alien political control and

a claim of sovereignty”.34 These measures contravene international law, where the acquisition of territory through threat or use of force is unlawful under the UN Charter, while transfer is prohibited under the Fourth Geneva Convention,

and a war crime under the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.35 Underpinning this framework is the inviolability of the rights of protected persons and protections guaranteed under the Fourth Geneva Convention. Protected persons cannot renounce their rights, even when territory is annexed or where representatives of the occupied population enter into agreements

with the Occupying Power.36

While an Occupying Power has primary obligations towards the terri-

tory and protected persons therein, and Third States have exterritorial obli-gations, it is important to note that corporate and other private actors also

Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention, Statement by the International Committee of the

Red Cross, 5 December 2001.

33 icrc, Expert Meeting, Occupation and Other Forms of Administration of Foreign Territory,

March 2012, page 68.

34 unhrc, Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights in the

Palestinian Territories Occupied Since 1967, Michael Lynk, a/ hrc/ 47/ 57, 8 July 2021, paras

41, 55, and 56.

35 Fourth Geneva Convention, Articles 49 and 147. The Rome Statue of the International

Criminal Court also considers “the transfer, directly or indirectly, by the Occupying Power

of parts of its own civilian population into the territory it occupies” as a war crime. Rome

Statute, Article 8(2)(b)(viii). For analysis of this Article as applied to the opt, see Michael

G. Kearney, ‘On the Situation in Palestine and the War Crime of Transfer of Civilians into

Occupied Territory’, 28(1), Criminal Law Forum (2017) 1.

36 Fourth Geneva Convention, Articles 7, 8, and 47.

Domination, Transformation, and Annexation via Utilities 355

have responsibilities, as they may facilitate and benefit from the manner in

which a territory is administered.37 International humanitarian law is bind-ing upon all actors whose activities are closely linked to an armed conflict, including business enterprises, even if they do not take part in active hostili-

ties.38 Corporate and private actors are also expected to respect international human rights law, undertake enhanced human rights due diligence to ensure that adverse impacts are prevented, and to responsibly divest and disengage

as necessary.39



2 Water: Making Settlements Viable

Israel’s control and exploitation of Palestinian water resources in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, have been well- documented and analysed, both in relation to the international law violations that have ensued as well as to how it has facilitated Israel’s settlement enterprise and annexation of terri-

tory.40 What has not been emphasised enough, however, is that the roadmap for annexation, centred on the water supplies in the region, was laid out well before 1967, and even prior to the establishment of Israel in 1948. At the Paris Peace Conference in 1919, following the end of World War i, Zionists acknowledged



37 The UN Independent International Fact- Finding Mission on Settlements noted, for

example, how businesses have “directly and indirectly, enabled, facilitated and profited

from the construction and growth of the settlements”. unhrc, Report of the Independent

International Fact- Finding Mission to Investigate the Implications of the Israeli Settlements

on the Civil, Political, Economic, Social and Cultural Rights of the Palestinian People

throughout the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, a/ hrc/ 22/ 63, 7

February 2013, para 96. On foreign investment in Iraqi companies during the occupation

by the United States, see Adam Roberts, ‘Transformative Military Occupation: Applying

the Laws of War and Human Rights’, 100(3), American Journal of International Law (2006)

580, page 615.

38 icrc, Business and International Humanitarian Law – An introduction to the rights and

obligations of business enterprises under international humanitarian law, December 2006.

39 UN Special Representative of the Secretary- General on the Issue of Human Rights

and Transnational Corporations and Other Business Enterprises, Protect, Respect and

Remedy: a Framework for Business and Human Rights: Report of the Special Representative

of the Secretary- General on the Issue of Human Rights and Transnational Corporations and

Other Business Enterprises, John Ruggie, a/ hrc/ 8/ 5, 7 April 2008.

40 See for example Amnesty International, Troubled Waters: Palestinians Denied Fair Access

to Water, 27 October 2009; Al- Haq, Water for One People: Discriminatory Access and ‘Water-

Apartheid’ in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, 8 April 2013; ohchr, Report of the UN

High Commissioner for Human Rights, The Allocation of Water Resources in the Occupied

Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, a/ hrc/ 48/ 43, 23 September 2021. 356 Farah and Abdallah

and underscored the importance of controlling water resources and accord-ingly proposed that the borders of Palestine include parts of Lebanon, Syria, Jordan, and Egypt, with special attention given to Mount Hermon, which

extends to the 1967- occupied Syrian Golan.41 The Zionist Organization stated:

Palestine must have its natural outlets to the seas and the control of its

rivers and their headwaters […] The economic life of Palestine, like that

of every other semi- arid country, depends on the available water supply.

It is, therefore, of vital importance not only to secure all water resources

already feeding the country, but also to be able to conserve and control

them at their sources.42

Control over water resources continued to be a primary aim for Zionists during

negotiations of mandate borders and throughout the mandate period,43 influ-

encing the proposed borders of partition under UN Resolution 181 of 1947.44

In parallel with these international efforts, Zionist organisations, such as

the Jewish National Fund, the Jewish Agency, and the Nir Company of the Histadrut Labor, moved to establish the Mekorot Water Company in 1937 in mandate Palestine. By 1943, Mekorot had prepared a detailed plan of how to

develop “all the water sources in the Land of Israel”,45 which Zionists defined to

include all of mandate Palestine.46 This vision was immediately demonstrated during the 1948 war when Mekorot was assigned a “national mission” to “lay a

water pipeline to the besieged capital” of Jerusalem.47 Following the end of the war, the company laid a second pipeline, further facilitating the annexation of

west Jerusalem.48



41 Jewish Virtual Library, Pre- State Israel: Zionist Organization Statement on Palestine at the

Paris Peace Conference, 3 February 1919.

42 Ibid.

43 Alwyn R. Rouyer, ‘Zionism and Water: Influences on Israel’s Future Water Policy during

the Pre- State Period’, 18(4), Arab Studies Quarterly (1996) 25, pages 37– 38.

44 Harald D. Fredericksen, ‘Water: Israeli Strategy, Implications for Peace and the Viability of

Palestine’, 10(4), Middle East Policy (2003) 73, page 75.

45 Mekorot Israel National Water Co. explains this on its dedicated webpage “Mekorot in

Action – “Mekorot’s” Waterway for the Development of Life and Greenery in Israel”.

46 The Jewish Agency notes this on its website, stating “Moreover, Judea and Samaria were in

the heart of the historic Land of Israel”. Jewish Agency for Israel, The Territories (Part 1), 27

April 2015.

47 See Mekorot Israel National Water Co. dedicated webpage “Mekorot in Action –

“Mekorot’s” Waterway for the Development of Life and Greenery in Israel”.

48 Ibid.

Domination, Transformation, and Annexation via Utilities 357

Issues concerning water continued to be paramount following the estab-

lishment of the State of Israel; control over water led to clashes between Israel, Jordan, and Syria, and is considered to be a driver for the 1967 war and ensuing

occupation.49

Even prior to the occupation, however, Israel was already using Palestinian

water supplies in the water- rich West Bank “by means of artesian wells drilled in Israel” constituting “approximately one- third of Israel’s annual water con-

sumption before 1967”.50 It is therefore unsurprising that immediately fol-lowing the start of the occupation, Israel issued a series of military orders

to control the abundant and key water resources in the opt.51 This included granting “full control over water resources” to the Israeli military commander (Military Order 92), prohibiting the establishment, ownership, or admin-istration of water infrastructure without an Israeli issued permit (Military Order 158), and invalidating “all prior settlement of disputes regarding water” (Military Order 291). Alongside these immediate legislative actions, through-out the course of the occupation, Israel has also used declarations of “closed military zones”, including along the bank of the Jordan River, and designated land as nature reserves or national parks, to further prohibit Palestinian access to water sources.

By 1980, Israel’s policies in the opt and the occupied Syrian Golan caused

the UN Security Council to pass resolution 465, calling for an investigation into “the reported serious depletion of natural resources, particularly the water

resources”.52 Unabated, Israel furthered its unlawful integration of the Palestinian water system into that of Israel and in 1982 granted Mekorot ownership of

Palestinian water infrastructure.53 In 1984, a UN team of experts warned that such full integration would “lead to the complete dependence of” Palestinians



49 ‘C. Historical Review of the Political Riparian Issues’ in United Nations University,

Development of the Jordan River and Basin Management (1995).

50 UN Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, Israel’s

Policy on the West Bank Water Resources, 1980. The UN report cites an article on Israeli

water policy, which explains that “one third of the pre- 1967 Israeli water consumption of

1.6 billion cubic metres originates in the rainfall over the western slopes of the West Bank

and is drawn, by drilling inside pre- 1967 Israel proper, from the same water aquifer system

that contains the water reserves for the West Bank [...]” Uri Davis, Antonia E.L. Maks,

and John Richardson, ‘Israel’s Water Policies’, 9(2) Journal of Palestine Studies (1979/ 80) 3,

page 5.

51 There are three main sources of natural fresh water in the opt: the Jordan River, the

Mountain Aquifer and the Coastal Aquifer.

52 unsc Resolution 465 (1 March 1980).

53 Al- Haq, Water for One People: Discriminatory Access and ‘Water- Apartheid’ in the Occupied

Palestinian Territory, 8 April 2013, page 17.

358 Farah and Abdallah

on Israel “and will eventually make the separation of the two very costly and

difficult”.54 This was reiterated in a Special Report to the 1989 Palestine Yearbook of International Law, which asserted that “Israel’s water policy in the Occupied Territories is a natural sequel to its broader designs of colonizing and

ultimately annexing these territories”.55

These warnings and Israel’s clear intention to annex and colonise came

with continued impunity. In the following years, the Oslo Accords, including

its establishment of the Joint Water Committee,56 followed by the Wye River Memorandum, served to deepen Israel’s control over and exploitation of water

and other resources in the opt.57 Israel further reinforced this domination via the construction of the Wall, which UN experts affirmed would annex “some

of the most important water wells in the region”58 and “most of the western

aquifer system”.59

The Wall and other Israeli methods used to appropriate water resources,

confiscate, and destroy water infrastructure, and prevent the modernisation



54 UN Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, Water

Resources of the Occupied Palestinian Territory, 1992; unsc, Report of the Security Council

Commission established under Resolution 446 (1979), s/ 14268, 25 November 1980. The

report highlights Israel’s exploitation of water supplies in both the West Bank and Gaza,

as well as in the occupied Syrian Golan.

55 ‘Special Report, Sovereignty Over Water Resources in the West Bank and Gaza Strip’, 5(1),

Palestinian Yearbook of International Law (1989) 346, page 346.

56 Palestinians stopped cooperating within the framework of the jwc for a period of time

as they were often compelled to approve water projects in Israeli settlements in order to

receive approval for their own. One report stated the jwc “institutionalized the intrin-

sically discriminatory system of Israeli control over Palestinian resources”. Amnesty

International, Troubled Water – Palestinians Denied Fair Access to Water, 2009, page 28.

57 For further analysis see unhrc, Report of the Independent International Fact- Finding

Mission to Investigate the Implications of the Israeli Settlements on the Civil, Political,

Economic, Social and Cultural Rights of the Palestinian People throughout the Occupied

Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, a/ hrc/ 22/ 63, 7 February 2013, 81– 82. See

also unhrc, Report of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, The Allocation of

Water Resources in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, a/ hrc/ 48/

43, 23 September 2021, paras 19– 21 and 26– 28.

58 UN Commission on Human Rights, Report of the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on

Human Rights, John Dugard, on the Situation of Human Rights in the Palestinian Territories

Occupied by Israel since 1967, Submitted in Accordance with Commission Resolution 1993/ 2

A, John Dugard, e/ cn.4/ 2004/ 6, 8 September 2003, para 9.

59 UN Commission on Human Rights, The Right to Food, Report by the Special Rapporteur,

Jean Ziegler, Addendum, Mission to the Occupied Palestinian Territories, John Ziegler, e/

cn.4/ 2004/ 10/ Add.2, 31 October 2003, para 51. See also icj, Legal Consequences of the

Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory (Advisory Opinion) icj Reports

136 (2004), para. 133.

Domination, Transformation, and Annexation via Utilities 359

of pipelines and water grids, resulting in significant leakages, amongst other

policies and practices, have obstructed Palestinians’ right to water,60 and have created an Israeli- imposed reality of water apartheid. The UN has recently estimated that “nearly 660,000 Palestinians have limited access to water, with 420,000 persons consuming” well below the recommendations set by the

World Health Organization.61

Mekorot has played a central role in Israel’s settlement enterprise and related

violations of Palestinian human rights, including by exploiting resources, “sell-ing back” water to Palestinians, and diverting water supplies for use in unlawful

Israeli settlements and Israel.62 This has been recognised by various UN experts

and bodies,63 as well as the UN database of businesses involved in Israeli settle-ments that have “enabled, facilitated and profited” from settlements produced

in 2020 by the UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights.64 Even



60 Israel has failed to meet its core obligations in regard to the right to water, including

failure to fulfil the elements of availability, quality, and accessibility. UN Human Rights

Committee, General Comment No 15: The Right to Water (Articles 11 and 12), e/ c.12/ 2002/ 11,

20 January 2003, para 12.

61 ohchr, Report of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, The Allocation of Water

Resources in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, a/ hrc/ 48/ 43, 23

September 2021, para 26.

62 As a result of Palestinian dependency on purchasing water from Mekorot, the Palestinian

Water Authority has even accumulated debt for such purchases. See Who Profits, Mekorot’s

Involvement in the Israeli Occupation, December 2013; UN Environmental Program Report,

State of Environment and Outlook Report for the oPt 2020. World Bank Group, Securing

Water for Development in West Bank and Gaza, 15 June 2018, page 6– 7.

63 The Special Rapporteur recognised “institutionalized Israeli violations of the Palestinian

people’s right to water […]”, including via Mekorot’s supply practices. UN Commission

on Human Rights, Report of the Special Rapporteur on Adequate Housing as a Component

of the Right to an Adequate Standard of Living, Report of visit to the occupied Palestinian

Territories, e/ cn.4/ 2003/ 5/ Add.1, 5– 10 January 2002, para 66(e). See also unhrc, Human

Rights Situation in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, with a Focus

on Access to Water and Environmental Degradation – Report of the Special Rapporteur on

the Situation of Human Rights in the Palestinian Territories Occupied Since 1967, a/ hrc/ 40/

73, Michael Lynk, 30 May 2019, paras 51– 52. See also unhrc, Report of the Independent

International Fact- finding Mission to Investigate the Implications of the Israeli Settlements

on the Civil, Political, Economic, Social and Cultural Rights of the Palestinian People through-

out the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, a/ hrc/ 22/ 63, 7 February

2013, paras 82– 84.

64 unhrc, Database of all Business Enterprises Involved in the Activities Detailed in Paragraph

96 of the Independent International Fact- Finding Mission to Investigate the Implications of

the Israeli Settlements on the Civil, Political, Economic, Social and Cultural Rights of the

Palestinian People throughout the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,

a/ hrc/ 43/ 71, 12 February 2020.

360 Farah and Abdallah

with this notoriety, Mekorot has not only remained viable, but has won lucra-

tive contracts globally, marketing itself as an expert in water systems.65



3 Electricity: Stolen Autonomy, De- development and Subjugation

Similar to the takeover of water, Zionist ambitions in Palestine were central to the establishment and control of the electricity sector. Pinhas Rutenberg,

a Russian Zionist who co- founded the Jewish terrorist group, the Haganah,66 was granted two concessions by British Mandate authorities in 1921 that led to the establishment of the Palestine Electric Company in 1923 (becoming the

Israel Electric Corporation in 1961).67 While Rutenberg’s plans were financially

supported by Zionists in various countries,68 he was met with consistent objec-tions and boycott actions by the Palestinian Arab population. For example, in 1924, various Palestinian groups in Haifa requested that the mayor end plans for work with Rutenberg. In 1929, Palestinian traders called for a boycott of the company. Shortly thereafter, the Jaffa municipalities refused to purchase

electricity from the company, with the Acre municipality following in 1932.69

Concessions for the provision of electricity in Palestine, however, were not

only in the hands of Rutenberg. The concession for providing electricity in Jerusalem was granted by Ottoman authorities to M. Euripide Mavrommatis,

a Greek national, in 1914, and renewed in 1926 by British authorities.70 Having this concession separate from those granted to Rutenberg later preserved some Palestinian autonomy over electricity where part of the concession eventually



65 See Mekorot’s webpage on “International Operations”.

66 ‘70 Russian- speaking Jews who Shaped Israel – Business and Industry’, The Jerusalem

Post, 2018.

67 api UK Parliament, ‘Palestine: The Rutenberg Concessions’, vol 57 cc 697 – 700, hl Deb 28

May 1924.

68 ‘American Organizations to Invest in Rutenberg Project’, Jewish Telegraphic Agency,

1 January 1924; ‘Raise Quarter Million Dollars in Vienna for Rutenberg Plan’, Jewish

Telegraphic Agency, 2 January 1924.

69 See ‘Arab Traders Urge Boycott Continuation at National Conference’, Jewish Telegraphic

Agency, 19 November 1929; ‘Jaffa Lights Streets with Gas; Carries out Boycott’, Jewish

Telegraphic Agency, 1 November 1929; ‘Nazareth to Buy Rutenberg Electricity; Acre

Refuses’, Jewish Telegraphic Agency, 27 September 1932.

70 Permanent Court of International Justice, Case of the Readaptation of the Mavrommatis

Jerusalem Concessions, Greece v Britain, Judgement No 10, 10 October 1927, para 12– 13.

For more information on the concession, including after 1948 see Michael Dumper,

The Politics of Jerusalem Since 1967 (Columbia University Press 1996) 153– 155. Domination, Transformation, and Annexation via Utilities 361

became the Arab- held, Jerusalem Electric Company.71 The company is now known as the Jerusalem District Electricity Company.

Following the start of the 1967 occupation, Israel moved to control and

dismantle the already existing electricity generating capacity and associated infrastructure, to ultimately make Palestinian village councils and districts

dependent on the Israeli electricity grid.72 These measures include Military Order 159, which transferred all issues related to electricity to the “Israeli

official- in- charge”,73 and Military Order 602, requiring a permit for any elec-

tricity work or generator.74

In October 1977, witnesses before a United States Senate subcommittee

meeting highlighted Israel’s control over electricity as a means to take over

territory.75 One witness, Ibrahim Dakkak, noted:

Another problem which we have faced also on the west bank was elec-

tricity and the promotion of electrical power. For instance, in Nablus,

the municipality has been working very hard to convince the authorities

that they should be allowed to import electrical generators to increase

the power used in that area. Until now the authorities have refused, and

suggested that it might be better and fit to connect the Nablus area with

the national grid in Israel and thus annex the area electrically.76

Corresponding policies related to Israeli settlements were also recognised by a report of a commission established by the UN Security Council in 1980, which noted “roads were being built and electricity and water systems installed in



71 In 1980, it was reported that shares were owned by approximately 2,000 Arabs and the

company supplied electricity to approximately 300,000 inhabitants and 131 industrial

enterprises. unsc, Report of the Security Council Commission established under Resolution

446 (1979), s/ 14268, 25 November 1980, para 6.

72 Omar Jabary Salamanca, ‘Hooked on Electricity: The Charged Political Economy of

Electrification in the Palestinian West Bank’ (‘Political Economy and Economy of the

Political’ Symposium, Brown University, 2014), pages 5– 7.

73 Israeli Military Order No 159 (1 November 1967). This Order was later amended by Israeli

Military Order No 375 and Israeli Military Order No 427 (which cancelled the prior order).

74 Israeli Military Order No 602 (1975).

75 Hearings before the Subcommittee on Immigration and Naturalization of the Committee

on the Judiciary, United States Senate, 95th Congress, First Session, The Question of West

Bank Settlements and the Treatment of Arabs in the Israeli- Occupied Territories, 17– 18

October 1977.

76 Ibid., pages 88– 89.

362 Farah and Abdallah

preparation for the establishment of further Israeli settlements, thus causing

the Arab population to despair and leave”.77

In parallel, Israel has tried to exert full control and take over the Jerusalem

Electric Company through various means since the start of the occupation.78 It has also placed countless obstacles before the company in order to impede its viability and profitability, including by having to provide electricity to rapidly

expanding settlements.79 Military Orders, however, were later issued allow-ing for the connection of a number of Israeli settlements in the West Bank to the Israeli electric supply grid, separating them from the Jerusalem Electric

Company, while advancing the de facto annexation of the areas.80 In 1988, the

company was forced to stop generating electricity.81 Although Israel has yet to fully succeed in integrating the company, it is unable to operate independent of the Israel Electric Corporation and Israeli authorities – including due to its location in annexed Jerusalem. The Jerusalem District Electricity Company mainly relies on Israel for its electric supply and has been reduced to being a

mere electricity distributor given Israel’s control over the sector.82 As of 2019,



77 unsc, Report of the Security Council Commission established under Resolution 446 (1979), S/

14268, 25 November 1980, para 37.

78 This included an attempt by the Custodian of Absentee Property to target the shares

of individuals considered ‘absentee’, and an attempt by the Municipality to impose two

board members in the company. See Meron Benvenisti, Jerusalem: The Torn City (The

University of Minnesota Press 1976) 191– 192. In 1979, the Israeli Minister of Energy and the

Military Commander of the West Bank also issued an order to the jec to sell its undertak-

ing as defined in its concession with an aim to integrate it into the Israeli system. unsc,

Report of the Security Council Commission Established under Resolution 446 (1979), S/ 14268,

25 November 1980.

79 See Michael Dumper, The Politics of Jerusalem Since 1967 (Columbia University Press

1996) 155– 159.

80 Israeli Military Order No 1216 (31 December 1987); Israeli Military Order No 1219 (12 January

1988). See also hcj 256/ 72, Electricity Company for Jerusalem District v. Minister of Defence

et al., (1972). This decision allowed for the iec to generate and supply electricity to the

Hebron municipality. See also badil, Israeli Annexation: The Case of Etzion Colonial Bloc,

July 2019, page 153.

81 Omar Jabary Salamanca, ‘Hooked on Electricity: The Charged Political Economy of

Electrification in the Palestinian West Bank’ (‘Political Economy and Economy of the

Political’ Symposium, Brown University, 2014), page 8.

82 Daoud Kuttab, ‘Jerusalem Electricity Company Crippled by Israel, Palestinian Authority’,

Al- Monitor, 16 March 2018; Palestine Economic Policy Research Institute, Background

Paper: Roundtable (7) – The Dimensions of the Electricity Sector Dilemma in Palestine

between the Public and Private Sectors – The Case of the Jerusalem Electricity Company,

2019 (in Arabic).

Domination, Transformation, and Annexation via Utilities 363

it had bought 280 million US dollars average worth of electricity in three years

from the Israel Electric Corporation.83

More broadly, the Oslo Accords exacerbated Palestinian dependency on

and subordination to Israel for electricity and other infrastructure, giving

Israel ultimate authority for the approval of any such projects and activities.84 Prior warnings were quickly reiterated in a 1994 UN Conference on Trade and Development report that highlighted Israel’s measures aimed at controlling electric power, along with other socioeconomic sectors, and making them

dependent on Israel’s infrastructure and economy.85

Palestinians can, in theory, partially resolve the electricity crisis and their

dependency on Israel through solar energy.86 However, Israel has prohibited Palestinians from constructing any alternative energy infrastructure – espe-cially in Area C, and the Jordan Valley in particular, where such projects may

be viable.87 Often citing a lack of permits, Israel regularly demolishes and confiscates already constructed solar panel installations and associated equip-

ment,88 including those donated by the international community as humani-

tarian relief.89

Israel also imposes restrictions on Palestinians to prevent them from: import-

ing energy related products and services;90 connecting to already- established electricity grids that serve Israeli settlements; and, installing electric booster



83 Ibid., page 2.

84 Ibid, page 12.

85 unctad, Public Utilities in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, unctad/ ecdc/ seu/ 2, 21

October 1994.

86 Al- Haq, The Sun Belongs to Everyone – Israeli Demolitions and Confiscations of Solar Panel

Aid Projects in Area C of the West Bank, 17 March 2018; Who Profits, Greenwashing the

Occupation: The Solar Energy Industry and the Israeli Occupation, February 2017.

87 87% of the Jordan Valley is designated as Area C. ocha, Humanitarian Fact Sheet on the

Jordan Valley and Dead Sea Area, February 2012. Area C makes up more than 60 percent of

the West Bank.

88 See for example ocha, Demolition and Seizure of Service Infrastructure in Palestinian

Communities in Area C Exacerbates Risk of Forcible Transfer, 11 October 2017; EU, Six- Month

Report on Demolitions and Confiscations of EU Funded Structures in Area C September

2016 – February 2017, 6 April 2017.

89 See for example Human Rights Watch, World Report – 2017 Events of 2016. Akiva Eldar,

‘Israel Demolishes West Bank Villages as Jewish Outposts Remains Untouched’, Haaretz,

21 February 2012.

90 Palestine Economic Policy Research Institute, Background Paper: Roundtable (7) – The

Dimensions of the Electricity Sector Dilemma in Palestine Between the Public and Private

Sectors – The Case of the Jerusalem Electricity Company, 2019 (in Arabic). 364 Farah and Abdallah

stations,91 all leading to frequent power outages.92 Further, Israel continu-ously uses its control over electricity to collectively punish Palestinians across the West Bank and the rest of the opt, including by cutting off the power to

municipalities and districts.93

Altogether, Palestinians are subjected to a “chronic electricity crisis”.94

Although a total of four power substations95 in the West Bank came under the control of the Palestinian Authority in 2020, touted by Israeli officials as being beneficial to settlements with the aim of “equalising” infrastructure between Israel and “Judea and Samaria”, Palestinian access to electricity remains

precarious.96

While Israel’s policies and practices related to electricity violate the rights of

Palestinians, and are part of a broader discriminatory, coercive environment,97 Israeli authorities not only ensure that settlements are connected, but also often reward the construction of new outposts – settlements that Israel itself considers to be illegal under its domestic law – with access to electricity and

water.98 It has further incentivised Israeli and international companies and investors to construct commercial solar fields in illegal settlements in the West



91 Al- Haq, The Sun Belongs to Everyone: Israeli Demolitions and Confiscations of Solar Panel

Aid Projects in Area C of the West Bank, 17 March 2018.

92 See for example Akram Al- Waara, ‘Palestinians Say Israel is Using Power Cuts to Apply

Pressure in the West Bank’, Middle East Eye, 9 July 2020; Nir Hasson, ‘Daily Power Outages

Hit East Jerusalem Amid Increased Demand’, Haaretz, 29 January 2020.

93 European Parliament, Background Note on Energy and Water Issues in Palestine, 2015,

page 3. See also ‘Israeli High Court Defies International Law by Sanctioning Collective

Punishment’, Palestine Monitor, 30 January 2008.

94 Who Profits, Greenwashing the Occupation: The Solar Energy Industry and the Israeli

Occupation, February 2017.

95 An electricity substation raises the generated voltage to transmission level, whereas an

electricity power plant provides large- scale electric power generation.

96 One substation was transferred in 2017 while another three were transferred in 2020. See

Jack Khoury, ‘Israel Gives Palestinian Authority Control Over Three West Bank Power

Stations’, Haaretz, 20 October 2020.

97 This includes but is not limited to: land and property confiscation, home demolitions,

movement and access restrictions, and inadequate infrastructure, with the aim of forc-

ibly transferring Palestinians. See Who Profits, Plundering the Sun – the Israeli Solar

Energy Industry and Palestinian Forced Displacement, May 2018. In 2006, the icty con-

cluded that the cutting of water, electricity and telephone services were among the

measures that resulted in the displacement of Muslim and Croats by the Serbs. icty,

Prosecutor v Momčilo Krajišnik, Trial Chamber i, Judgement, it- 00- 39- t, 27 September

2006.

98 Jacob Magid, ‘PM Orders 12 Illegal Outposts be Hooked Up to Power Grid, 8 Days before

Election’, Times of Israel, 24 February 2020.

Domination, Transformation, and Annexation via Utilities 365

Bank,99 with the electricity generated sold to the Israel Electric Corporation,

providing millions in revenue.100



4 Control and Domination via Telecommunications

Following the start of the occupation, Israel also moved to control the tele-communications sector. In August 1967, Israel issued Military Order 79, which forbade Palestinians from owning “any broadcasting equipment without per-

mission, or to broadcast on it”.101 This was amended to also include the term “communications receiver”, and later, to require licenses for using broadcast-ing or telecommunications equipment to be authorised by the Israeli Civil

Administration.102

In the decades after 1967, Israel controlled telecommunications in the opt

via these and other military orders,103 the Israeli Ministry of Communication and the then State- owned company Bezeq (which was privatised in 2005). Even though the Oslo ii Accords gave lip service to the Palestinian right to a “separate and independent” communications system, in reality, it guaran-teed Israeli control by requiring Israeli “confirmation” prior to “any digging or building regarding telecommunications and any installation of telecommuni-

cations equipment” in Area C.104 It also ensured the continued presence of Israeli companies in the West Bank, given that telecommunications services

to settlements and military outposts would continue under Israeli authority.105

As a result, telecommunications companies106 have established mobile

telephone infrastructure, including transmission stations and more than 600



99 Some of these companies include Energix Renewable Energies, JA Solar Holdings,

Clal Sun, Enerpoint Israel, SolarEdge, among numerous others. To date, there are four

fields: Kalia Solar Field, Meitarim Solar Field, Netiv Hagdud Solar Field, and Shadmot

Mehola Solar Field. See Who Profits, Greenwashing the Occupation: The Solar Energy

Industry and the Israeli Occupation, January 2017.

100 Ibid., page 10.

101 Israeli Military Order No 79 (2 August 1967).

102 Israeli Military Order No 230 (12 March 1968) and Israeli Military Order No 701 (7 March

1977). Both amending Military Order 79.

103 Israeli Military Order No 951 (24 December 1981), for example, granted the head of the

Civil Administration the right to establish a telephone network.

104 Oslo ii Accord, Annex iii, Article 36(A)(2a).

105 Ibid., Article 36(A)(2b).

106 Pelephone, Cellcom, Partner, Hot Mobile, and Golan Telecom are the five main companies

that are mobile network operators in Israel. There are also three virtual network operators

that provide mobile services through Pelephone and Partner infrastructures: Rami Levy 366 Farah and Abdallah

active Israeli cellular antennas107 across the occupied West Bank on unlawfully

appropriated, including privately owned, Palestinian land.108 This infrastruc-

ture “cover(s) well in excess of the needs” of Israeli settlements and settlers,109 and makes no distinction between Israel and the opt.

Importantly, the State of Israel and telecommunications companies are

unabashed in their partnerships. In 2019, the Israeli Minister of Communications gave explicit instructions to hot Telecommunication System Ltd. to provide

internet and telephone services and benefits to Israeli settlements.110 Further, although Bezeq had been operating in the opt for 35 years prior, in October 2020, the Israeli Communications Minister formalised Bezeq’s operations in Area C of the West Bank by awarding it a license to operate. This license allows Bezeq to install more towers and increase its network to enhance Israeli settle-

ments’ connectivity.111 Israeli telecommunications companies also contribute to the Israeli settlement economy by paying rent for land use and licensing

fees to the Israeli Civil Administration and settlement regional councils.112 In doing so, telecommunications companies thereby service, operationally and

financially, Israel’s de facto annexation.113

In parallel, the Israeli telecommunications sector exploits the Palestinian

market,114 in part due to Israel’s control over “electromagnetic and radio



Communications, 019 Telzar, and Cellact. Who Profits, Signal Strength: Occupied – The

Telecommunications Sector and the Israeli Occupation, July 2018, pages 8– 9.

107 Ibid., page 7.

108 fidh, Orange’s Dangerous Liaisons in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, May 2015, page 12.

109 The World Bank Group, Telecommunication Sector Note in the Palestinian Territories: Missed

Opportunity for Economic Development, 2 January 2016, page 31.

110 ‘Communications Minister: HOT must Service Judea and Samaria’ Arutz Sheva 7, 30 July

2019. Hezki Baruch, ‘HOT to Provide Service to Residents in Judea and Samaria’ Arutz

Sheva 7, 4 November 2019.

111 Tovah Lazaroff, ‘Bezeq Operating License for Area C Formalized After 36 Years’, The

Jerusalem Post, 18 October 2020. Dima Abumaria, ‘PA Telecoms Brace for Losses after

Bezeq gets West Bank License’, The Jerusalem Post, 27 October 2020.

112 Israeli mobile companies make monthly rent payments to settlement regional coun-

cils, ranging between 1,100 – 1,800 US dollars, including for land privately owned by

Palestinians. Amira Hass, ‘Israeli Cell Companies Paying West Bank Settlement for Use of

Private Palestinian Land’, Haaretz, 16 July 2013.

113 Al- Haq, Questions and Answers: Israel’s De Facto Annexation of Palestinian Territory, 25

May 2021.

114 “Put differently, access to the Palestinian captive market is effectively subsidizing the

installation and maintenance of telecommunications infrastructure in settlements”.

Who Profits, Signal Strength: Occupied – The Telecommunications Sector and the Israeli

Occupation, July 2018, page 8.

Domination, Transformation, and Annexation via Utilities 367

frequency spectrums”,115 and Israeli restrictions preventing the provision of services by Palestinian companies in many areas of the West Bank, including

Area C.116 Most notably, Israel’s obstruction of the Palestinian cellular compa-

nies Jawwal and Wataniya to offer 4G117 (or even 3G until 2018) to Palestinians in the opt has allowed Israeli companies to gain a competitive advantage in

the Palestinian market,118 contrary to Palestinian laws and other regulations.119 The domination of the Israeli telecommunications sector has resulted in a situation where Israel, the Occupying Power and associated corporations are

profiting at the expense of the occupied population,120 while Palestinian com-

panies and gross domestic product suffer major losses.121

Israel’s mass control of the telecommunications sector has also translated

into serious violations of Palestinian digital rights, security, privacy, and



115 Failed Architecture, Israel’s Occupation of the West Bank Extends to the Electromagnetic

Spectrum, 21 April 2021.

116 fidh, Orange’s Dangerous Liaisons in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, May 2015, page 10.

117 In late November 2021, it was reported that Israel “has tentatively agreed to permit

Palestinian cellular companies to set up fourth- generation mobile networks”. Aaron

Boxerman, ‘Israel Pledges to Finally Permit Long- Restricted Palestinian 4G Cell Service’,

Times of Israel, 23 November 2021. In March 2022, US Ambassador to Israel Tom Nides

discussed the need to prioritize Palestinian access to 4G service in order to “improve” the

economy of the West Bank. Jacob Magid, ‘US Envoy Looks to Bolster West Bank Economy

with 4G Service, Tech Offerings’, Times of Israel, 16 March 2022.

118 The World Bank has reported on the 2015 agreement allowing Palestinian operators to

introduce 3G services “about eight years after their initial request”, noting “the agreement

would still place the Palestinian operators at a competitive disadvantage, as Israeli oper-

ators have 3G and 4G capabilities and are able to attract higher value customers”. The

World Bank Group, Telecommunication Sector Note in the Palestinian Territories: Missed

Opportunity for Economic Development, 2 January 2016, page 29.

119 Who Profits, Signal Strength: Occupied – The Telecommunications Sector and the Israeli

Occupation, July 2018, pages 6– 8.

120 Some of obstacles imposed on the Palestinian telecommunications industry

include: Israel’s control of the telephone numbering plan, “dysfunctional jtc […] unau-

thorized competition by Israeli operators; Israeli restrictions to import civil and ict

material across borders especially in Gaza; difficulties to obtain permits to operate in

Area C (infrastructure deployment and maintenance); restrictions to access international

links which is only allowed through an Israeli- registered company”. The World Bank

Group, Telecommunication Sector Note in the Palestinian Territories: Missed Opportunity

for Economic Development, 2 January 2016, page 9.

121 For example, according to the World Bank, between 2013 and 2015, the total revenue

loss for Palestinian mobile operators ranged between 436 – 1,150 million US dollars

primarily due to the absence of a 3G network, which reflects “up to” 3 percent of the

Palestinian gdp. The World Bank Group, Telecommunication Sector Note in the Palestinian

Territories: Missed Opportunity for Economic Development, 2 January 2016, page 8. 368 Farah and Abdallah

freedom of expression, including access to information. This has included the provision of tools and services for the Occupying Power and its relevant appa-

ratuses to exercise mass surveillance of Palestinians.122

Like other businesses associated with Israel’s occupation, telecommunica-

tions companies have been under scrutiny for their involvement in the illegal

settlement enterprise and related violations of the rights of Palestinian.123 In 2015, the French company Orange tm, in which France owned 25,05 percent of shares at the time, was the target of advocacy campaigns by civil society due to its activities and business relationship with Partner, an Israeli telecom-munications company with antennas and other infrastructure in the opt and

occupied Syrian Golan.124 The campaigns underscored France’s obligations and Orange’s responsibility to respect international law. In response, Orange clarified at the time that it was only bound by a brand contract agreement with Partner, which had allowed Partner to operate under Orange’s name for more

than 20 years.125 Following contract negotiations,126 and continued pressure

by civil society, the brand licensing agreement was terminated.127

In the 2020 UN database of businesses involved in Israeli settlements, seven

Israeli telecommunications companies, including Bezeq, Partner, and hot, were listed for their provision of “services and utilities supporting the mainte-nance and existence of settlements” and use of natural resources, particularly

land.128



122 7amleh, Connection Interrupted: Israel’s Control of the Palestinian ICT Infrastructure and

Its Impact on Digital Rights, December 2018.

123 Business and Human Rights Resources Centre, NGO Accuses Telecommunication

Companies of being Complicit in the Israeli Occupation, 12 November 2018.

124 See Association France Palestine Solidarite, Orange Doit Cesser son Partenariat Avec

Partner, 25 January 2014; fidh, Orange’s Dangerous Liaisons in the Occupied Palestinian

Territory, May 2015. See also Who Profits’ web page on Partner Communications ( former

Orange).

125 Hayat Gazzane, ‘Polémique Autour d’un Partenariat d’Orange en Israël’, Le Figaro, 6

May 2015.

126 It should be noted that in 2014, the French Foreign Ministry issued a non- legally binding

statement warning its citizens against engaging in economic activities and investments

in Israeli settlements in the West Bank, East Jerusalem, and the occupied Syrian Golan.

European Council on Foreign Relations, EU Member State Business Advisories on Israeli

Settlements, 2 November 2016.

127 Al- Haq, Israel/ Palestine: Termination of Contract between Partner and Orange, 6

January 2016.

128 These companies included: Bezeq, the Israel Telecommunication Corp Ltd., Hot

Telecommunications Systems Ltd., hot Mobile Ltd., Cellcom Israel Ltd., Motorola

Solutions Israel Ltd, Pelephone Communications Ltd., and Partner Communications

Company Ltd.

Domination, Transformation, and Annexation via Utilities 369

5 Conclusion

As illustrated in the chapter, in violation of its duties as Occupying Power, Israel has ensured that Palestinian access to necessities, such as water, electric-ity, and telecommunications, remains obstructed and a tool of domination and

persecution.129 Israel has implemented an array of policies and practices, rang-ing from military orders to a discriminatory permit system, that are intended to obstruct full Palestinian administration of and control over their land, resources and infrastructure. These policies, part of a continuum of Zionist plans predating 1948 and later entrenched by Israel’s prolonged military occu-pation, have facilitated the physical, economic, and demographic transforma-tion of the opt in a manner that wholly defies international law. This has not only posed a direct threat to the lives of Palestinians and undermined their livelihoods and rights but has also established the opt as a captive market for utilities and other services and goods.

At the same time, Israel has ensured the discriminatory provision of water,

electricity and telecommunications, alongside other services and infrastruc-ture, enables the establishment and growth of unlawful Israeli settlements and benefits its wider population and economy. The presence and growth of settlements and their integration via utility networks, roads, and other infra-structure into Israel unmistakeably demonstrate Israel’s intent to establish permanent control and ultimately become sovereign, while ensuring that the Palestinian right to self- determination remains obstructed.

To achieve this, Israel has sought the support and financial resources of

States and private actors, including Israeli and international “charitable” asso-ciations and business enterprises. For their part, businesses have largely sup-ported Israel’s policies through their activities and relationships and reaped the financial rewards of impunity. Indeed, many of the companies discussed in this chapter – and the sectors that they work in more broadly – have been the subject of UN and civil society reports and campaigns that have under-scored their enabling and profiting from grave violations of international law,



unhrc, Database of all Business Enterprises Involved in the Activities Detailed in

Paragraph 96 of the Independent International Fact- Finding Mission to Investigate the

Implications of the Israeli Settlements on the Civil, Political, Economic, Social and Cultural

Rights of the Palestinian People throughout the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including

East Jerusalem, a/ hrc/ 43/ 71, 12 February 2020.

129 Human Rights Watch, A Threshold Crossed – Israeli Authorities and the Crimes of Apartheid

and Persecution, 27 April 2021.

370 Farah and Abdallah

including internationally recognised crimes. However, these countless warn-ings and condemnations have gone unheeded.

Instead, the annexation of Palestinian territory and its transformation has

continued unabated, as has Israel’s broader settler- colonial project premised on the transfer of Palestinians, the exploitation of their land and resources, and the subjugation of those who remain. Within this unlawful and unilateral reality and vacuum of international action, challenges to the ever- deteriorating

status quo continue.130



130 See for example calls by UN Special Rapporteurs for the examination of the legality of

Israel’s prolonged military occupation. unhrc, Report of the Special Rapporteur on the

Situation of Human Rights in the Palestinian Territories Occupied Since 1967, Richard Falk,

Richard Falk, a/ hrc/ 25/ 67, 13 January 2014, paras 51 and 81.





chapter 16


Palestinian Refugees and International Law

Thomas Hammarberg



The United Nations decided in November 1947 to divide Palestine into an inde-pendent Arab State and an independent Jewish State, and to place Jerusalem

under international administration, after the end of the British Mandate.1 At the time, however, the overwhelming majority of the population was Palestinian and they possessed most of the lands. Only 5.8 percent of the cultivated land

was owned by the Jewish population in 1947.2 Palestinian leaders immediately rejected the plan that would give more than half of the Palestine territory to Jews. The then leader of the Jewish communities, David Ben- Gurion, was for other reasons dissatisfied with the UN partition plan but noted that the ques-

tion of precise borders was undetermined.3

There had been tensions between the two societies for several years, but

now relations escalated into armed conflict. Jewish militias were better pre-pared and linked to paramilitary groups, ready to use brutal methods. As the war escalated, the Palestinians began to flee in large numbers as refugees. In the middle of May, the State of Israel was formally declared. An attempted military intervention by some Arab States failed to put an end to unilateral Israeli actions. In the meantime, attacks against Palestinian cities and villages continued and the number of refugees increased further. At the end of the hostilities, the area under Israel’s control was larger than that allocated under the UN partition plan. Jordan took control over the West Bank and Egypt took control over the Gaza Strip.

The UN appointed Swedish Count Folke Bernadotte as mediator between

the parties. He outlined that steps had to be taken to ensure that Palestinian refugees could return to their homes. He was murdered by members of one of the Jewish terror groups in September 1948. A few months thereafter, the UN General Assembly agreed to resolve “that the refugees wishing to return to their homes and live at peace with their neighbours should be permitted to do so at the earliest practicable date, and that compensation should be paid for the property of those choosing not to return and for loss of or damage to

1 unsc Resolution 181 (ii) (29 November 1947).

2 Ilan Pappe, The Ethnic Cleansing of Palestine (One World 2006) 30.

3 Ibid., pages 33– 35.



© Thomas Hammarberg, 2023 | DOI:10.1163/978900

372 Hammarberg

property”, in accordance with international law.4 To this day, Palestinians have not been allowed to exercise their right of return or receive compensation.

The consequence of this failure is the subject of this chapter. This chap-

ter seeks to address the key aspects of this serious crisis. It will explain why a majority of Palestinians fled their homes, why they have not been able to return, what their current situation is, and how the international community has reacted to their displacement. It will also delve into the right of return under international law, the actors responsible for refugees, including UN agencies, and discuss what can be done to remedy the injustice caused.



1 The Nakba Reality

What happened in 1947– 49 is known among Palestinians as the Nakba, the catastrophe. From the outset, the international community failed to fully com-prehend the reasons as to why most of the Palestinian population, around

750,000 Palestinians,5 fled their homes. More is known today, largely owing to the research by independent historians, many of them Israeli, of documents that were kept secret until the 1980s. The documents that have now been accessed shed a stark light on the events surrounding the establishment of

the State of Israel and the Palestinian exodus.6 Importantly, these documents make clear that there had been no call from either Arab or Palestinian lead-ers for Palestinians to leave their homes, as argued by Israeli representatives. Rather, the reason for the Palestinian exodus was the orchestration of system-atic and brutal attacks, even executions of Palestinians by Zionist militias.

The massacre of the village of Deir Yassin on 9 April 1948 was known early

on but academics have, since 1980, been able to uncover some additional and important details. For example, two paramilitary Zionist groups, Irgun and Lehi, in cooperation with the Haganah (the military arm of the Jewish com-munity) played a significant role in the massacre, crushing whatever limited Palestinian resistance existed with extreme violence. More than 100 villag-ers were killed in the massacre, including women, children, and the elderly.



4 unga Resolution 194 (iii) (11 December 1948).

5 The exact number of original refugees has not been totally established. The number 750,000

has been proposed by several researchers. Israeli officials have suggested lower numbers.

6 Benny Morris, The Birth of the Palestinian Refugee Problem (cup 2003); Tom Segev, 1949 The

First Israelis (Free Press 1986); Simha Flapan, The Birth of Israel, Myths and Realities (London

and Sydney, Croom Helm 1987); Ilan Pappé, The Making of the Arab- Israeli Conflict, 1947– 1951

(I.B. Taurus 2014).

Palestinian Refugees and International Law 373

Palestinian survivors were put on trucks, brought to West Jerusalem and

paraded through the streets.7

What happened in Deir Yassin was not unique. Several researchers have

documented a dizzying number of serious atrocities in villages and towns, including murders and mass expulsions. The destruction of entire Palestinian villages and towns was methodical and widespread. Ilan Pappé records the

destruction of 531 Palestinian villages,8 while Benny Morris lists 369 cases,9 and other researchers have concluded that the number of evacuated and destroyed

places is even higher.10

New information on war crimes committed in the 1940s was made public

over the course of 2021 by the Israeli newspaper Haaretz in cooperation with

the Akevot Institute.11 In one of the several incidents reported, the Irgun mili-tia executed between 80– 100 Palestinian villagers who waived a white flag

to show that they had no intention to resist.12 The Zionist militia made the Palestinian civilians dig their own grave before forcing them into it and shoot-

ing them dead.13

Palestinian villages were also emptied and destroyed during the 1967 war

that resulted in Israel’s occupation of the Palestinian territory. Aerial attacks, large scale detention of male civilians and repeated threats contributed to mass displacement during and after the days of the war. About 320,000 Palestinians

were forced to flee their homes in the Gaza Strip and West Bank.14



7 The total number of people killed is disputed. A delegation from the icrc visiting Deir

Yassin on 11 April estimated that the total number was more than 200. These observers

reported also that women had been raped. Ilan Pappe, The Ethnic Cleansing of Palestine

(One World 2006) 90– 91.

8 Ilan Pappé, The Ethnic Cleansing of Palestine (One World 2006) 30.

9 Benny Morris, The Birth of the Palestinian Refugee Problem Revisited (cup 2004).

10 Professor Susan Akram refers to information that 530 Palestinian villages were com-

pletely or partly destroyed, that homes were dynamited, crops destroyed and towns and

villages declared “closed military areas”. Naseer Aruri (ed), Palestinian Refugees: The Right

of Return (Pluto Press 2001) 180.

11 Adam Raz, ‘Classified Docs Reveal Massacres of Palestinians in ‘48 – and What Israeli

Leaders Knew’, Haaretz, 9 December 2021.

12 Nur Masalha, The Politics of Denial: Israel and the Palestinian Refugee Problem (2003 Pluto

Press); Adam Raz, ‘Classified Docs Reveal Massacres of Palestinians in ‘48 – and What

Israeli Leaders Knew’, Haaretz, 9 December 2021.

13 Ibid. This case in Meron was reported by Shmuel Mikunis who at the time was member of

the Council which was the preliminary national parliament. His report was made public

by Adam Raz through the Haaretz newspaper. The Akevot material also referred to the

executions in the village of Rein and Al- Bjur.

14 Nur Masalha discusses “The 1967 Refugee Exodus” in his book. Nur Masalha, The Politics

of Denial: Israel and the Palestinian Refugee Problem (Pluto Press 2003). 374 Hammarberg

Researchers agree that Palestinians left their homes as a consequence of

violence, expulsion, intimidation and fear. Benny Morris confirmed that:

[T] he refugee problem was caused by attacks by Jewish forces on Arab

villages and towns and by the inhabitants’ fear of such attacks, com-

pounded by, and rumors of atrocities – and by the crucial Israeli Cabinet

decision in June 1948 to bar a refugee return.15

Internal documents, now being partly made public, leave no doubt about the fact that Jewish leaders, including Ben- Gurion and subsequent ministers, knew of the violence unleashed against Palestinians and that some played a

role in it.16 The methods used to cleanse Palestine were set out explicitly in

various plans.17 Some Israeli members of the cabinet expressed shock at what was happening, some demanded that those responsible be punished, and some requested a thorough investigation. But an investigation has never been

carried out.18

1.1 The Israeli Response to Palestinian Refugees and the Nakba While Palestinians have had to struggle for the Nakba not to be forgotten, Israelis have chosen to suppress it. Shlomi Ben- Ami, diplomat and former

Foreign Minister of Israel,19 explains:

The Israelis chose to repress the memory of their war against a dispos-

sessed, autochthonous Palestinian community claiming national rights,

and preferred the ethos of the struggle against foreign and supposedly



15 Benny Morris stressed the impact of “the war, of the shelling, shooting, and bombing, and

the fears that these generated”. Further, he concluded that the flight of the Palestinians

was also due to their incompetent leadership that failed to prepare properly for the war

and left their communities leaderless. Benny Morris, ‘Revisiting the Palestinian Exodus of

1948’ in Eugene Rogan (ed), The War for Palestine. Rewriting the History of 1948 (cup 2001).

In a more recent book Morris wrote that there had been cases of some 20 massacres, ran-

dom killings of individual prisoners, killings of villagers and of farmers who had stayed

behind. Also there had been several dozen cases of rape, Benny Morris, The Birth of the

Palestinian Refugee Problem Revisited (cup 2003).

16 See for example Adam Raz, ‘Classified Docs Reveal Massacres of Palestinians in ’48 – and

What Israeli Leaders Knew’ Haaretz, 9 December 2021.

17 Ilan Pappé, The Ethnic Cleansing of Palestine (One World 2006) Chapter 3.

18 The historian Adam Raze, related to Akevot Institute, was the first to disclose information

on this government discussion.

19 Shlomo Ben- Ami is a former Israeli Foreign Minister who also took part in several negoti-

ation efforts including at Camp David ii.

Palestinian Refugees and International Law 375

superior invading Arab armies. Israel as a society oppressed the memory

of its war against the local Palestinians because it could not really come to

terms with the fact that its finest Sabras, the heroes of its war for indepen-

dence and the role models of the new nation, expelled Arabs, committed

atrocities against them and dispossessed them. This was like admitting

that the noble Jewish dream of statehood was stained forever by a major

injustice committed against the Palestinians and that the Jewish state was

born in sin. When the war was over the Palestinian problem practically

disappeared from Israeli public discourse; it was conveniently defined as

one of “refugees” or “infiltrators”. There was no Israeli- Palestinian conflict,

hardly a Palestinian plight. This was submerged into one single issue: the

Arab- Israeli conflict.20

Zionist leaders had before the war discussed how to encourage the forcible transfer of Palestinians from Palestine. Ben- Gurion believed that Zionism would not succeed in establishing a homogeneous Jewish State and fulfilling its imperative of absorbing the expected influx of Jewish immigrants if the indigenous inhabitants were allowed to remain. In February 1948, he stated that “[t] he war will give us the land. The concepts of ‘ours´ and `not ours’ are

peace concepts only, and in war they lose their whole meaning”.21

The Israeli explanation as to why so many Palestinians left their homes was,

as mentioned above, that they had been ordered to do so by leaders in Arab countries. The leaders were said to have ordered the Palestinians to get out of the way, before their armies would invade the new Israeli State. Even Shimon

Peres repeated this version in a book in 1993.22 However, it has been clearly proven that no such communication took place and that the actual position

of the Arab countries was that the Palestinians should stay where they lived.23

While the UN demanded that the refugees should be allowed to return

home, the Israeli leaders decided that they would not accept the return of

Palestinian refugees. They even adopted a special law to that effect.24 Houses



20 Text from Shlomo Ben- Ami, Scars of War Wounds of Peace: The Israel- Arab Tragedy (oup

United States 2007).

21 Aspects on the “Transfer” discussion has been analyzed by Nur Mashala, Politics of

Denial: Israel and the Palestinian Refugee Problem (Pluto Press 2003).

22 Shimon Peres, The New Middle East (Henry Holt and Co. 1993).

23 Walid Khalidi reports on the thorough investigation into what the Arab countries actually

said about Palestinians moving or staying. Walid Khalidi, ‘Why Did the Palestinians Leave,

Revisited’, 34(2) Journal of Palestine Studies (Winter 2005) 42– 54.

24 Ibid. Through the Israeli 1952 Nationality Law all Palestinian refugees were retroactively

denaturalized.

376 Hammarberg

and other properties owned by the refugees were confiscated and transferred to Israeli hands. The responsibility for the refugees was now, according to the

Israeli position, a matter fully for the Arab countries.25 Notably, on its admis-sion to the UN, Israeli representatives explained that the Palestinian refugee

problem “was not of its making”,26 and that its resolution depended on the establishment of peace and practicability. Israel’s “resolution” essentially pro-posed the resettlement of Palestinians refugees in countries other than Israel. Israel’s representative to the UN explained that:

A study of the economic, irrigation and other potentialities of the under-

populated and under- developed areas of the Arab States revealed greater

possibilities for a stable solution by the latter method than by resettle-

ment in Israel. Therefore, the Government of Israel contended that

resettlement in neighbouring areas should be considered as the main

principle of solution.27

There was no recognition that Palestinians are indigenous to Palestine and had been forcibly transferred. Furthermore, there was no acknowledgement that Palestinians are intrinsically connected to Palestine, as individuals and a collective, and to their homes, lands, and families therein. In the post- war situation there seemed to be little political space for the kind of self- criticism that had been previously voiced by Israeli ministers at a closed meeting in the

autumn of 1948 (as reported by the Akevot Institute).28

After the dispossession and displacement of Palestinians, several meth-

ods were deployed to erase the traces of Palestinian presence and history in what became the State of Israel. Across Palestine, the Jewish National Fund planted entire swathes – tens of thousands of dunums of forests, made up on



25 Nur Masalha, The Politics of Denial: Israel and the Palestinian Refugee Problem (Pluto Press

2003) 41.

26 See the study prepared for the UN Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights

of the Palestinian People in pursuance of unga Resolution 32/ 40B (2 December 1977).

UN Special Unit on Palestinian Rights, The Right of Return of the Palestinian People, 1

November 1978.

27 See the study prepared for the UN Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights

of the Palestinian People in pursuance of unga Resolution 32/ 40B (2 December 1977).

UN Special Unit on Palestinian Rights, The Right of Return of the Palestinian People, 1

November 1978.

28 Akevot Institute for Israeli- Palestinian Conflict Research. Report published in Adam Raz,

‘Classified Docs Reveal Massacres of Palestinians in ‘48 – and What Israeli Leaders Knew’,

Haaretz, 9 December 2021.

Palestinian Refugees and International Law 377

non- indigenous trees – on the remnants of Palestinian towns and villages. The State of Israel also replaced Palestinian, Arabic- named geographical locations

with Hebrew names, to engineer a Jewish connection to the land.29

Recently, in 2011, the Israeli Parliament enacted the so- called Nakba Law that

authorises the Minister of Finance to reduce State funding or support to any institution that commemorates, as a day of mourning, the Israeli Independence

Day, or the day on which the State was established.30 Palestinians often com-memorate the Nakba on that day. A petition by school children and school alumni, requesting that Israel’s Supreme Court deem the law unconstitutional,

was rejected in 2012.31

Those responsible for the unlawful killing of Palestinian civilians, destruc-

tion of civilian property, and the forcible transfer of Palestinians during the war have not been held to account. Many Israelis involved have benefitted from this impunity, with some able to climb the hierarchical ladder to occupy top positions within the State of Israel. It must be noted that no statute of limitations applies to war crimes and crimes against humanity committed between 1947 and 1948. They still await investigation and prosecution. The UN Convention on the Non- Applicability of Statutory Limitations for War Crimes and Crimes against Humanity confirms that persons that perpetrate such crimes the must be brought to justice, however long after the crime in question

occurs.32



2 The Right to Return or to Receive Compensation

The right to return to one’s homeland is an established and recognised human right in international law. Article 13(2) of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights provides unequivocally that “[e] veryone has the right to leave any coun-try, including his own, and to return to his country”. Only one day after the UN General Assembly adopted the Universal Declaration on Human Rights, it



29 Nur Masalha, The Palestine Nakba: Decolonising History, Narrating the Subaltern,

Reclaiming Memory (Zed Books 2012) Chapters 2 and 3.

30 Israel, Budget Foundations Law (Amendment No 40) (2011).

31 Israel, Budget Foundations Law (Amendment No 40) (2011). See also Adalah and

Association for Civil Rights in Israel, Adalah and ACRI: Israeli High Court Ignored the

Chilling Effect Already Caused by the ‘Nakba Law’, 5 January 2012.

32 Convention on the Non- Applicability of Statutory Limitations to War Crimes and Crimes

Against Humanity, adopted in unga Resolution 2391 (xxiii) (26 November 1968). 378 Hammarberg

voted in favour of resolution 194 (iii), which declares that Palestinians should

be permitted to return to their homes or else receive compensation.33

International human rights instruments have since affirmed the existence

of the right of return. Notably, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights provides that “[n] o one shall be arbitrarily deprived of the right to enter

his own country”.34 Specifically, the UN Human Rights Committee has clari-fied that the right to return also applies to disputed territories and territories which have undergone political change. It has stated:

The scope of ‘his own country’ is broader than the concept ‘country of

his nationality’. It is not limited to nationality in a formal sense, that is,

nationality acquired at birth or by conferral; it embraces, at the very least,

an individual who, because of his or her special ties to or claims in rela-

tion to a given country, cannot be considered to be a mere alien. This

would be the case, for example, of nationals of a country who have there

been stripped of their nationality in violation of international law, and

of individuals whose country of nationality has been incorporated in or

transferred to another national entity, whose nationality is being denied

them.35

The UN Human Rights Committee has further elaborated that the holders of the right of return are not only the original refugees and their families, but

also their descendants.36 Children born into a refugee family would accord-ingly not be deprived of the right to be treated themselves as refugees. They would thereby have the same right to live in the country their families once had to leave. Indeed, this is also the approach of the UN High Commissioner

for Refugees in relation to refugee situations in other parts of the world.37

Palestinians’ right to return to their homeland, whether inside Israel or in

the occupied Palestinian territory, finds further support in international cus-tomary law with the icrc confirming that persons displaced, voluntarily or

involuntarily, on account of a conflict, have a right to return.38 The right to

33 unga Resolution 194 (iii) (11 December 1948).

34 iccpr, Article 12(4).

35 UN Human Rights Committee, General Comment No 27: Freedom of Movement (Article 12),

ccpr/ c/ 21/ Rev.1/ Add.9, 2 November 1999, para 20.

36 UN Human Rights Committee, General Comment No 27: Freedom of Movement (Article 12),

ccpr/ c/ 21/ Rev.1/ Add.9, 2 November 1999, para 19.

37 unhcr, Protection of Refugee Children in the Middle East and North Africa, October 2016,

page 16.

38 icrc, Customary International Humanitarian Law, Volume i: Rules (cup 2010) Rule 132. Palestinian Refugees and International Law 379

return has been mirrored in several UN resolutions on the Palestine issue over

the years. UN General Assembly resolutions 194 (iii) (see Section 2.1), 3236, and 52/ 59 are informative in this regard, with the latter two resolutions explic-

itly referring to the right of Palestinians to return to their homes.39

2.1 The Relevance and Implementation of UN General Assembly

Resolution 194 (iii)

One key source of discussions about the right of return for the Palestinians has

been UN General Assembly resolution 194 (iii) from December 1948.40 It states that the UN General Assembly:

Resolves that the refugees wishing to return to their homes and live at

peace with their neighbours should be permitted to do so at the earliest

practicable date, and that compensation should be paid for the property

of those choosing not to return and for the loss of or damage to property

which, under principles of international law or in equity, should be made

good by the Governments or authorities responsible.41

This resolution has been crucial in international discussions on the issue of Palestinian refugees as it clearly confirms the right of return. It also mentions compensation for the loss of property, as well as compensation for those who choose not to return. This last point has been referred to in international peace- making efforts, as a possible opening for a solution that would not end with a massive return of Palestinian refugees to the State of Israel. However, resolution 194 (iii) has not been accepted by any Israeli government.

For some time, there was resistance also from the Palestinian side to the

resolution. The Palestine Liberation Organization feared that the text of the resolution would be interpreted as an indirect recognition of the State of Israel

and thereby undermine the basic right of return for many of the refugees.42 It was only when the plo accepted the two- state solution in 1988 that it finally

accepted resolution 194 (iii).43 In doing so, the plo implicitly recognised that



39 unga Resolutions 3236 (22 November 1974) and 52/59 (10 December 1997).

40 unga Resolution 194 (iii) (11 December 1948).

41 Ibid.

42 Thomas Hammarberg, Justice Postponed, Analytical Report on Palestinian Refugees (The

Swedish Institute of International Affairs 2018) 53.

43 Jaber Suleiman describes the gradual recognition on Resolution 194 (iii) by the plo. Jaber

Suleiman, ‘The Palestine Liberation Organization: From Right of Return to Bantustan’ in

Naseer Aruri (ed), Palestinian Refugees: The Right of Return (Pluto 2001). 380 Hammarberg

a Palestinian refugee could “return” to a Palestinian State, instead of to their home within the State of Israel. However, a constructive discussion on the implementation of resolution 194 (iii) has not followed. As explained above, the Israeli government continues to refuse to acknowledge any responsibility for the Palestinian refugee problem.

As Israeli participation is understood as necessary for the implementation

of UN General Assembly resolution 194 (iii), there have not been many con-crete preparations for how to organise the return of Palestinians or the dis-bursement of compensation. Although the United Nations Compensation Commission has conducted some preparatory work on relevant documenta-

tion, to date, no comprehensive plan has been put in place.44 This is regretta-ble, as the return or compensation to millions of Palestinians is a mammoth task of great importance. The genuine implementation of the resolution would necessitate the establishment of a special agency within the UN to secure nec-essary funding and prepare solutions, which would be relevant even to indi-vidual cases. Of course, under international law, the party responsible for the return of Palestinians and compensation is principally the wrongdoing party –

namely Israel.45



3 International Meetings to Make Solutions Possible

A serious attempt at initiating a real discussion on ways to implement UN General Assembly resolution 194 (iii) was made at the Madrid Conference, convened in 1991 and co- sponsored by the United States and the former Soviet Union. However, the Refugee Working Group set up by the conference in that process did not get the Israeli delegation to take part in any meaning-ful exchanges. Israel’s delegation insisted that Israel had no responsibility for the refugee problem and would therefore abstain from any discussion on the

issue.46

The Refugee Working Group was chaired by Canadian diplomats who in the

end delivered a Vision Paper based on consultation among the other delegates



44 Lack of support for preparing discussions on how to implement resolution 194 contrib-

uted to the closure of the UN Compensation Commission.

45 See Permanent Court of International Justice, Case Concerning the Factory at Chorzow,

Series A, No 9 (26 July 1927).

46 Thomas Hammarberg, ‘The Palestinian Refugees: After Five Decades of Betrayal – Time at

Last?’, Study Paper 16, Sweden Ministry for Foreign Affairs, Middle East and North Africa,

2000, page 31.

Palestinian Refugees and International Law 381

and their governments.47 The paper argued that the refugees must be provided

“with options from which they can make a free and informative choice”.48 This would require more clarity on the concrete substance of the real options. One aspect mentioned, relates to the “absorptive capacity” in the future West Bank

and Gaza Strip.49 Parallel to such clarifications it would be necessary to know more about the individual situations and preferences of the refugees. In other words, the paper highlights the need to start preparing a serious implementa-

tion phase in the work for the rights of the refugees.50

The refugee issue was not dealt with in substance during the 1993 Oslo nego-

tiations or as part of the Camp David process in 2000. Soon after the talks in Camp David failed, a less official attempt to negotiate was organised in Taba,

Egypt, by Israeli and Palestinian officials.51 This appeared, at first, to be a promising meeting with concrete exchanges on substance. Even UN General Assembly resolution 194 (iii) came up in the discussion, although limited

to aspects relating to compensation for the refugees.52 However, these talks ended when Ariel Sharon became the Prime Minister of Israel.

More than a decade later, a peace- making attempt was made by the US

Secretary of State, John Kerry in 2013– 2014. This initiative also failed, but Kerry made an important speech which was interpreted to reflect the position of then President Obama. He said, among other things, the following on the par-ticular issue of Palestinian refugees:

The plight of many Palestinian refugees is heartbreaking, and all agree

their needs must be addressed. As part of a comprehensive resolution,

they must be provided with compensation, their suffering must be

acknowledged, and there will need to be options and assistance in finding

permanent homes. The international community can provide significant

47 Rex Brynen, ‘Much Ado About Nothing? The Refugee Working Group and the Perils of

Multilateral Quasi- Negotiation’, 2(2) International Negotiations (November 1997).

48 Thomas Hammarberg, Justice Postponed, Analytical Report on Palestinian Refugees (The

Swedish Institute of International Affairs 2018) 59. Emphasis added.

49 Thomas Hammarberg, ‘The Palestinian Refugees: After Five Decades of Betrayal – Time at

Last?’, Study Paper 16, Sweden Ministry for Foreign Affairs, Middle East and North Africa,

2000, page 34.

50 A summary on the Refugee Working Group discussion can be found in Thomas

Hammarberg, Justice Postponed, Analytical Report on Palestinian Refugees (The Swedish

Institute of International Affairs 2018). Jaber Suleiman has included facts on the Refugee

Working Group in his contribution to Palestinian Refugees, The Right of Return.

51 Michael Lynk, ‘The Right to Restitution and Compensation in International Law’, 21(2)

Refuge: Canada’s Journal on Refugees (2003) 105.

52 Ibid., page 106.

382 Hammarberg

support and assistance, including in raising money to help ensure that

compensation and other needs of the refugees are met, and many have

expressed a willingness to contribute. But there is a general recognition

that the solution must be consistent with two states for two peoples, and

cannot affect the fundamental character of Israel.53



4 UN, unrwa and Its Responsibility to Protect

The United Nations Relief and Works Agency is a special agency set up to address Palestinian refugees and their needs. Its mandate was from the begin-

ning focused on humanitarian assistance.54 Not all Palestinian refugees can benefit from the support of unrwa. Its area of operation is limited to Jordan, Syria, Lebanon, the West Bank and Gaza Strip. A Palestine refugee (this is the

term used by unrwa, rather than Palestinian refugee)55 was decided to be any person whose “normal place of residence was Palestine during the period of 1 June 1946 to 15 May 1948 and who lost both home and means of livelihood as a

result of the 1948 conflict”.56 Those who fled for a second time because of the 1967 hostilities have been listed by unrwa and are serviced like the 1948 refu-

gees within the unrwa geographic areas.57 Palestinians from the West Bank, who fled around 1948, were considered by the Jordanian government as inter-nally displaced and have received support by the authorities in Amman. The unrwa was mandated to assist them as well, on an exceptional basis.

Although the unrwa programme is focused on providing relief and human

development, it also has a protection mandate. Its role, in this respect, is dif-ferent from that of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, which is the special authority for global implementation of international refugee law. The 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees provides that refugees

supported by other UN agencies are not covered by that UN treaty.58 In this



53 Congressional Record Volume 163, Number 3 (5 January 2017) H159.

54 Chapters 4 – 4.4 are largely based on facts presented in a book by Francesca Albenese and

Lex Takkenberg, Palestinian Refugees in International Law (oup 2020).

55 Reference to “Palestine” instead of “Palestinian” was to make clear that unrwa was man-

dated to support all refugees from Palestine, irrespective of their national/ ethnic origin.

The Agency has registered refugees from Palestine to some two dozen nationalities. The

overwhelming majority are, however, Palestinians.

56 unrwa, Frequently Asked Questions, Who Is UNRWA Mandated to Serve.

57 Ibid.

58 UN Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees, adopted in 1951. Article 1D states that

the convention does “not apply to persons who are at present receiving from organs or Palestinian Refugees and International Law 383

regard, “other UN agencies” includes the unrwa and therefore the conven-tion have been interpreted by some to mean that Palestinians registered with unrwa would have less internationally agreed rights than other refugees. This unfortunate perception is based either on a misunderstanding or a deliberate misrepresentation.

It is true that Article 1D of the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees

restricts its application to persons who are not receiving protection and assis-tance from other UN bodies. In fact, it was clear when this formulation was agreed that it did refer to unrwa. Palestinians can nevertheless fall within its scope, as is made clear by the second part of Article 1D. The second part of Article 1D provides that:

When such protection or assistance has ceased for any reason, without

the position of such persons being definitively settled in accordance with

the relevant resolutions adopted by the General Assembly of the United

Nations, these persons shall ipso facto be entitled to the benefits of this

Convention.59

The unhcr has clarified that the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees may apply to Palestinians in its official handbook:

With regard to refugees from Palestine, it will be noted that unrwa oper-

ates only in certain areas of the Middle East, and it is only there that its

protection or assistance are given. Thus, a refugee from Palestine who

finds himself outside that area does not enjoy the assistance mentioned

and may be considered for determination of his refugee status under the

criteria of the 1951 Convention. It should normally be sufficient to establish

that the circumstances which originally made him qualify for protection or

assistance from unrwa still persist and that he has neither ceased to be a

refugee under one of the cessation clauses nor is excluded from the applica-

tion of the Convention under one of the exclusion clauses.60

In conclusion, Palestinian refugees are entitled the same rights as other ref-ugees, irrespective of which UN body has the more direct relation to the



agencies of the United Nations other than the United Nations High Commissioner for

Refugees protection or assistance”.

59 UN Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees, Article 1D.

60 unrwa, Handbook and Guidelines on Procedures and Criteria for Determining Refugee

Status, December 2011.

384 Hammarberg

individual. The fact that Palestinian refugees outside the five unrwa serviced areas would have the same protection as all other refugees, speaks for such equality of treatment. Article 1D thereby has an inclusive dimension which is in line with the arguments voiced when the relevant documents were drafted

and adopted.61

4.1 The Upgrade of the unrwa Protection Programme Protection aspects for Palestinian refugees were originally to be covered by another body, the UN Conciliation Commission for Palestine, set up in December 1948 as per the decision of the General Assembly on resolution 194 (iii). The intention was that this commission would also take over tasks after

the murder of Count Bernadotte a couple of months earlier.62

The UN Conciliation Commission and unrwa worked in parallel when

unhcr was established and, at the time, it was felt that Palestinians already had at least as good legal protection as to what unhcr could offer. However, the UN Conciliation Commission was gradually undermined and then phased out, without unrwa’s mandate being clearly amended on the question of protection. This is one reason for the continued misunderstandings about the mandate of unrwa. Today, unrwa has activities on protection within its area of competence and it cooperates with unhcr to ensure “continuity of protec-

tion”.63 unhcr and unrwa have both on occasion sought to intervene with governments when Palestinian refugees’ lives and fundamental rights have

been violated, unfortunately, with limited results.64

Proposals have been made to merge unrwa’s mandate with the unhcr’s

programme. Considering the differences in expertise and working meth-ods, such a marriage would not be easy. However, it should be clarified that Palestinian refugees, whether connected to unrwa or not, should have the same protection support as all other refugees. That intention was clearly there from the beginning and should be honoured. In reality, it has been difficult for unrwa to fully integrate protection into its programme and a protection



61 Susan Akram, ‘Reinterpreting Palestinian Refugee Rights under International Law’ in

Naseer Aruri, Palestinian Refugees, The Right of Return (Pluto Press 2001).

62 For a thorough analysis of the common efforts to protect the rights of the Palestinian ref-

ugees, see Francesca Albenese and Lex Takkenberg, Palestinian Refugees in International

Law (oup 2020) I.4.

63 Guy S Goodwin and Jane McAdam, The Refugee in International Law (oup 2007) 189.

64 See Francesca Albenese and Lex Takkenberg, Palestinian Refugees in International Law

(Oxford University Press 2020).

Palestinian Refugees and International Law 385

gap remains. It is therefore imperative that UN Member States support unrwa and enable it to progress further on this aspect.

The fact that Palestinian refugees differ from most other refugees in that

they do not seek to settle in any other country – but continue to request the right to return – is no reason to deny them the benefit of international refugee rights. The recognition of protection rights for all Palestinian refugees is con-sistent with international human rights standards, which apply to all human beings. Further, the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees should be seen as applicable to Palestinian refugees even if the host country has not rati-

fied it – given its contemporary status as customary international law.65

4.2 Rights of Stateless Persons and Human Rights Standards Applied to

Palestinians

For Palestinian refugees who have no recognised citizenship, the two UN con-

ventions on statelessness are critically relevant.66 The UN Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons from 1954 contains the same formulation as the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees, that those who have pro-tection and assistance from a UN body other than unhcr are not covered. Accordingly, refugees serviced by unrwa cannot therefore benefit from the treaty. However, there are a significant number of stateless Palestinians living outside the unrwa serviced areas and in countries that are parties to the two conventions on statelessness.

The international community has so far failed to ensure that the problem

of statelessness among Palestinians is solved. Continued cooperation between unrwa and unhcr on this matter is important. Responsibility for stateless Palestinian refugees outside the unrwa domain will rest with the host coun-try. Clearly, Palestinian refugees have the same right as other refugees, to ben-efit from international human rights and international humanitarian law. For example, the rights of refugee children are protected by the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child. Even if unrwa is taking substantive responsibility for its implementation, other parts of the UN family, as well as host countries, will be expected to cooperate.

4.3 The unrwa Dilemma

The mandate of unrwa has been repeatedly renewed by the UN General Assembly. Exceptional services to refugees and people displaced by the

65 Lebanon, Syria and Jordan have not ratified the UN refugee treaties.

66 UN Convention Relating to the Status of Stateless Persons and the 1961 Convention on the

Reduction of Statelessness, adopted in 1954.

386 Hammarberg

Arab- Israeli conflict in 1967 and subsequent hostilities have been added to the programme. The mandate was extended in the autumn of 2020 for a further

three years until June 2023.67

Today, more than half a million girls and boys attend 700 unrwa schools,

with a personnel staff of 22,000.68 About 8.4 million patients visit the 143

health clinics annually and more than 3,000 are employed in this sector.69 About 900 staff members are running the relief and social services programme,

which includes providing cash in emergency situations.70 To date, more than

500,000 microloans have been awarded by the microfinance programme.71 It must be noted also, that as a UN agency, unrwa is unique in that its staff are overwhelmingly recruited from the people that it is created to support. There are around 30,000 Palestinian employed while less than 200 of the posts are

international.72

Unfortunately, funding has not kept pace with the increasing needs of ser-

vices for the growing number of refugees, resulting in a reduction of services. The average annual spending per refugee has decreased from 200 US dollars

per year in 1975, to 110 US dollars per year in 2017.73 This trend has continued. The very system of funding is problematic. The budget depends largely on vol-untary contributions from Member States and is not part of the UN assessed contribution system. Only the core international staff posts are financed from

the regular UN budget.74

The recent emergency situations in the Gaza Strip, the West Bank and Syria

have created further major capacity problems.75 The response to emergency appeals for assistance has not been sufficient. Over one million people in the West Bank and Gaza Strip have in recent times been impoverished by the con-flict, violence, and restrictions. The situation is similar for the refugees in war affected Syria. The need for food assistance, support for the reconstruction of destroyed homes, and even cash assistance, has become acute.



67 unrwa, UNRWA Requires US$ 149 Million in 2020 for Operations in Jordan, 5 February 2020.

68 ‘Palestinian Schools to Reopen – But UN Agency Warns Funding Will Run Out Within

Weeks’, Their World, 16 August 2018.

69 unrwa, What We Do, 15 March 2022.

70 unrwa, In Figures, 31 December 2020.

71 unrwa, What We Do, 15 March 2022.

72 unrwa, Working at UNRWA, 15 March 2022.

73 United Kingdom Home Office, Country Policy and Information Note Lebanon: Palestinians,

page 28.

74 This applies to some other UN humanitarian agencies as well, for instance unicef.

75 unrwa, Emergency Appeal for the Occupied Palestinian Territory, 15 March 2022. Palestinian Refugees and International Law 387

4.4 The Politics Undermining the unrwa Israeli governments have been critical of unrwa. The mere existence of this agency has been seen as an unwanted reminder of a problem created in connec-

tion with the birth of the State of Israel.76 There has also been criticism against the inclusion of descendants in the definition of a refugee. Furthermore, there has been a perception in Israel that the agency did not promote resettlement in the Arab host countries with sufficient determination – and thereby, at least indirectly, encourage - Palestinians to maintain their demand for a right to

return.77

Benjamin Netanyahu did earlier advise the US government to minimise its

funding of the agency and recommended that available resources instead be

transferred to the Jordanian government.78 Despite recommending the closure of unrwa, he has reportedly stressed that international aid be continued to

cover humanitarian needs in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.79 Key representa-tives of the Israeli Defence Forces are known to have expressed concern about the risk of new popular uprisings or other security problems in the occupied

territories if living conditions are not improved.80

The unrwa funding crisis worsened considerably during Donald Trump’s

presidency. The cuts were dramatic as the US had been the number one donor over the years. From having provided roughly 30 percent of the overall funding, it ended up paying nothing. Both Trump and Netanyahu declared that unrwa

should be dismantled and closed.81 They also pressured other governments to support this position. In response some other governments did in fact increase

their contributions.82 However, the financial crisis of unrwa is still acute.

In recent years unrwa has had to face serious disasters. The military oper-

ation in the Gaza Strip in 2014 and 2021 further burdened unrwa. Four years after the 2014 offensive against the Gaza Strip, the agency reported that thou-

sands of Palestinian refugee families remained displaced.83 More than 50,000



76 ‘UN agency for Palestinian Refugees Faces Funding Crisis’, Aljazeera, 30 November 2021.

77 Ibid.

78 Barak Ravid, ‘Netanyahu Wants to Transfer Part of unrwa Funding to Jordan’, Axios, 8

March 2018.

79 Ibid.

80 Thomas Hammarberg, Justice Postponed, Analytical Report on Palestinian Refugees (The

Swedish Institute of International Affairs 2018) 35.

81 Hady Amr, ‘In one move, Trump Eliminated US Funding for unrwa and the US Role as

Mideast Peacemaker’, Brookings, 7 September 2018.

82 Norway Ministry of Foreign Affairs, ‘Norway Increases Support for UNRWA’, 16

November 2021.

83 unrwa, Occupied Palestinian Territory Emergency Appeal, 2018. 388 Hammarberg

homes were still not repaired.84 Several of them were in ruins also when the 2021 attacks started. The continued closure has caused increased poverty and

added to the high rate of unemployment.85 More than one million Palestinian

refugees are dependent on unrwa for emergency food assistance.86

The war in Syria has re- victimised the Palestinian refugee community. In

spite of the continued war, unrwa has managed to provide life support to the

more than 400,000 remaining Palestinians registered as refugees.87 More than 50,000 Palestinian refugees in Syria have sought to escape the hostilities by fleeing to Lebanon or Jordan – where their acute situation has required mas-

sive humanitarian assistance in order to prevent further agony.88 Among the most vulnerable are the many families in which women are single parents. It falls largely on them to protect the children and ensure that they can access the schooling options available.

Despite all the problems, unrwa has run crucial programmes to care for the

refugees, many of them in camps. Today, unrwa is a lifeline for the majority in the suffering people in Gaza but important as well on the West Bank and for the refugees in Lebanon, Syria and Jordan. A premature closure of unrwa would be a serious and dangerous mistake. The programmes of the agency are essential for the more than five million humans who benefit from its services. A decision to close or scale down these programmes would, almost certainly, result in a serious political crisis and even violent unrest.



5 New Framework for Resolution of the Humanitarian Crisis

As a matter of immediate urgency, the financial crisis imposed on unrwa has to be resolved. The gaps in the current budgets must be filled. Steps should be taken to ensure a more stable and predictable system of funding its pro-grammes. unrwa should be kept going until a just and lasting solution to the demands and needs of the refugees is in place.

The situation for the refugees in the occupied Palestinian territory is very

precarious, particularly in the Gaza Strip. Real efforts must be made to resolve the urgent humanitarian needs without delay. It should be understood that the



84 Thomas Hammarberg, Justice Postponed, Analytical Report on Palestinian Refugees (The

Swedish Institute of International Affairs 2018) 36.

85 Ibid.

86 Ibid.

87 Ibid.

88 unrwa, Where We Work, 15 March 2022.

Palestinian Refugees and International Law 389

occupation in the West Bank and the blockade against the Gaza Strip are major root causes underpinning these human conditions. Palestinian refugees flee-ing from Syria to other countries have also suffered terribly. They should not be treated any less than other refugees from the war. They have the right to the same protection based on international standards of refugee rights, including the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and its 1967 protocol.

There is a notion amongst officials in some of the host countries, but also

to some extent in the refugee communities, that when demanding the right to return home, they should avoid being integrated into the society where they now live. This notion has been particularly prominent in Lebanon and has complicated daily life for the Palestinians there. Owing to this, Palestinians do not have the same rights as other refugees to seek employment, higher educa-tion, or medical treatment. This is a violation of their right to the same oppor-tunities and services as other groups of refugees.

It is important to build upon the spirit and recommendations of the New York

Declaration for Refugees and Migrants, which was adopted in September 2016, by the total majority of 197 UN Member States. That declaration, reaffirms the right to leave ones country and to return to it, commits to promote human rights and the rule of law, and recognises that, “armed conflict, persecution and violence, including terrorism, are among the factors which give rise to large refugee movements” and that, “the root causes of such crisis situations

must be addressed”.89 It also reaffirms, that, “international refugee law, interna-tional human rights law and international humanitarian law provide the legal

framework to strengthen the protection of refugees”.90

This declaration and two detailed follow- up documents are highly relevant

to the efforts to establish just and durable solutions for the Palestinian refu-gees. The broad support by UN Member States for the New York Declaration ought to be seen as a call for genuine efforts to break the unfortunate deadlock. There is particularly, a need to ensure that new initiatives are based on interna-tional law and human rights.

5.1 Breaking the Political Deadlock The work by historians and other researchers has been important to establish the facts about what really happened in 1948 and 1967 to the Palestinian peo-ple. The documents they were able to study, analyse and make public, have become essential in establishing the truth. However, not all documents are

89 New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants, September 2016, para 64, unga resolu-

tion 71/ 1 (16 September 2016).

90 Ibid., para 66.

390 Hammarberg

available; several Israeli documents remain classified, and Israel has destroyed

and looted the Palestinian archives and documentation centres.91 In any case, it is not likely that these “missing documents” would undermine the detailed and extensive picture that so far has been painted of the Nakba.

That picture provides that Palestinians are victims of the most serious

human rights violations, including the execution and rape of civilians. It is also clear that no real legal action has been taken against those responsible. Moreover, it has been convincingly shown that Palestinians fled their homes because of the violence that engulfed them and the region. Israel’s denial of the Nakba, as well as its role and the role of its founding fathers, in the delib-erate mass- displacement and dispossession of Palestinians evades the truth of the facts since uncovered.

With Israel “hardly [recognising] a Palestinian plight”,92 and the interna-

tional community’s lackluster efforts at implementing decisions taken to sup-port their rights, the Palestinians have been left to suffer in refugee camps or compelled to become nationals of other States. Their own leaders have also not been effective in presenting the Palestinian case.

Today, close to 75 years after the decisive 1948 developments and all the

changes which have taken place ever since, what can really be done for genuine justice? The passing of time means that none of the current leaders in Israel has any personal, individual, responsibility for what happened in 1948. Like their predecessors, they have stated that UN General Assembly resolution 194 (iii) is impossible to implement as it would allow several million Palestinians to move to Israel, including many who have never been in the country. A related argument is, of course, that Israel now is dramatically different from what it was when the refugees fled. Many of their original homes have been destroyed.

These arguments might be seen as more convincing with the passing

of time. However, it is clear that time does not heal this wound. It is crucial that the refugee tragedy be addressed, no matter the time- lapse. Ignoring the injustice would be a serious mistake; it will prolong the political tension it has caused and undermine any effort to establish peaceful relations.

Critically, UN General Assembly resolution 194 (iii) will not be imple-

mented without the decisive intervention of the international community. Notwithstanding, Israel’s position has consistently been one of total denial.



91 See Nur Masalha, The Palestine Nakba: Decolonising History, Narrating the Subaltern,

Reclaiming Memory (Zed Books 2012) Chapter 4.

92 Quote from Shlomo Ben- Ami text in this chapter.

Palestinian Refugees and International Law 391

International peace negotiations, when tried, have referred the refugee issue to a “final status” discussion, which has not taken place. Meanwhile, Israel’s pol-icy of entrenched control over the opt and its transfer of settlers into the West Bank have further limited the actual physical space available for Palestinians wishing to return to a liberated Palestinian State. The situation of Palestinian refugees from 1967 is linked to the unfolding occupation of the Palestinian ter-ritory, which saw many Palestinians being internally displaced. For example, Palestinians living in Sheikh Jarrah are refugees from 1948, who are now at risk

of being expelled once more.93

The UN should be asked to organise the necessary steps towards a fair solu-

tion for the refugees. The concrete options for them will have to be defined and their precise wishes solicited. Financial resources will be needed to cover compensation. However, the stalemate so far has prevented the collection of such necessary knowledge. While economic compensation will of course be important, the point is that the process gets started and and that there be a genuine examination of what is wanted and what is possible.

Except for the preliminary exchange in Taba twenty- two years ago, there has

been no real attempt in this direction. The argument that implementation of UN General Assembly resolution 194 (iii) would amount to suicide for Israel misses a crucial point. The mere discussion on what can be done to address the refugee problem is essential by itself.

An Israeli statement of regret would change a lot. My personal impression is

that what many of the refugees are seeking is a clear recognition that they, and their families, have been mistreated. If Israel offers a genuine acknowledge-ment of responsibility, takes ownership, and expresses remorse then meaning-ful solutions may be possible. But there are of course many obstacles, not least because of the current occupation of the Palestinian territory.

It is important that the UN plays a key role in this process. The UN would

depend heavily on support from the Member States in doing so. Actions on the refugee issue need to relate to other steps to ensure a two- state solution. The settlement activities on the West Bank will have to be stopped and the blockade of Gaza Strip must be lifted. At the same time, active and determined involvement by the international community is necessary.



93 unrwa, Statement of the Humanitarian Country Team on the Imminent Eviction of the

Salem Family in Sheikh Jarrah in East Jerusalem, 20 February 2022. 392 Hammarberg

6 Conclusion

That Palestinians have a right to return and compensation is supported by UN decisions and international law. Recognition of this right by the collective inter-national community has not been withdrawn and remains valid. Solutions for the Palestinian refugees have been proposed ever since 1948 but all efforts to protect their basic human rights have failed or been ignored. A major obstacle has been Israel’s Nakba denial and the role that it played in ridding historic Palestine of Palestinians. It is most unlikely that there will be any solution to this serious injustice until that denial is overcome.

This is exacerbated by Israel’s occupation and settlement policy in the West

Bank, which undercuts any potential for Palestinians to return to the opt or leave the camps in the opt to return to their homes in the State of Israel. It has become clear that no real progress will be made without the direct and deci-sive involvement by the international community. Almost 75 years have now passed since the first wave of dispossessions and displacement of Palestinians. Sadly, the passing of time has not made this injustice disappear. The Nakba never ended for the refugees as well as other Palestinians. Continued failure to address this gross violation will similarly undermine future peace efforts in the region. And the impotence of the international human rights system will be further exposed by its negative consequences.



Bibliography



Acheraïou, Amar, Questioning Hybridity, Postcolonialism and Globalization (Palgrave

Macmillan 2011).

Albenese, Francesca and Takkenberg, Lex, Palestinian Refugees in International Law

(Oxford University Press 2020).

Ambos, Kai (ed), Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court: Article- by- Article

Commentary (Beck/ Hart 2022).

Anghie, Antony, Imperialism, Sovereignty and the Making of International Law

(Cambridge University Press 2004).

Arai- Takahashi, Yutaka, The Law of Occupation, Continuity and Change of Inter-

national Humanitarian Law, and its Interaction with International Human Rights

Law (Martinus Nijhoff 2009).

Arnold, Roberta and Quenivet, Noelle (eds), International Humanitarian Law and

Human Rights Law: Towards a Merger in International Law (Nijhoff 2008).

Aruri, Naseer (ed), Palestinian Refugees: The Right of Return (Pluto Press 2001). Bederman, David J, ‘International Law in the Ancient World’ in David Armstrong (ed),

Routledge Handbook of International Law (Routledge 2009).

Ben- Naftali, Orna (ed), International Humanitarian Law and International Human

Rights Law (Oxford University Press 2011).

Ben- Naftali, Orna; Sfard, Michael and Viterbo, Hedi, The ABC of the OPT: A Legal

Lexicon of the Israeli Control Over the Occupied Palestinian Territory (Cambridge

University Press 2018).

Benvenisti, Eyal, The International Law of Occupation (Oxford University Press 2012). Benvenisti, Eyal, The International Law of Occupation (Princeton University

Press 1993).

Benvenisti, Meron, ‘Jerusalem: The Torn City’ (The University of Minnesota Press 1976). Boisson de Chazournes, Laurence, Kohen, Marcelo (eds), International Law and

the Quest for its Implementation, Liber Amicorum Vera Gowlland– Debbas (Brill

Publishers 2010).

Brownlie, Ian, Principles of Public International Law (Oxford University Press 2003). Cameron, Lindsey and Chetail, Vincent, Privatizing War: Private Military and Security

Companies under Public International Law (Cambridge University Press 2013).

Cassese, Antonio, International Law (Oxford University Press 2005). Cassese, Antonio, Self- Determination of Peoples: A Legal Reappraisal (Cambridge

University Press 1995).

Chesterman, Simon, From Mercenaries to Market: The Rise and Regulation of Private

Military Companies (Oxford University Press 2009).

394 Bibliography

Clapham, Andrew, Human Rights Obligations of Non- State Actors (Oxford University

Press 2006).

Clapham, Andrew; Gaeta, Paola and Sassoli, Marco (eds), The 1949 Geneva Conventions-

A Commentary (Oxford University Press 2015).

Cohen, Stuart A, Routledge Handbook on Israeli Security (Taylor and Francis 2018). Crawford and Koskenniemi (eds), The Cambridge Companion to International Law

(Cambridge University Press 2012).

Crawford, James (ed), Brownlie’s Principles of Public International Law (Oxford

University Press 2019).

Cryer, Robert, An Introduction to International Criminal Law and Procedure

(Cambridge University Press 2014).

Dinstein, Yoram, The International Law of Belligerent Occupation (Cambridge

University Press 2009).

Dinstein, Yoram, War, Aggression and Self- Defence (Cambridge University Press 2011). Doria, José; Gasser, Hans- Peter and Bassiouni, Cherif M, The Legal Regime of the

International Criminal Court: Essays in Honour of Professor Igor Blishchenko

(Martinus Nijhoff Publishers 2009).

Dugard, John, Confronting Apartheid, A Personal History of South Africa, Namibia and

Palestine (Jacana 2018).

Dugard, John, du Plessis, Max et al., Dugard’s International Law: A South African

Perspective (Juta 2018).

Dumper, Michael, The Politics of Jerusalem Since 1967, Columbia University Press

(1996).

Edelstein, David M, Occupational Hazards: Success and Failure in Military Occupation

(Cornell University Press 2008).

Erakat, Noura, Justice for Some: Law and the Question of Palestine (Stanford University

Press 2019).

Falk, Richard; Stevens, Jacqueline and Rajagopal, Balakrishnan (eds), International

Law and the Third World: Reshaping Justice (Routledge 2008).

Feilchenfeld, Ernst, The International Economic Law of Belligerent Occupation

(Carnegie Endowment for International Peace 1942).

Feldman, Keith, A Shadow over Palestine: The Imperial Life of Race in America

(University of Minnesota Press 2015).

Finnin, Sarah, Elements of Accessorial Modes of Liability: Article 25(3)(b) and (c) of

the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (Martinus Nijhoff 2012).

Freire, Paulo, Pedagogy of the Oppressed (Continuum New York 1970). Goodwin, Guy S and McAdam, Jane, The Refugee in International Law (Oxford

University Press 2007).

Gray, Christine D, International Law and the Use of Force (Oxford University

Press 2000).

Bibliography 395

Gray, Christine, International Law and the Use of Force (Oxford University Press 2008). Greenspan, Morris, The Modern Law of Land Warfare (University of California

Press 1959).

Gross, Aeyal, The Writing on the Wall: Rethinking the International Law of Occupation

(Cambridge University Press 2017).

Hajjar, Lisa, Courting Conflict – The Israeli Military Court System in the West Bank and

Gaza (University of California Press 2005).

Hammarberg, Thomas, Justice Postponed, Analytical Report on Palestinian Refugees

(The Swedish Institute of International Affairs 2018).

icrc, Commentary on the First Geneva Convention: Convention (I) for the Ameliora-

tion of the Condition of the Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field

(Cambridge University Press 2016).

Jennings, Robert and Watts, Arthur (eds), Oppenheim’s International Law: Volume 1

Peace (Longmans 1992).

Keane, David and McDermott, Yvonne (eds), The Challenge of Human Rights: Past,

Present and Future (Edward Elgar 2012).

Koskenniemi, Martti, From Apology to Utopia: The Structure of International Legal

Argument (Cambridge University Press 2005).

Koskenniemi, Martti, The Gentle Civilizer of Nations: The Rise and Fall of International

Law 1870– 1960 (Cambridge University Press 2001).

Koskenniemi, Martti, The Politics of International Law (Hart Publishing 2009). Kretzmer, David and Ronen, Yaël, The Occupation of Justice, The Supreme Court of

Israel and the Occupied Territories (Oxford University Press 2021).

Kretzmer, David, The Occupation of Justice: The Supreme Court of Israel and the

Occupied Territories (New York Press 2002).

Leibowitz, Yeshayahu, Human Values and the Jewish State (Harvard University

Press 1992).

Lever, Shir, The Privatisation of Israeli Security (Pluto Press 2017). Lewin, Kurt, Field Theory in Social Science: Selected Theoretical Papers (Harper and

Row 1951).

M, Weller, Escaping the Self- Determination Trap (Martinus Nijhoff 2008). Masalha, Nur, The Palestine Nakba: Decolonising History, Narrating the Subaltern,

Reclaiming Memory (Zed Books 2012).

Masalha, Nur, The Politics of Denial: Israel and the Palestinian Refugee Problem (2003,

Pluto Press).

Masalha, Nur, The Zionist Bible: Biblical Precedent, Colonialism and the Erasure of

Memory (Routledge 2014).

Masri, Mazen, The Dynamics of Exclusionary Constitutionalism: Israel as a Jewish and

Democratic State (Hart 2017).

396 Bibliography

McAuliffe, Padraig, Transformative Transitional Justice and the Malleability of Post-

conflict States (Edward Elgar Publishing 2017).

Morris, Benny, The Birth of the Palestinian Refugee Problem Revisited (Cambridge

University Press 2004).

Moyo, Khanyisela, Postcolonial Transitional Justice: Zimbabwe and Beyond

(Routledge 2019).

Mujezinović Larsen, Kjetil, The Human Rights Treaty Obligations of Peacekeepers

(Cambridge University Press 2012).

Mulrine, M Barbara, The Price of Honor (Fairleigh Dickinson University Press 2011). Mulrine, Barbara M, The Price of Honor (Fairleigh Dickinson University Press, 2011). Nollkaemper, Andre; Reinisch, August and Janik Ralph, International Law in Domestic

Courts: A Casebook (Oxford University Press 2018).

O’Keefe, Roger, The Protection of Cultural Property in Armed Conflict (Cambridge

University Press 2006).

Orford, Anne and Hoffmann, Florian (eds), The Oxford Handbook of the Theory of

International Law (Oxford University Press 2016).

Pappe, Ilan, The Ethnic Cleansing of Palestine (One World 2006). Playfair, Emma (ed), International Law and the Administration of Occupied

Territories: Two Decades of Israeli Occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip

(Oxford: Clarendon Press 1992).

Quigley, John, The Six- Day War and Israeli Self- Defense: Questioning the Legal Basis

for Preventive War (Cambridge University Press 2013).

Quigley, John, The Statehood of Palestine: International Law in The Middle East

Conflict (Cambridge University Press 2010).

Ragazzi, Maurizio, Responsibility of International Organizations (Martinus Nijhoff

2013).

Reed, Alan and Bohlander, Michael (eds), Participation in Crime: Domestic and

Comparative Perspectives (Routledge 2013).

Reynolds, John, Empire, Emergency and International Law (Cambridge University

Press 2018).

Rouhana, Nadim and Huneidi, Sahar (eds.), Israel and Its Palestinian Citizens: Ethnic

Privilege and Equal Citizenship (Cambridge University Press 2017).

Said, Edward W, The Question of Palestine (Vintage 1979). Sayegh, Fayez, Zionist Colonialism in Palestine (plo Research Center 1965). Schabas, William, The International Criminal Court: A Commentary on the Rome

Statute (Oxford University Press 2010).

Segev, Tom, 1967: Israel, the War, and the Year that Transformed the Middle East

(Jessica Cohen Metropolitan Books 2005).

Shalhoub- Kevorkian, Nadera, Security Theology, Surveillance and the Politics of Fear

(Cambridge University Press 2015).

Bibliography 397

Shapiro, Martin and Stone, Alec, On Law, Politics and Judicialization (Oxford University

Press 2002).

Shehadeh, Raja, Occupier’s Law (Institute for Palestine Studies 1988). Stahn, Carsten (ed), The Law and Practice of the International Criminal Court (Oxford

University Press 2015).

Stewart, James G, Corporate War Crimes: Prosecuting the Pillage of Natural Resources

(Open Society Justice Initiative 2011).

Stone, Julius, Legal Controls of International Conflict (Stevens and Sons Ltd 1954). Thornberry, Patrick, The International Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of

Racial Discrimination: A Commentary (Oxford University Press 2016).

Tilley, Virginia (ed), Beyond Occupation: Apartheid, Colonialism and International

Law in the Occupied Palestinian Territories (Pluto 2012).

Von Glahn, Gerhard, The Occupation of Enemy Territory: A Commentary on the Law

and Practice of Belligerent Occupation (University of Minnesota Press 1957).

Welchman, Lynn, Al- Haq: A Global History of the First Palestinian Human Rights

Organization (University of California Press 2021).

Werbner, Pnina and Modood, Tariq (eds), Debating Cultural Hybridity: Multicultural

Identities and the Politics of Anti- Racism (Zed Books 2015).

Winstanley, Asa and Barat, Frank (eds), Corporate Complicity in Israel’s Occupation:

Evidence from the London Session of the Russell Tribunal on Palestine (Pluto Press

2011).



Index

Abu Aqley, Shireen 4 Ben- Ami, Shlomo 374– 375

Abu El- Haj, Nadia 105 Ben- Gurion, David 26, 114, 371, 374, 375

accountability 142, 158 Ben Naftali, Orna 38

corporate 290 Benisho, Netanel 165

individual 56, 290 Bensouda, Fatou 308

acquisition 29 Bentov, Mordecai 29

Adalah 112 Benvenisti, Eyal 141– 142, 261, 274, 312

Addameer 107, 287 Bernadotte, Count Folk 371

aggression 26– 28, 44– 46 Bhabha, Homi 150

crime of 27, 202– 203 Birzeit Institute of Law 147

definition of 41– 42 Bishara, Suhad 117, 118

Agreed Document on Movement and Access Britain

(2005) 75 pressure aimed at Zionist militias 27

aiding and abetting 302– 305 Brown, George 16

Akevot Institute 373, 376 B’Tselem 106, 107, 131, 278, 287, 292

Al- Fattah al- Sharif, Abed 268

Al- Haq 107, 109– 113, 127, 152– 153, 286 Camp David negotiations (2000) 30, 381

Al Mezan 267, 286– 287 China

Al Risheq, Osama 155 in UN Security Council 17

Ambos, Kai 257 climate change vulnerability 176– 196

Amit, Meir 22 protection in international law 191– 195

Amnesty International 106, 108, 227, 287 Cohen, Felix 80, 81

Anghie, Antony 59 colonialism 133– 158

annexation 27, 34, 36, 40, 370 Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,

de facto 40, 41, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or

207, 216, 366 Punishment (1984) 170, 200

de jure 40, 41, 48, 68, 207, 216 Convention on the Non- Applicability of

of Jerusalem 203– 204, 207, 219 Statu tory Limitations to War Crimes

of territory by force 225 and Crimes Against Humanity

apartheid 57, 59, 104– 132, 208– 210 (1968) 123, 377

international law’s definitions and Convention on the Rights of the Child

prohibition 106, 122– 131, 226– 227 (1989) 200

internationally wrongful act 123 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees

Arab- Israeli conflict 375 (1951) 382, 385, 389

Arai- Takahashi, Yutaka 141 Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees

arbitrary imprisonment 294 (1967) 389

armistice agreements 15 Convention relating to the Status of Stateless

Azaria, Elor 268 Persons (1954) 385

crime of pillage 191, 225, 310– 329

Bachelet, Michelle 1 See also systematic economic exploitation

Badil 111, 112 of occupied territory

Resource Center for Palestinian Residency Crimea and Sevastopol 245, 246

and Refugee Rights 145 crimes against humanity 204– 206, 208

Barak, Ehud 30 customary international law 33, 47, 50, 53,

Begin, Menachem 28, 57 60, 200, 208, 378, 385 Index 399

Cyprus, Republic of 243, 244 EU- plo Association Agreement

(1997) 231

Dakkak, Ibrahim 361 European Citizens’ Initiative

Declaration of Principles on Interim Self- (eci) 246– 251

Government (1993) 337 European External Action Service 231

see also United Nations - Declaration export of illegal settlement goods 231

Deir Yassin massacre (9 April Member States Market Surveillance

1948)  372– 373 Authorities 236

Diakona 106 regulating trade with illegal

Diamond, Eitan 153– 154 settlements 223– 252

Diaspora Jewry 116 Treaty on the Functioning of the

Don’t Buy into Occupation coalition 312 European Union (tfeu) (1957) 237–

duties of non- recognition and non- 240, 242

assistance 227– 230, 237 Evron, Ephraim 21

Dugard, John 59, 119, 145, 226

Falk, Richard 143, 144

Eban, Abba 19– 21, 23, 24, 28 Fatah- Hamas clash 84

Egypt  Feilchenfeld, Ernst 318

in UN Security Council 18, 23 Freire, Paolo 66

possible invasion of Israel 19– 21, 28 France

Eisenhower, Dwight 22 in UN Security Council 17

electricity, provision of 360– 365

cutting of power and outages 363– 364 G4S (global security firm) 289– 309

environmental harm.  See climate change Gathii, James Thuo 62

vulnerability Gaza Freedom Flotilla 73, 75, 76, 94

Epstein, Eliahu 26 Gaza Strip 25, 27, 31, 69– 103

Eshkol, Levi 22, 23, 28 addressed by Israeli High Court of

Ethiopia Eritrea Claim Commission on Justice 85– 93

occupation 81, 82, 84 closure 72– 74

European Court of Human Rights control over land crossings 74, 88, 91

(ECtHR) 270, 274, 275 de facto government of Hamas 74

on adequate investigations 275 determination of the status of 93– 102

on ‘boots on the ground’ 102 disengagement plan and decree 69– 70

on protection of individual human education 91– 92

beings 345 food insecurity 96, 100, 101 European Court of Justice  functional approach to legal

on recognition of Western Sahara 234 status 80– 84

on refusal to register measure proposed by Israeli Military Commander in 90

eci 248– 251 ‘Naval Blockade’ 75– 76, 94, 95, 96

European Union  obligations of State of Israel in 86, 87, 88

Common Commercial Policy (ccp) 237, restriction of goods and people 72– 74

238, 239, 249 sui generis 102, 193

Common Foreign and Security Policy supply of electricity by Israel 81,

(cfsp) 229, 237– 241, 244, 249 86, 87, 89

ec- Israel Association Agreement territorial waters 95

(1995) 235, 236 Geneva Convention (iii) relative to the

EU- Morocco Association Agreement Treatment of Prisoners of War (1949)

(2000) 233 (Third Geneva Convention) 89, 165 400 Index

Geneva Convention (iv) relative to the International Convention for the Elimination

Protection of Civilian Persons in of All Forms of Racial Discrimination

Time of War (1949)(Fourth Geneva (1965)(icerd) 122, 125, 128, 200, 208

Convention) 33– 35, 57, 64, 79, 86, 93, International Convention on the Suppression

97, 98, 142– 144, 162, 165, 166, 168, 169, and Punishment of the Crime of

172, 173, 181– 182, 200, 217, 220, 224, 262, Apartheid (1973) 109, 110, 123, 226

279, 281, 283, 315, 327, 328, 344, 346, 350, mandatory establishment of an ad hoc

352, 354 Conciliation Commission 129, 210

High Contracting Party 344– 345 International Court of Justice (icj) 33, 34,

Protocol Additional to the Geneva 60, 61, 90, 123, 192, 199, 200, 203, 207,

Conventions of 12 August 1949, and 217, 218, 225

relating to the Protection of Victims on applicability of human rights

of International Armed Conflicts instruments 144

(Protocol i) (1977)(Additional Protocol on ergaomnes 345

i) 33, 35, 86, 97, 123, 191– 192, 226, on jus cogens 341

326, 350 reference to ‘civilized nations’ in

Great March of Return in the Gaza Strip Statute 55

(2018) 4, 74, 101, 205, 206, 267, International Covenant on Civil and Political

275, 280 Rights (1966) 173, 200, 378

Gross, Aeyal 38, 144 International Covenant on Economic, Social

and Cultural Rights (1966) 200, 351

Haaretz newspaper 373 International Criminal Court 55, 56, 61, 67,

Haganah 360, 372 113, 253– 258

Hague Convention (iv) Respecting the Laws and Israel 256– 259

and Customs of War on Land and its and Oslo Accords 330– 347

Annex: Regulations Concerning Laws annual reports Prosecutor 280

and Customs of War on Land (1907) crime of apartheid 129, 130, 208, 286, 294

(Hague Regulations) 33, 34, 37, 38, crime of persecution 286

57– 58, 64, 79, 83– 84, 93, 142– 144, 164, crime of pillage 191, 280, 321– 327, 352

169, 181, 314– 316, 323, 325– 327, 352 dolusspecialis 314

mixed public property 317– 318 crime of deportation and

moveable property 316– 317 transfer 283, 284

Hajjar, Lisa 113 crime of torture and other inhumane

Hamas 74, 75, 91 acts 285, 286, 293, 294

Harel, Dan 69 denial of fair trial rights 293

hcj.  See Israel High Court of Justice jurisdiction 334– 337, 343– 344

Holy City of Jerusalem 2 nemo dat quod non habet 335– 337

Human Rights Watch 106, 107, 108, 121, law and policy 289– 309

131, 147 Rome Statute (1998) 41, 42, 123, 191, 202,

hybridity 149– 150 204– 205, 224, 226, 227, 354

crimes against humanity 294

ihl.  See international humanitarian crimes of war 346

law crimes relevant to

immediacy, necessity and occupation 279– 287

proportionality 45– 46, 50, 95 detention of children 293

International Committee of the Red Cross deferral requests 256

(icrc) 61, 66, 200, 353– 354, 378 individual criminal

on investigations 275– 277 responsibility 290, 301– 302 Index 401

International Criminal Court (cont.) Draft articles on Prevention and

mens rea 303– 304 Punishment of Crimes Against

territorial jurisdiction of, in the West Humanity (2019) 206

Bank, including East Jerusalem and the liability of legal persons 300– 301

Gaza Strip 255– 256 Draft Articles on Responsibility of States

Situation in the State of Palestine (Situation for Internationally Wrongful Acts

in Palestine) 254– 256, 290 (2001) 124– 125, 130, 131, 142, 199, 212,

international criminal law 129– 130, 293 218, 225

aiding and abetting 302– 305 Draft Conclusions on the Peremptory

liability of legal persons 300, 301 Norms of General International Law

corporate complicity and 300– 307 (jus cogens) 201, 225, 342

non- State actors 300 International State Crime Initiative

International Criminal Tribunal for the (statecrime.org) 136

former Yugoslavia  Iraq 311, 322

on crime of pillage 314, 323– 324 Coalition Provisional Authority 311

international environmental law 193– 195 Irshaid, Meissa 155 International Fact- Finding Mission on Israel

Israeli Settlements in the Occupied Apartheid Regime 113– 122

Palestinian Territory 189 Attorney General 61, 274

International Human Rights Clinic of Basic Law: Israel Lands (1960) 117

Harvard Law School 287 Basic Law: Jerusalem Capital of Israel

international human rights law 33, 125, 153, (1980) 203

182, 192, 211, 350, 355 Basic Law: State of all its Citizens

right to health 351 draft 118

right to life with dignity 351 Basic Law: the Knesset (1958) 117

right to return 377– 380, 392 Basic Law: the Nation State of the Jewish

right to water 350– 351, 355– 360 People (2018) 117

international humanitarian law (ihl) 31– Bezeq 365, 366

41, 47, 48, 50, 57– 59, 66– 68, 137, 152, 153, citizenship, nationality and immigration

155, 163, 166, 168, 206– 207, 224, 225– laws 114

226, 350, 355 Civil Administration, Israeli 366

jus cogens in statunascendi or jus Commission of Inquiry into Methods

cogens 226 of Investigation of the General

limits on property use 315– 318 Security Service regarding Hostile

laissez faire doctrine 315 Terrorist Activity of 1987 (Landau

principle of distinction 206 commission) 285

principle of proportionality 206 Defence Forces (idf) 21, 27, 28, 209, 266,

International Indigenous Peoples Forum on 269, 279

Climate Change 183 definition of West Bank as ‘contested

international law 130, 191– 195 territory’ 34

application of, in case of exclusion or disengagement plan and decree 69–

oppression of Palestine 56– 62, 66– 68 70, 99

approaches to, by national courts 261 Electric Corporation (previously Palestine

source of 53 Electric Company) 360, 362, 365

State responsibility 47, 48, 130, 223– 252 High Court of Justice (hcj) 33, 36– 38,

duties of non- recognition and non- 62– 66, 81, 85– 93, 116, 118, 258– 266, 377

assistance 227– 230, 237 against establishment of privately run

International Law Commission  prison 298 402 Index

Israel (cont.) transfer of Palestinians 282– 283

carte blanche to pursue settlement Turkel Commission 75, 96, 97, 100,

policy 263 273, 274

government- accommodating violation of territorial integrity of

interpretations 263– 266 occupied territory 147

independence and impartiality 259 Israel’s military justice system 159– 175, 259,

no propriomotu powers to judicially 266– 279

review decisions by mag 273 administrative detention 173– 174

non- enforceability and non- breaches of international humanitarian

justiciability of international law 163, 166

law 262– 263 Court of Appeals 182

separation of powers 261 Criminal Code of the Military

Inspector for Complaints against Courts 167

Israel Security Agency extraterritorial jurisdiction 164

interrogators 286 impartiality of military courts 165– 168

Jerusalem District Electricity Company insufficient civilian oversight 272

(previously Jerusalem Electric jurisdiction of military courts over

Company) 361, 362 Palestinian civilians 160– 168

Law of Return (1950) 114, 115 language barrier 163

Law on the Incarceration of Unlawful legal and judicial competences 162

Combatants (2002) 89, 90 legality of military courts 165– 168

Levy Committee 61 mass prosecution of minor offenses 172

majority age of Palestinian children from Military Advocate General (mag) 259,

16 to 18 168, 171 267, 268, 271– 272

Ministry of Communication 365 military orders 159, 160, 161, 171, 357,

Ministry of Foreign Affairs 60 361, 365

‘missing reversioner’ theory 59– 62 Military Police Criminal Investigations

Mossad 22 Division 268

Nakba Law (2011) 377 inadequate investigations 275– 279

Nationality Law (1952) 115, 375 lack and undue delay of

nation- state of Jewish people 114, 116, 137 investigations 275

Operation “Guardian of the presumption of innocence 172

Walls” 205, 206 prosecution of minors 171

“Operation Cast Lead” 205, 206, 266, retroactive application of criminal

268, 275 laws 166– 167

“Operation Pillar of Defence” 268 right to information 173– 174

“Operation Protective Edge” 202, 205, Security Agency 292

206, 266, 268, 275, 278 Settlements Regularization Law for Judea

Plant Protection (Damage by Goats) Law and Samaria 282

(1950) 188– 189 settlers prosecuted before civilian

possible invasion of Egypt 19– 22 courts 164

Public Committee against Torture in superseding competence of Palestinian

Israel 286 domestic courts 169– 170

racial privileging of Jewishness 116 treatment of Palestinian detainees and

State Comptroller 278 prisoners 291– 296

statehood declaration (1948) 26 unlawful extension of jurisdic tion 169

tax harmonisation 311– 313 use of torture and other coercive

transfer of Israeli civilians 279– 281, 354 practices 170– 171, 285 Index 403

Israel’s impunity from peremptory mag.  See Israel, Military Advocate General

norms 199– 222, 287, 292, 358 Mavrommatis, M. Euripide 360

response of international McNamara, Robert 20, 21, 22

community 215– 220 Meir, Golda 27

South African precedent to respond Mekorot Water Company 356, 359, 360

to violations of peremptory Michaeli, Keren 38

norms 214– 215 Middle East Quartet 217, 218

violation of 201– 210 military necessity 62– 65

Israeli- Palestinian Interim Agreement Moldova, Republic of 243

(1995) 337 Morocco 232, 233, 311

cease- fire between polisario front

Jabareen, Hassan 117, 118 and 233

Jabarin, Shawan 152– 153 Morris, Benny 373, 374

Jabotinsky, Ze’ev 137 Muhareb, Rania 121 Japanese seizure of oil stocks from

Singapore 322– 323 Nakba 3, 105, 177, 178, 348, 372– 377, 390

Jaradag, Ingrid 152 Nasser, Gamal Abdel 21

Jewish Agency 26, 117, 356 necessity.  See immediacy, necessity and

Jewish National Fund 117, 356, 376 proportionality

Jewish Nation- State Basic Law 1, 2 New York Declaration for Refugees and

Johnson, Lyndon 19, 21 Migrants (unga resolution 71/ 1 (16

jurisdiction, meaning of, in international September 2016)) 389

law 331– 334 Nir Company of the Histadrut Labor 356

sovereignty as indicator during belligerent non- assistance 227– 230, 237

occupation 331– 334 non- enforceability 262– 263

jus ad bellum 13, 26, 29– 31, 36, 41– 47, 50– non- interference in domestic affairs 55

51, 93, 94 non- justiciability 262– 263

jus cogens 41, 43, 44, 48, 124, 199– 222, 224– non- recognition 227– 230, 244

227, 238, 341 Nuremberg War Crimes Tribunal 318– 321

jus in bello 76, 93 Charter 314

Nuseibah, Munir 153

Kamal, Zahira 154

Kerry, John 3, 74 obligations ergaomnes 124, 145, 207, 225, 345

on Palestinian refugees 381– 382 occupation 5, 25

Khalaf, Rima 226 belligerent 27, 31, 32– 36, 39, 43, 50, 93–

Koutroulis, Vaios 36 102, 133

Kuttab, Jonathan 110 breaches of principle of

temporariness 47– 49, 58– 59

League of Nations 54– 55 duration of 32– 41

Lewin, Kurt 147 financial gains from 66– 68

Li, Darryl 116 functional approach of 80, 81

Lorimer, James 53 legality of 38, 57, 65, 136– 145, 160

Luft, Michael 92 military 155

Lynk, Michael 39, 131, 142, 287, 297, 354 multilateral 141

permanent 57– 59, 137

Machover, Moshe 140 prolonged 31– 51, 141, 143, 144, 207, 353

Madrid conference (1991) 380 termination of 78

Refugee Working Group 380– 381 transformative 141 404 Index

Occupied Palestinian Territory (1967) Palestine Liberation Organization (plo) 67,

(opt) 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 61, 65, 66, 121 72, 109, 337

corporate and other private acceptance of two- state solution in

actors 354– 355 1988 379

extraterritorial obligations of Third Negotiation Affairs Department 106, 107

States 354 Palestine Research Center 105

Joint Water Committee 358 Palestine Legislative Council 72

water resources 357 Palestinian Authority (pa) 77, 78, 337, 338

Occupying Power 34– 37, 39, 50– 51, 57, 76, Hamas 292

93, 94, 141, 224, 227, 281 individuals detained by 291, 292

concluding treaties with occupied involvement of business enterprises

State 339– 340 in violations of human rights

obligations under international law 350 attributable to 298

Ophir, Adi 99 Palestinian Boycott, Divestment and

Orakhelashvili, Alexander 64 Sanctions National Committee 112

Organization Order: military Government in Palestinian exodus 372

State of Emergency 27 Palestinian Society for the Protection of

Oslo Accords (i and ii) 67, 95, 101, 106, 169, Human Rights and the Environment

328, 330– 347, 365 (law) 110, 111

incompatibility with Palestine’s Palestinian refugees 115, 371– 392

international obligations 344– 346 compensation 379– 380, 392

Protocol Concerning Legal denaturalization of 375– 376

Affairs 336– 337 Israeli response 374– 377

Oslo negotiations (1993) 381 right to return 377– 380, 392

Palestinians holding Israeli citizenship 117

Palestine, State of  Palmer Committee 97

Environment Quality Authority 179 Pappé, Ilan 138, 373

discriminatory water allocation 185– 186, Peace of Westphalia (1648) 53

355– 360 peremptory norms.  See jus cogens

exploitation 66– 68 Peres, Shimon on explanation for Palestinian

flag 4 refugees 375

food insecurity 184 pillage.  See crime of pillage; systematic

gender- differentiated vulnerability to economic exploitation of occupied

climate change 183– 184 territory

geopolitical vulnerabilities 182– 183 proportionality.  See immediacy, necessity

indigenous knowledge 183 and proportionality

Israel’s control over water and land Parliamentary Subcommittee for Judea and

resources 181, 355– 360 Samaria 2

jurisdiction 330– 347 pre- emptive strike 24

legal activism 109– 113 private sector responsibility for treatment

loss of vegetation cover 186– 189 of Palestinian prisoners and

Mandate 57 detainees 289– 309

National Adaptation Plan to Climate Protocol on Amendments to the

Change 179, 180, 184 Protocol on the Statute of the African

statehood of 202– 203, 210 Court of Justice and Human Rights

sovereignty 339 (2014) 300

treatment of detainees and public international law.  See

prisoners 289– 309 international law Index 405

Quigley, John 115 Sfard, Michael 209

Qumsiyeh, Mazin 151 Shalit, Gilad 73, 74

Shamgar, Meir 102

Rabin, Yitzak 27, 28 Shany, Yuval

Rapoport, Meron 156 on occupation 76– 79, 83

recognition of statehood 53 Sharon, Ariel 199, 381

reparation 47– 48 Shehadeh, Raja 109

responsibility of States for internationally Sheikh Jarrah 391

wrongful acts.  See international law Shohat, Ella 139

Responsibility to Protect 55, 382– 388 Six- Day War (1967) 46, 138, 373

Reynolds, John 226 South Africa 124– 126, 199– 222

Roberts, Adam 64, 142, 144 Bantustans 213, 214

Rochling, Hermann 310 crime against humanity of

Rome Statute.  See International apartheid 129, 306

Criminal Court Human Sciences Research Council 112,

Rostow, Walt 21, 23 113, 119, 142

Rouhana, Nadim 140 presence in Namibia 227

Russell Tribunal on Palestine 120, 142 response of States to apartheid

Russian Federation 245, 246 in 211– 214

Rutenberg, Pinhas 360 Truth and Reconciliation

Commission 306

Sabbagh- Khoury, Areej 140 South Hebron Hills.  See Westbank,

Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic 311 Masafer Yatta

Said, Edward 108 sovereign immunity from prosecution 167

San Remo Rules governing naval sovereign equality 55

warfare 97 sovereignty 43, 257, 331– 334

sanctions explained 228– 230, 237– 246, 249 Soviet Union

Sassóli, Marco 352– 353 co- sponsor Madrid conference of

Sayegh, Fayez 105, 122 1991 380

Schwartz, Doubi 155 draft resolution 14– 18

Scobbie, Ian 38, 77– 79 in UN General Assembly 29

Segev, Tom 138 in UN Security Council 14, 15

segregation 157 stateless persons, rights of 385

self- defence 25, 31, 44– 47 Stewart, James 322

self- determination 3– 4, 55, 78, 112, 210, systematic economic exploitation of

340– 344 occupied territory 310– 329

denial of 56– 57 historical background of

right to 42, 44, 145, 192, 225 pillage 313– 315

settlements 39, 65, 311 prosecuting as pillage 318– 328

as breaches of jus cogens norms 224– 227

commercial solar fields in Taba, Egypt conference 381, 391

illegal 364– 365 temporariness.  See occupation

definition of illegal 224 terrae nullius 61

trade with 223– 252 principle 54

settler colonialism 57, 104, 105, 112, 134, 185, telecommunications 365– 368

207, 279– 282 mass surveillance of Palestinians 368

as State crime 135 mobile telephone

settler violence 190 infrastructure 365– 366 406 Index

telecommunications (cont.) Declaration on the Granting of

obstruction of Palestinian cellular Independence to Colonial Countries

companies 367 and Peoples (Declaration on

violations of digital rights 367 Colonialism) (1960) 145– 147

Third World Approaches to International Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous

Law  Peoples (2007) 146, 192– 193

explanation 52– 56 Economic and Social Commission for

views on occupation of West Asia (escwa) 127, 128, 226

Palestine 52– 68 Framework Convention on Climate

Thornberry, Patrick 127 Change (1994) 179

threat to international peace and Paris Agreement (2015) 193– 196

security 48 General Assembly 13, 55, 60, 122, 192

Tladi, Dire 342 emergency special session 24, 25, 29

torture 208, 285, 341 on apartheid 123, 211– 213, 216– 218

transitional justice 133– 158 resolution 181 (ii) (29 November

Truman, Harry 26 1947) 56– 57, 356, 371

Tutu, Desmond 57, 299 resolution 194 (iii) (11 December

Two States One Homeland 156 1948) 372, 379– 380, 390, 391

twail.  See Third World Approaches to resolution 217 (iii) (10 December

International Law 1948) 377

resolution 1514 (xv) (14 December

United Arab Republic 15 1960) 145– 147 United Kingdom  resolution 2625 (xxv) (24 October

Ministry of Defence, The Manual of the 1970) 341

Law of Armed Conflict 317 resolution 3103 (xxviii) (12 December

United Nations  1973) 146

Centre Against Apartheid 131 resolution 3236 (xxix) (22 November

Charter 14, 15, 24, 41, 42, 43, 44, 47, 94, 1974) 379

123, 342, 354 resolution 3314 (xxix) (14 December





Chapter vii 48 1974) 202


Committee Against Torture 173– 174, 208, resolution 43/ 177 (25 December

266, 286 1988) 333

Committee on Economic, Social and resolution 52/ 59 (10 December

Cultural Rights (cescr) 351, 352, 353 1997) 379

Committee on the Elimination of Racial resolution 71/ 1 (16 September

Discrimination 113, 125– 129 2016) 389

complaint by Palestinian authorities Guiding Principles on Business and

against Israel 128 Human Rights 302

Compensation Commission 380 Guiding Principles on Internal

Conference on Trade and Development Displacement 178, 182

(unctad) 363 High Commissioner for Refugees

Conciliation Commission for (unhcr) 378, 382, 384

Palestine 384 Human Rights Committee 173, 268, 269,

Declaration on Principles of International 291, 351, 378

Law Concerning Friendly Relations Human Rights Council 228, 297

and Co- operation among States in Independent Commission of Inquiry

Accordance with the Charter of the on the 2014 Gaza Conflict 268, 272,

United Nations (1970) 203 274, 292

Index 407

United Nations (cont.) World Conference Against Racism,

Independent International Commission Durban (2001) 111

of Inquiry on the Protests in the Cairo Declaration 111

Occupied Palestinian Territory 266 United States

Independent International Fact- Finding aiding and abetting 304

Mission to Investigate the Implications Alien Torts Statute 304

of the Israeli Settlements 282, Army Field Manual, The Law of Land

297, 298 Warfare 317

Office of the High Commissioner for Central Intelligence Agency 19– 20

Human Rights 228, 297, 307, 359 Comprehensive Anti- Apartheid Act

database of businesses involved in (1986) 213, 220

settlement activity 297, 359, 368 co- sponsor Madrid conference of

Rapporteur on the Right to Food 99 1991 380

Relief and Works Agency (unrwa) 100, in UN Security Council 13, 16, 17,

382– 388 18, 19, 29

criticism from Israel and United House of Representatives, Foreign Affairs

States 387 Committee 110

financial crisis 387 Military Tribunal on permission of limited

Palestine refugee definition 382 requisitions 63

protection mandate 382 pressure aimed at Zionist

Rio Declaration on Environment and militias 27

Development (1996) 193 reaction to Israel’s possible invasion of

Secretary- General 2, 18 Egypt 19– 22

Security Council 2, 13, 22, 27– 29, 32, 42– relocation US embassy 67

44, 48, 60, 61, 122, 192, 207 sustaining occupation 142

Commission established under Resolution Unity Intifada 107

446 (1979) 361, 362 Universal Declaration of Human Rights

inaction 14– 18 (unga resolution 217 (iii) (10

on apartheid 123– 124, 211– 213, 216– 219 December 1948)) 377– 378

permanent members 55 use of force 13, 26, 31, 41

resolution 242 (22 November exception to the prohibition

1967) 29, 203 of 42, 44– 45

resolution 465 (1 March 1980) 228, 357 unlawful 47, 48, 224, 225

Special Committee Against utilities.  See electricity; water;

Apartheid 131 telecommunications

Special Committee on

Decolonization 146 Veracini, Lorenzo 139

Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties

Practices Affecting the Human Rights (1969) 201, 341

of the Palestinian People and Other vulnerability 149– 150

Arabs of the Occupied Territories 261

Special Rapporteur on the Rights of Wall, the 39, 64, 203– 204, 210, 217, 219, 224,

Indigenous Peoples 146 225, 309, 358

Special Rapporteur on the Situation water, right to 350– 351, 355– 360

of Human Rights in the Palestinian Weill, Sharon 164

Territories Occupied by Israel since Weisglass, Dov 100

1967 119, 131, 142, 144, 145, 218, 287, 291, Weizman, Eyal 99, 138

296– 297 Welchman, Lynn 110 408 Index

West Bank 25, 27, 31– 51, 90 Yesh Din 106, 267, 279, 287

Firing Zone 918 178, 188 Yiftachel, Oren 61

Masafer Yatta 177– 179, 185

see also Palestine, State of Zionism 104, 105, 109, 113, 139, 140, 150, 375

West Bank Area Commander 160– 161 on Jewishness 116

Western Sahara 232, 233 paramilitary groups Irgun and

Wheeler, Earle 20 Lehi 372, 373

World Health Organization 359 World Zionist Organization 117

Wye River Memorandum (1998) 358 Zionist Space 138





